---
title: 'National Assembly - 07 April 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: APRIL
month_slug: Apr
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2000-04-07
---

FRIDAY, 7 APRIL 2000
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 09:30.

The Deputy Chairperson of Committees took the Chair and requested members
to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                        WELCOMING OF MEMBERS OF SANDF

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! We are glad to see so many
members of our armed forces in the gallery. We welcome them to Parliament.
We feel particularly protected today. [Laughter.]

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Ms N E HANGANA: Chair, I give notice that on the next sitting day of the
House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the death from cancer yesterday of the Cape Town anti-apartheid
       stalwart Gaby Shapiro;

  (2) remembers that she was born in what later became East Berlin and as a
       little girl had to live under the evil reign of Nazi Germany;

  (3) acknowledges her passionate commitment and contribution to the
       struggle for freedom and democracy in South Africa and the love with
       which she touched other people's lives; and

  (4) expresses its condolences to all her loved ones who have lost an
       exceptional wife, mother, grandmother, friend and comrade.

[Applause.]

Mr A SINGH: Chair, I give notice that on the next sitting day of the House
I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) recognises that the Department of Welfare has, over the past five
       years, failed dismally to spend significant portions of its budget,
       thereby denying the poorest of the poor the right to social support;

  (2) notes that the Committee on Public Accounts has found that the
       Welfare Ministry, along with the department, must accept
       responsibility for this failure, as R103 million of the budget
       allocated for poverty is still unspent; and

  (3) calls on the department to carry out a thorough review of the
       activities of the department and take strong action against the
       persons responsible for the problems, even if such persons included
       the Minister.

[Interjections.]

Mrs I MARS: Chairperson, I give notice that at the next sitting of the
House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:
  That the House appeals to the Minister for Provincial and Local
  Government to create a facility at which caring and concerned members of
  the House can deliver clothing, blankets and donations for the benefit of
  the many families whose homes and belongings were destroyed by the recent
  flood.

Mr L ZITA: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of the
House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the South African economy has been given a boost by the
       news that exports in the first two months of this year increased by
       R5 billion compared to the same period last year;

  (2) recognises that this follows on the positive reception of the
       Minister of Finance's Budget speech in which he projected an annual
       growth rate of 3% for the next three years;

  (3) acknowledges that the Government's sound economic policies are
       leading to economic stability; and
  (4) calls on the Government to proceed with its excellent work in
       building a better life for all South Africans.

Mr R S SCHOEMAN: Mr Chairman, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I will move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with shock and concern the decision of the Zimbabwean
       parliament to allow the illegal occupation of commercial and other
       agricultural land in that country, without compensation, and condemns
       the decision in the strongest possible terms;

  (2) expresses its grave concern at the negative impact on the image of
       and investment in the SADC region; and

  (3) calls on President Mbeki to take the lead in calling for an emergency
       summit meeting of SADC leaders to discuss this crisis.

Prof L M MBADI: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I will move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with concern -


       (a)  the heavy-handed action by security forces when, among others,
           teargas and bulldozers were used to disperse a blockade by taxis
           in Umzimkulu in the Eastern Cape on 16 February 2000, which
           resulted in injury to people and serious damage to a number of
           vehicles;

       (b)  the deplorable state of the roads in Umzimkulu which led to the
           action by the taxi drivers and about which nothing has been done
           by the responsible authorities;

       (c)  the fact that these authorities do not seem to recognise that
           this blockade was a peaceful protest against the collapse of the
           road infrastructure in the area and not in protest against the
           Government's recapitalisation proposals for the taxi industry,
           which have given rise to taxi protests elsewhere ...

[[Interjections.] Time expired.]

Mr G Q M DOIDGE: Chairperson, on a point of order: Is it in order for the
hon member to mislead the House?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! That is not a point of order.

Mr G Q M DOIDGE: Chairperson, it is! What the member has read is, in fact,
not true. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! We will not know the facts
until we have verified them.

Mr G Q M DOIDGE: Are you undertaking to do so, Chair?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! We will do so. Please be
seated.

Mr P A C HENDRICKSE: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:
  That the House -


  (1) notes that the burning of motor vehicle tyres is an environmental
       hazard that results in grave air pollution, which may cause health
       problems, including birth defects, miscarriages and cancer, as well
       as allergies and asthma;

  (2) welcomes the report that the Department of Environmental Affairs and
       Tourism has appointed consultants to look at solutions to deal with
       waste tyre disposal;

  (3) looks forward to creative solutions to encourage the proper disposal
       of waste tyres; and

  (4) urges members of the public and the tyre and motor industries to
       dispose of waste tyres in a responsible manner at hazardous waste
       sites.

[Applause.]

Ms C DUDLEY: Chairperson, I give notice that at the next sitting of the
House I shall move on behalf of the ACDP:
  That the House -


  (1) expresses its concern at the decision by the SA Human Rights
       Commission that homosexuals have a constitutional right to donate
       blood;

  (2) calls on the HRC not to elevate political correctness at the expense
       of common sense and sound, internationally proven medical decision-
       making;

  (3) acknowledges that the Blood Transfusion Service's decision is a
       medical decision and not a human rights issue;

  (4) notes that the service turns away all people, heterosexual and
       homosexual, who engage in risky sexual behaviour;

  (5) acknowledges that there is an HIV/Aids epidemic in South Africa, and
       in view of limited funds and limited available personnel, the Blood
       Transfusion Service should be allowed to make such decisions in the
       best interests of the nation; and

  (6) calls on all people of South Africa to behave morally and responsibly
       and on all those who engage in risky sexual behaviour, or who have
       partners who do so, to refrain from donating blood.

[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, there is too much
noise in the House today!

Gen C L VILJOEN: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I will move on behalf of the FF:


  That the House -


  (1) takes note of the indirect attempt at character assassination on the
       leader of the FF in a notice of motion on behalf of the ANC on 6
       April 2000 with regard to a court case involving his daughter;

  (2) takes note of the fact that the case referred to is sub judice and
       that it would be inappropriate to comment on it or give details;
  (3) further notes that the facts so far reported are slanted, not
       complete and will only be known once the case is complete; and

  (4) resolves that it would be wise to wait for all the details before
       drawing conclusions, condemning a fellow member of Parliament or his
       family.

Mrs R N CAPA: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with concern media reports in which it is alleged that the AWB
       leader, Eugène Terre'Blanche, is receiving preferential treatment in
       prison;

  (2) recognises that the Department of Correctional Services has launched
       an investigation into the allegations regarding the Potchefstroom
       prison; and

  (3) calls on the department to conclude its investigation speedily and to
       ensure fairness towards everyone and preferential treatment for no
       one.
[Applause.]

Mnr A J BOTHA: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek gee kennis dat ek op die volgende
sittingsdag namens die DP sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) daarvan kennis neem dat die Minister van Arbeid eensydig die permitte
       opgeskort het wat gebruiklik toegestaan is aan Lesotho-burgers om
       oeswerk op Vrystaatse plase te verrig;

  (2) besef dat hierdie optrede groot lyding veroorsaak het by die betrokke
       Lesotho-burgers op 'n tydstip toe hulle ekonomies ernstig geknou is
       deur onrus in Lesotho, wat gedeeltelik veroorsaak is deur die Suid-
       Afrikaanse Regering se optrede;

  (3) verder daarvan kennis neem dat hierdie opskorting groot ontwrigting
       veroorsaak het in die landbou, met gepaardgaande ekonomiese verliese,
       'n verlies aan uitvoergeleenthede en 'n verlies aan plaaslike
       werksgeleenthede;

  (4) daarop let dat die Minister se rede vir hierdie optrede plaaslike
       werkloosheid is, maar dat hy dit nie in ag neem by die toestaan van
       sodanige permitte aan Lesotho-burgers om vir die Vrystaatse mynbedryf
       te werk nie; en

  (5) ten sterkste by die Minister van Arbeid aandring op die gelyke
       behandeling van die verskillende sektore deur onmiddellik permitte
       vir landboudoeleindes uit te reik en dat hy spesifiek nie sy veldtog
       van verdagmakery teen die landbou voortsit nie.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr A J BOTHA: Mr Chairman, I give notice that on the next sitting day, I
shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the Minister of Labour has unilaterally suspended the
       permits that are customarily granted to Lesotho citizens to perform
       harvesting work on Free State farms;

  (2) realises that this action has caused great suffering among the
       Lesotho citizens concerned at a time when they have been economically
       seriously harmed by unrest in Lesotho, which was partially caused by
       actions of the South African Government;

  (3) further notes that this suspension has greatly disrupted agriculture,
       with accompanying economic losses, a loss of exporting opportunities
       and a loss of local job opportunities;

  (4) notes that the Minister's reason for this action is local
       unemployment, but that he does not take this into consideration when
       granting such permits to Lesotho citizens to work in the Free State
       mining industry; and

  (5) insists in the strongest terms that the Minister of Labour treat the
       various sectors equally by immediately issuing permits for
       agricultural purposes, and that he specifically does not continue
       with his campaign of suspicion-mongering against agriculture.]

Mnr D A A OLIFANT: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag namens die ANC sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) daarvan kennis neem dat die Silwerstroomstrand die enigste strand in
       die Kaapse Skiereiland was waar toegangsgeld betaalbaar was, terwyl
       die toegang tot alle ander strande gratis was;

  (2) verder kennis neem dat die gemeenskappe van Atlantis, Mamre, Pella en
       Witsand, onder leiding van die ANC, op 8 Januarie 2000 protesoptrede
       geloods het teen dié soort eksklusiwiteit wat ten doel gehad het om
       swartmense uit te sluit;

  (3) ook daarvan kennis neem dat die plaaslike owerheid geforseer word om
       die strand gratis aan die publiek oop te stel; en

  (4) die ANC gelukwens vir sy toegewydheid aan die stryd vir menseregte en
       teen rassisme, sowel as die ANC se praktiese uitlewing van die
       slagspreuk ``Al God se strande vir al God se mense''.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr D A A OLIFANT: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I shall move
on the next sitting day on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that Silwerstroomstrand was the only beach in the Cape
       Peninsula where an entrance fee was payable while entrance to all
       other beaches was free;

  (2) further notes that on 8 January 2000 the communities of Atlantis,
       Mamre, Pella and Witsand, headed by the ANC, launched protest actions
       against this type of selectivity which was aimed at the exclusion of
       black people;

  (3) also notes that the local authority was forced to open this beach for
       free to the public; and

  (4) congratulates the ANC on its commitment to the struggle for human
       rights and against racism, as well as the ANC's practical
       implementation of the slogan: ``All of God's beaches for all of God's
       people''.

[Applause.]]

Mr S SIMMONS: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) commends the decision by the Cabinet to render all services and
       resources available to assist those in the various provinces who were
       recently affected by the devastating natural disasters in the form of
       hurricanes, cyclones and floods;

  (2) notes, however, that the community of Hondeklip Bay along the West
       Coast in Namaqualand in the Northern Cape province has for some time
       not been provided with clean potable water owing to red tape;

  (3) notes that the negotiations between the mining diamond giant De Beers
       and the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry to provide a water
       service to Hondeklip Bay have been in progress for over two years,
       without any finality being reached; and

  (4) calls upon the Government to render the necessary services and
       resources to improve the wellbeing of the Hondeklip Bay residents by
       providing potable water in accordance with RDP standards.

Mr M N RAMODIKE: Chairperson, I give notice that at the next sitting of the
House I will move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes revelations and reports by some senior Government officials
       regarding the misuse and mismanagement of funds, involving 32 housing
       projects in the Northern Province and an amount of up to R500
       million, which implicate, inter alia, the former Housing MEC of the
       Northern Province;

  (2) notes that findings regarding these projects have already been
       submitted to the President;

  (3) further notes that the misuse and mismanagement of funds in the
       Northern Province recur unabated, such as the mismanagement of funds
       disclosed by the Semenya Commission;

  (4) deplores and condemns the provincial government for its failure to
       take decisive steps regarding the management of funds; and

  (5) calls on the Government and/or the NCOP to intervene and normalise
       the situation.

Ms M VERWOERD: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the recent flow of raw sewage into False Bay;

       (b)  that there have been 16 raw sewage spills over the past year;

       (c)  that the Cape Metropolitan Council now acknowledges that these
           spills pose serious health and environmental risks; and

       (d)  that the stench is unbearable for the people of Macassar;


  (2) agrees with the local people that these spills are directly related
       to the bad planning of the New NP-controlled CMC which should have
       had the foresight timeously to expand the sewage works;

  (3) agrees that the New NP-controlled provincial authorities do not have
       the health and welfare of this community and environment at heart;
       and

  (4) reiterates the call of the people of Macassar for this matter to be
       sorted out speedily.

                        WELCOMING OF NCOP CHAIRPERSON

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, before we proceed
to the Orders of the Day, I wish to recognise and welcome the Chairperson
of the NCOP, the hon Naledi Pandor, to this Chamber. I trust that she will
enjoy an interesting debate on the Defence Vote. [Applause.]

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 7 - Defence:

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Mr Chairperson, hon members, the defence function
is about developing and maintaining the capability to ward off threats or
dangers to this country and its people. Some of these are human-made, yet
others arise from natural forces.

The most memorable record of South Africa's defence capability in recent
times was the newspaper reportage, as well as radio and television footage
- broadcast throughout the world - of SA National Defence Force personnel
and aircraft in action, flying rescue missions in Mozambique. We saw
dramatic displays of skill, courage, discipline and heroism, including the
breathtaking rescue of Sophia Pedro, a young Mozambican woman who had just
given birth to a baby girl in a tree.

During those weeks, while the international community hesitated, the SA
National Defence Force flew a total of 955,7 hours, using 82 uniformed
members and consuming some 484 049 litres of petrol in the process of
saving more than 14 000 Mozambicans from certain death. [Applause.] These
were SANDF personnel performing their duty as our nation expected of them.
There could be no more eloquent testament of the need for a Defence Force
with capacity, a properly equipped National Defence Force with well trained
personnel, loyal to the national objectives and with the capacity to
perform the missions that this country, the region and, indeed, the rest of
the world expect of us.

Three to four years ago, the need to equip our National Defence Force
afresh was identified. An acquisition programne was drawn up and central to
it was the creation of a number of mechanisms and procedures to ensure a
reliable process and transparency. The process has been followed to the
last letter. The procedures that were followed are under the scrutiny of
the Auditor-General at present. I am confident that any irregularities that
may have occurred will be uncovered and dealt with accordingly.

The arms packages entail the acquisition of the following equipment: Three
German submarines, four German corvettes, 30 Italian light utility
helicopters, 28 Swedish and British light fighter aircraft and 24 British
fighter-trainer aircraft. The total value of the package programme amounts
to R29 992 million, which will be paid over a 12-year period. The overall
commitment of the value of the offset programmes, coupled with the supply
contract, amounts to approximately R104 billion.

Sceptics continue to question the wisdom of the decision to re-equip the
National Defence Force. I place on record this morning that the capital
equipment of the SA National Defence Force has reached a state of block
obsolescence. They will, however, be maintained until they can be replaced
with newer generation equipment. The ships being used by the Navy at
present will be obsolete by the year 2004, after which the Navy will have
no surface capacity if new ships are not acquired now. Similarly, the
decommissioning of the Daphne submarines by 2005 will leave the navy with
no underwater capability, should the acquisition of new submarines not be
initiated at this time.

The Alouette III helicopters currently in use by the SA Air Force were
bought during the early 1960s and will finally be decommissioned during
2005. They will be replaced by the Italian Agusta light utility
helicopters. We have trimmed down the original request made by the Air
Force from 60 to 30 helicopters. The 24 Impala jet trainer aircraft due to
be decommissioned during 2007 will be replaced by 12 Hawk aircraft. We will
review the situation again in 2002, when an option to acquire 12 more will
be examined.

It should be noted that the SA Air Force has significantly downscaled its
frontline capability over the past few years. Where the SA Air Force at one
time operated a total of 54 frontline fighter aircraft, these will now be
replaced with only 9 Gripen fighters. An option to acquire another 19 will
be examined in 2004. These currently approved package programmes will only
provide for the capital renewal requirements of the SA Navy and the SA Air
Force. The Department of Defence will henceforth embark on the planned
capital renewal programme for the SA Army, which will primarily consist of
a domestic acquisition programme.

The strategic defence packages have given a sharper focus to the issue of
arms control. The SA defence industry is currently regulated by the White
Paper on Defence, the White Paper on SA Defence-related Industries and the
Armaments Development and Production Act. This Act is currently being
revised and wide consultation will take place. In addition, South Africa
conforms to the international code of conduct on the arms trade by way of
the National Conventional Arms Control Committee which meets regularly and
reports to Parliament quarterly. This committee is convened under the able
leadership of and chaired by Minister Kader Asmal.

As the dramatic rescue missions of the past few weeks have demonstrated,
the need for quality capital equipment has raised a profound political and
tactical question. What do we emphasise more in our future force
preparation: the capacity to threaten our neighbours as a deterrent or the
capacity to be of more help to them so as to surround ourselves with a
field of friends? This is a question that will have to engage us in the
coming period.

We are now training for peacekeeping. Operation Blue Crane and Operation
Blue Hungwe were carried out under the auspices of SADC and were joint
exercises with our regional partners. But now South Africa is increasingly
inundated with requests from her neighbours for assistance in training for
peacekeeping. If we can contribute to the capacity of our neighbours to
participate in peacekeeping missions, then they will effectively share the
burden of peacekeeping missions in the region, so that instead of us acting
on behalf of others, we act with them.

We remain ready and prepared to deploy our forces when and if we are
requested to do so by the United Nations, and that is in spite of efforts
to discredit this country's role in the peace process in the DRC. I appeal
to hon members this morning not to make assertions which undermine this
country's role in regional peace initiatives. Doubt about South Africa's
motives could create a dangerous atmosphere for those of our SA National
Defence Force members who may be deployed in neighbouring countries.
[Applause.] In this regard, the hon Bantu Holomisa's allegations during the
President's debate and his questionable sorties into the DRC without even
informing our diplomatic mission there raise serious concern for me.
[Interjections.]

Turning to the transformation process of the Department of Defence, the
integration intake process of the statutory and nonstatutory forces is now
drawing to a close. This process has taken much longer than originally
anticipated, but we are now in the last phase. We will be introducing
legislation to finalise the process during the course of this year.
Integration has been both a complicated and a sensitive process, fraught
with difficulties, but overall, it has been successful. The foundation has
firmed up.

One of the recommendations of the Defence Review was the downsizing of the
SANDF. To effect this ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Order, hon Minister!

Dr C P MULDER: Chairperson, on a point of order: I am sorry to disturb the
hon the Minister, but I need your ruling, sir. We are being entertained
this morning with video clips being shown throughout the Minister's speech.
I would like to have your ruling, sir. Is that the way in which Parliament
will be conducted in future? For the simple reason, sir ...
[Interjections.] I would like to know this for the simple reason that if
that is going to be the way in which all speeches are going to be
conducted, our party also has videos that we would like to show to the
public on television. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, please be seated.
[Interjections.] Order! Order! Hon member and the House, the Minister of
Defence is giving his speech on the Defence Vote and appropriate matters
are being shown on the screen for your benefit and that of the House.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, now that you have ruled
on the matter, I am satisfied. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, is this further to
the point of order you raised?

Dr C P MULDER: Yes, Chairperson, but I need clarity on your ruling, if you
will allow me, please.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! I will not allow you to debate
my ruling. [Applause.] Hon member, please be seated and put whatever you
want to say in writing to the Speaker or to me directly. I have given a
ruling.

Dr C P MULDER: Chairperson, I will put it in writing, because I need to
know if this is going to be the future ruling.

The MINISTER: I think because of that interruption, I may get some extra
time.

One of the recommendations of the Defence Review was the downsizing of the
SANDF. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, the Minister is
delivering his speech. Please be courteous.

The MINISTER: To effect this, we will be guided by the employer-initiated
retrenchment scheme currently being formulated by the Government. We are
also working with other relevant departments to retrain and remuster some
of our numbers due for rationalisation. The participation and concern of
the parliamentary committees on this issue has been most valuable. Their
oversight ensures that the department remains on track and proceeds
correctly.

The composition of the SANDF must be demographically representative. The
same applies to the composition of our officer corps. This necessitates
that training must be shaped to ensure representivity and a balanced force
for the future. Training is a key strategic area under the Chief of the
SANDF. Training policy is determined by the Defence Secretariat under my
political guidance. Strategic planning is therefore essential to ensure
succession planning for the present and for the future. We will be
reviewing the arms industry with a view to developing a clear strategy for
the industry.

At the same time the conversion of the industry is under discussion. We
will be introducing legislation - hopefully at the end of this year - in
the form of the new Armscor Act, which will reflect the needs of a
transformed department in a new South Africa.

The complex world of defence intelligence has always been difficult to
handle. The Moerane commission is now completing its work. We will then be
in a position to examine its findings closely, and we will look at its
recommendations with a view to implementation.

The previous system of military discipline posed a challenge to the
transformation process. It was found that the problems around integration
were reflected in the military justice system and grievance procedures.
When, therefore, the Constitutional Court ruled that the disciplinary
system was unconstitutional, we had to take immediate measures.
Subsequently, the Military Discipline Supplementary Measures Act was passed
last year. I have requested the Secretary for Defence to monitor its
implementation. We are committed to making this system work fairly for all
members of the force to enable them to have legal representation.

However, we have to tighten discipline in the National Defence Force. We
have recently introduced a code of conduct which must extend to all ranks
of the SANDF. The National Defence Force members who are faced with charges
of murder, rape, attempted murder, pointing of a firearm and similar
offences in that category will have to stay out of our bases until the
courts have cleared them. The presence of persons who are charged under
this category of crime in the base has a seriously demoralising ill-effect
on all the members of the force, and a generally debilitating impact on
discipline as a whole.

The modernisation of the National Defence Force has necessitated, among
other things, the incorporation of an appropriate value system. Training in
the National Defence Force must reflect this realignment. Previously, the
preparation of troops centred around preparation for war. This must now be
extended to include participation in peacekeeping and training for
development.

The massacre at Tempe was a tragedy for the country at large and for the
department specifically. The ministerial commission of inquiry into the
Tempe massacre will be making its preliminary report by the end of June. I
take this opportunity to recognise Dr Setai, Mrs Lamani and Col Mbongwe,
who are here with us this morning. Gen Geldenhuys did tender an apology. We
are taking this inquiry very seriously and will be delving into the heart
of this problem in order to dig out problems and consider solutions.

What has clearly emerged at this point in time is that there are a few
elements, a minority, in the SANDF - drawn from both the former statutory
and nonstatutory forces - who are not loyal to the national objectives.
[Interjections.] They are busy with activities which seek to disrupt the
process of bringing together members of the National Defence Force. They
constitute a criminal element. Whether they are those who attempted to
celebrate the Kasinga massacre or those involved in murder and rape, they
are a scourge.

Our organisational culture will have to be addressed. We will be looking
beyond the scope of the civic education programme with regard to its
effectiveness to make sure that there is no place for them. The National
Defence Force must, indeed, become the foremost institution which the youth
of our country can look up to as a beginning and a preparation for their
future. [Applause.]

HIV/Aids is a strategy and a security issue for the SANDF. It must receive
higher priority and attention. We are now fighting to break the silence
around this issue. We aim to create an environment within the National
Defence Force for soldiers to speak out. We must encourage, as the rest of
society is now doing, voluntary testing and peer support. We must identify
soldiers who are prepared to declare their status and use them as
counsellors of their colleagues in the National Defence Force.

We will be introducing six pieces of legislation this year. The first and
foremost is the new Defence Bill, to replace the outdated Act originally
drawn up in 1957. This Bill regulates the defence function and has taken
shape over the past four years. It has had to be recast continually, in
line with the transformation of the department and the compilation of the
Defence Review. The Bill is now before the Cabinet committee, where it is
being examined closely.

I would like to recognise the work of the Defence Act work group for the
work they put into this Bill. The work group, set up by Minister Modise -
well, former Minister Modise - is composed of members of Parliament,
experts from different fields and senior members of the department.

The National Conventional Arms Control Committee is to be institutionalised
and given the necessary status, in accordance with its task. Legislation to
this effect is already with the state law advisers and will be tabled
shortly.

As we terminate the integration intake of statutory and nonstatutory
forces, legislation to this effect is in the pipeline. The Termination of
Integration Intake Bill brings this process to its finalisation. This goes
with two other small pieces of legislation. The first is an amendment to
the Demobilisation Act and the second is a minor amendment to the
Constitution, both of which at present leave the process open-ended. We
will also be introducing an amendment to the Defence Endowment Property and
Account Act.

An interdepartmental team has drawn up a draft or framework of foreign
defence policy. Central to it is: the promotion of security and defence co-
operation and co-ordination; the strengthening of regional security and
defence institutions; the promotion and development of stable civil-
military relations; the design and implementation of confidence and
security-building measures; the establishment of communication and other
procedures for addressing interstate tension around military matters;
ensuring effective border control; participation in disaster relief and
other humanitarian operations; the promotion of regional co-ordination in
preparing for peace support operations; and the promotion of co-operation
and co-ordination in a variety of specialised fields, for example naval
matters and aviation matters.

South Africa's regional peace initiatives have been widely covered in the
media. Current efforts, led by the Minister of Foreign Affairs, have been
in relation to the Democratic Republic of Congo. We are also participating
in the retraining of the Lesotho Defence Force. We are putting hard work
and effort into the strengthening of the SADC Organ on Politics, Peace and
Security. We are working hard with our regional counterparts to achieve
consensus on this issue.

Our constitutional obligations stipulate that the Defence Force must be
structured and managed as a disciplined military force; that the primary
object of the Defence Force is to defend and protect the Republic; and that
the Defence Force may be employed, in co-operation with the Police Service,
in defence of the Republic or in fulfilment of any international
obligation.

Peace in the region, and on the continent, is an essential component of
South Africa's security system. The social and economic upliftment of our
people, however, is the best guarantor of security.

The general trend, noted in the Auditor-General's report, is not good. The
Auditor-General says that inadequate controls are in place, that there is
limited compliance with Treasury regulations, and that vigorous internal
control is far from what is should be. Most disturbing, however, is that
the regulations of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts, which are
passed by Parliament, are either ignored or flouted. Corrective measures
have now been taken, and the Secretary for Defence has set up an
independent audit committee, reporting directly to me. This committee had
its first meeting two weeks ago.

Finally, I would like to acknowledge some people here. I take this
opportunity firstly to thank my Deputy Minister, whose contribution is of
invaluable worth. She plays a key role in the areas we have assigned to
her, namely, firstly, the decision-making structures of the department;
secondly, legislation undertaken in the department; and, thirdly, the
budget, its process and function. [Applause.]

Then, the secretariat, whose existence is enshrined in the Constitution,
has had an exceptionally difficult time this year. After the departure of
Pierre Steyn, who steered the secretariat through the first stage of
transition, Mr Mamatho Netsianda acted in this post for over a year. We
would like to thank him for this. [Applause.]

The Defence Secretary, Mr January Masilela, was appointed on 1 December
last year, and has already taken control of his function. We wish him well
and success in the years that lie ahead. [Applause.] Sadly, we have also
lost our chief of policy planning, Mr Aboobaker Ismail. He has moved to
head the security division at the SA Reserve Bank. He played a key role in
the creation and functioning of the secretariat and we would like to wish
him well in his new post. The effective functioning of the secretariat is
of paramount importance. Together with the secretary, we will be looking at
strengthening the secretariat.

I would also like to thank the Chief of the National Defence Force, Gen
Nyanda, who has borne numerous difficulties during the course of this year.
He is playing a key role in the transformation of the department.
[Applause.] Special thanks go to members of the Defence Staff Council and
all members of the department who have gone to such lengths to enable the
transition of the changeover of Ministers and made this transition smooth
and effective.

The Ministry has two advisers, and I would like to thank them both for
their contribution. My thanks also go to the new staff of the Office of the
Minister. I would also like to give a special word of thanks to BMATT, the
British Military Advisory Training Team, for their consistent contribution
throughout the year. My thanks also go to the team at Armscor.

Last, but not least, many thanks to the parliamentary oversight bodies,
namely the portfolio committee, the joint standing committee and the select
committee. These committees, under the able leadership of the hon Thandi
Modise, Ntshiki Mashimbye and Jabu Mahlangu, keep us on our toes at all
times and vigorously monitor all that we do. [Applause.] We appreciate
their commitment and hard work in this process. I hope that they do not
mind the moments when we clash. [Laughter.] Their involvement bears
testament to our understanding of defence in a democracy and reflects the
importance we attach to accountability and civil control over the military.

Finally, I would like to acknowledge all those who have died in the past
year while serving in the SANDF in the service of their country, especially
the surgeon-general who passed away not long ago. [Applause.]

Mr J N MASHIMBYE: Chairperson, hon Chief Whip, hon Minister, hon Deputy
Minister, hon Thandi Modise and colleagues, this is not one of those
occasions when we clash. I remember most occasions when we do not clash. I
also wish to join the hon the Minister in saying that it is an appropriate
occasion for me to ask Parliament to join me in conveying our condolences
to the family of Lt Gen Masuku, fondly known to many of us as ``Dr Hagar''
in our days during the liberation war. Dr Hagar brought us through very
difficult conditions as a leader in uMkhonto weSizwe and, as a medical
practitioner, he always gave good leadership and took care of our health.
We hope to convey these condolences to his loved ones.

The US Congress is empowered to confer on its citizenry and, in particular,
on members of its armed forces who have served their country and people
efficiently, gallantly and heroically, a congressional medal of honour. It
is my wish and intention to cede this to our highest office of the land
empowered to recognise South Africans who have served impeccably and
heroically, as did those men and women in uniform who were in Mozambique in
time to rescue thousands of people from the floods that devastated our
neighbour. [Applause.]

The pain and the anguish caused by those floods will be remembered as
accurately symbolised by Sophia Pedro, a pregnant woman who clung to a tree
to save her life and that of the child she was carrying. To hold on tight
to a tree and to pray for absolution was all she could do. The answer to
her prayers for absolution can only be described as tragic joy. It was
joyous relief that she gave birth to Rosita Pedro, but tragic that her life
would not have seen many hours of existence as the floods were only getting
more angry. The SA Air Force, however, arrived on the scene, on time,
bringing with them safety, warmth, food and temporary shelter. That crucial
flight to a safer and, hopefully, a better future can only be symbolised by
the newly born Rosita Pedro.

As members of Parliament we might well agree that the tomorrow that this
baby embraces might well be appropriately honoured and recalled with a
parliamentary Rosita Pedro medal of honour. [Applause.] These good deeds of
our armed forces must be encouraged, consolidated and sustained, but to do
so will require of us also to speak about and act on the things that make
us uncomfortable when we listen to them.

So let me begin by speaking about them. It is uncomfortable for us to still
hear the following statistics. Since 1994 there has been a major increase
of blacks in senior ranks, that is at the level of brigadier-general to
full general. There has not, however, been a significant increase of blacks
in the ranks of major to colonel. This is an area of concern because the
ranks of major to colonel represent the middle management and are basically
unit commanders who deal with the rank-and-file on a daily basis.

It is also an area of concern that approximately 93,2% of warrant officers
are, at this stage, from the former statutory force. Warrant officers are
the ones who need to take up the complaints and problems of their
subordinates, which means that they have to understand the culture and
practices of their subordinates. The same applies to the staff-sergeant to
sergeant ranks, which, until the recent past, were 76,1% from the former SA
Defence Force. The ranks from private to corporal were almost
representative of the population. However, this creates the impression that
the SA National Defence Force is a black defence force with white officers.
The only way not to speak about these things that make us so uncomfortable
is to move faster, with high and accelerated speed, on this noble project
of transformation. We must move faster.

Change does not depend on legislation only. It has to be carried out and
driven by men and women at all levels of leadership in the Defence Force.
If one is a head of an arm of service - be it the Army, the Air Force, the
Navy, or Sams - one will always have to ask oneself a question. The
question that these leaders must ask themselves is: How does one want to be
remembered when one is no longer in that office?

I am certain that no one, no leader, wants to be remembered as having
contributed nothing to the project of transformation. We may have good
policies, but good policies can only be implemented by the men and women
who carry them out. This is a challenge that I pose to the leaders of the
Defence Force, especially heads of arms of service.

As Parliament, we will continue to execute our obligations towards the
Defence Force. When we had the difficult task of re-equipping obsolete
defence equipment, we did so against many odds and against many competing
needs, but we did that. We look forward to the delivery of these goods and
hope that no one will renege on the offset agreements. We will be watching
the process of implementation of these packages very closely.

I indicated that when we had to re-equip the Defence Force, we did so. We
have played our role as Parliament. Those who receive this equipment must
also play their role, and make sure that this equipment will be utilised by
all members of the SANDF, representative of our country, South Africa.

As Parliament, there are many ventures we will be dealing with in the near
future. In the current year, we want the following things to be dealt with
urgently and meticulously, namely the Defence Act, the Armaments
Development and Production Act and the White Paper on SA Defence-related
Industries. We will be joining the Ministry in working out and scrutinising
an appropriate, fair and just mechanism for rationalisation.

Five years of experience has persuaded us of the need to review the Defence
Review itself. We will also be looking forward to receiving a report from
the ministerial commission of inquiry and we hope that this body will
interact with the parliamentary committees as soon as possible.

I further want to urge that we all do our work as heads of arms of the
service, as the general leadership of the Defence Force, as members of
Parliament and as the Ministry. It is only when we all do our work that we
shall remain heroes and heroines to Rosita Pedro, who embraces a better and
safer future.

Mr A J BOTHA: Mr Chairperson, the DP also shares in the condolences to the
family of the surgeon-general, and we would appreciate it if that could be
conveyed to them. While I am speaking about this, may I inform the House
that we wish a speedy recovery to the spokesman on defence for the DP, Brig
Gen Schalkwyk, who has had a very serious operation. He is recovering, but
it seems to be a hard and long road.

We thank the hon the Minister of Defence, Mr Mosiuoa Lekota, for his
presentation this morning. It was very interesting and, as we are wont to
expect from him, it was plain speaking in many ways. Minister Lekota is a
bit like a comet passing through Parliament now and again. Indeed, for this
very reason, we had to bring his Vote forward to this week, necessitating
an unscheduled briefing earlier this week at which neither the hon the
Minister, the Deputy Ministers nor the Secretary for Defence bothered to
put in an appearance.

This diminishes parliamentary capacity for meaningful debate and undermines
democratic control of the SANDF, as indeed the Minister himself highlighted
during his speech this morning. He used the word ``flouted'' when he said
that Parliament is ignored and ``flouted'' in this matter. We believe that
it is absolutely necessary that this be avoided, and I believe that the
Minister can assist us in this matter.

Our soldiers, sailors, airmen and airwomen and medics may face one of the
toughest military missions ever undertaken should the Defence Force be
deployed in peace support operations in the DRC. Because of this, there is
no more appropriate time than now to ask the hard questions about the state
of the Defence Force.

With more time, I should have liked to have touched on the growing
concentration of power in the military, diminishing democratic control.
However, the most important immediate concern is the ANC Government's
failure to downsize the Defence Force, resulting in a form of armed welfare
where too many soldiers lie idle in the barracks, too many aircraft remain
grounded in hangars and too many ships stay moored in harbours.

Having said this, we all know that the Defence Force was the decisive
factor that saved thousands of lives during the floods that recently
ravaged Mozambique, motivating the DP at the time to write to the Deputy
Minister, the hon Routledge, suggesting:


  ... that the Ministry of Defence consider presenting either a special
  medal or an appropriate medal with a clasp, or any other suitable
  commendation, to members of the SA National Defence Force deployed in the
  flood relief operations at the earliest opportunity.

[Interjections.] The key to sustaining this highly motivated and militarily
prepared Defence Force, according to the Defence Review, would be a
spending ratio of 40%, 30% and 30% on personnel, operating costs and
capital renewal respectively. The ratio could only be realised by
downsizing the personnel component to between 65 000 and 70 000 full-time
members of the Defence Force, a process that should have been completed
before the year 2000. But this is precisely what has not happened.

Political considerations initially ballooned the Defence Force to over 100
000 personnel, but it has since declined to about 82 000 through natural
attrition, demobilisation and voluntary severance packages. The present
spending ratio of 52% on personnel, 32% on operating costs and 26% on
capital renewal in the 2000-01 budget results in far too many full-time
members of the force not having staffed posts, which means that, to all
intents and purposes, they are recipients of welfare.

The effect of this armed welfare has been devastating, especially for the
Army. With 80% of the budget for landward defence spent on personnel, the
SA Army requires an additional R166 million in operational funds to
effectively carry out border control operations and support the crime
combating strategy of the SA Police Service. At present, the Army can only
protect high-risk border segments and provide partial support to the
Police. This could be alleviated by paying more attention to the commando
system, which is seriously underfunded.
What is true of the Army is more or less true of the other services. The SA
National Defence Force is on its chinstraps because of excessive
expenditure on surplus personnel. Why has the ANC Government refused to
begin the downsizing of the Defence Force? There are all sorts of excuses,
but the Department of Defence appears to attribute the failure to downsize
to the inability of the Government to approve employer-initiated
retrenchment packages for the Public Service, possibly because the Minister
for the Public Service and Administration, the hon Fraser-Moleketi, is kept
too busy explaining the nondelivery of welfare to the poor to attend to
this matter. [Interjections.]

Undoubtedly, there is a great difficulty in simultaneously initiating this
programme, achieving the desired representivity in the army and maintaining
military preparedness in the process. The hon Comrade Lekota has, however,
proved himself equal to challenges. Not only is he one of the few members
of Government who understands the dangers of the Zimbabwean situation,
maybe because of his military background, but he also repeatedly warns
indisciplined members of the armed forces that he will not stand for
unworthy behaviour, of which there are examples aplenty.
Indeed, he restated his commitment very clearly this morning. There is one
thing that concerns me, however. I fully agree with him when he clearly
says to us that those members do not belong in the barracks among the other
people. I am concerned, though, that he does not speak of apprehending such
people and bringing them to book. Let us look at the matter of theft.
Mercifully, it appears that we have not actually lost two helicopters, but
we have indeed lost thousands upon thousands of weapons, rounds of
ammunition and even armour-piercing missiles - with the concomitant dangers
of cash-in-transit hijacks on our highways - not to mention vehicles and
misuse of the same.

Surely in a closed society like the Defence Force the culprits can be
identified and we can expect the guilty parties to be brought to book and
fired? Why is this not happening, notwithstanding the stated intentions of
the hon the Minister? Is he also constrained by the inflexibility of the
labour laws? Why does he not speak out about this? Is he afraid that the
hon the Minister of Labour will vilify even him as a rich, white capitalist
racist whenever one talks about these laws?

The Minister referred to the controversial issue of Aids and I believe it
is absolutely necessary to take a very hard look at this matter. This
becomes all the more pressing considering the recent figures which suggest
- and I emphasise that they suggest - that the prevalence may be much
higher than originally thought. I believe we should take it seriously. We
must take cognisance of the fact that the United Nations does not allow
personnel so afflicted to serve in the UN forces.

In the absence of a vigorous policy of downsizing ... [Interjections.] Yes,
somebody said ``Oh, no!'' We cannot send people who are HIV/Aids positive
on a peacekeeping mission to the DRC, and that is a fact. In the absence of
a vigorous policy of downsizing, perhaps the greatest tragedy has been that
large numbers of highly skilled and experienced officers have been lost to
the SANDF through voluntary severance packages. Considering this leakage of
skills and the insufficient budget for training replacements, who is going
to command the tanks, fly the aircraft, drive the ships, tend the sickbays
and provide logistical support, especially considering the upgrading of
equipment in the future Army? If we intend using that equipment
effectively, we need highly trained and experienced people and the time to
start training them is now.

The hon the Minister has told us what he intends to do and for this, as I
have already stated, he has our full support. What he has not told us is
why he does not get on with it, and on this we are awaiting his reply. I
believe it was only partially answered this morning. And in the interests
of us all, may the force be with the Minister. [Applause.]

Mnu V B NDLOVU: Sihlalo, mhlonishwa uLekota nePhini lakho uMaMadlala wakwa-
Routledge kanye nosihlalo bonke abakhona namalungu ePhalamende,
ngiyanibingelela.
 
Okokuqala, ngicela ukukhalela kakhulu umndeni wakwaMasuku nezingane
ngokushiywa ubaba wekhaya. Sengathi iNkosi ingaba nabo. Ameni. (Translation
of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr V B NDLOVU: Chairperson, I take pleasure in saluting the hon Lekota and
his Deputy, Ms Madlala-Routledge, hon members and all chairpersons who are
here today.

Firstly, I would like to convey my deepest sympathy to the Masuku family on
the death of the head of the family. I trust that God will help them.
Amen.]

The task entrusted to the SA National Defence Force is a vital one. They
are charged not only with protecting our borders in the event of aggression
from a foreign power, but also with supporting the civil authorities in
times of crises such as the recent floods or important national events such
as giving logistical support to the IEC in election times.

Therefore it is vital that our armed forces are properly equipped to
discharge their duties efficiently and effectively. This requires not only
that up-to-date military hardware is provided, but also that the resources
are available to provide proper training and instruction to ensure that our
servicemen and servicewomen have the capacity to fulfil their important
role. On the whole, the Defence Force does an excellent job and we should
pay tribute to it for that.

Nevertheless, we cannot ignore the fact that the SA National Defence Force
continues to face some severe problems. The terrible events at Msinga,
where some members of the Defence Force allegedly murdered civilians, is
one of the examples of the lack of discipline which must not be allowed to
take hold. The Minister and the Chief of the Defence Force must make it
absolutely and utterly clear that indiscipline of any sort is unacceptable,
that the National Defence Force is a professional force which expects all
its members to act in a professional manner, and that there is no place in
it for murderers or any other sorts of criminals.

Related to that is the issue which arose from the tragic Madubane case, the
killings at Tempe military base in the Free State. These tragic events
reinforce the view of the IFP that much greater effort must be made to
instruct members of the Defence Force on issues of cultural diversity, so
that all servicemen and servicewomen can understand and respect one other
traditionally, because Afrikaans is not the only language that should be
spoken.

The second issue that has to be addressed by the Defence Force is the
matter of retrenchment. The need to reduce the overall force level is well
understood. But my party and I urge great caution over the mechanism we use
to do this, particularly with the prospect of employer-initiative
retrenchments. Compulsory retrenchment of military personnel is a concept
that poses many dangers. To throw large numbers of trained military
servicemen and servicewomen out onto the streets without alternative
employment at this time has the potential of adding significantly to the
crime crisis which we already face in South Africa.

If compulsory retrenchment is to be embarked upon, it must only be applied
where alternative employment prospects can be found for the affected
parties. In particular, the Defence Force could look at redeployment of
members to the SAPS in order to ensure that retrenched personnel contribute
to the battle against the current crime wave. However, the IFP is convinced
that employer-initiative retrenchment is neither desirable nor necessary.
The force level can surely be managed down more effectively through natural
attrition than through compulsory retrenchment.

Tragically, the incidence of HIV recorded in our armed forces suggests that
a significant number of personnel will be retired ill over the coming
years. It would, therefore, seem sensible for proper research to be
conducted to assess those likely to be affected by HIV/Aids before the
retrenchment plan is adopted. The HIV-Aids issue also raises issues
relating to the duty that the Defence Force has towards the care and
welfare of those serving our country. Much more attention must be given by
officers of the SANDF to the task of keeping a firm hand on the discipline,
health and welfare of our soldiers, sailors and Air Force personnel.
Clearly, much more emphasis must be given to Aids education by the SANDF.

The incidence of HIV/Aids in the SANDF calls into question the role that
South Africa will be able to play in the contribution to peacekeeping
efforts abroad. The UN requires that all troops serving in the UN section
of peacekeeping efforts be certified HIV/Aids negative. This has serious
implications for our ability to discharge our responsibility to the
international community. In any event, troops deployed by South Africa to
peacekeeping missions will require a degree of specialised training,
according to international requirements and peacekeeping methods, over and
above their usual training.

In view of this fact, my party will propose that significant, specific
units be trained and ready to be deployed as forces for peacekeeping
missions. Whenever such a force is deployed, it must be with a clear
understanding that the international community will meet the financing of
our military personnel in full.

I would like to conclude on a positive note by paying tribute to the
sterling efforts and immense courage that the SANDF personnel demonstrated
in assisting the victims of the recent floods, both within South Africa and
in Mozambique, after so many years during which the SA Army was regarded
with fear and loathing by our neighbours.

Njalo uma ngikhuluma izinto ezinhle ngiye ngiphelelwe yisikhathi [Uhleko.]
[Ihlombe.] [Every time I speak about good things, I am told that my time
has expired. [Laughter.] [Applause.]]

Mna K W MORWAMOCHE: Mohlomphegi Modulasetulo, le nna ntumelele ke
itswalanye le Kabo ye ya Kgoro ya Tšhireletšo.

Ka moka le kwele ge baDP ba bolela mo. Ka segagešo re re monna ge a palelwa
ke go itia kati o re kgoro ke ye nyenyane. [Legofsi.] Pudi le yona ge e
šitwa go tswala e re kgwahla di a lla. [Ditshego.]

Le nna untumelele ke ahlaahle Kabo ye ya Kgoro ya Tšhireletšo ka bophara.
Mošomo wo mogolo wa kgoro ye ke go šireletša naga ya rena ka bophara le
bopêpêtla bja yona. Re ikgantšha ka sesole sa rena, ka ge se šireleditše
temokrasi ya rena ka potego. Ka 'baka la Kgoro ya Tšhireletšo, Mopresitente
wa rena ga a buše, o a rena. Ga go batšwantle bao ba kago thopa naga ye ya
rena ka dikgoka, gobane sesole sa rena se tiile.

Mellwaneng ya naga ya rena go rena šebešebe ka 'baka la masole a rena ao a
hlahlwago ke Mmušo wa ANC. Le kua Ga-Sekhukhune, bošego ge go re
``kgwahlaa'', re a tseba gore ga se lenaba, ke sehlotlolo. Seo ga se re
gore re re go ja mpunyane, re lebale, re hloke le magagešo-dumelang. Ge re
ka robala bja matloga-dibešong, re ka tla ra hwetša temokrasi ye ya rena e
wetše diatleng tša botate-nthute-go-epa-digwere-e-sego-maano-a-go-ja.
Mogologolo o boletše are o se bone dinaka tša bopudi go bapela bolane ka
gare ga tšona.

Kgoro ya tša Selegae e kgona go phethagatša mošomo wa yona mellwaneng ka
'baka la thekgo ya sesole sa rena. Le nakong ya dikgetho sesole sa rena se
šireletša bakgethi kantle ga go tšeya lehlakori. Gape Kgoro ya tša Selegae
e kgona go romela batšwantle, bao ba tlilego mo nageng ya rena kantle ga
molao, ka thušo ya sesole sa rena.

Kgoro ya tša Mediro le yona nakong ya ge merwalela e tšere ditsela, e
thušwa ke sesole sa rena go direla batho matšibogo a nakwana.

Kgoro ya tša Thuto le yona e thušwa ke dinamelwa tša sesole go iša
ditlabakelo tša sekolo dikolong tša dinageng tša magae, moo go se nago
ditsela.

Balemi kua dithokgweng ba dula ba tseba gore tšhireletšo ya sesole e gona.
Nakong ya dikomelelo, sesole sa rena se thuša batho ka go ba išetša meetse.
Ge hlaga e swa, go a tsebega gore sesole sa rena se tšeya karolo ye kgolo
kudu.

Balemi ba rua leruo dikampeng, ka kholofelo ya gore bobanna-re-maano ba ka
se tšeye leruo la bona ka ge sesole se bonala dithokgweng.

Nakong ya ge dingaka le baoki ba ngadile mešomo, dingaka tša sesole di
kgona go ema Kgoro ya tša Maphelo nokeng. Le dinakong tša masolo a thibela-
malwetši mafelong ao go se nago ditsela, Kgoro ya Tšhireletšo e thuša ka
dinamelwa tša sesole go fihlelela ditšhaba tšeo di tsomago melemo. Difofane
tša sesole di tsebega ka go phološa setšhaba nakong tša merwalela.

Kgoro ya tša Toka le yona e ahlola basenyi le batšwantle bao ba rekišago
diokobatši mo nageng ya rena ka mokgwa wo e sego wa molao, e tseba gore ga
go tlhaselo yeo e kago dirwa go tšwa dinageng tšeo.

Sesole sa lewatleng le sona se tšeya karolo go thibeleng bosenyi le go
phološa batho ka meetseng. Sesole se ema maphodisa a rena nokeng ge go
lwantšhwa bosenyi ka kakaretšo. Le tšona dimpja tšeo di šomišwago ke
maphodisa di hwetša hlahlo go tšwa sesoleng.

Babeeletši ba go tšwa dinageng tša kantle ba kgona go bula dikgwebo mo
nageng ya rena ka ge ba tseba gore tšhireletšo ya naga ye e tiile go tloga
lewatleng go fihla lefaufaung.

Kgoro ya Tšhireletšo e kgona go dira dinamelwa le difofane tša sesole, ya
di rekišetša dinaga tša kantle. Kgoro ye e tšeya karolo ye kgolo go
oketšeng letseno la naga ye. Ke dira boipiletšo go Tona ya tša Matlotlo
gore a oketše Kabo ya Kgoro ye, ka ge e šomela dinaga tše dingwe, gammogo
le dikgoro tše dingwe mo nageng ya rena.
Go tšeo di hlagetšego Tona ya Tšhireletšo, ge a be a le mo sefaleng, ke
rata gore ka sesagešo ... [Nako e fedile.] [Legofsi.] (Translation of
Sepedi speech follows.)

[Mr K W MORWAMOCHE: Mr Chairperson, allow me the opportunity to associate
myself with the Defence Vote.

Hon members have heard everything the DP had to say about this Vote. As the
saying goes in my language: A man who cannot dance blames the stage for
being too narrow to adequately accommodate his performance.
[Interjections.] In the same vein, a goat that is unable to procreate
blames its own udder for being too small to feed its offspring. [Applause.]

The primary objective of the SA National Defence Force is to protect and
defend our country against foreign aggression. We are proud of our Defence
Force because it protects our democracy so faithfully. Our President is
able to exercise his good quality leadership in this country because of the
support he gets from the Department of Defence. We are confident that our
country will not be subjected to foreign aggression that might result in
forceful seizure of our Government.
The ANC-led Government has ensured that there is peace and stability on our
borders. Even in my rural Sekhukhune village, we live in such tranquillity
that any nocturnal disturbances are not perceived to be those of
adversaries, but rather of friends and comrades. However, this does not
suggest that we should not be alert to the dangers of being invaded. If we
are too complacent, we may risk our treasured democracy falling into the
hands of our enemies. Our ancestors have warned that one's good neighbour
may turn out to be one's fiercest enemy.

The Department of Home Affairs is able to perform its duty of controlling
over our borders through the support of our Army. During election times,
voters, irrespective of their political affiliation, are protected by our
Defence Force. This department is able to repatriate illegal aliens through
the support of our Defence Force.

During the recent devastating floods, our Defence Force, in collaboration
with the Department of Public Works, helped the affected communities by
erecting some temporary bridges to enable them to cross the roaring waters.

Our military vehicles are used by the Department of Education in
transporting equipment to schools in rural areas that are normally
characterised by poor road infrastructure.

Our rural farming communities are assured of protection by our Army. During
droughts, our Defence Force normally helps by transporting fresh drinking
water to the farmers. When veld fires occur, it is our Defence Force that
helps the affected communities by fighting the flames, eventually bringing
the fires under control.

Cattle farmers in pastoral camps are also assured of protection against
stock thieves, because of the visible policing by our Army.

During strikes by hospital staff, doctors from our Defence Force are sent
out to perform duties on behalf of the Department of Health. During
vaccination campaigns, our military vehicles are able to access some
normally inaccessible areas, particularly in the countryside. Helicopters
from our Defence Force rescued many lives during the recent floods.

The Department of Justice is able to sentence criminals and to order the
repatriation of druglords who smuggle dangerous drugs into our country,
knowing full well that there will be no invasion of our country.

The Navy helps in combatting crime and rescuing those who drown at sea.
Thus, the Defence Force plays a supportive role in combatting crime. Police
dogs are trained by the Defence Force.

Foreign investors are able to proceed with their investments in this
country because of the protection afforded them by our Defence Force, which
is very strong at sea and in the air.

Our Department of Defence has the ability to manufacture military vehicles
and planes and sell them abroad. Therefore, since the department is able to
generate its own income and assist other Government departments, I would
like to appeal to the Minister of Finance to increase its budget so as to
enable it to continue performing those duties.

With regard to the bickering of some individuals from the opposition
parties while the Minister was at the podium, I wish to say that in our
culture ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]]

Mnr H A SMIT: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek maak graag gebruik van hierdie
geleentheid om agb minister Lekota te bedank vir sy wydlopende,
insiggewende inleidende toespraak, en ek wil hom ook hartlik bedank dat hy
dit vooraf beskikbaar gestel het. Ons het groot waardering daarvoor. Ek wil
ook dadelik sê ek het ook waardering vir die wyse waarop die toeligting
geskied het. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr H A SMIT: Mr Chairperson, I wish to take this opportunity to thank the
hon Minister Lekota for his wide-ranging, informative introductory speech,
and I also want to thank him sincerely for making it available beforehand.
We greatly appreciate that. Furthermore, I would like to add immediately
that I am also appreciative of the way in which the explanation was dealt
with.]

I would also like to thank the hon the Minister of Defence for his open-
door approach to management, and also towards opposition parties. I really
appreciate that, because the SA National Defence Force is a proud and
important arm of our public sector.
If anyone is unrightfully planning to harm that arm, he or she can expect
serious resistance from my party, the New NP. I regard the SA National
Defence Force as an institution that should be above petty party politics,
and today I want to salute our armed forces for their involvement during
the current financial year in various rescue operations within our borders
and also in neighbouring countries. I will not dwell on detail, but I only
want to quote the heading of a newspaper clipping, ``SA aircraft race
rising waters'', referring to the Mozambican rescue operations. The
Minister also referred at length to these operations.

Our Defence budget is underfunded. This is a general statement, but I am
specifically referring to our Army. We must keep this statement in mind. I
think it is of the utmost importance to try and achieve the ideal
rightsizing of 70 000 men and women, as agreed upon in the Defence Review.
My hon colleague from the DP also referred to this aspect. At the moment we
stand at approximately 82 000, which is already a downsizing from Mr
Modise's approximately 112 000.

The New NP is sympathetic towards those people who are to be retrenched,
but if we want to take up our responsibilities, we must carefully manage
this process. This means that the people who are to be retrenched must be
carefully trained to take their rightful place in society again. I am also
of the opinion that our troops are being used for jobs outside their job
description, for example, to guard VIPs, to guard buildings and even to
guard Parliament. I think it is outside their job description, and I can
name numerous other cases.

I also feel that because of other duties attached, such as border
protection and support rendered to the SA Police Service, Government must
supplement the Defence budget. We must get a satisfactory ruling regarding
certain expenses such as our involvement during the Mozambican general
elections. I am not referring to the floods, I am referring to the recent
general elections in Mozambique, which cost the SA Defence Force an amount
in the vicinity of R7,4 million.

Why should our Defence Force pay this bill? If Foreign Affairs made the
request, then they must pay the bill. I must add that I did receive the hon
the Minister's written reply yesterday, but from speaking to the officials
from the hon the Minister's office, I am still not convinced that the SA
Defence Force will not have to pick up this bill. In the process we are
losing the capability of this proud force.

Regarding losses because of theft, equipment worth R7,04 million was lost
in the period until 1 July 1999 according to a lengthy written reply from
the hon the Minister. This is unacceptable. Please do not tell me that it
is only a small percentage of the total budget. If one spade is stolen, it
is already one too many, and I am not even referring to the pair of Ray-Ban
glasses that were stolen at Langebaan or the 245 firearms that were stolen
in the period mentioned in the Minister's reply.

We will fulfil our duty as an opposition party. We will criticise if
necessary, but he will never have to look for us when it comes to loyalty
to this proud force.
Ek bedank graag die voorsitter van die gesamentlike komitee, mnr Mashimbye,
vir die afgelope jaar se noue samewerking, asook die voorsitter van die
portefeuljekomitee, die agb me Modise. Ek dink nie 'n mens sal in enige
faset van die parlementêre opset beter samewerking vind nie. (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[I would like to thank the chairperson of the joint committee, Mr
Mashimbye, for the past year's close co-operation, as well as the
chairperson of the portfolio committee, the hon Ms Modise. I do not think
that one will find better co-operation in any facet of the parliamentary
set-up.]

Keeping all of this in mind, the New NP will vote for the adoption of the
Defence budget. [Applause.]

Mrs N R SHOPE: Mr Chairman and hon members, the ANC supports this budget.

First of all I would like to congratulate the SANDF on the good work done
with regard to integration. That is the area on which I will concentrate.
The main reason for my appreciation is the fact that at the end of the day
we managed, despite many formations coming from different areas of thought
and ideology and a few hiccups here and there, to come out with one SA
National Defence Force.

The defence committees did very well in fulfilling their oversight function
at the beginning of the first democratic Parliament. In our interaction
with various stakeholders and the Ministry, we came out with good policy
documents such as the Defence Review and the White Paper on Defence. These
documents have guided us along the way in establishing and strengthening
the SA National Defence Force.

The oversight duty of the committees still exists and the scope of work
broadens as we look at monitoring the implementation of the policy by the
SANDF.

Ntirho wa tikomiti ta Vusirheleri ti angarhela na ku seketela na ku
tsundzuxa vanhu hinkwavo lava tirhaku ntirho wihi kumbe wihi wa tiko. Loko
swilo swi onhaka hi ta vula, loko swi saseka kona hi ta vula, hikwalaho ke,
mina ndzi nga xirho xa ANC, ndzi nga rhumiwa hi yona ANC kuva xirho xa yona
Palamende leyi ya ku hlonipheka, ndzi na ku rhandza ku xiyaxiya swilo swa
vavasati na timhaka ta vona endleleni ya hina yo aka na ku hundzuluxa tiko.
Ku na ``principle'' ya ku ntshunxiwa ka vamanana ``emancipation of women'',
lowu nga nawu lowu sasekisaka ANC. Lowu nga endla leswaku vaxisati vo kota
ku fana na mina, na van'wanyana hi kokeka ku ta nghena hi va swirho swo
tiya swa ANC. (Translation of Tsonga paragraph follows.)

[The functions of the Defence committees include protecting and advising
all employees working in various spheres throughout the country. If things
go wrong we are going to react, and when things go right, we are also going
to comment, therefore I, as a member of the ANC and also having been sent
by the ANC to be a member of this honourable Parliament, am interested in
the careful consideration of matters and affairs pertaining to women in our
path to nation-building and the transformation of our country. There is a
principle of the emancipation of women, and this principle is advocated by
the ANC. It enabled women like me and others to be attracted to become
staunch members of the ANC.]

It is for this reason that I have a few words that will indicate that in
the process of integration and the building of the SANDF, this principle
does get lost sometimes. On 8 March 1998 a gender conference of the SANDF
was held. One of the resolutions of that conference was that we needed to
put in place a structure that would sensitise all structures of the SANDF,
so that gender issues are taken seriously and are at the centre of all
decisions and activities within the SANDF.

On 30 March 2000 a gender workshop of the SANDF was held. It was clear from
the deliberations at the workshop that the location of the gender
sensitising machinery was not in order. I, therefore, would like to
indicate that officers who deal with equal opportunity should be placed so
that they account to the Chief of the SANDF and the Secretary for Defence.
In this way, women's problems will find a shorter route to the ears of
decision-makers. The longer the route, the longer the problem lingers.

We are happy to have Gen Sedibe in charge of equal opportunity programmes.
At the same time, it should be remembered that a number of us women are ex-
members of MK and have also viewed Sedibe as our mentor. I would like to
believe that even now, as the officer in charge of the equal opportunities
programme, young women soldiers regard her and others as mentors, more so
because she is a general by rank. My problem in this matter stems from the
fact that she is not reporting to a higher authority, but to a lower rank,
which means to me that women's issues take a longer route to decision-
making. [Applause.] I would like to suggest that, as part of the worksheet
of every officer, gender should be included, so that this item is
integrated and treated as a line function.

There is the problem of the medical scheme, which I learnt is not woman-
friendly. I would like to urge all those who are in decision-making
positions to take into serious consideration the provisions of the said
medical aid and correct them. I am concerned that this budget has no
prominent allocation for women's empowerment programmes. One of the duties
of the SANDF, like all institutions and businesses of this land, is that it
has a fundamental duty to create child-care facilities and to make
conscious efforts to empower women. Because of problems such as this, we
would appeal to the department always to remember to involve the defence
committee in the early stages of the budgeting process, so that, at the end
of the day, we can go out to the South African public and report with full
knowledge and understanding, thus being confident of our report.

It will have to be taken into account that the empowerment programme has
not been followed rigorously and no woman should be made to leave the SANDF
without having been to the various courses, because there was no support
system put in place for them to develop to their full potential and
hopefully be an asset to South Africa. Please bear in mind that women
soldiers are just as patriotic as anyone in the force, or anyone in the
other sectors. However, certain things should be put in place as a means of
support. For the reason that I mentioned when I started with my speech, the
work ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, your speaking time has
expired.

Mrs N R SHOPE: I support this budget. [Applause.]

Mr M E MABETA: Madam Speaker, hon Minister and colleagues, it is a pleasure
for us to participate in this debate. I would like to start by
congratulating the Minister on the good work he has done in continuing with
the task of reorganising and restructuring our Defence Force under very
difficult conditions.

The UDM supports this budget and concurs with the view of the Department of
Defence that, generally, the defence programme is underfunded, even though
the strategic packages have partially helped or are likely to partially
remedy the situation. The Army has suffered most as a result of this
underfunding, because of the extent of voluntary packages in the nineties
and the continuing unbudgeted commitments in other areas, the effects of
which are to undermine the internal Defence budget planning processes.

The White Paper on Defence talks about a defence structure that is based on
a core force. The review paper talks about set numbers. The Minister or his
department needs to clarify for us whether we are talking about 50 000, 65
000 or 70 000. However, my party is more concerned about the effect that
the budget has on the general staffing process in defence because, despite
the fact that we now have this sophisticated equipment which is there to
stay, it is difficult to imagine how in the absence of a programme for
retraining and reskilling - a common practice in all other countries - of
the existing members of the Defence Force, we are going to be able to man
these machines.

We know that in the three-year budget cycle there is no planned increase in
funding for the Army and personnel. The first question is: How do we effect
the vision of a core force from a personnel and an operational point of
view? Do we have the professional people or soldiers to man the ships,
submarines, Army corvettes and helicopters for rescue missions? The
important consideration in this matter is, how are we to utilise the most
modern equipment without a trained manpower?

It is not clear in the current plan how we are going to move from the
current situation in the Army to the core force. The effect of that seems
to be that we are going to maintain the high levels of people in the Army.
Rather than having a narrow and lean force, we are going to end up with a
larger core force, a larger Army and a highly demoralised Defence Force.
This is not likely to help the issues of racism, crime and theft, which so
painfully and openly characterise the type of morale in our armed forces.

The Defence Review requires a small core force and a large part-time force,
but in reality we are likely to have a large core force and a small part-
time force. We fully appreciate the painful and unexplained pressure on the
Minister, because no money is made available for development and
operational expenditure despite the fact that there are daily requests from
Foreign Affairs and the Police Service to make the soldiers available for
the operations that the police should have taken care of and budgeted for.
In our view as the UDM - and this is not party-bashing - the Minister needs
an integrated system involving different clusters, namely the Police
Service and the Ministries of Defence, of Finance and of Intelligence, so
that one does not have a day-to-day and piecemeal arrangement in the
deployment of our armed forces in these areas.

I must say at this point in my speech that I am quite disappointed that the
Minister chose to make the remarks he made about Gen Holomisa's
disclosures. [Interjections.] I am heartened, however, that the Minister of
Foreign Affairs has pledged that she will call a debate. I hope that the
Minister will figure out whether she will speak in the debate, or he will
speak in the debate, or whether it will be the Minister for Intelligence.
We welcome the debate, but I regret to say that the Minister of Defence's
comments are not proper at this point. [Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: Uqalile ke! [There you go again!]

Mr M E MABETA: Ndiqalile nangoku! [Of course, yes!]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!
 
Mr M E MABETA: We would also like the Minister to pay attention, through
the Secretariat for Defence, to the issue of racism in the armed forces. I
am particularly upset by the fact that there is no linguistic or language
training programme in the current civic education programme. We need to
sensitise everybody in Defence that all South African languages have to be
spoken by everybody.

I would like to personally make the point that the current problems in the
rationalisation and transformation of the armed forces are likely to create
a situation in which we have within the Defence Force and our society a
large portion of people who are discontented. Their families have not
received their packages or pensions; all that sort of thing. On his
missions outside the Minister is likely to find these people operating as
mercenaries. No one would welcome this.

I would like to ask the Minister of Defence to instruct the Secretary for
Defence, if the Chief of Defence agrees to look into this. I do not know
who, in terms of the current restructuring, should give these instructions.
I do not believe that they have sorted out this issue. It is a big issue in
our committee and I would like the Minister to sort it out. [Time expired.]

Mr L V J NGCULU: Chairperson, Minister and Deputy Minister of Defence, as
we debate the Defence budget today, we need to look back on the century we
have traversed. For us as South Africans it was a century of pain and
struggle, but also a century which held the hope that victory was certain.

South Africa was ruled by a government which had made racism its official
policy. In order to sustain this racist bigotry, apartheid South Africa
used its security organs to repress and destabilise not only South Africa,
but the entire region. It was thus regarded as the Frankenstein of our
continent, whose murderous and destabilisation campaign created havoc and
mayhem.

To date Southern Africa is still suffering from such ill-conceived
policies. To highlight my point, we remember, firstly, the raid on Maseru
in Lesotho on 9 December 1982 in which about 42 people were killed. The PFP
spokesman on defence, Philip Myburgh, justified this dastardly attack by
saying that the army had ``no choice but to carry out a pre-emptive
strike.'' The Rand Daily Mail went further to say, referring to violence:


  Those who advocate it must expect, indeed accept, that arms will be taken
  up against them. The SA Defence Force has always made it clear that it
  will not hesitate to cross borders to attack and destroy ANC bases.

Secondly, on 14 June 1985 the SADF invaded Botswana and killed 13 people in
cold blood. Commenting on this cowardly act, Constand Viljoen, then Chief
of the SADF, said it was ``a rather difficult and unpleasant operation. We
did not like it, but we had to do it.'' [Interjections.]

Such was the callousness which characterised apartheid South Africa, a
country that never respected the sovereignty and dignity of its
neighbouring countries! The first democratic election in 1994 proclaimed
that our national Defence Force would never again be used to repress
democracy and the aspirations of the people of Africa for freedom. South
Africa proclaimed itself as a country committed to the renewal of Africa.
When he was addressing this House, our esteemed President, Comrade Thabo
Mbeki, said


  In the course of a mere decade, we ended the entrenched and pernicious
  system of apartheid white minority rule. We have put in place a
  constitutionally governed and stable democratic system ...

  Having ended our dark days as a pariah country, we can rightly say that,
  today, the nations of our common universe are confident that out of South
  Africa will emerge a thing of value that will contribute to the building
  of a more humane world.

I want to say, therefore, that our debate on the budget should be informed
by this and by the clarion call of the continent to have South Africa
participate in the development and nurturing of peace in Africa.

There are those who would like to see the Defence budget reduced to a point
at which the very capacity of the SANDF to play its rightful role is
undermined. They do so not out of concern for the people of South Africa,
but in order to create an opportunity to launch reckless attacks on our
Government and therefore the ANC. Before 1994 the Defence budget often
unaccountably escalated, but those hon members were as silent in this House
as the statues standing outside this building.

One of the critical fundamental changes brought about by the ANC-led
Government was to entrench constitutional parameters for the SANDF and see
military relations underpinned by the following principles: firstly, the
principle of supremacy; secondly, that of accountability; and, thirdly,
that of transparency. Our approach to the Defence budget, in particular, is
informed by these principles. In 1988 defence spending constituted 4,3% of
GDP. This shrank in 1996 to 2% and last year to 1,5% of GDP. As the
Minister of Finance himself acknowledged:


  What we did from 1996 was to apply an unbelievably heavy squeeze on
  defence.

Thus the trend has been a steep decline in defence spending over the past
few years. However, we need to take into account that the country needs a
defence capability that will meet demands and expectations from our region
and continent.

We live in an environment of huge instability on our continent. Therefore
we cannot allow our defence capability to run itself into the ground,
otherwise we will find that, in the years ahead, the massive backlog
created will cause big problems. The debate should not be around guns or
butter, but rather on the dialectical relationship between the need to
provide an efficient and sustainable defence capability and the need to
bring about a better life for all.

Our national Defence Force should prepare itself to assist in both local
and regional disaster relief and humanitarian programmes. It seems these
tasks should be factored into our budgeting and planning as they are
concrete tasks that could further demonstrate our political commitment to
the African renaissance.

In this vein, the sterling role played by the SANDF in disaster relief in
the northern provinces and Mozambique stands out as an heroic feat of
patriotism and commitment. In Mozambique, in particular, the SANDF acted
with high morale and efficiency in rescuing flood victims. It elevated the
standard and respect of South Africa as a country to be relied upon, and,
of course, this reclaiming of South Africa as a country to be relied on and
trusted came about because of the ANC's steadfast commitment to democracy
and the wellbeing of all the people. We are no longer regarded as the
Frankenstein of our continent, but rather as a beacon of hope.

It is in this regard, as enshrined in the Freedom Charter, that there shall
be peace and friendship, that our country shall continue to be committed to
peace on our continent. Much has been done to prepare for our role in
entrenching peace in Africa. There were joint operations in September 1998
with Tanzania and Mozambique. South Africa has rendered full co-operation
with the SADC, and with the ISDSC in various fields, such as the support
given to Tanzania to help with the recovery of casualties from the sunken
ferry in Lake Victoria, assistance given to Lesotho during heavy rains, and
the sterling support given to Mozambique during the recent floods.
Operation Blue Crane, a peacekeeping exercise in April 1999 in which
contingents from most of the SADC countries participated, was rated as a
major success in joint operations.

There was also Operation Boleas, which was the operation to intervene in
stabilising Lesotho. It was a milestone for democratic South Africa. It was
the first time that democratic South Africa deployed troops on foreign
soil, invited by that country and in full co-operation with SADC, in order
to bring peace and defend a democratic government. Even though the main
elements of the combined task force have now been withdrawn from Lesotho
and have returned to their respective countries, a small training team
comprising both the SA National Defence Force and the Botswana Defence
Force remains in Lesotho to assist with the restructuring and training of
the Lesotho Defence Force. The President and our Minister have also
indicated that our Defence Force is readying itself to participate in peace
operations in the DRC under the auspices of the UN.

This year's budget allocation will give an added impetus. We are happy that
this budget is a solid contribution to the achievement of peace and
prosperity in Africa and to ensuring that the 21st century evolves as an
African century. In this way Africa will work her way towards the
resumption of her rightful place among the continents of the globe. Serving
as a catalyst to this process is a Government under the illustrious
leadership of Thabo Mbeki. To our Minister of Defence, Comrade Mosiuoa
Lekota, we say: The budget is ours. [Applause.]
Mrs R M SOUTHGATE: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister, the ACDP wishes to
congratulate the SANDF on its recent rescue operations. We appeal to the
Ministry, however, to enhance infrastructure, management and finances to
ensure that the Defence Force is always ready to respond efficiently when
natural disasters occur. Let the department improve on whatever weaknesses
it noted in its operations in Mozambique. Let us not lose momentum.

The Ministry must also be central in setting up the SADC relief centre to
ease the burden on the Defence Force in future when disasters strike. The
Minister recently, in a written a reply to hon Madasa, stated that finances
constrained further development in this matter.

The ACDP urges the Ministry to play a leading role and to seek foreign
donors to help SADC to set up the necessary structures and to purchase its
equipment. The ACDP requests the Minister to follow up on the list of
individuals and associations compiled by the department which have shown a
keen interest in helping the Defence Force in rescue operations.

We are of the view that long-term private associations exclusively and/or
in partnership with the Defence Force and SADC would be the proper vehicle
to help if natural disasters occur. The ACDP notes with great concern the
admission by the Minister of Defence on Wednesday, when he was questioned
by the hon member Modise, the chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on
Defence, that the department has been restructured without consulting the
portfolio committee. We view this decision not only as undermining the
oversight role of Parliament, but as repugnant to the Constitution.

The offices of the Chief of the Defence Force and the Secretary for Defence
are separate. This was done to ensure accountability and to strengthen the
idea of military-civilian control. The ACDP calls on the Minister to halt
the implementation of this decision until the portfolio committee has been
properly consulted. [Time expired.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Chairperson, Minister of Defence and
members, on 2 June 1999 the people of South Africa renewed the mandate to
the ANC-led Government to deliver a better life for all. The Ministry and
Department of Defence take that mandate seriously and are accelerating the
process of change.
However, we realise that transforming the Defence Force is not an easy
task. It forms one of the biggest challenges facing the democratic
Government. Some of the problems go back to the agreements reached at the
negotiations. Despite these problems, however, transformation in the SA
National Defence Force has started in earnest. All the policies, strategies
and targets are in place. Also in place are guidelines for an efficient
Defence Force that is representative and professional. We are encouraged by
the contribution this morning of the members who have already spoken, and
we will take into account all their proposals.

We are working towards identifying and removing all obstacles in the path
of transformation and empowerment of our members. We are looking at the
following critical issue, namely ensuring that the staffing boards are
representative, credible, fair, equitable and transparent. The results of
the staffing process must, therefore, reflect Government policy on racial
and gender representivity, and, finally, there must be timely and proper
communication to all stakeholders.

What are some of the challenges as already observed by some of the speakers
before me? The majority of the privates and corporals in the SANDF are
black. The middle layer remains predominantly white and male. To correct
this we have identified the need to recruit more blacks and women into the
Navy and the Air Force and to invest in targeted training of black students
and soldiers to enter and advance in these highly technical arms of
service.

This investment will also focus on providing quality leadership. Soldiers
recognise and respect good leadership. A good commander cares for and
listens to the troops and will not send them where he or she would not go.
We now know that Gen Geldenhuys, former chief of the SADF, gained the
respect of his troops by leading them from the front. Let me acknowledge at
this point the contribution that he is making to the ministerial committee
chaired by Dr Setai, and let me acknowledge the work that they are doing.
We look forward to their report and recommendations.

We are concerned about the resistance to change from some sections of the
Defence Force. The theft of SANDF property is receiving our immediate and
thorough attention. Similarly, we are getting to the bottom of other
criminal activities, as the Minister has stated, such as soldiers assisting
and participating in mercenary activity. We will soon be making an
announcement on this issue.

As part of the process of accelerating change, we will be strengthening the
oversight role of the secretariat and the Ministry and we will be asking
experts to assist us in this respect. We are monitoring the departmental
plans regarding transformation and we will be asking for regular reports on
the implementation of Government policies.

However, transformation goes beyond numbers. We want to ensure that
democratic values are entrenched in every aspect of our work. The civic
education programme will become a core part of all training and will
include transforming the culture of the SANDF so that it reflects the
values of justice, peace, gender equality, democracy and development, as
well as the diverse spectrum of its membership.

Monitoring the Defence budget is an important tool of civilian oversight.
Transparency in Defence spending will make it possible to monitor how much
is spent and on what. The Minister of Defence has given me the
responsibility of monitoring the Defence budget. The new process of
managing departmental finances will make the task of monitoring on a
monthly and biannual basis easier.

I will be working very closely with the chief of finance in the Defence
Secretariat on all aspects of the budget process. I will also co-operate
with members of Parliament who will play a crucial role, and experts in
civil society will assist me in monitoring Defence spending. This will
allow for tighter budget control and reprioritisation.

The Department of Defence is discussing ways of sharing resources and spare
capabilities with other Government departments to assist in reconstruction
and service delivery. We are contributing to the fight against tropical
diseases and the HIV/Aids pandemic. The former SA Defence Force was
perceived as a threat to its own people and to its neighbours. We have just
come from a history of maximising regional destabilisation. It therefore
becomes imperative that we optimise our efforts at promoting regional
security.

Our power as a major player in the region is not necessarily seen by all as
a catalyst to further regional co-operation. On the other hand, it is
widely acknowledged that we are the armed forces of a democracy, one that
leads in pursuit of democratic values. This is an advantage as we seek to
promote our common interest in the region. Instead of being trapped by a
paradigm that mechanistically interprets the military in the sense of an
armed force, our democratic nature allows us to pursue regional co-
operation without having to be seen as the policeman of Southern Africa.

We need to maximise our opportunities without creating fears amongst our
partners. We have, also, to interpret the African renaissance as meaning
that we should share resources and develop African competencies
collectively so that we may take our rightful place on the world stage. Our
initiatives must be joint and multilateral in that we share commitment and
accountability. If we are required, for example, to add to the duties of
our Navy the role of patrolling our common fishing grounds, whilst
acquiring deep-sea experience, we expect that our partner should cover some
of the operational costs. It is this visible contribution that is essential
for authentic partnership in the region.

We will be promoting, through SADC forums, the sharing of training
opportunities. Once we agree that we have to expose some of our personnel
to the large military academies of the world, there is absolutely no reason
why we cannot promote joint operability by training SADC forces together in
African countries. This promotes regional stability and our common
security. We have many years of co-operation in the health sphere that will
promote regional stability and security. We now need to make greater
strides towards combating the HIV/Aids pandemic, malaria, tuberculosis and
malnutrition.

Security is not a matter of guns only, but it is also about combating all
threats to our national sovereignty and security, be they in the form of
belligerent forces, belligerent bugs or poverty. We will be intensifying
our collaborative efforts with the health agencies in the region to fight
these enemies together.

An analysis of the causes of conflicts in Africa reveals that issues of
access and control of resources that can be used for development appear to
be the underlying cause of most conflicts. This assumption is clearly
illustrated by the nature of the conflicts in Angola, the DRC and the Great
Lakes region. The relevance of development not only relates to the causes
of war, but also to its severe impact on the socioeconomic development of a
nation and its human and physical development resources. It is for this
reason that we have concerned ourselves not only with issues of physical
security, but the broader concept of human security.

We believe that in order to achieve a sustainable peace in the region,
issues of economic development must be integrated into all our
interventions. This assumption provides an alternative approach to
peacekeeping on the African continent. Such an intervention would utilise
development interventions to solve what is fundamentally a development
crisis. When one considers the fact that the needs of people whose
livelihoods have been devastated by floods or war are often barely
distinguishable from the needs of those living in absolute poverty and
facing permanent emergency, it gives a new impetus to the implementation of
developmental peacekeeping initiatives.

Given the interrelated developmental causes and consequences of complex
emergencies, peacekeeping interventions cannot be fully effective unless
they are related to a comprehensive strategy for peace and security, human
rights and social and economic development. That is why events in Zimbabwe
give us concern for security in the region. Developmental principles
require working with and through local institutions, consulting with local
people about their perceptions and needs and where possible, linking
rehabilitation work with existing and related problems and projects.

Albert Einstein argued that peace could not be kept through force.
Peacekeepers of the future should, therefore, not just be military
personnel keeping or enforcing peace, but be active facilitators in laying
the foundation for sustainable peace. Peace attained in this way is not
just a silence of guns after a war. It provides stability, reduces
dependency, lessens vulnerability and provides hope and lasting peace to
populations devastated by war by addressing the root causes of conflict.

We should implement short-term reconstruction measures which are balanced
by concerns for long-term development of civil society. It is proposed that
all future peacekeeping interventions conducted by the SA National Defence
Force or in which the SANDF participates, should ascribe to the principle
of participatory, empowering and sustainable development. This would
require a refocus and retraining of our soldiers to meet the demands of
developmental peacekeeping. For such an intervention to succeed, we need to
develop and enhance our systems to enable our members to facilitate
sustainable solutions in the various areas of operation.

We have proposed to train and make available our peacekeeping formation to
facilitate some of the reconstruction processes required in the Northern
Province, Mpumalanga and the Eastern Cape. This is a unique opportunity to
empower and equip our communities and peacekeepers with skills and
opportunities that will contribute to making the African renaissance a
sustainable African reality.

The gender dimension of peace-building tends to be overlooked. Our
commitment to gender equality, human rights and peace-building mean that
this should be corrected. We are convening three events this year as the
Department of Defence, focusing on women and peace. These activities, which
will bring together women in defence with women in civil society, will
assist us to examine peace through a gender lens. They will help us to
focus on the role of women in peacekeeping and peace-building.
Women's voices and perspectives in peace negotiations and peace-building
have been absent. It is essential that they be heard. To build a world
where gender equality and human rights are respected, deep-rooted change is
necessary. The specific way in which women's security is undermined and
their human rights violated during a state of war must be addressed. We
have planned these activities so that women can define what security and
peace mean to them, and what role they will play in peacekeeping and peace-
building.

Finally, I want to address the issue of the proliferation of small arms. In
July 1999, the OAU adopted a declaration to combat the illicit
proliferation, circulation and trafficking of small arms and light weapons.
We welcome this important step, and that taken by the EU, to regulate the
arms trade and limit arms flows to regions plagued by conflicts. We also
acknowledge the role played by civil society in their efforts to combat the
proliferation of guns in our society. The collection and destruction of
illegal guns in KwaMashu will involve youth representatives from all
political parties coming from Lindelani, Richmond, the Northern Central
local council, schools and the local community policing forum.

We realise that many conflicts in our region are fuelled by the
proliferation of small weapons. Most wars in our continent are fought not
with canons and mortars. Later this year the SANDF will conduct a public
destruction of illegal small arms and all our surplus stock. This will be a
public activity and will be used to raise awareness about the danger of
illegally acquired and surplus small arms. We are going to build a monument
to peace, using the residue of the destroyed weapons in memory of all those
that have died in wars in Africa. This monument will serve as a reminder of
our commitment to peace and the abolition of war in Africa.

Let me finish by thanking my Minister, Terror Lekota, whose friendship and
comradeship go back many years. We both share a past in the trenches of the
Mass Democratic Movement. I also thank our advisers, Kevin Qhobosheane and
Sue Rapkin, the parliamentary committees and my staff. Let me say also how
happy I am to be part of Defence in a democracy. The generals sitting here
have all welcomed me into their fold. Finally, I want to thank my husband,
Jeremy Routledge, my mother-in-law sitting in the gallery, and my family,
who continue to support me. [Time expired.] [Applause.]
Mr E P MOGALE: Mohlomphegi Modulasetulo le Ngwako wo hlomphegago, [Mr
Chairperson, hon members,] although it was implied in many speeches today,
civil-military relations is not a common concept. This concept is extremely
important to the development of our Army, and the influence which this
development will have on the armies of the subcontinent and entire
continent.

Throughout history, the army has been the most abused component of the
state. Its use has shaped the world as we know it today. The colonialists
used military forces to enslave, plunder and arrest the development of
peoples and nations. The fascists, juntas and other military zealots
unleashed armies on peoples and nations, causing death and destruction, the
consequences of which are the underdevelopment, poverty, divisions, debt
and constant wars which are still part of our real world today.

Here at home, the apartheid machinery used the army and caused much
destruction. Thousands died in Southern Africa as a result of military
aggression. The end of apartheid and the emergence of a new democratic
state has had profound political and strategic consequences. As shown
above, military aggression and the destructive deployment of armed forces
have, in many cases, served a few cliques and dictators who had a free hand
in the armies. There was no civil control over the armies, and no checks
and balances.

South Africa is one of the strongest countries on the continent. The
massive task of the reconstruction of our country and the continent will
need our involvement, and this sometimes has to be balanced by military
intervention. The concept of civil-military relations is of special
importance to us. There must be a balance between our responsibility to
intervene and noninterference, which aims at giving peaceful solutions a
chance. To a great extent, the continent will turn to learn from us,
especially on the usage of the military forces. That is why the concept of
civil-military relations becomes vital to our new democracy.

Our Constitution has provisions that create a good foundation and an
environment for the development of civil-military relations. A few of them
can be cited here. Firstly, the President shall be the Commander-in-Chief
of the SANDF and he may employ the SANDF in accordance with their functions
and subject to accountability. Parliament can resolve to terminate such
employment. The authority and power of Parliament are important in pursuing
the concept of civil military relations.

Civil-military relations deal with the hierarchy between the executive,
Parliament and the armed forces. To ensure improved democratic civil-
military relations, Parliament has a range of significant powers regarding
military affairs, namely legislative powers, budget approval, and review of
a presidential decision to deploy the SANDF in critical functions. The
Joint Standing Committee on Defence has powers to investigate and recommend
functions relating to military supervision as may be prescribed by the law.
Close relations with the Department of Defence is crucial.

During the apartheid era the department was totally militarised. The
Defence headquarters performed almost every function. In entrenching civil-
military relations, the Defence Amendment Act of 1995 provides for the
reconstruction of the Department of Defence, which comprises the SANDF and
a civilian Defence Secretariat. The Chief of the SANDF and Secretary for
Defence serve on the statutory Council on Defence.

Civil professionalism is vital in civil-military relations. We can cite
some of the features of that professionalism. These are the acceptance by
military personnel of the principle of civil supremacy over the armed
forces and adherence to that principle, and the maintenance of technical,
managerial, organisational skills and resources which enable the armed
forces to perform their primary and secondary functions efficiently and
effectively. Other principles include the training and education of the
military forces. Strict adherence to the Constitution, national
legislation, international law and treaties are some of the things that the
military must be aware of.

A conscious involvement of the SANDF in community work will also improve
their civil-military relations. We will be facing a big task of educating
our people about our role on the continent, on the subcontinent and in
various international streams. We must also contribute to the endeavour of
many people who are daily increasing civilian control of the Army. This is
a peace mission.

Ge re bolela gore se sengwe le se sengwe seo se lego sesoleng se swanetše
gore se tsebje ke batho, goba batho ba be le taolo godimo ga sesole, ga re
re gore re nape re ponoke. [Nako e fedile.] [Legofsi.] [When we say that
everything in the Army should be transparent to the public, and that our
Defence Force should be placed under civilian control, we do not
necessarily mean that we should be stripped naked. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Mr M A MNCWANGO: Mr Chairman, over the past three to four years we have
witnessed a substantial reduction in the Defence budget. Such a reduction
was understandable owing to our common desire to redirect funds towards
important social areas such as health, education and welfare. Nevertheless,
we must remain mindful of the need to maintain a balance between the
requirements of development and other important social areas of spending,
and the need to provide adequate resources to allow the Defence Force to
fulfil its constitutional mandate.

We therefore welcome the Government's decision to implement a R30 billion
programme of modernising our forces and equipping them to carry out their
duties effectively. The modernisation programme should also bring spinoffs
to our economy through the investment agreements which were concluded with
those suppliers who have won contracts under the programme. We are hopeful
that these agreements will have a beneficial impact upon unemployment and
economic activity in general.

Now that South Africa has returned to international respectability, after
the dark apartheid years, the Defence Force has a new and important role to
play in peacekeeping, and in providing assistance in international civil
disasters. We welcome the recognition of the role that the Defence Force
can now play in peace-keeping duties, particularly in the Democratic
Republic of Congo. However, there remains an outstanding issue of who will
pay for these operations. In terms of the Democratic Republic of Congo, we
are hopeful that the United Nations will assume its full budgetary
responsibility for these activities, but we must ensure that before any
deployment takes place, there is absolute clarity over financial liability
in this respect.

One learns with great disappointment that the vital role carried out by our
armed forces in Lesotho, for instance, under the auspices of SADC has still
not been paid for. The costs to the South African public was approximately
R9 million, and we now hear that SADC does not have the money to meet its
obligations. These problems over financial liability must be thoroughly
addressed, otherwise the South African public will become increasingly
unwilling to allow international deployment of its Defence Force in support
of our neighbours, however important such deployments may be to the
stability of Southern Africa.

The recent deployment of our armed forces in Mozambique and within South
Africa, in response to the civil disaster caused by the floods, showed the
world the commitment and effectiveness of our forces. We unreservedly
commend all the Defence Force personnel involved in this magnificent effort
to save the lives of our own citizens and the citizens of our neighbour.
Again, however, the issue of the costs involved is unavoidable, and here
the international community must look at how it can assist the South
African fiscus with the cost of such operations, for if the world is to
look to South Africa in expectation of humanitarian intervention when
disaster strikes our neighbours, then we must also have the right to look
to the world in expectation of some defrayment of cost.

I conclude by offering the IFP's support for this Vote, but in offering the
support, I hope the Minister will take on board the need to sort out the
important issue of financial obligations and liabilities. [Applause.]

Genl C L VILJOEN: Mnr die Voorsitter, agb Minister, die VF wil ook graag sê
ons betreur die dood van die geneesheer-generaal. Gen Masuku was 'n baie
aanvaarbare persoonlikheid en sy dood is beslis vir ons 'n verlies. Dan wil
ek vir die uniformmense sê die feit dat ek net drie minute praat, beteken
nie dat ek nie meer het om te sê nie. Ek het baie meer om te sê, maar dit
is wat die demokrasie my toelaat.

Die VF glo aan die SA Nasionale Weermag as 'n organisasie wat apolities
moet wees en een waarop almal trots kan wees. Wie sal nou nie trots kan
wees op die soort operasie wat uitgevoer is in Mosambiek nie! My hartlike
gelukwense aan die Minister, aan sy hele departement en veral aan die
Lugmag. Ek het al in 1985 gesê, toe ek afgetree het, vir sy taak en sy
grootte, is die SA Lugmag die beste lugmag in die wêreld, en dit lyk my
hulle is nog steeds die beste lugmag in die wêreld. [Applous.]
[Tussenwerpsels.]

As ek sê dat die SA Weermag 'n belangrike organisasie is, dan moet agb lede
weet die Weermag moet ook aanvaarbaar wees vir almal. Hier is twee aspekte
waaraan ek graag die Minister wil vra om aandag te gee. Die eerste is die
kwessie van taal. Daar moet vir al die tale in die Weermag 'n plek wees.
Tweedens is daar die kwessie van politieke aanstellings. Die Minister moet
ons asseblief 'n versekering gee dat daar in die Weermag geen politieke
aanstellings gemaak sal word nie, want die Weermag behoort aan almal. Die
Weermag behoort nie aan een politieke party wat vir die huidige die
politieke toneel oorheers nie.

Die Weermag is verder, volgens die VF, die finale instrument vir
stabiliteit in ons land. Ons glo dat daar aan die Weermag fondse toegeken
moet word volgens behoefte en dat die Minister dan verantwoordelik is om
dit behoorlik te bestee. Die VF sal hierdie begrotingspos steun, want ons
meen die fondse is noodsaaklik, maar ons wil ook sê daar is 'n
onderbegroting, volgens die departement, waarvan ons bewus is. Die VF stem
saam dat onderbegroting bestaan veral sover dit grensbeheer en steun aan
die SA Polisie betref, maar ons glo ook dat die Weermag binne hulle eie
vermoë 'n herverdeling van fondse kan toepas om te kan bykom. Dit is twee
belangrike nasionale prioriteite. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Gen C L VILJOEN: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister, we in the Freedom Front
would also like to say that we regret the death of the surgeon-general. Gen
Masuku was a very pleasant person and his death is definitely a loss for
us. Furthermore, I would like to say to the people in uniform that the fact
that I shall only speak for three minutes does not mean that I have nothing
more to say. I have a lot more to say, but this is what democracy allows
me.

The FF believes in the SA National Defence Force as an organisation which
should be apolitical, and one of which everybody should be proud. Who would
not be proud of the kind of operation that was carried out in Mozambique!
My sincere congratulations to the Minister, to his whole department and
especially to the Air Force. As long ago as 1985, when I retired, I said
that for its task and its size, the SA Air Force was the best air force in
the world, and it would seem that it is still the best air force in the
world. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

When I say that the SA Defence Force is an important organisation, then hon
members must know that the Defence Force must also be acceptable to
everybody. Here are two aspects I would like to ask the Minister to pay
attention to. The first is the issue of language. There should be a place
for all the languages in the Defence Force. Secondly, there is the issue of
political appointments. The Minister must please give us the assurance that
there will be no political appointments in the Defence Force, because the
Defence Force belongs to everybody. The Defence Force does not belong to a
political party which dominates the political arena at a given moment.

Furthermore, the Defence Force, according to the FF, is the final
instrument for stability in our country. We believe that funds should be
allocated to the Defence Force according to need and that the Minister
should then be responsible for spending those funds properly. The FF will
support this Vote, because we are of the opinion that the funds are
essential, but we also want to say that according to the department, and as
we are aware, it is underbudgeted. The FF agrees that there is
underbudgeting, especially as far as border control and support to the SA
Police are concerned, but we also believe that the Defence Force can
implement a redistribution of funds within their own means to make up the
shortfall. These are two important national priorities.]

We need to have a quick look at priorities. I would like to start off by
saying that the basic training and discipline in the Defence Force should
be the Minister's first priority. It serves no purpose getting R30 billion
worth of weapons if the Minister does not have the right and properly
disciplined people to deal with these weapons.

Together with that there is also the question of morale and a sense of
esprit de corps. If the Minister admits coherence problems and disciplinary
problems within the Defence Force, then this is where he has to start.
Secondly, there is the question of human resources at all levels. If we
have the problem of a 60% to 70% prevalence of HIV/Aids infections in the
Defence Force, this is a very big red flag flying and the Minister will
have to give us more of an indication as to what he intends to do about
that.

Coming to downsizing, this is where the Minister has to start, because the
Defence Force is far too expensive and the dislocation or the disruption of
... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mrs Z A KOTA: Chairperson, Minister of Defence, comrades and colleagues,
allow me to welcome in this august House members of the Department of
Defence. Before addressing this House on this important budget, I would
like to pay tribute to ``Dr Hager'', Lt Gen Masuku, who left us at a time
when the country needed him most. We thank his family for allowing him to
be part of the revolutionary movement.

On this day we remember Comrade Gaby Shapiro who passed away yesterday. She
was a veteran and member of the provincial executive of the ANC Women's
League in the Western Cape. We shall always remember Comrade Gaby by
ensuring that the financial books of the ANC Women's League in our province
are kept in the right manner. Long live the spirit of our comrades, long
live! [Applause.]

The White Paper on Defence provides us with the fundamental values,
principles, objectives and strategies for the transformation of defence
policy in our new democracy. On the other hand, the Defence Review has the
following objectives: Firstly, it seeks to define in sufficient detail
South Africa's defence requirements over the next decade. Secondly, it
seeks to ensure that these requirements are consistent with budgetary
realities, the constitutional functions of the SANDF and the White Paper
provision that the armed forces shall be primarily defence oriented.
Thirdly, it seeks to build and maintain a national consensus on defence
matters to the greatest extent possible. It is that consensus that guides
us as different parties in this Parliament in ensuring that defence matters
are dealt with in a sensitive manner which ensures that defence is not used
as a political football.

In the White Paper we supported the national priority of redirecting state
funds towards development and social services. At the same time we
motivated for maintaining the combat readiness of the SANDF, as a result of
which the Government released funds to address the obsolence of the Navy
and the Air Force, with the understanding that the purchase of this
equipment will in turn create jobs and lead to economic empowerment in some
sectors of our society. We arrived at these decisions as a result of
discussions between the department, the defence committees and Cabinet.
More importantly, they were the product of an extensive and intensive
consultation process throughout the country, which included a whole range
of nongovernmental organisations.

The ongoing challenge of the Department of Defence has been to ensure that
these noble ideas and goals are supported by all members of the SANDF, more
particularly by senior officials who have the responsibility for
implementing these decisions. A generation gap between transformation-
minded officers and others had to be bridged. The civic education programme
was meant to be an instrument through which these tensions could be
managed. The question remains: To what extent have these nation-building
programmes been able to achieve their desired goals? What were the
frustrations and how were they managed? The Tempe incident is but one
example.

What has been identified, in the process of the Defence Review, as a
weakness in the SANDF was communication within its structures. Building a
two-way communication system is long overdue, particularly in the Army
where there is still mistrust between the members of the integrated forces.
The military tradition of the top-down approach needs to be supplemented by
a bottom-up communication system to address grievances from all levels.
Martial courts have been replaced with more humane measures to address the
issue of discipline in the SANDF. We support the measures that have been
taken by the Defence Ministry in addressing the issue of discipline in the
Army; we support our Comrade Minister.

We have a military ombudsperson, but the shortcoming is that this person
does not have resources to perform his functions. He is using SANDF cars to
perform his functions. How can this person be objective and independent?
The location of this office therefore needs to be addressed as soon as
possible.

The budget debate today calls on all of us to see whether the Department of
Defence is justified in its appeal for more money. In response to that call
one would look at the core force approach and philosophy, underpinned by a
strategy which argues for the retention of an affordable, modern and
balanced Defence Force which is appropriate to a peace-time role, but
capable of performing and responding timeously to meet any defence
contingencies which may arise within a realistic warning period.

We are very clear on the fact that the SANDF does, at present, have those
capabilities. The only concern at the moment is that the Army is not
catered for. They would like to buy more army tanks. One organisational
development concern is that, at the moment, more money is being spent on
personnel due to the presence of 12 000 soldiers who need to be
rationalised.

I have a different view on that. I do not see the 12 000 people as a
problem. We think it is appropriate for the Government to delay this
process of rationalisation until the issue of criteria for rationalisation
has been dealt with thoroughly. Interdisciplinary measures should be taken
to ensure the placement of demobilised soldiers, so that other departments
can absorb these people and also ensure that the service corps is equipped
to deal with this responsibility when that need arises. I support Mr Smit
in his call for ensuring that there should be multiskilling of all the
members of the SANDF.

Allow me to address the issue of HIV/Aids in the SANDF. The present report
in the newspapers that 60% of SANDF members are HIV-infected is not
authentic and is not scientific. It is bad reporting at a time when we are
faced with the challenge of rationalisation and at a time when we are busy
with peacekeeping missions. It is, indeed, racism. [Interjections.] Of
course, we are not saying that members of the SANDF are immune to being
infected with HIV/Aids, but the reporting must be accurate. We call upon
the management of the SANDF to see this as a challenge.

We support the initiatives currently being taken by the SANDF in embarking
on HIV/Aids awareness programmes to prevent the spread of this deadly
disease. We need to create mechanisms to support those infected through
increasing the budget of Sams, so that they are able to acquire relevant
drugs. What we should avoid is to prejudice those members who are infected.
We need to encourage all members to voluntarily declare their status.

In conclusion - coming back to the issue of budget - the worrying factor is
the question raised by the Auditor-General regarding financial controls
within the Department of Defence, and whether there are mechanisms put in
place to improve that situation. The department has to begin to take the
resolution of Parliament regarding financial control seriously. The
question of stocktaking needs to be thoroughly examined, in the light of
whether it is advisable for the Department of Defence to have a high
concentration of stock if it cannot guarantee its safety. How can we be
expected to motivate the buying of more equipment if the present equipment
is vulnerable to theft or abuse?

As public representatives, we need to be convinced that the priorities of
the Department of Defence are correct. We would not like to be seen
assisting in a situation of self-created comfort zones where each budget
debate is used to ask for more money, but where mechanisms to safeguard
those assets are not in place. I support this budget. [Applause.]

Mr S B NTULI: Chairperson, hon members, at the outset I want to state
categorically that we in the ANC unconditionally support this budget.

Why do we take this position? Considered from the internal South African
perspective, a reasonable budget for the Department of Defence is aimed at
addressing the following issues. Firstly, it will provide an opportunity
for the creation of jobs; secondly, it will alleviate the problem of crime;
and, thirdly, it will assist in the restructuring of the Defence Force.

Nothwithstanding the aforementioned advantages which will accrue to South
Africa, there are other pertinent factors of which we should take
cognisance. In fact, I am tempted to say that these factors are
deliberately or negligently overlooked by those who disapprove of this
budget. We find ourselves in Africa, and it is an indisputable fact that
the African continent has, and continues to have, a reputation as a
continent plagued by regional conflicts. Although we as Africans do not
take this as a compliment, we nevertheless acknowledge the presence of such
conflicts and take cognisance of their negative implications for regional
security and stability.

How does South Africa fit into this picture? We must admit that we are not
immune to such forces of regional instability. Instability somewhere is a
threat to stability elsewhere. When there is instability elsewhere in the
region, we are all, as the inhabitants of the region, directly or
indirectly affected. This is exemplified by an influx of refugees to South
Africa due to instability in their countries from Africa and beyond. We
must ask ourselves, given this context, what will happen to the wellbeing
of our citizens if in the midst of such instability we face its negative
consequences with a weak or an ill-equipped Defence Force?

We will not be able to have effective control of our borders. A laissez-
faire state of affairs is bound to exist. There will be lawlessness in this
country. Refugees will be entering our country without any regulations.
Needless to say, this state of affairs is incompatible with what the
Department of Defence is striving to achieve, namely to defend and protect
South Africa, its territorial integrity and its people. Instead of carrying
out this mandate we will be victims of regional, social, political and
economic instability.

This argument leads me to another point, which is that we must acknowledge
the interdependence of nations. It is a reality that at the turn of this
millennium, more than ever before, countries are increasingly becoming
dependent on each other, not only to ensure their prosperity, but,
importantly, also for their wellbeing. South Africa is no exception. For
this reason, we cannot fold our arms when something that has a direct
impact on the wellbeing of our citizens and the stability of the South
African democratic state is happening to our neighbours, or anywhere for
that matter. Whenever such a problem arises, we must rise to the occasion.

We have a role to play as a peacekeeping force. We have to protect our
democratic values, for which many have sacrificed their lives. Will we be
able to meet such challenges with an ill-equipped or weak Defence Force? It
is inconceivable that South Africa will be attacked one day. Some of us, I
assume, would argue that there is no reasonable prospect of such a thing
happening. The reality, however, is that the future is unpredictable and
change is the only thing that we can be certain of. Today's best friend may
be tomorrow's worst enemy. The wise man or woman, therefore, arms himself
or herself for such a possibility, so that when it occurs, he or she will
not be caught off-guard.

Our argument is basically centred around two issues, namely stability and
change. We need a strong, well-equipped Defence Force to ensure that
stability prevails not only for the wellbeing of South Africa, but also
that of our region and our continent. To meet these challenges, an
adequately equipped and well-trained Defence Force is necessary, not only
for the protection of our citizens but also for peacekeeping in the
promotion of regional stability so as to ensure South Africa's wellbeing.
For us to achieve and maintain our wellbeing as a country in an
interdependent world, and for purposes of ensuring regional stability, this
Defence Budget, as proposed, is imperative. Furthermore, in order for our
Defence Force to able to play such a role effectively, this budget is
necessary.

We must continually prepare ourselves for change because we do not know
what tomorrow brings. As some of us may recall, when Macmillan addressed
members of Parliament on 3 February 1960, within these very precincts of
Parliament, he spoke of the winds of change. Representatives of some
parties in this House, who today claim to have been reborn and to have
experienced transformation in thought, thought then that he was building
castles in the air. They ignored his advice, outlawed liberation movements,
massacred people, for example in Sharpeville, and pushed the liberation
movement to take up the armed struggle. It seems as if that mentality has
not changed, because, even today, we still have people who are opposed to
this Defence budget and who doubt or refuse to acknowledge that change is
inevitable.

Regional stability today can easily turn into open conflict tomorrow. Are
they prepared to learn from the mistakes of the past, or are they, as
always, deliberately turning a blind eye to the realities we face? Let us
be awake to such changes. Let us not be short-sighted. In supporting this
budget, we are preparing for tomorrow, because we never know what tomorrow
might bring.

Lastly, I want to say: Let us not make the mistake of not learning from
history. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister, our kgosis [chiefs] here,
hon members ...

... ngithi kuMnu uNgqongqoshe, siyabonga. Imithwalo yakhe inzima kakhulu
kodwa sithandazela ukuthi uNkulunkulu abe naye. [Ihlombe.] [... to the hon
the Minister I would like to say thank you. All the burdens that he must
carry are heavy, but we pray that God will help him. [Applause.]]

The SA National Defence Force is tasked, within the ambit of the
Constitution and the principles of international law, with the
responsibility of protecting the country against external or internal
military threats. In South Africa, democracy is like an acquired taste for
people who have no guarantee that antidemocracy troublemakers will not
silently manipulate conflict amongst our citizens.

Therefore, training and maintaining prepared combatants is a realistic
necessity. However, this must not be done with the intention of creating a
military regime.

Essentially, the SANDF must work at being nonracial, and must always uphold
democratic values and be accountable to Parliament. The role of the Defence
Force is to deter external aggression. The armed forces must be
professionally equipped and trained so that they can accomplish their
mission credibly.

The Defence Force also has a number of secondary tasks. One is to enhance
regional security and another to support civilian authority during national
disasters and emergencies. More financial provision must be made in this
particular area to upgrade soldiers' skills in order to improve the
soldiers' response time and proactiveness. A third task is to provide
support to the police in controlling internal unrest. To avoid unnecessary
problems, active military support to the police in time of need must be
executed through legislative control. The military must always be called in
as a last resort at a point when the police and civil authority have deemed
it necessary.

The culture of the Defence Force must be professional and apolitical in
nature. The transformation and restructuring of the Defence Force must
revolve around the wisdom of nation-building in South Africa. Reliable
leadership at various levels within the Defence Force provides a balance of
power between the individual in uniform and the state, and between the
state and external elements that present a threat to its sovereignty. The
SANDF must never assist or indulge in arms deal contracts with countries
that are at war and where people's basic human rights are infringed upon.

We live in a plural society. Therefore the Defence Force must tolerate
differing opinions, and it must remember that it is subject to public
discussion, just like any other institution. The SANDF must face criticism
both in public and by the media, and must be mature enough not to perceive
this criticism as unpatriotic. Of course, criticism levelled at the SANDF
must be legitimate and in context.

The MF applauds and commends the SANDF on the recent display of heroism
during the rescue missions in Mozambique and supports this Vote.
[Applause.]

Ms T R MODISE: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister, hon members,
the pride of South Africans, young and old, black and white, men and women,
is indescribable. Our sense and our source of pride are our men and women
in uniform, because of their valiant efforts in fighting life-threatening
veld fires in and around Cape Town, the brave rescue mission that all of us
have been speaking about, and their bravery in rescuing American victims of
terrorism. All this pride and this ownership is, in fact, the final
acceptance by South Africans of the SANDF. Because of this pride and this
public ownership and admiration, parliamentarians must do their work
honestly, effortlessly and fearlessly. [Interjections.]

Rule 201(1)(c) of this House confers powers on the portfolio committee to,
amongst other things -


  ... monitor, investigate, enquire into and make recommendations
  concerning any such executive organ of state, constitutional institution
  or other body or institution, including the legislative programme,
  budget, rationalisation, restructuring, functioning, organisation,
  structure, staff and policies of such organ ...
Rule 201(1)(d) enables the committee to liaise and consult, whilst Rule
201(1)(e) obliges the committee to carry out these rules and functions.
Therefore, the fact that the portfolio committee is interested in the issue
of the structure is because we are obliged to do our work.

Now, Chapter 11 of the Constitution deals extensively with civil and
military relations. To give effect to democratic and civilian control over
the military and defence policy, Parliament is given a range of significant
powers. For example, whilst the Chief of the SANDF enjoys executive
military powers under the direction of the Minister, Parliament has
legislative powers, approves the budget, and reviews the presidential
decisions to deploy the SANDF. The interim Constitution of 1993 called for
the establishment of the Joint Standing Committee on Defence and spelled
out its scope and its powers.

Furthermore, the Rules of this House empower committees to determine their
meetings, their venues and their programmes. I repeat that, because we have
this vested interest and because we are obliged by the Constitution and the
Rules, we will pursue the issue around the process followed in the
structuring of the SANDF. We will ask questions about this and the
guidelines used. We shall be duty-bound to investigate and make
recommendations on the possible implication of this altered structure on
the policy, on the functioning and on the morale of the Department of
Defence. I do not think that the road will be easy, but then, the past has
not been easy either. However, we must do our job.

We support this Vote. We have a little bit of a problem with it here and
there. For instance, the budget reflects a 31,83% increase, but this is not
actually true, because R2,8 billion, earmarked for defence acquisitions is
actually included in this budget. Therefore, if one takes out the R2,8
billion, one will actually not see much of a difference between the 1999-
2000 and 2000-01 budgets. We have a difference of something like R530
million, which is not much of an increase in the Defence budget.

Significantly though, the department tells us that, in fact, because of our
current rate of inflation, this R9,9 billion budget has actually lost
purchasing power of 5% on the operating budget of the Department of
Defence. Sadly, this little increase goes mostly into the improvement of
the conditions of service. The personnel bill has jumped from R5,3 billion
to R5,7 billion. I do hope that most of this increase will go to the lower
ranks where it is actually sorely needed.

The next question, of course, is the question which has been bandied in the
House today, ie whether if one rationalises 12 000 members of the SA
National Defence Force, one will actually have real savings, or whether one
will see any improvement in one's spending ratios. I am not actually sure
whether this is the case because natural attrition and voluntary
retrenchment packages have not shown us that we have made any real savings
when people leave the service. Therefore, I want to tell the hon Mr Botha
of the DP that it is absolutely not true to say that the ANC is reluctant
to rationalise.

We are not reluctant to rationalise. We want to see the process done
correctly, and we want to see the alternatives worked out and put in front
of us so that when ex-members of the SA National Defence Force enter civil
society, they have been well prepared and we do not let loose into normal
society members who have very dangerous skills and who are jobless.
[Applause.]

We also just want to look a little bit at the need to outsource nonmilitary
functions which has been drummed into our heads by the department. The
question is really whether we make any savings in this. If one looks at the
current Defence budget, the one we are talking about today, there is an
increase of 0,64% for consultancy, while the professional services
allocation jumps by 4,31%. I do not want to begrudge the department money
for these services, but let us see what the department states in the
explanatory memorandum. It says:


  ... the defence allocation is not sufficient to sustain the force design
  and force structure as set out in the Defence Review.

And further on it says:


  The declining balance available for operating the SA Army results in a
  lack of funds to meet the escalating, more intensive, maintenance demands
  of aging landward defence weapon systems ...

  And then it goes on to say:

  ... air defence artillery capability, is already below the core growth
  capability.

Now why do they want to spend more on outsourcing and the so-called ``other
professional services'' when they actually have their air defence artillery
capability illegally below the core growth capability? It would seem to me
then that we must look at the area of consultancy and these professional
services.

I am also a little bit worried about the almost double entry of Programme
9, which is the Special Defence Account. We are told that this programme is
used for banking the money for strategic packages, spares and sensitive
projects. An elaboration by the department revealed that these sensitive
projects are connected to military intelligence, and yet one has as
Programme 6 military intelligence as a standalone that receives
R151 104 million.

Now this happens apart from the very serious statement that says the
department must cut down on the flying hours of force preparations in the
Air Force. The number of hours is to be cut from 42 820 to 20 800, owing to
a lack of operating funds and some unforeseen aircraft repairs. Frankly, I
think there is a big problem around this area.

Maybe some committee members here know whether there are proper accounting
systems in place for the programmes on military intelligence. I do not
know. If we were clear on, for instance, the Joint Standing Committee on
Intelligence having enough oversight of the issues of military
intelligence, I would not be standing here saying so. However, if the Joint
Standing Committee on Intelligence does not have this oversight, because,
certainly, we do not have this oversight of military intelligence, then
surely Cabinet must come to the rescue. Cabinet must do something so that
there is proper accounting in this area. [Applause.]

It is true that border control, police support operations and humanitarian
relief missions are not the reasons for the existence of the SANDF, nor do
any of us want to see them solely deployed in this capacity. But when we
lost our pariah status, when our posture became primarily defensive and we
became legitimate and respected, we also became responsible neighbours.
Whether we like it or not, that costs money. We must, therefore, accept
that the SANDF has been occupied with these secondary functions since 1994,
and surely by now we know the spending patterns. Surely by now we can
almost say per annum this is how much we are expected to spend in this
area, so that we do not have to keep coming here and saying that we cannot
do this because we do not have the money.

The Defence Bill contains provisions which require that the President
detail the size, the nature of deployment and the related costs of any
deployment of the SANDF in future. This, we know, will facilitate the
authorisation of any expenditure which would be related to any secondary
deployment of the Defence Force. Therefore we will not continue being
followed by bad reports from the Auditor-General.

The international trend in defence spending is 1,5% of GDP. South Africa is
within this margin. South Africa has just committed herself to
refurbishment to the tune of R29 billion. There is absolutely no way in
which we are going to be able to convince the public to start right away
with refurbishing the Army, the Army that says to us that its equipment
comes from the middle and late eighties, while in defence terms that
equipment is still brand new and still has a lot of wear and tear.

The loss of equipment is a bit of a problem. Some years ago the Joint
Standing Committee on Defence called in the members of military
intelligence. One of the questions we put to them was: Do you know what has
happened to the arms and ammunition that was stolen from the department?
Either they had not bothered to look for them or they thought that that
information was not for our consumption. Therefore I want to appeal for
measures to be put in place within this department so that thieves and
chancers are actually given their just desserts. [Applause.]

We are tired of the chaos that we read about in the papers. [Applause.] We
do not just want to hear about breaking the silence on the HIV/Aids scourge
within the department. We want to know what the department and are doing
actively to ensure that we do come out with a cure and inoculations in this
field. We do not want to hear what we keep on hearing, that they are busy
right now with a drug that modifies child behaviour. One can modify a
child's behaviour if one can make sure that that child lives.

As I said, we are supporting the budget, but we are worried about the
budgeting priorities of the Defence Force, and I am very happy to know that
the Deputy Minister will personally be seized with this issue. She will
have all our support and we will want to be there with her, so that next
time I do not stand here and keep harping on issues while the committee
members do not. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Chairperson, first of all, may I extend my
gratitude to all the parties for coming out in support of the budget
process. There have been very legitimate concerns raised and criticism on
parts of the work. That is all very well because it does help to highlight
areas which require urgent attention. I should also say, in relation to the
committees, that it is quite regrettable that we have not, in the recent
past, been able to be present at the briefings owing to other commitments
which could not be set aside, but I do want to make a commitment that we
will constantly be available, either both or alternatively, whenever these
briefings come up.

The question of rightsizing is one that has been raised by almost all the
speakers, and I do want to say that we are dealing with this matter. I am
very happy that we have not rushed into it and put ourselves in even deeper
problems. I raised the issue with the relevant cluster of Ministers and
indicated that we did not think that it would be a solution of the problem
to take large numbers of men and women who are very disciplined, well
trained and capable individuals and put them out on the streets, because
the following day we would be invited by the SA Police Service to come and
support them in arresting those people.

Therefore the shifting of the problem is not an answer. I therefore have
made a recommendation, and we are now agreed in the relevant cluster of
Ministers, that the SA Police Service should be working out criteria for
selecting men and women whom they would be willing to accept for retraining
and remustering, because there is a huge shortage of personnel in the SA
Police Service. In this way, we will be in a position to continue the
process of downsizing without worsening the situation of crime and
unemployment in the country. A number of departments are working with us
with regard to that.

With regard to the question of peace missions, I was quite touched by the
sentiments of the hon Mabeta when I raised this issue about Gen Holomisa. I
should say this to this House and I therefore take members into my
confidence. When the issue came up during the debate on the President's
Address, I was quite astounded that an assertion could be made that South
Africa had taken sides in the DRC peace process. We are the one country
that has refused to support one or the other side. A number of our
neighbours actually have military formations in the DRC, some supporting
President Kabila and his side, and others supporting Dr Ilunga, Prof Wamba
dia Wamba and the MLC under J P Bemba.

We have refused to take sides in this matter, because we have said that the
answer must be found by pushing these people towards a national dialogue.
That is why we have refused even to sell weaponry to the belligerents who
had already placed orders. We have their money, but we suspended the sale
and delivery of those weapons. We have done all that because of our
commitment to peace in the region and for the safety of our own people,
because problems in our neighbouring countries might overflow into this
country. That is why we are refusing to do this.

However, that hon member rose here and made those statements. When I joined
the Minister of Foreign Affairs to have discussions with President Kabila
and his people recently, about two or three weeks ago, they relied on the
statement that was made here, saying that South Africa - and this matter
has already been raised even in our Parliament - has taken sides in the
DRC. That weakened our capacity to debate the issues with them.
[Interjections.]
Therefore, all I am saying is that the hon member should have asked us the
question: ``Has the Government taken sides? We have information that the
Government is doing that.'' I asked him for the evidence, but he has
provided no information, to this day. But what I found significant is that
when we went down on this mission recently to see President Kabila, two
days before we arrived, he entered that country. He did not make any
contact with our mission, and what he was doing there when we were faced
with this thing has raised a big question in my mind.

I have said as much to the President of the country, viz that this is a
serious situation. If the UN, of course, invites us to take part in the
DRC, we will do so. The only condition is that we must be welcome. We must
know that the populace of that country welcomes our presence there. I will
not make a recommendation to the President of the country, who is the
Commander-in-Chief of the National Defence Force, that we should take young
South Africans and place them in an atmosphere in which there is a real
danger that the populace of that country may attack them because of
statements such as these ones. [Interjections.]

I proceed then to deal with the issue that has also been rightly raised,
the issue of the theft of weaponry and other equipment of the National
Defence Force that I reported in a reply in this House. I think this is
very important. The question only asked what had been stolen, and so on. It
did not ask how much of that which was lost in that period of time had been
recovered. The impression is left, since I answered the question as asked,
that all of those things that were reported stolen have been lost forever.

Much of this equipment has been recovered. Some of it is still being
pursued and I would be happy, at some point after this, to present to
Parliament an indication of what has happened in each and everyone of these
cases, so that there is clarity on the part of the members of the House and
the country at large as to what is being done. Members will observe, as
they look at that reply, that much of this was stolen at various times at
different bases, and so on. But much of it has been recovered and what is
outstanding is still being pursued by the police.

With regard to the issue of the language policy, I have made the issue
quite clear to the National Defence Force: This country has 11 official
languages and those languages, as elsewhere, must enjoy a status similar to
the one they enjoy in this House. Therefore, we are grappling with that
issue. We are reviewing the position of the Communications Directorate, its
composition and location, so that we can be sure that when Salute or any of
the magazines of the SA National Defence Force goes out, members of the
National Defence Force can find themselves in the various pages of this
documentation; and that when policy statements are issued, there is
reasonable certainty that all of the members of the National Defence Force
will be able to access them and understand them better as they will be
published, among others, in their mother tongue. We are working on this
issue.

The issue of language is a very sore one, and I have said so to members of
the SANDF, even a few days ago. When Lt Madubela telephoned the unit
commander in Bloemfontein during his father's burial, the unit commander
who responded spoke to him in Afrikaans. He, of course, came from a part of
the country where Afrikaans is not as dominant a language or as widely
spoken as in the Free State. But he made an effort to speak in Afikaans. He
could have said: ``Xhosa is my mother tongue and is an official language,
therefore I will speak to you in that language.'' But he made a genuine
effort to reach out to the unit commander, who nevertheless, took the
position: ``Jy moet Afrikaans praat; ek is die baas.'' Those were not his
words, but I take the position of saying that any general or commander who
thinks that we are still in 1952 or 1948 in the SANDF is making a mistake.
[Applause.]

I think that any commander who cannot speak Sesotho and comes across
somebody who speaks that language but at least makes an effort to speak
English - which is a language they can more or less understand - ought to
be humble enough also to make an effort to reach out to the other person.
Anyone in the command structure of the SANDF who does not adopt this
attitude is not fit to lead in the SANDF. [Applause.] But I should
immediately also say that I appreciate very much the observations which
have been made by members, especially the point that Gen Viljoen made.

The SANDF should not be disrupted by political loyalties. The men and women
we have in there have a singular duty that requires them to respect the
other and work together. We must, therefore, cultivate an atmosphere in
which they can feel that they are being ordered or led by a command
structure and political leadership that is committed to all of them and,
therefore, enhances the coherence among them. So, political considerations
will shift somewhat to the back. The primary task is what we are faced
with. Whatever political views the members of the SANDF may have, they will
man the voting stations, and so on. But within the operation of the SANDF
and its bases, we expect to see men and women singularly committed to this
task and therefore cultivating an atmosphere that strengthens its unity.

A point has been raised that we should honour those who took part in the
mission in Mozambique. I know that there is a lot of keenness, which I also
share. But it is important that we should consider the matter very
carefully. Whatever gesture is extended to our forces who participated in
Mozambique, we must realise that we will be setting a precedent for all
those who will soon be deployed to various missions around the world.
Therefore, we have to think very carefully about this issue; we have to
take action that places us on a footing to say that, in future, any member
of the SANDF serving in a mission for the nation may expect the possibility
of this kind of treatment.

We cannot afford to do things without thinking about them seriously.
Somebody said to me that we must perhaps establish a medal called Rosita
Pedro, which can be issued. There are so many ideas that people are
throwing around. We are considering the matter. I can, however, say to the
House that on 27 April 2000, the President will descend on Bloemfontein
where we will have a major gathering. Among other things, we will launch
the new coat of arms for the SANDF. I expect that on that occasion we will
have an opportunity to address this concern that members have raised.

With regard to the peace operations - Maluti, Operation Boleas, and so on -
I need to take this opportunity to clarify some aspects of this matter.
Earlier on, the hon Smit sent me a question on this matter, and we have
heard about the toing and froing on this issue. One of the necessary
documents - the memorandums of understanding and so on - has been signed,
and others were outstanding. I have been to Lesotho and we signed this last
week with a Minister from Botswana, representatives from Zimbabwe and
Ministers from Lesotho and South Africa, a foursome, looking as this issue
of the Maluti operation. I can now say to the House that we have signed the
formal documents. The responsibility for the operations there has therefore
been clarified in these documents. Principally, the government of Lesotho,
having requested SADC to come and assist, carries that obligation. What
will happen subsequent to that, in terms of implementation, is a different
matter. I will not go into that at this stage.

With regard to the situation in Mozambique, South Africa took the
initiative to go in. We have the responsibility with regard to that, but
other responsibilities are being carried out by the United Nations. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

                   NONPROFIT ORGANISATIONS AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

Order disposed of without debate.

Bill read a second time.

The House adjourned at 12:40.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister for the Public Service and Administration:


     Report of the Public Service Commission on the Management of
     Remunerated Overtime in the Public Service [RP 171-99].


