---
title: 'National Assembly - 22 February 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2000-02-22
---

                          TUESDAY, 22 FEBRUARY 2000
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:00.

The Chairperson of Committees took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! A lot of members are still coming
through the doors and they are causing a lot of interference in the House.
In the future, can we always try to be on time, please.

Dr B G MBULAWA: Chairperson, I give notice that at the next sitting of the
House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:
  That the House -


  (1) notes that STDs are a major determinant of HIV transmission, with
       11 million STD episodes treated annually in South Africa;

  (2) further notes that South Africa has recognised the STD success
       stories in other countries such as Tanzania, which has managed to
       reduce HIV transmission by 40% by improving the quality of STD
       services, using a system that is called the syndromic approach;

  (3) commends the Department of Health for initiating STD Awareness Week
       and training hundreds of nurses in the syndromic approach, so that
       each clinic now has at least one nurse trained in this approach;

  (4) further commends the department for the impressive results it has
       achieved with the Lesedi Project in Welkom in the Free State and the
       Mothusimpilo Project in Carletonville, reducing the number of new
       infections by 46%, amounting to a saving in medical costs of
       R2,34 million ...
[Time expired.]

Ms M SMUTS: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of the
House I will move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the SA Human Rights Commission has conditionally offered
       to withdraw the summonses issued to editors and broadcasters as part
       of its enquiry into racism in the media;

  (2) nevertheless remains concerned about the jurisdictional problems
       relating to actions of the commission, such as -


       (a)  summonsing foreign editors;

       (b)  summonsing broadcasters who are governed by the provisions of
           broadcasting legislation and whose sector is regulated by the
           IBA;

       (c)  failing to recognise that the content of print media cannot be
           regulated in the same way as that of broadcasters and is
           protected by the free-speech provisions of the Constitution;

       (d)  failing to respect the decision of Parliament to exclude
           newspapers from the provisions of the Films and Publications Act
           of 1996, leaving them to regulate themselves; and

       (e)  failing to note that the publication of unfairly discriminatory
           matters and hate speech is now governed by the Promotion of
           Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act and will be
           adjudicated by the courts; and


  (3  resolves to review the Human Rights Commission Act in order to give
       the SAHRC clarity on its role, powers and functions.

[Applause.]

Mr V B NDLOVU: Chairperson, I give notice that at the next sitting of the
House I will move:


  That the House -
  (1) welcomes the appointment of Moses Khanyile as the Provincial
       Commissioner of the Kingdom of KwaZulu;

  (2) notes with grave concern the anonymous letters circulating about him
       in certain police stations, calling him a ``bobbejaan'';

  (3) calls on all Afrikaans speakers and writers to denounce such action
       and to distance themselves from the author of such a despicable
       letter; and

  (4) appeals to all Afrikaans speakers and writers, and all people in the
       Kingdom of KwaZulu, to work together with Commissioner Khanyile to
       improve the safety and security of the Kingdom.

Mr A MLANGENI: Chair, I give notice that on the next sitting day of the
House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that today marks the 129th anniversary of the birth of John
       Langalibalele Dube, first president of the ANC;
  (2) believes that he paved the way for the ANC to transform millions of
       lives of the marginalised people of South Africa and our continent;
       and

  (3) salutes the contribution made by President Langalibalele Dube in
       building a better life for all South Africans.

[Applause.]

Mnr J J DOWRY: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek gee kennis dat ek op die volgende
sittingsdag namens die Nuwe NP sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) sy innige meegevoel betuig oor die gewelddadige en tragiese dood van
       sewe mense die naweek op die plaas Ou Muur in die Koue Bokkeveld;

  (2) daarvan kennis neem dat 'n mens met hartseer en afgryse vervul was
       met 'n besoek aan die moordtoneel, wat soos 'n slagveld voorgekom
       het;

  (3) die sowat 30 polisiebeamptes wat aan die soektog na die moordenaar
       deelgeneem het, gelukwens met hul vinnige en doeltreffende spanwerk
       om die moordenaar vas te trek; en

     4) dié soort lafhartige moorde ten sterkste veroordeel en die Regering
        versoek om die herinstelling van die doodstraf ernstig te oorweeg.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr J J DOWRY: Mr Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day I
shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) expresses its sincere sympathy at the violent and tragic death of
       seven people over the weekend on the farm Ou Muur in the Koue
       Bokkeveld;

  (2) notes that one was filled with grief and horror during a visit to the
       scene of the murder, which took on the appearance of a battlefield;

  (3) congratulates the 30-odd police officials who participated in the
       search for the murderer on their fast and effective teamwork in
       apprehending him; and

  (4) condemns this type of cowardly murder in the strongest possible terms
       and requests the Government to give serious consideration to the
       reinstatement of the death penalty.]

Mr M N RAMODIKE: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I will move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the arrival of Cyclone Eline in Mozambique, and the possibility
       of further flooding across the northern and north eastern regions of
       South Africa;

  (2) notes the special Cabinet meeting that was held recently to discuss
       these floods;

  (3) calls on the Government to present to the House the decisions taken
       at that meeting, specifically outlining -


       (a)  the proposed plan of action;

       (b)  the overall cost;

       (c)  the exact amount affecting the budgets of individual Government
           departments and provincial governments; and

       (d)  the time-scales involved before all disrupted services will be
           restored to these areas; and


  (4) calls on the Government to indicate whether contingency plans exist
       in the event of further flooding.

Mrs F MAHOMED: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the illness of the hon Chief Justice, Ismail Mohamed;

  (2) recognises the invaluable contribution made by the hon Chief Justice
       to nation-building, justice and hope;

  (3) wishes the Chief Justice a full and speedy recovery; and

  (4) looks forward to his resumption of duties so that we are once again
       blessed with his wisdom, leadership and courage.

[Applause.]

Mrs R M SOUTHGATE: Mr Chair, I hereby give notice that at the next sitting
of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) expresses shock and horror at how the senior citizens of South Africa
       are being physically, emotionally and mentally abused by members of
       their families in their homes and by nursing staff at institutions;

  (2) notes that this is an indictment against the Government as the
       Constitution guarantees each citizen, old and young, the right to
       protection, respect and dignity;

  (3) calls on the Department of Welfare and the Human Rights Commission
       fully to investigate and act on any complaints of gross violations
       perpetrated against defenceless senior citizens and not to turn a
       blind eye or shirk their responsibilities; and

  (4) calls on the Government to practise what they preach and to show our
       senior citizens that they are of great value to the heritage of our
       nation.

Mr E K MOORCROFT: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the Marine Living Resources Act of 1998 was meant ``to
       provide for the exercise of control over marine living resources in a
       fair and equitable manner to the benefit of all the citizens of South
       Africa'';
  (2) further notes that -


       (a)  the allocation of fishing quotas has been delayed for the third
           year in a row;

       (b)  more than 300 people have lost their jobs due to the delays;

       (c)  many fishermen and their families have been left without income
           during a crucial part of the fishing season;

       (d)  the relevant authority is riddled by chaos and corruption; and

       (e)  new entrants into the fishing industry who have benefited from
           the allocation of quotas read like a Who's Who of the ANC elite;
           and


  (3) calls for -


       (a)  the immediate allocation of quotas to the fishing communities
           who have lived off the sea for generations; and
       (b)  an independent inquiry into the marine and coastal management
           department.

[Applause.]

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) in view of three children's deaths allegedly related to the
       administration of diphtheria, whooping cough and tetanus inoculation,
       calls on the Minister of Health to make widely known the results of
       her inquiry as to -


       (a)  whether the vaccines were linked to a particular batch or
           supplier;

       (b)  whether the deaths were linked to the immunisation;

       (c)  if other similar related incidents have occurred; and
       (d)  who first drew attention to these cases; and


  (2) recognises that this should be done in order to reassure the public
       about the safety of DWT inoculation or to alert them to possible
       dangers.

Mr P J A GERBER: Chairperson, I give notice that at the next sitting of the
House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes reports that a group of prominent Afrikaner business people
       have issued a declaration to our President in which they pledge their
       support for the economic management of the country;

  (2) daaraan erkenning gee dat hierdie steun vir ons Regering se
       beleidsrigtings 'n toename in direkte buitelandse beleggings sal
       meebring;

  (3) hierdie dapper sakelui salueer vir hul dapper en progressiewe houding
       teenoor die nuwe politieke en ekonomiese bestel in Suid-Afrika; en
  (4) president Mbeki en sy Regering, en spesifiek die Minister van
       Finansies, gelukwens met hul uitstaande bestuur van die Suid-
       Afrikaanse ekonomie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)


  (2) recognises that this support for the policies of our Government will
       bring about an increase in direct foreign investment;

  (3) salutes these brave businesspeople for their courageous and
       progressive attitude towards the new political and economic
       dispensation in South Africa; and

  (4) congratulates President Mbeki and his Government, and specifically
       the Minister of Finance, on their outstanding management of the South
       African economy.

[Applause.]]

Dr P J RABIE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the urgent need for tax reform;

  (2) appeals to the hon the Minister to -
        
       (a)  reduce the tax burden in general and the net tax burden in
           particular;

       (b)  reduce the tax rate on individuals in all income brackets; and

       (c)  increase tax thresholds - the bottom threshold to R26 000 per
           annum and the top threshold to R150 000 per annum;


  (3) believes that the Government should immediately cut the maximum
       marginal tax rate from 45% to 40%, with the long-term target of
       bringing it down to between 23% and 28%, and that this 5% cut should
       immediately be applied across the board in all tax brackets;

  (4) requests the Government to eliminate the effect of inflation on
       personal income tax, or fiscal drag, as a matter of routine, which
       also implies that inflation should not be used as an undisclosed
       source of Government revenue;

  (5) asks the Government to reduce the effect of corporate tax, inter alia
       through the abolition of secondary tax on companies and reducing the
       tax rate from 30% to 25% with immediate effect ...

[Time expired.]

Dr G W KOORNHOF: Chairperson, I give notice that at the next sitting of the
House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with dismay Cosatu's intent to embark upon nation-wide strike
       action;

  (2) condemns this action by Cosatu to hijack, on the eve of the Budget,
       economic reforms by Government when it has not yet exhausted all
       avenues of negotiation at Nedlac;
  (3) encourages the Minister of Finance to continue with economic reform
       and transformation that will create an attractive climate for
       investment and savings, and to ensure a stable economic environment;
       and

  (4) calls on Cosatu to abandon its intended strike action, starting on 6
       March 2000, and to assist with job creation initiatives rather than
       flexing its muscles within the governing alliance.

Ms B O DLAMINI: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that since last year the United States government has continued
       to deny the request by the father of the little Cuban boy, Elian
       Gonzales, that Elian be returned to him in Cuba;

  (2) expresses serious reservations about the attempts by the US
       government to block the latest requests by the father, Juan Miguel
       Gonzales, for his son to be transferred to his nephew, Manuel
       Gonzales; and
(3)   calls on the US government to return Elian to his father, where he
      belongs, as soon as possible, to avoid further compounding his
      traumatic experiences of the past three months.

[Applause.]

Mr C AUCAMP: Mr Chairman, my apologies for not being here earlier, but I
was busy finalising my third speech of the day. [Interjections.]

Mnr die Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die volgende
sittingsdag namens die AEB sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) met sorg kennis neem -


       (a)  van die drastiese toename in plaasmoorde, wyd verspreid oor die
           land, en dat net in KwaZulu-Natal die afgelope ses weke nege
           boere vermoor is;

       (b)  dat daar groeiende ontevredenheid bestaan oor die Regering se
           klaarblyklike onvermoë om hierdie saak op te los;

       (c)  dat die persepsie begin posvat dat 'n proses van etniese
           suiwering sodoende aan die gang is; en

       (d)  dat dikwels ongegronde negatiewe publisiteit oor sogenaamde
           vergrype deur blanke boere bydra tot hierdie situasie; en


  (2) van mening is dat -


       (a)  die aandag van die internasionale gemeenskap toenemend op
           hierdie onverkwiklike situasie gevestig moet word; en

         b) maatreëls in die voorgestelde wapenwetgewing, wat die
            selfverdedigingskapasiteit van boere op plase aan bande sal lê,
            dringend hersien moet word.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day I will
move on behalf of the AEB:
  That the House -


  (1) notes with concern -


       (a)  the drastic increase in farm murders, widely distributed across
           the country, and that in KwaZulu-Natal alone nine farmers have
           been murdered during the past six weeks;

       (b)  that growing dissatisfaction exists about the Government's
           apparent inability to solve this matter;

       (c)  that the perception is beginning to take root that a process of
           ethnic cleansing is in this way under way; and

       (d)  that frequently unsubstantiated negative publicity about so-
           called misdeeds by white farmers is contributing to this
           situation; and


  (2) is of the opinion that -


       (a)  the attention of the international community should increasingly
           be drawn to this unpleasant situation; and

       (b)  measures in the proposed firearms legislation, which will
           restrict the self-defence capacity of farmers on farms, should
           urgently be reviewed.]

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                         (The late Mr M I Vilakazi)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I am about to move a
very sad motion. I would like you to ask hon members to listen to the
motion, because there is a lot of talking in the House.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, could we please give the
hon member time to be heard.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the premature death of the hon Mthunzi Vilakazi on Wednesday,
       16 February 2000;

  (2) recognises the valuable contribution that the hon Vilakazi made to
       our first democratic Parliament, where he was a dedicated member of
       the Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security, which committee he
       also chaired for a time;

  (3) believes that the hon Vilakazi served the people of South Africa with
       selfless dedication;

  (4) mourns the passing of our fellow member, Mthunzi Vilakazi;

  (5) expresses our sincerest condolences to the wife, children, family,
       friends and constituency of the deceased; and

  (6) wishes that they be filled with strength and fortitude in their time
       of sadness.

Hamba kahle, Comrade Vilakazi, qhawe lamaqhawe! [Go well, Comrade Vilakazi,
hero of heroes!]
Mr S P MAKWETLA: Chairperson, hon members, it is with profound sadness and
shock that the ANC learned of the premature departure of Comrade Mthunzi
Vilakazi. Comrade Mthunzi will be fondly missed by all of us in the ANC
caucus and, indeed, in Parliament at large.

He was a quiet giant who inspired everyone by his humility, loyalty and
commitment to the ideas of liberation, democracy and equality. In him the
ANC has lost a dedicated cadre who was always ready to learn, listen and
work hard for a better life for all.

As we mourn his passing away, we extend heartfelt condolences to his wife,
Gloria, family members and relatives. May his soul rest in peace.

Mr D H M GIBSON: Is the microphone working?

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! It is working now.

Mr D H M GIBSON: Chairperson, the DP wishes to be associated with this
motion of condolence, and I particularly want to be associated with it
personally because Mthunzi Vilakazi was somebody I came to know quite well.
We served on the same portfolio committee throughout the first term of our
democratic Parliament, and I had the great privilege of travelling abroad
with him and getting to know him very well.

I am sure all of the things which the hon the Chief Whip has said about him
are true. I simply knew him as a friend, and he was a quiet gentleman and a
very nice person. I was extremely distressed to hear of his passing at a
very young age. We associate ourselves with the condolences to his widow,
his family, his friends, his constituency and his party.

Mnuz V B NDLOVU: Sihlalo, egameni leNkatha yeNkululeko yeSizwe,
ngiphakamisa ukuzwelana kakhulu nomndeni wasemaPhephetheni ngokuhanjelwa
umfowethu uVilakazi. Sikhala kanye nezihlobo, nenkosikazi, nezingane,
nemindeni, nabafowabo nodadewabo ngesehlo esivelile. Sikhala kanye neqembu
lakhe akade elisebenzela nalabo bantu akade ehlala nabo ngaso sonke
isikhathi, ebacabanga ngaso sonke isikhathi futhi ebasebenzela.

Ngisebenzile kakhulu nomfowethu uVilakazi sisebenza ngaphansi kwemiNyango
emibili, owezemiSebenzi nowezokuPhepha nokuVikeleka. Ubengumuntu olunge
ngendlela eyisimangaliso. Njengoba esedlulile emhlabeni, siyethemba ukuthi
nezingane ezikhulayo zisibonile isibonelo esihle kuyena.

Sithi abomndeni balale ngenxeba, abeqembu balale ngenxeba nabaholi bakhe
balale ngenxeba ngokwedlula kwakhe emhlabeni. Inkosi ize imsize kukho konke
okubi akwenza ikubuyisele eceleni, akwazi ukuba abone oyisemkhulu.
(Translation of Zulu speech follows.)

[Mr V B NDLOVU: Chairperson, on behalf of the IFP I wish to convey my
deepest condolences to the Mphephethe family on the death of our brother,
Mr Vilakazi. We sympathise with the relatives, his wife, his children, the
family, his brothers and sisters, for what has happened. We also convey our
condolences to the political party in which he was serving, to those with
whom he was staying all the time and who were always in his mind as he was
always working for them.

Vilakazi and I have been together for a long time, serving in two
departments, namely the Department of Defence and the Department of Labour.
He was an incredibly kind man. As he has passed away now, we hope that
young people have seen his exemplary personality.

To the family, his political party and his leaders we say that they must be
consoled and we wish them a quick recovery from this sadness. We hope that
God will overlook all his sins so that he will be able to meet his
forebears.]

Adv A H GAUM: Mnr die Voorsitter, die Nuwe NP steun the mosie heelhartig en
vereenselwig ons graag met die sentimente daarin uitgespreek. Ons wil ook
ons diepe meegevoel betuig teenoor die agb Vilakazi se gesin en familie.
Ons bid hulle Gods rykste seën en sterkte toe in hierdie baie moeilike tyd.

Ons het groot waardering vir mnr Vilakazi se bydrae as lid en voorsitter
van die Portefeuljekomitee oor Veiligheid en Sekuriteit, waar hy `n
belangrike rol in `n kritieke tydperk in ons land se geskiedenis gespeel
het. Mag die voorbeeld wat hy gestel het ons bybly. (Translation of
Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Adv A H GAUM: Mr Chairperson, the New NP wholeheartedly supports the
motion and we would like to associate ourselves with the sentiments
expressed in it. We also want to express our deepest sympathy to the family
and relatives of the hon Vilakazi. We wish them strength and God's richest
blessings in this very difficult time.

We have great appreciation for the contributions made by Mr Vilakazi as a
member and as the chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Safety and
Security, where he played an important role in a critical period in the
history of our country. May the example he set remain with us.]

Dr S E MZIMELA: Chairperson, the UDM wishes to associate itself with the
sympathies expressed in this House, and we also wish to express our
condolences to the widow and family of our late comrade. To him we say:
Requiescat in pace.

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, the ACDP supports this motion, and we take this
opportunity, in this moment of silence, to express our condolences to the
Vilakazi family.

We note that Mr Vilakazi chaired the Portfolio Committee on Safety and
Security and served this Parliament and the nation with dignity and
diligence. The ACDP also recognises his valuable contribution to South
Africa as a nation for change, for freedom and for democracy.

We sincerely express our condolences to his wife, his children, his family
members and his friends, as well as the ANC. We know that he will be missed
by all of us in this House. May the spirit of God console his loved ones
during their time of mourning and grief.

Dr C P MULDER: Mnr die Voorsitter, dit is gebruik in hierdie Huis om hulde
te bring aan lede van hierdie Huis wanneer hulle tot sterwe kom, en dit is
ook gepas dat dit gedoen word. So `n lid van die Huis wat ons wel ontval
het, is mnr Vilakazi. Ek het hom nie persoonlik geken nie, maar aan sy
optrede in die Huis was dit duidelik dat hy baie toegewyd was aan sy
ideale. Dit het veral geblyk uit sy toesprake, en veral die entoesiasme
waarmee hy altyd sy taak aangepak het, ook in hierdie Huis waar hy sy
standpunte onbevreesd gestel het.

Sy onverwagte afsterwe is sekerlik vir die ANC, en ook vir sy familie, 'n
baie groot verlies, en ek wil graag namens die VF ons medelye en simpatie
met hulle uitspreek en hulle baie sterkte toewens. (Translation of
Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr C P MULDER: Mr Chairperson, it is customary in this House to pay
tribute to members of the House upon their passing away, and it is also
proper to do so. One such member of the House to have left us is Mr
Vilakazi. I did not know him personally, but it was clear from his conduct
in the House that he was very dedicated to his ideals. This was
particularly evident from his speeches and particularly the enthusiasm with
which he always approached his task, also in this House where he fearlessly
stated his point of view.

His unexpected passing away must surely be a very great loss to the ANC, as
well as to his family, and on behalf of the FF I would like to convey our
commiseration and sympathy to them and wish them well.]

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Chairperson, the UCDP wants to convey its deepest
sympathy to the late Mr M Vilakazi's family. Mr Vilakazi was a dedicated
and committed member of this Chamber. He was selfless, unassuming and a
loyal South African. He contributed as Chairperson of the Portfolio
Committee on Safety and Security. Hence he will be remembered by all for a
long time. Let his soul rest in peace.

Dr S E PHEKO: Chair, on behalf of the PAC and Azapo I rise to associate
myself with what has been said with regard to this comrade. I cannot claim
that I knew him, but we value all those who have served us. We know that
the family has suffered a loss and we would like to send our sympathies to
them and to the ANC. May his soul rest in peace.

Dr L LUYT: Mr Chairman, we support this motion, of course. Words cannot
bring anyone back, but one only has to listen to know how much he meant to
this House. We offer our condolences to his family and also to the ANC.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Chair, I would like to thank Mr M I Vilakazi for serving
South Africa. He has departed from us as a servant of the people. His
contribution to democracy and the upliftment of society will always be
cherished fondly.

The MF expresses its condolences to Mr Vilakazi's family and friends and we
hope that he will continue living in them in brave spirit.

Mnr C AUCAMP: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek het mnr Vilakazi nie persoonlik geken
nie en daarom kan ek nie uit eie ervaring praat oor sy persoon en sy werk
nie. Tog aanvaar ek heelhartig die opregtheid van die mooi getuienis wat
vandag oor hom uitgegaan het van agb lede van alle partye van hierdie Huis.
Die AEB vereenselwig hom dus met hierdie mosie.

Vir ons as mense lyk die dood van 'n geliefde in die fleur van sy lewe
dikwels prematuur, soos die mosie ook sê. Mag sy naasbestaandes egter troos
vind daarin dat in die alwyse plan van die Here God, wat ons dae getel het,
geen dood ooit prematuur is nie. Mag Hy hulle ryklik vertroos deur Sy gees
en woord. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr C AUCAMP: Mr Chairperson, I did not know Mr Vilakazi personally and I
cannot therefore speak from personal experience about him as a person and
his work. Yet I accept wholeheartedly the sincerity of the wonderful
testimony expressed with regard to him today by hon members of all parties
in this House. The AEB therefore associates itself with this motion.
To us as human beings the death of a loved one in the prime of his life
often seems premature, as the motion also states. However, may his next of
kin find comfort in the fact that in the all-wise plan of the Lord God, who
has counted our days, no death is ever premature. May He comfort them
abundantly through His spirit and word.]

Motion agreed to, all members standing.

                SOUTH AFRICAN AIRWAYS UNALLOCATABLE DEBT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, members of the House, I think
the first thing I have to say is that the Minister of Finance is not
present today because he has a rare fever called ``budget blues''.
[Laughter.]

The South Arican Airways Unallocatable Debt Bill seeks to allow the
Minister of Finance to borrow R1,3 billion in order to enable the
Government to take over a portion of the R3 billion debt of SA Airways that
was not allocated to the company when it was corporatised. It was crucial
that SA Airways should not be corporatised with an albatross of debt that
arose as a result of imprudent management of state-owned assets in the
previous era, in particular the plundering of the SA Transport Services
pension fund, which was funded by only 10% in 1990.

The corporatisation and subsequent successful sale of 20% of SAA to the
strategic equity partner, Swissair, should not be viewed as isolated
coincidental events that are not located in a particular policy framework.
These are deliberate actions by the Government to ensure that the South
African economy works, is competitive, attracts direct foreign investment,
becomes a prime tourist location and, most importantly, that creates jobs.
These are the policies and actions that are intended to haul us from the
darkness of underdevelopment to a reconstructed and developed South Africa.

We must therefore view this Bill as part of the broader policies of the
restructuring of state assets that seek to build the portfolio of state-
owned assets reflecting the reconstruction and development priorities of
the Government. In doing so, it becomes necessary to review the relevance
of the ownership by the state of certain assets and the depth of ownership
and control of others. We seek to introduce partners in strategic areas in
order to inject fresh expertise and alternative thinking in certain areas
and to reallocate and share risks with the private sector and others. What
this means, therefore, is that our approach to the restructuring of state
assets is a comprehensive one and is not simply looking at one track of how
to restructure state assets.

SA Airways is a strategic asset of the Republic. It is a crucial cog in the
economy and it facilitates business, investment and the creation of jobs. I
certainly would not share the view which I believe was expressed in the
hearings of the portfolio committee that it is an asset that exists for the
indulgence of the elite, because I have seen all kinds of people benefiting
from the use of an efficient airline.

Before corporatisation and the introduction of the strategic equity
partner, the net asset value of the airline was R0, and that means that the
assets of the airline were almost equal to its liabilities. At
corporatisation, the gearing ratio was reduced to 25% by allocating only R1
billion of the Transnet debt attributable to SA Airways to its balance
sheets. This permitted us to raise sufficient interest in the airline from
potential strategic equity partners which culminated in the choice of
Swissair as the preferred bidder. The successful sale of 20% of SAA for
R1,4 billion means that the implied enterprise value of SAA is now R7
billion from R0.

Government's interest in the SAA through the 80% shareholding of Transnet
in SAA has therefore increased to R5,6 billion. In addition, the airline's
strategy for winning has turned it around to profitability. A loss of R280
million as at 31 March 1998 was reversed to a profit of R9 million as at 31
March 1999. The projected profit of SAA for 31 March 2000 is R460 million.
This ensures that we as South Africa have a globally competitive and
profitable airline at our disposal in the pursuit of a vibrant economy
which will lead to a better life for all South Africans. I move for the
adoption of this Bill. [Applause.]

Mr S J LEEUW: Chairperson, hon members, when this Government came into
power in 1994, it was faced with a lot of challenges, and it still is. The
issues that it faced then still prevail now, and they are the restructuring
of the economy, job creation, education and the eradication of poverty.

To address some of the above issues, Government had to restructure some of
the parastatals in such a way that they operate on business principles
hence SA Airways was corporatised, that is, it was operated as a commercial
entity. But these measures are not without their own complexities. A debt
accumulated by SA Airways amounted to approximately R4,057 billion. This
debt was caused, among other things, by the previous regime plundering the
pension fund of the then SA Transport Services and which is now Transnet.
The Bill seeks to address some of these inherited dilemmas.

It was agreed then that for SAA to be competitive and attractive, some
measures had to be taken to lighten their balance sheet. Out of the R4,057
billion, R1 billion was allocated to SAA, Transnet was allocated R1,724 and
the Government was allocated R1,33 billion, including the service costs.
The Bill seeks to enable the Minister of Finance to borrow and make trade-
offs with a suitable financial instrument. The Department of Finance has
indicated that this transaction will be done within the parameters set out
in the Budget ending March 1999-2000. This is encouraging.

The above transaction or agreement has borne fruits. Members may remember
that in June 1999 the President announced in this Parliament a deal
concluded between SAA and Swissair amounting to R1,4 billion, that is, a
20% stake of SAA equity. While acknowledging the success and complexities
of this transaction, we want to appeal to the Ministries that the process
was not quite the way we wanted it to be. Because of that oversight in the
Ministries, extra expenses could not be avoided.

I would like to refer to the submission made by Cosatu on opting for
alternatives to the approach used currently. This call is made in the light
of us not knowing whether in future this type of transaction will arise or
not. Seeing that the process of restructuring involves a lot of complicated
issues, it will be necessary that we start now to investigate various
options of dealing with similar issues of acquiring debt.

May I take this opportunity to wish the Deputy Minister, the Minister and
their team well at this interesting time of the year of presenting the
Budget tomorrow. The ANC will support this Bill. [Applause.]

Ms R TALJAARD: Chairperson, hon members, we heard during the committee
deliberations on this Bill that Transnet was hovering close to a very high
gearing level. Indeed, it was hovering on the precipice of potential debt
default. This process must be stopped, and this Bill is an important
building block in that process.

The DP supports this Bill in the hope that it will give a clear and
unambiguous signal that a new commitment to privatisation has been forged.
In this vein, I can assure the Deputy Minister of our support in all
measures aimed at smoothing the path for the privatisation process.

Our support to this Bill is subject to a number of provisos related to SA
Airways, however. Firstly, we will continue to seek answers to the untimely
death of Sun Air and SA Airways' role in this event. [Interjections.]
Secondly, we will continue to strive for competitive skies and not allow SA
Airways to exploit South African consumers by exploiting its monopoly
conditions. [Interjections.]

It is further worth reminding ourselves that every wish list for the Budget
day tomorrow, including the recent one released by Sacob, included a
specific desirability item that there should be more commitment and detail
on the Government's privatisation programme. I would like to tell the
Minister and the Deputy Minister to let this unwavering commitment to
clarity on detail be the guiding light in their Budget tomorrow.

Indeed, this sentiment underscores the key question that the Minister and
the Deputy Minister will be asked tomorrow, which is: Is it good enough to
have earned a mere R10,3 billion thus far from the privatisation process?
The DP believes that we can set our target much, much higher than this and
that we will be able to actually extract revenue to the tune of R20 billion
per annum over the next five years.

One of the major obstacles to accelerated economic growth that holds South
Africa in its grip and holds us back is the high cost of servicing debt.
This cripples our ability to produce a budget which reflects our real
priorities of economic growth, job creation and poverty alleviation. A key
and immediate consequence of such a bold step of releasing R20 billion per
annum is that debt-servicing costs would decrease by about R2,5 billion
each year, amounting to a reduction of about R10 billion by the year 2000.

Half-hearted attempts at privatisation are costing our country dear as we
forego the enormous benefits associated with such a project. We need real
privatisation, not a drip-feed of strategic equity and foreign earnings
through strategic equity partnerships. Only a bold leap forward will take
our country forward on this path. The DP would like the Minister of Finance
to be bold tomorrow. His boldness on the privatisation score will send a
clear-cut signal to investors and also to rating agencies hovering over a
rating for this country, that we are serious about creating a thriving
market economy in South Africa. [Applause.]

Dr G G WOODS: Chairperson, because of particular actions and decisions
already taken which relate to the intentions of this Bill, we find
ourselves feeling obliged to support the Bill, not so much for what it sets
out to do, but to avoid the possible problems that would arise if it were
not passed today. What also makes this an uncomfortable situation is that
the claimed merits of the Bill and its underlying rationale remain
partially unclear, even after two meetings by the Portfolio Committee on
Finance with the Asset and Liability Management Division of the Department
of Finance.

The actual transactions - burden-sharing transactions - are understood, as
is the broad motivation for such transactions. However, what is less
understood is the overall financial viability of these transactions. In the
committee, I requested a copy of the department's cost-benefit analysis,
the study upon which the debt-shifting decisions were based. This was
promised, but only a brief document, which did little to explain the
underlying economic and financial assumptions and calculations, was sent. I
do trust that a full study was in fact undertaken prior to the formulation
of this Bill, a study that included all the assumptions, the projections
and the rates used.

So for us the central question regarding eventual benefit from the future
sell-off of parts of SA Airways versus the cost to the fiscus from the
additional debt, and the financial impact on Transnet and its customers,
has not been met with substantive answers by the department. In fact, an
even less clear commitment on the future privatisation of SAA has been
spelt out. This has left us trying to make some sense of the limited
information at our disposal. However, based on the assumption that the
privatisation of SAA will be ongoing and that such proceeds from that
privatisation, together with an equitable share of the future SAA profits,
are to be distributed to the fiscus and to Transnet, we do see the
possibility that this Bill would produce its intended outcomes, and this
would further influence our decision to support this Bill.

Dr P J RABIE: Chairperson, the South African Airways Unallocatable Debt
Bill authorises the Minister to borrow money during the financial year
ending March 2000 for the specific purpose of discharging a portion of the
debt of Transnet attributable to SA Airways at its incorporation, and to
provide for the settlement of outstanding debts, which relate to a pension
fund, of R1,33 billion.

In wese beteken dit dat daar 'n skuldverdeling tussen Transnet en die
Regering moet wees. Dit is 'n positiewe stap hierdie wat die proses van
privatisering sal verhaas. Die Nuwe NP is ten gunste van hierdie wetgewing
en ons steun dit derhalwe. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Essentially this means that there should be a division of debt between
Transnet and the Government. This is a positive step which will expedite
the process of privatisation. The New NP is in favour of this legislation,
and accordingly we support it.]

It is the opinion of my party that the Government will be able to
accommodate the interest cost of R1,33 billion within the 1999-2000 budget
for debt services and costs.

Vergun my ook die geleentheid om 'n beroep te doen op alle rolspelers dat
die SA Lugdiens, wat reeds 20% geprivatiseer is, volkome privatiseer sal
word, en dat Transnet ook die proses sal volg. Indien hierdie proses nie
verhaas word nie, sal dit tot die nadeel van die verbruiker wees en toon
dat die Regering nie ernstig is met die privatisering van die sogenaamde
``parastatals'' nie, soos byvoorbeeld Eskom, Denel, Transnet en Telkom. Ek
doen 'n beroep dat hierdie proses onverwyld sal voortgaan.

My party steun hierdie wetsontwerp. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)
[Also allow me the opportunity to appeal to all role-players that the SA
Airways, which is already 20% privatised, will be wholly privatised, and
that Transnet will also follow this process. If this process is not
expedited, it will be to the detriment of the consumer and show that the
Government is not serious about the privatisation of the so-called
parastatals, for example, Eskom, Denel, Transnet and Telkom. I make an
appeal for this process to continue without delay.

My party supports this Bill.]

Dr G W KOORNHOF: Chairperson, a serious concern about this Bill is the
process it has followed. Nine months ago, in May 1999, it missed the
opportunity to be included in the legislative programme of Parliament and
again six months ago, in August 1999. It also failed to be included in the
adjustments estimate for 1999-2000 in November last year.

It is a pity that the approval of such a substantial amount by Parliament,
namely R1,33 billion plus interest payable, has been delayed for such a
long period of time. This delay cost the state probably in the region of
R200 million in interest for the past 11 months, which is quite an
expensive process that was followed. A core issue in approving that
Government takes over a portion of the debt is Government policy on the
restructuring of state assets.

We will support privatisation programmes that will accelerate the creation
and delivery of infrastructure to disadvantaged people. Whilst it attracts
investments, provides jobs and enhances local ownership, the retention of
Eskom, Denel, Transnet and Telkom, with a combined value of R150 billion,
in the public sector is holding back the South African economy. This
position must be changed as soon as possible and with urgency. It is
important that such institutions must generate jobs and income for our
population.

The UDM supports the Bill and encourages Cabinet to fast-track the
restructuring of state assets in such a way that we can expand service
delivery to disadvantaged communities and create new jobs in the process.
[Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, Ministers and members, SA Airways projects that
it will make a profit of R500 million this year. The Government is of the
opinion that the benefits of taking over R1,3 billion of the debt of SAA
will improve the revenue to the state over time. It is estimated that
clearing up SAA's debt will increase its net asset value to about R7
billion. The other side of this equation must, however, not elude our
focus.

The CEO of SAA, Mr Coleman Andrews, intimated that for SAA to be
competitive and generate a surplus it is important that the labour
legislation be revamped. It stands to reason, therefore, that current
labour legislation will face major challenges from business' restructuring
requirements.

The ACDP support this Bill. We believe that the Government is correct to
address the debt relief problems of this industry in the manner outlined in
this Bill. [Time expired.]

Mr G E BALOI: Chairperson, this Bill authorises the Minister of Finance to
borrow a certain amount of money during the financial year ending 31 March
2000, for the purpose of discharging a portion of the debt of the Transnet
Group of Companies attributable to SA Airways at its incorporation, and to
provide for matters in connection therewith.
The Ministry may borrow an amount of R1,33 billion plus such amount as may
be necessary to cover the costs of servicing the debt during the financial
year ending on 31 March 2000. From the money borrowed, the Minister must
transfer to Transnet a sum of money sufficient to discharge the portion of
allocatable debt which was assumed by Government.

The UCDP supports the passage of the Bill.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, Deputy President, Ministers and members, the
avoidance of serious fiscal imbalance and unstable debt conditions is a key
responsibility of the Government. In South Africa this task is difficult,
as the Government is subject to strong political, economic and social
pressure to increase spending and keep taxes down.

Nevertheless, to accommodate the reforms introduced by the SA Revenue
Service and the sale of state-owned assets, the South African Airways
Unallocatable Debt Bill addresses the legitimate duty of the Government to
share the burden of the debt allocated to Transnet, so that the purpose of
discharging the debt must be executed according to section 213 (2) of the
Constitution. The MF supports the South African Airways Unallocatable Debt
Bill and wishes the Minister the richest blessing in his Budget Speech.
[Applause.]

Ms B A HOGAN: Mr Chairman, I went on a voyage of discovery on this Bill and
discovered quite a few things.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Voyager miles or Voyager Discovery?
[Laughter.]

Ms B A HOGAN: I wish I could get some more Voyager Miles. If the hon member
knows how, he should tell me! When this Bill first came before us, the
question that was raised was: Is this an Appropriation Bill? Government is
asking us to approve a loan and so we went scouring around and sort of
saying: Is this now an Appropriation Bill, because Parliament is not
allowed to amend Appropriation Bills, as hon members know. That started the
voyage of discovery, because I then went to look at the actual
Appropriation Bill that we passed in 1999, only to discover that we did not
vote on any borrowing whatsoever: we just voted on what Government
departments were going to spend.

I then looked at the Budget Review and discovered that there is an amount
which is allocated for servicing debt cost and for Government debt.
However, that was not reflected in what we voted on in 1999. I then looked
at the Division of Revenue Bill to see maybe if it was not included there,
because debt is the first charge in the National Revenue Fund. I looked in
the National Revenue Fund and there was no mention of Government debt - we
did not vote on Government debt. I then phoned the Ministry of Finance and
asked: Is it true, does Parliament not vote on borrowing? They said: No, it
is true, Parliament does not vote on what Government borrows.

There are pros and cons in this debate, but it brings to the fore the issue
of what oversight role Parliament wants to exercise over the Budget. If we
are not exercising oversight over borrowing, then do we need a Bill of this
kind to come before us? Obviously the Ministry has been extremely courteous
by producing this Bill, because it is actually asking Parliament to approve
of such a Bill. However, it brings into focus the broader debates
underlying the privatisation process.

Now we know that Government is committed to the restructuring process, but
we also know, as parliamentarians, that we are not fully on board on the
restructuring process. Many of the speakers who have spoken now have showed
and confirmed that we are not clear on what the actual figures are
underlying this process. Our committee was faced with an invidious
position, where we got the end result of what, I am sure, was a very
thorough process. I am informed that the Ministry of Finance spent a year
and a half looking at the figures. We were given the end process, but we
were not given the insights into the thinking around this particular
privatisation initiative. This brings to the fore that maybe we as
portfolio committees need to be networking more with each other, because,
certainly, I am sure the committee that is looking at these issues has
followed it. But our committees are ignorant. Therefore, I want to make an
appeal that these are some of the issues that we should engage in in more
detail in the coming issues around restructuring.

Finally, I would like to say that there is also a legal confusion. Mr
Chair, I beg your indulgence on this. If Parliament could just investigate
the status of such a Bill. When we finally had to make a decision, we were
more or less of the opinion that this was not an Appropriation Bill,
although Parliament's joint tagging mechanism did indicate that they
thought that it was an Appropriation Bill. In order to avoid this kind of
confusion in the future, I think we do need to have some kind of legal
opinion from our parliamentary legal advisers to advise us on the exact
status of such a Bill.

Finally, we had a fairly fruitful series of interchanges from various
people on this Bill. Cosatu, as the House knows, came out with what was
described in one newspaper as ``a blistering attack'' on the Ministry. When
I looked at the submission that Cosatu actually made, I could not say that
it was ``a blistering attack'', but there were certain issues that were
raised that I think, for the comfort of all MPs, do need to be addressed,
looked at and considered by us in order for us to be on board with what the
Ministry is proposing.

Having said that, I would like to congratulate the Ministry on a fairly
lengthy process of negotiating the complexities of the financing of this
transaction, because it has been a major process that they have undergone,
and to call upon them, if we are going to be looking at Bills of this kind
in future, to make available more detailed figures - the kind of figures
that Dr Woods was asking for - so that we are in a better position to make
a more informed decision.

The ANC supports this Bill.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, I would like to thank all
members for their support for this Bill.

There are a few issues that I would just like to say something on. The
first is that, in relation to the issue that Ms Hogan was raising just now,
we have to understand that this has been a very complex process. First and
foremost, this work is located in the Department of Public Enterprises. In
addition to that, we have the various enterprises regulated by different
pieces of legislation located in different Ministries within Government.
These are some of the complexities.

I certainly think the hon Hogan is right when she says that perhaps what
Parliament needs to look at is how to interact within the committees
themselves, because, if that is not the case, information will be located
in a whole number of different places. I think that that is something that
we may want to look at in time.

Secondly, there is the question of the pace of the restructuring of state
assets. I think we have to state quite openly that the question of public
policy with regard to public enterprises is an important one to us, because
the positions that we take must, of course, be rooted in the conditions
that we are trying to deal with. Therefore, anybody who wants the wholesale
privatisation of all these things misses a very important point, and that
is that there are important public policy objectives that we have as a
Government and as a country.

We thus have to deal with all of these problems and find ways in a
constrained environment of getting the maximum resources that we can use in
order to meet those public policy aims. I think we also have to address the
question of the process that we have taken to improve the performance, the
efficiency and the sustainability of these assets.

This makes a fundamental point about our attitude towards public funds,
because these assets were bought, in the first place, with public funds. If
I said a moment ago that the value of the SAA was zero rand, because the
assets and liabilities were almost the same, we could have sold SAA for
R1,00. What attitude is that towards public funds? These are important
issues that people need to take into account when we question the pace and
the process of restructuring of state assets. [Applause.]

Finally, I would like to say to Dr Woods, that it is a pity that he was not
able to benefit from the different studies that were done. However, I would
want to assure him that there is a lot of work that went into this and a
number of options were looked at. In the final analysis it was felt that
this was the best option for Government to pursue. Besides these points, I
would like to thank everybody for supporting the Bill. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

                   FINANCIAL SERVICES BOARD AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, the Financial Services Board
is an independent statutory institution which was established under the
Financial Services Board Act of 1990, to supervise the nonbanking financial
services industry. Its mission is to promote sound and efficient financial
institutions and services, together with mechanisms for investor protection
in the markets it supervises. Its regulatory functions are entrusted to
different registrars: insurance, friendly societies, pensions funds, unit
trust companies, stock exchanges and financial markets.

The amendments provided for in this particular Bill are not of major
consequence, and are mainly directed at clarifying uncertain aspects of the
principal Acts or at legislating on matters which have thus far have been
practised by the FSB in its daily operations. One of the issues that is
being dealt with is to settle the relationship between the executive
officer of the FSB and the board. It provides for three tiers or categories
of functions and the degree of supervision prescribed in each case.

The first relates to functions that may not be performed without prior
approval of the board. Secondly, those which must be performed in
accordance with guidelines issued by the board. Thirdly, those functions
which the executive officer may perform in his or her discretion.

Another amendment in the Bill relates to functions of the board described
more clearly than before in clause 2 of the Bill. The functions are to
supervise compliance with laws regulating financial institutions and the
provision of financial services. We also introduce a new function in this
Bill for the FSB, which is to promote programmes and initiatives by
financial institutions directed at consumer education. This is an important
issue, because the majority of consumers in our country are not enlightened
on matters that relate to investments, financial products and others. So,
this is a new function that we are introducing.

Fourthly, we relieve the President of the functions hitherto assigned to
him in relation to the selection and appointment of members of the FSB
itself. This function will now vest in the Minister of Finance, under whose
auspices the FSB operates, and who has a variety of other functions under
the Act, such as the appointment of the executive of the FSB and of members
of the Financial Services Board of Appeal.

We also expand, through this Bill, the number of members of the executive
and the activities of the FSB which are funded by the financial services
industry. What we do in this Bill is to introduce a process of consultation
with the industry before levies are proclaimed in the Gazette.

On the question of consultation between the FSB and the Minister of
Finance, we streamline this procedure so that the board and the executive
can consult with the Minister on any other matter relating to the exercise
of the board's powers, should the Minister call for such a consultation. We
also extend a little bit the ability of the FSB to exchange information
with other regulators - local, self-regulatory bodies - and render
assistance to foreign regulatory or supervisory authorities, subject to
such exchange or assistance not being against the public interest.

These are the major amendments that we effect in this particular Bill. The
final one, of course, clarifies the question of negligence. One finds that
in a number of pieces of legislation in South Africa the question of
negligence is not dealt with properly. In this Bill, we make it quite clear
that gross negligence will not be excused.
With those words, I would like to introduce this Bill. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

            TENTH ANNIVERSARY OF RELEASE OF EX-PRESIDENT MANDELA

                          (Subject for Discussion)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Chairperson, hon Deputy President,
dear members, the ANC has called for a snap debate to honour and celebrate
the tenth anniversary of the release of Comrade Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela.
We do so because we acknowledge the sterling leadership Madiba has
demonstrated in his capacity as the leader of the ANC and as the president
of the first democratic Government in South Africa.

Eighty years ago, a legend was born in the village of Qunu - a humble
person who displayed qualities of a leader at a very early stage of his
life. That legend is Comrade Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela. A number of authors
have reflected on the early life of Madiba. We are always tempted to
examine his public political life, justifiably so, for his life serves as
an inspiration to the people of South Africa, both black and white, to the
people of the African continent and the international community.

As the scion of the Thembu Royal House in the then Transkei, there lay
before Comrade Mandela the prospect of comfort and ease. He could have
taken the easy walk, accepted the alienation of the land of his
forefathers, a fragmentation of his country and the loss of his birthright
as a South African - a path which would have led to a position of empty
authority and status, created and buttressed by the conquerors of his
country, an administration of apartheid laws, and one which would mould his
people's future and destiny at the behest of apartheid rule. Comrade
Mandela rejected this path. He refused to sacrifice his dignity as an
African, and as a free person.

The former president of the ANC, the late Oliver Reginald Tambo remarked:


  Comrade Mandela is perhaps the fastest to get to grips with the harsh
  realities of the African struggle against the most powerful adversary in
  Africa.

Mr P V Narashima Rao, the Minister of External Affairs and President of the
Indian Council for Cultural Relations, on the presentation of the Jawaharal
Nehru Award for International Understanding to Nelson Mandela in 1980 made
the following points:


  We regard Nelson Mandela as a front-ranking leader of the oppressed
  people of South Africa. We have admired his unfailing courage in waging a
  relentless struggle against social injustice and racial discrimination.

  The ideas of liberty, equality and justice were cherished by the man in
  whose memory this award has been instituted and, even earlier, by his
  sage and mentor, Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi.

  With Jawaharlal Nehru, Nelson Mandela is a man of peace who fought
  against oppression.

  By dedicating himself to constructing a society in which all people may
  live in harmony, he has recognised the supremacy of moral law that
  underlies national and international relations without which there cannot
  be enduring peace.

Comrade Mandela has left a legacy of upholding noble human values like
freedom, equality and democracy, which serves as inspiration to generations
to come. Comrade Mandela stood firm in pursuing these noble goals. He is
the founding father of our rainbow nation, and through his term of office,
managed to foster our national unity.

Whilst Comrade Mandela is known for being firm in his principles, he is
also a flexible leader. He has taught us the importance of listening to the
other person, even if there is a divergence of opinions. He always reminded
his comrades that compromises are not equivalent to selling out, and that
we are sometimes forced to compromises with a view to pursuing strategic
objectives.

Madiba is well known as an ardent supporter of the rights of youth, women,
children and the disabled. The Nelson Mandela Children's Trust continues to
provide assistance to children who are trapped in a vicious cycle of
poverty. The Office of the Status of Women, the Gender Commission and the
National Youth Commission were established during his term as the President
of the Republic of South Africa. He believes that investment in the younger
generation is an important ingredient for the moral renewal of our society.

One of the most important leadership qualities that Comrade Madiba
displayed during his term of office was that he did not cling to power. He
served his country for one term of office as the leader of government and
allowed the younger generation to lead the next term. [Applause.] This will
continue to serve as an inspiration, not only amongst South Africans, but
to Southern African countries and the rest of the African continent.

Comrade Madiba continued being involved, after he served his term as a
president. He continues to be involved in a process of finding a lasting
solution to the crisis in the Great Lakes Region. Here at home, Comrade
Mandela is central in ensuring that schools and clinics are built in rural
parts of our country, where they are needed most.

We are blessed to have a leader like Comrade Mandela. As a result, we, from
the ANC, believe that it will be important for this House to consider
accepting our proposal that a bust of this great man should grace the
precincts of this honourable institution.

Long live Comrade Nelson Mandela! [Applause.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: Mr Chairperson, the DP is very happy to be associated with
this call, and the interesting suggestion Mr Yengeni has made about
erecting a bust of the former president, where more appropriate than the
grounds of Parliament or, indeed, in the Parliament building, to honour a
great South African in this way. [Applause.]

On a hot Sunday afternoon, ten years ago, Nelson Mandela walked away from
prison, at last a free man. As President Mandela's days behind bars ended,
so our country began its own journey away from the prisons of the past -
racial division, the repression of authoritarian government and the
unjustifiable denial of the rights and freedoms of our people.

We are here today, to honour the man who helped show South Africa a better
way. His achievements have been many, but the essential heart of his
legacy, his greatest gift to his people, is the spirit of reconciliation
that guided him as he guided us across the often perilous terrain of our
transition to democracy.

In doing this, Mr Mandela did so in a uniquely warm and personal way. I can
only say that he treated me with fatherly kindness. I want to disclose to
the House just one conversation which I had with him, and I am sure he will
forgive me for it. I was at lunch in Johannesburg, just over a year ago,
when the telephone rang and a woman's voice said: ``Please hold on for the
President.'' I asked: ``The president of what?'' I was not expecting a call
from Mr Mandela. So that well-known voice said: ``Of South Africa,
Douglas.'' He then proceeded to ask me how things were going with the
Mickey Mouse party, and I was able to ask him how things were going with
the Goofy Government. The House might remember that my hon leader coined
that phrase.

We then discussed Christmas and how it had been, and the New Year and how
it had been, and he said that he remembered my wife and he had liked her,
but he could not remember how many children I had. I told him I had only
one son who was 22 years old at the time. ``Oh shame, why?'' So I had to
explain why. [Laughter.]

Then he wanted to know from me: ``But haven't you got any daughters?'' So I
said: ``No, I haven't'', and he said: ``Well, you must talk to your wife
and do something about it!'' [Laughter.]

So I explained to Mr Mandela that we were in our late fifties, and that the
baby factory had closed down. [Laughter.] He then said: ``But you can adopt
one. Tell your wife that girls are wonderful. You must adopt a daughter.''
Only then, after we had talked about all of this, did he say that he could
not get hold of my leader that afternoon, and that he had something
important that he wanted to discuss with us and where he wanted our help
and support.

That was the sort of relationship that political opponents were able to
have with him, and I might say that it continues today. Last weekend - I do
not want to breach confidences - President Mandela talked to people on our
side of the divide, and we appreciate it very much.

For President Mandela, reconciliation has always been the key to future
success in South Africa. He knew intuitively, when those with less insight
and no foresight remained entrenched in antagonism and suspicion, that our
country's future depended on a coming together of all the people of our
land. He knew from the beginning, that the futures of all South Africans
were linked inexorably, and that only together would there be any future
for us.

I want to remind everybody of the words which he used at Rivonia, where he
said that he had fought against white domination, that he had fought
against black domination, and that he cherished the ideal of a democratic
and free society in which all people lived together in harmony and with
equal opportunities. He said that he hoped to achieve that and that he
wanted to live for it, but if need be, it was an ideal for which he was
prepared to die.

I do not think anybody will ever forget those words, because they are such
a lesson to us, and, whatever the divide is, whatever the differences
across politics and parties, we must never forget our essential humanity -
the fact that we are really, all together, South Africans. President
Mandela knew that, and knows that today. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Madam Speaker, I think most
Ministers will concur with the hon Mr Gibson that they have also
experienced, in some form or other, hearing Dr Mandela's voice in telephone
calls early in the morning, after which one would really not know what to
do - whether to respond, to have tea or to go to the bathroom. One would
not know, really.

I must also complain a little bit here to the hon the Chief Whip of the
Majority Party that, at this important tenth anniversary of Mr Mandela's
release, he gives himself 10 minutes and us four minutes of speaking time.
We would have liked to have 10 minutes, I think. It is important that we
should have had 10 minutes.

Mr Mandela said of Mohandas K Gandhi:


  He was no ordinary leader. There are those who believe that he was
  divinely inspired and it is difficult not to believe with them.

There exist, in the life and history of every nation, mysteries which have
spawned leaders of great charisma and honour. Because the realm of the
divine is often beyond human comprehension and description, we find it more
comfortable to simply lay our individual and party claims to the noble
deeds and charismatic leadership before us, and rightly so, because our
association with a figure over a period of time demands we do so. Such are
some of the historical circumstances and perceptions surrounding the era
and leadership of Dr Nelson Mandela.

In an extract from a letter written underground, which was published in
London in 1965 and reprinted in the African writers' series in 1973, Dr
Mandela hinted briefly, and I quote him:


  Any serious politicians will realise that under the present-day
  conditions in this country, to seek a cheap martyrdom by handing myself
  over to the police is naive and criminal. We have an important programme
  before us and it is important to carry it out very seriously and without
  delay. I have chosen this latter course which is more difficult and which
  entails more risk and hardship than sitting in jail. I have had to
  separate myself from my dear wife and children, from my mother and
  sisters, to live as an outlaw in my own land. I have had to close my
  business, to abandon my profession, and live in poverty and misery, as
  many of my people are doing.
Today, as we speak, South Africa shares the fruits of this sacrifice with
Africa and the rest of the world. It must be true that the experience of
the past 10 years was rich and fulfilling for Dr Mandela, for it must be
this experience also, from which he has drawn the extraordinary courage and
vision to embark on what is noble for Africa.

Some may say he was one of us, and now he belongs to the world. [Applause.]

Mr R S SCHOEMAN: Madam Speaker, hon Deputy President, colleagues, at the
outset I would like to say that the New NP fully supports the proposal by
the Chief Whip that there should be recognition of former President Mandela
here in the parliamentary precints. We think it is an excellent idea.

It was my privilege to have been a member of Parliament, sitting in this
very Chamber - in fact, I think I sat in the seat currently occupied by the
hon the Minister Joe Nhlanhla - when the then President F W De Klerk made
the momentous announcement on 2 February 1990 that Mr Nelson Mandela was to
be released from prison and that all political movements were to be
unbanned.
Four years later I had the privilege to serve in President Mandela's
administration as Deputy Minister of Education for two years, and I could
experience from close proximity the qualities which have resulted in him
being acknowledged as one of Africa's greatest sons of all time.

I will refer to just a few qualities, but for me as an Afrikaner it was the
fact that Mr Mandela unfailingly spoke to me in Afrikaans that underlined
his recognition that our diversity can be used to strengthen our respect
for one another and our common nationhood, and not harm it.

Mnr Mandela se voorbeeld van groothartigheid teenoor almal en die erkenning
van ons land se taal- en kultuurverskeidenheid demonstreer vir my dat sy
verbintenis tot nasiebou en versoening nie net lippediens is nie, maar 'n
diepgewortelde oortuiging en 'n ingesteldheid van leef en laat leef.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The example Mr Mandela sets of magnanimity towards everyone and the
recognition of the linguistic and cultural diversity of our country
demonstrates to me that his commitment to nation-building and
reconciliation is not mere lip-service, but a deep-rooted conviction and an
attitude of live and let live.]

It is therefore a privilege for me to be able to participate in this debate
today on behalf of the New NP as a party committed to the recognition of
diversity, to reconciliation and to seeking a broad national consensus on
important issues where sufficient commonality exists.

As we look back over the past 10 years, and specifically at the role of Mr
Nelson Mandela, there are many images which come to mind, but for me four
qualities of many more stand out. They are his humility, his courage, his
integrity and his perseverance. None of these qualities need to be
elaborated on today, but the last one, perseverance, is best illustrated if
one realises that as long ago as 1956 in an article entitled ``In our
lifetime'' written for the publication Liberation, Mr Mandela refers to the
1955 adoption of the Freedom Charter as follows, and I quote:


  For the first time in the history of our country, the democratic forces,
  irrespective of race, ideological conviction, party affiliation or
  religious belief, have renounced and discarded racialism and its
  ramifications.

To this unshakeable belief in nonracialism Mr Mandela has held firm for the
45 years that have elapsed since he spoke these words. I would submit that
his rejection of racialism, in any form, in our new democratic South Africa
is as important and relevant today as ever it was in 1956, because we must
still turn our dream of a truly nonracial South Africa into an enduring
reality. This is our common challenge.

If we achieve that vision of sustaining a truly democratic, nonsexist,
nonracial South Africa, it would be the most meaningful tribute we can pay
to Nelson Mandela and it would be a legacy which, like Mr Mandela's life
and his example, gives hope to future generations. Let us all be part of
that endeavour. [Applause.]

Dr S E MZIMELA: Madam Speaker, as one listens to the eulogies this
afternoon, one is reminded of a funeral service at which much is said and
very little is meant. However, we are not at a funeral this afternoon. We
are here to honour Nelson Mandela and to pay tribute to him for what he has
done for this country and, if I may add, for what he continues to do.

For our purposes there are two ways of looking at Mr Mandela. Firstly, we
can look at him through the eyes of the international community where he is
an icon, a living legend, where he is idealised, immortalised and, indeed,
he is at a stage at which nothing that we do can belittle his achievements,
nothing that we do can add to what he has already achieved, and nothing
that we do not do can diminish his stature.

However, when one looks at him through the eyes of the South African
public, one immediately must concede that he is, after all, a human being
like all of us, and that any attempt to deify him does him an injustice
and, in fact, destroys all the good he has done. The international
community would in fact rewrite Shakespeare, because Shakespeare said:


  The evil that men do lives after them;
  The good is oft interred with their bones.

Future generations on the international scene will say that the evil he did
was interred with his bones, and that the good lives after him.

His policy of reconciliation, which was the cornerstone of his time in
office, did indeed save South Africa from impending doom. It has also
reaped some valuable benefits for the party in power. After all, they have
netted such fish as Pik Botha and a long list of born-again Afrikaner
businessmen who have suddenly discovered that this Government is on the
right track.

The same policy of reconciliation, of course, had its downside. It
prevented him from seeing the emergence of a manipulative force within his
own ranks. It is this force which has prevented the evolution and
consolidation of democracy. We must remember that despite all the talk of
democracy in South Africa, we still have no democracy. Less than one year
after Mandela's departure from the South African political helm, we are
beginning to see and experience the emergence of this authoritarianism,
clear evidence that this manipulative force was at work, even while he was
in power.

Were it not for this manipulative force, some of South Africa's most
competent, intelligent and skilled citizens would be occupying some of the
front benches on this side of the House, giving this House the benefit of
their wisdom, insight and talent. The failure to prevent this manipulative
force from spreading its tentacles now means that the Mandela legacy has
shifted to the South African people as a whole, who must re-lay the
foundations of democracy and prevent South Africa from becoming the final
African disaster. [Interjections.] Emerge as a leader!

The SPEAKER: Order! Order!

Rev K R J MESHOE: Madam Speaker, it is a great honour for me to take part
in the debate on the tenth anniversary of the release of our former
President, Mr Nelson Mandela. This debate was called to give tribute to a
man whose leadership is exemplary and whose commitment to peace and
reconciliation is unquestionable. His contribution to this country and the
world is both legendary and inspirational.

Mr Mandela's passion for reconciliation and his desire to see South Africa
emerge as a peaceful nation never allowed him to live in the past. He
constantly still reaches out a hand of friendship to friend and foe alike.
In Parliament, he reached out to all political parties irrespective of
their size and respected their opinions. He successfully made us all feel
important in the building of the new democratic South Africa.

He personally called me a few times, as he did others, to inform me about
issues others would not have wanted me to know about, and then also asked
for my opinion. His style of leadership has definitely made an impact on my
life. I remember getting a phone call from him the Saturday evening after
the 1999 election results were made known. I marvelled as I listened to
this great statesman, that always behaved like the President of all South
Africans, congratulating the ACDP on its performance.

Mr Mandela, as the President of South Africa, knew how to rise above party
politics. We will always honour him for that. It is my prayer that Almighty
God will keep him strong and healthy as he stretches himself to the limit
while trying to broker peace in Burundi. He is doing a great job and has
the support of all peace-loving citizens of this country and the rest of
the world.

The ACDP salutes this great son of Africa. We will support any measure to
honour Dr Nelson Mandela within the precincts of this Parliament.
[Applause.]

Genl C L VILJOEN: Mevrou die Speaker, soos tevore sê ek dat mnr Mandela se
vrylating 'n simfonie was, maar 'n halfvoltooide simfonie. As dit nie
voltooi word nie, dink ek, gaan daar nog baie wanklanke oor kom. Hierdie
vrylating was korrek, noodsaaklik en tydig, veral aangesien die
kommunistiese bedreiging in die wêreld in daardie stadium ineengestort het.

Verder was die tyd reg in Suid-Afrika vir die uitbreiding van volle
demokratiese regte aan al die mense van Suid-Afrika. Dit was ook billik
teenoor mnr Mandela as persoon. Hy was 'n besondere mens, en ondanks sy
baie jare in die gevangenis het hy steeds daarin geslaag om 'n ware swart
aristokraat te bly. Hy ken sy mense, hulle ken hom en hy is wyd
aanvaarbaar. Ek dink erkenning aan hom is sekerlik gepas. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Gen C L Viljoen: Madam Speaker, as before, I say that Mr Mandela's release
was a symphony, but a half completed one. If it is not completed, I think
there will still be many discordant notes. This release was correct,
necessary and timely, especially since at that stage the worldwide
communist threat had collapsed.

Furthermore the time was right in South Africa for the extension of full
democratic rights to all the people of South Africa. It was also fair to Mr
Mandela as a person. He was an exceptional man, and despite his many years
in prison, he still managed to remain a true black aristocrat. He knows his
people, they know him and he is widely accepted. I certainly think it is
appropriate to pay homage to him.]

But the crux of the macropolitics about releasing Mr Mandela was to create
enough harmony and reconciliation between the clashing interests and
emotions of many racial groups, the dividing line of that time, so that
democracy could be extended to the masses in a way that would not
jeopardised stability.

That was the first part of the symphony. What needs to be done now is to
address the deeper intrinsic diversity of the kind which Mr Mandela is
experiencing at the moment in Africa between the Hutus and Tutsis, as we
have between the Afrikaners, the Zulus and other peoples here. To do so in
South Africa, we must stop homogenising South Africa. We must accept
minority rights as a fundamental freedom as part of human rights and
included in the Bill of Rights. We must honour the accord of Afrikaner self-
determination to which Mr Mandela agreed. We must honour the role of
traditional authorities and communities, and we must honour the African
Charter of Human Rights and Peoples' Rights.

We need it. Africa needs it. Let us complete this symphony by allowing this
release anniversary occasion really to achieve its full potential here and
in Africa.

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Madam Speaker, Deputy President, Nelson Mandela is a
son of South African soil, a family man, a statesman, a compatriot, freedom
fighter, and the first South African democratically elected president
accepted by all across colour divides.

What has he achieved as a president of South Africa since 1994? He has
steered the country in the direction of peace and stability - what
international observers would like to term ``the miracle transition to
democracy.'' He is well known for his unapologetic stance on reconciliation
even though his approach earned him criticism, especially from those who
felt that he was giving too much without the other group reciprocating on
his gestures.

Despite all this, he continued and urged South Africans to forge ahead in
building a nonracial and a united, democratic society based on the
principles of equality and advancement of human rights and freedom. This
path has earned him a natural role of being an international mediator and
peace-broker in Burundi and other countries seeking his services.

What can we learn from Madiba? What we know is that he served his former
enemies in the Government of National Unity without being bitter about his
incarceration for 27 years which robbed South Africa of a visionary leader
during the said period.

The challenges that lie ahead for South Africa, and in particular for
President Thabo Mbeki, is to consolidate and break down Dr Mandela's vision
into a concrete reality for every South African. The UCDP would like to
say: Siyabonga Madiba. We thank you very much, Madiba. Today Africa, and
South Africa in particular, is a shining star because of your deeds and
sacrifices. [Applause.]

Dr M S MOGOBA: Madam Speaker, 10 years is a short time when one is in the
business of nation-building, but it is a long time when one is incarcerated
in a colonial, fascist prison. Mr Mandela spent nearly 10 times three,
which is 30 years, in prison. We salute him.

Some comrades who were with him like Mangaliso Sobukwe, Zephania Mothopeng,
Jafta Masemola, Elias Motsoaledi were not so lucky. On 15 January this
year, in pouring rain, we buried Dimake Malepe, one of the young boys who
were sentenced to life imprisonment and almost forgotten by the world.

I have had a very unusual privilege of having known Mr Mandela as a lawyer
in Johannesburg. He adjudicated in a school debate between Jan Hofmeyr
School of Social Work and the Pretoria Bantu Normal College, to which I
belonged, and he caused our team to lose. Then, after that, we were
prisoners together on Robben Island. Later I became his pastor in the
church. One of the memorable moments was sharing Holy Communion with him at
Pollsmoor prison. That was followed by a visit at Victor Verster where we
shared deeply about problems facing our country.

In the drama of transition to democratic South Africa, I recall being part
of a team trying to bring reconciliation between Madiba and Shenge, between
IFP and ANC. At Tuynhuys he always introduced me to visiting leaders as his
bishop and his opponent. He has done so much, although much still remains
to be done, particularly in the area of reconciling and reuniting fellow
comrades in the liberation struggle.

I was sent by the World Methodist Council to invite him, a fellow
Methodist, to address a world conference of about 5 000 methodists
representing 54 million people from 93 countries. Although he declined this
invitation, it is still a reliable measure of his greatness. Judged by all
standards, he is a world figure who towers above his contemporaries like a
colossus. May the coming decades bring us more justice, tolerance, peace
and development. His greatness deserves nothing less. I want to associate
myself with the suggestion that he be honoured in the precincts of this
very Parliament. [Applause.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, when God chooses his messengers to save
humanity, he chooses only the best, like our former president, Nelson
Mandela.

In 1979 Nelson Mandela was chosen as the recipient of India's prestigious
Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International Understanding. In response to the
honour, he wrote a letter to the Indian Council for Cultural Relations,
expressing his sincere thanks and appreciation. In the introduction of the
letter, he made a selfless statement, and I quote:


  Although I have been singled out for this award, I am mindful that I am
  the mere medium for an honour that rightly belongs to the people of our
  country.

[Applause.] The honourable Nelson Mandela experienced the joy and hardship
of the freedom struggle with the people of South Africa. On 11 February
1990, following his release, he gave a speech in which he stated that his
friends and comrades, his fellow South Africans, and all people throughout
the world who fought against the apartheid regime, were the heroes of the
freedom achieved by the struggle.

The honourable Nelson Mandela was entrusted with a demanding and unique
duty, to reconcile and unite the people with their diverse differences, to
lay the foundation for social, economic and political development, and to
place South Africa on the international map. Most importantly, he taught us
how to forgive.

Madiba played the dual role of father and mother to the nation. Siyabonga
Baba, buesa South Africa. We salute him. We bring to him best wishes for a
long life from the leader of the MF, Mr Amichand Rajbansi. [Applause.]

Mr C AUCAMP: Madam Speaker, Rev Meshoe's speech made me a little jealous,
because Mr Mandela did not phone me to congratulate me on the success of
the AEB in the election. I suppose at that time he did not have my phone
number. [Laughter.]

The image of Nelson Mandela, inside and outside South Africa, is the
outcome of internal and external political factors combined with very
personal gifts bestowed upon him by God. In the person of Nelson Mandela,
the attributes of charisma and a kind of traditional aristocracy are
combined with humility, and the spice of a very personal sense of humour.
His devotion to the cause in which he believes is respected even by those
who differ with him. His love for children and, recently, Bonsmara cattle,
is well known and admired.

During his years in prison he was the personification of the entire
struggle movement in South Africa. Since his release he has played a
constructive role to accomplish a soft and peaceful transition. His person
and his sense for politics helped to create a political climate of
negotiation.

As this is not an obituary but an evaluation, it would be dishonest not to
mention the disappointment that as leader of the ANC he did not give effect
to the agreements prior to the 1994 election with regard to the question of
self-determination for the Afrikaner.

In hierdie verband is dit veelseggend om daarop te let dat hy sopas
voorgestel het dat die etniese konflik tussen die Hutu's en die Tutsi's
opgelos moet word deur die proses van minderheidsregte. As internasionale
bemiddelaar geniet hy hoë aansien. Dit is daarom ook ironies dat juis die
belofte van internasionale bemiddeling oor federalisme voor die 1994-
verkiesing nie nagekom is nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[In this regard it is significant to note that he has just suggested that
the ethnic conflict between the Hutus and the Tutsis should be resolved by
way of the process of minority rights. As an international mediator he is
held in high esteem. It is therefore ironic that it is in fact the promise
of international mediation on federalism that was made before 1994 that has
not been kept.]

Nelson Mandela will at the end of the century go down in history as the man
of the moment. His influence will transcend his relatively short term of
office. I would also be dishonest if I did not state that, whether one
agrees with his viewpoints or not, it is impossible not to have respect for
him and for what he achieved for his people. [Applause.]

Mr M A MANGENA: Madam Speaker, one does not have to agree with Mr Mandela
in order to embrace him. One does not have to agree with him to want to co-
operate with him or to want to elevate him to the position where he
belongs. Because of this attribute, he has been able to play a crucial and
unifying role, especially during the transition in our country. All of us,
people of different political, social, religious and linguistic
backgrounds, were able to coalesce around him.

In the Black Consciousness Movement, we would call him a tower. A tower is
tall, a tower is prominent, a tower is strong, a tower is rare and special.
One does not find towers everywhere. Madiba literally and figuratively is
tall, because he is a tower. He is prominent and known to all of us, even
small children all over our country, because he is a tower. He is strong.
He wakes up in the morning, jumps from one car to the other, from one
village to the other, from one plane to the other and does all sorts of
things. As we are speaking here, he is in Arusha, helping to bring about
peace in Burundi. He is a tower: He is rare and he is special.

I am also a tower. [Laughter.] But I am a smallernyana [small] tower!
[Laughter.] All of us who are here are towers in our own right, but Madiba
is a tower amongst towers. A bust of this tower around Parliament - that is
a good idea! [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

                               POINT OF ORDER

                                  (Ruling)
The SPEAKER: Order! Before we move on to the next matter on the Order
Paper, I want to give a ruling on some points of order that were raised on
8 February.

Mr Ellis, on that day, raised a point of order that the Deputy Minister of
Education, Father Mkhatshwa, had deliberately misled the House as to what
the Leader of the Opposition had said. I undertook to look at the Hansard
to follow the matter up, which I have done. The Deputy Minister said that
Mr Leon had gleefully criticised the Government for producing only 3 000
African students in maths, science and technology since 1994. According to
the record, Mr Leon said that the Government, and I quote:


  ... after six years of ANC rule, has managed to provide matric passes
  with exemption in maths and science for only 3 000 Africans this year.

It is clear that Father Mkhatshwa was not quoting Mr Leon, but rather gave
his interpretation of what was said. It would be inappropriate for the
Speaker, at any time, to monitor and evaluate how members understand and
interpret one another's statements, and the way in which each one of you
conducts the debate. Accordingly, I cannot find anything objectionable in
what the Deputy Minister said.

On the same day, Mr De Lange raised a point of order that Mr Ellis, in
raising the point of order against the Deputy Minister of Education, had
said that the Deputy Minister was deliberately misleading the House. I have
ruled on several occasions previously that it would not be unparliamentary
to claim that a member is misleading the House. In fact, this is a charge
that is often levelled across the floor.

It is, however, unacceptable to say that a member is deliberately
misleading the House. It does not matter if the member does so in the form
of a question. This Mr Ellis did. If the member is of the view that another
is deliberately misleading the House, that member should table a
substantive motion for consideration. Accordingly, Mr Ellis's remark was
unparliamentary, and I must therefore request him to withdraw it.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, I must say that I find myself in an unexpected
situation, because I still believe that the hon the Leader of the
Opposition was misquoted. Nevertheless, if that is your ruling, I do
withdraw it.
The SPEAKER: I thank you. I would suggest, incidentally, that you look at
the actual quote, because my point is really the distinction, which I think
all hon members ought to understand, between how you interpret what
somebody has said, and the quotation from what they said. This is really
the point I was making. I thank you very much, however.

                  EFFECT OF RECENT FLOODS ON CONSTITUENCIES

                          (Subject for Discussion)

Prof S S RIPINGA: Madam Speaker, Deputy President, Ministers, hon members,
comrades, it is an honour for me to participate in this debate, which the
ANC considers to be of national importance.

The devastating floods in Mpumalanga, Gauteng, the Northern Province,
KwaZulu-Natal, the North West and the Eastern Cape constitute yet another
disaster that has plunged these areas into abject poverty and sorrow. We
mourn those who have died tragically. We wish to send our heartfelt
condolences to the bereaved families in these areas and to our neighbours
in Botswana and Mozambique. We wish to thank those who worked vigorously to
stabilise the situation in these areas. We further wish to thank the ANC
for deploying some of us to the ravaged areas to assess the damage and
assist victims of the floods residing in our constituencies and the areas
at large.

I wish to highlight the devastating floods in these areas. The first flood
came in 1986 when cyclone Demoina struck. Heavy rain fell during a three-
day period. Damage was not caused by the flooding, but by the gale-force
winds which pounded the area. During February 1996, the rain came down in
torrents again. This time it fell over a few days, from 6 February 2000,
and only subsided on 18 February 2000. All records set during the Demoina
disaster were shattered.

I further wish to highlight the areas affected by the floods. Many areas in
the Lowveld, Mpumalanga, the Northern Province, Alexandra in Gauteng, the
North West, KwaZulu-Natal and parts of the Eastern Cape have been severely
ravaged by the floods. Some areas have, for the first time, recorded more
than the average annual rainfall in a period of 24 hours. For instance,
Graskop received 800 mm, White River 840 mm, and Skukuza 500 mm. Many areas
affected by the devastating floods in the aforesaid provinces are
predominantly rural and peri-urban. The poorest of the poor reside in these
areas. Why?

This is part of the legacy of colonial and apartheid planning which
destined people to these areas. The ANC, through its integrated development
programmes, will rectify this. Some areas are completely isolated, for
instance 12 villages in the Nsikazi area are isolated. The south of the
Kruger National Park has been ravaged by the worst floods since the 1930s.
The entire southern part of the park, south of Satara, has been cut off
from the world. In the Northern Province, Tshino and Ramakhuba have been
isolated because the Levubu Bridge that separate the two areas is damaged.
Vuwani is also isolated from Thohoyandou.

Further I would like to highlight the nature of the damage. The heavy rain
has left a trail of destruction. Comrade Samson Ndou who visited these
areas graphically describes the aftermath of the flood disaster as being
like the aftermath of a conventional war. This is the seriousness and
nature of the damage in these areas. Bridges were damaged and washed away,
and dams and houses were flooded and some crumbled before the onslaught of
flooded rivers. Pump stations and roads disappeared, and electricity,
sewerage, water and telephone infrastructure was damaged. Animals, domestic
and wild, have drowned in droves. Fertile and arable agricultural land have
been washed away. Agricultural crops have been flooded. Human beings have
been injured, some have disappeared, and the saddest of all was the loss of
human lives in the rural areas.

I would further like to highlight the management of the disaster in this
area. In a disastrous situation, as experienced in these areas, human life
is paramount. The search for and rescue of stranded people were priorities.
Managing a disaster is a matter of managing life and death. Decision-
making, communication, the availability of seed funding for disasters and
willing people are cardinal ingredients for the successful management of
disasters. Various disaster structures such as provincial disaster
committees and JOCs, or joint operation committees, did just this. Various
structures and individuals worked jointly with these designated disaster
bodies to ensure that the disaster did not become too catastrophic.

The SA National Defence Force has played a major role in searching for and
rescuing people who were trapped by water or washed away by flooded rivers.
In our interaction with Col Hein Visser, commander of Group 33, Nelspruit,
he informed us that helicopters were also sent into Mozambique to rescue 15
stranded South African contractors who were working at the Coromane Dam
there. They were trapped by water and were left without food. He also
confirmed that the SANDF saved the lives of inhabitants of a village about
35 kilometres inside Mozambique. Numerous mercy flights have also been
undertaken to Botswana since the floods invaded and ravaged a part of that
country. Such actions auger well for the African renaissance which is, in
essence, about the reconstruction and development of Africa.

I briefly want to highlight flood relief. The challenges confronting the
various disaster structures, Government, the private sector, NGOs,
individuals and the community at large, are to ensure that victims of the
flooded areas are fed, drinking water is provided, bleach is distributed to
purify contaminated water, the sick can reach health centres, roads and
bridges are temporarily repaired and to guard against the outbreak of
diseases.

We also learned from our visitors that the Health Department has
distributed medicine to health centres. We have further noted that bridges
are being repaired, that Government has declared some areas disaster areas
and that Government has pledged millions and has made an amount available
as a first step to get the lives of people in ravaged areas back to normal.

We were also informed that the national Government has made huge sums
available to start reviving life in the disaster areas. What we wish to do,
is to call upon the private sector, NGOs, individuals and communities to
contribute materially to the reconstruction and development of these areas.
We wish to thank those structures and individuals who empathise, are
compassionate and understand the plight of the poor.

Lastly, we also wish to highlight the effects of the floods on
constituencies. Communication by road is impossible, normal day-to-day
activities have been disrupted, telecommunication to a certain extent is
disrupted, delivery of basic food and water is impossible and schooling has
been disrupted.

We also want to recommend, on the basis of our interaction, that
participation in disaster structures should be at the highest level,
adequate resources should be voted annually to disaster structures,
planning for such an eventuality should be a continuous exercise, training
in disaster management is crucial, the media should be collaborative and
not adversarial, people need to learn from past experiences, the Government
should minimise red tape, the co-ordination of disaster management should
be centralised and there should be a review of residential settlements.

In conclusion, we wish to thank the hon the Chief Whip of the ANC for the
opportunity to explore the impact of the floods, the chairpersons of the
disaster structures, various communities, individuals and the SANDF. We are
convinced that the victims will rise above all odds and re-establish their
lives. The generous support of individuals, the private sector and
Government will ensure that the victims of the floods will succeed in their
search for new lives. [Applause.]

Mr E K MOORCROFT: Madam Speaker, the recent floods which followed a
devastating drought in certain parts of our country serve to bring home to
us, once again, the harsh nature of our climate.

In South Africa we experience very often either a feast or a famine. Seven
lean years will be followed by seven fat years. However, unfortunately
these climatic swings also bring with them much damage. Up until now we
have not been very good at controlling that damage and the present floods
have been no exception. Great destruction has been wreaked while we have
had to stand by helplessly and watch.

My appeal to the hon the Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry and his
colleague the hon the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs, neither of
whom unfortunately are in the House this afternoon, would be that they
consider ways of initiating an entirely new approach to the problem of
flooding. We need to be proactive rather than reactive. As things stand at
the moment, our approach has almost entirely been reactive. We wait until
the danger is upon us then we rush around madly trying to stem the damage.
This is the least effective way of setting about solving a recurring
problem. We should address the cause rather than the effects of flooding.

What is the cause of flooding? The easy answer is, of course, that it is
simply a matter of too much rain falling in too short a period of time on
too small an area of ground. But that is only half the answer. We should
rather answer the question: Why is it that floods appear to be more
ferocious and do more damage with each succeeding flood? The answer is
simple, though it is not always perceived. It is because our management of
the land has been such that rain falling on it is more likely to run off
rather than to sink in to replenish soil moisture and underground aquifers.
Consequently, the increased run-off leads to increased flooding that has
become a feature of of our times.

Perhaps the best known example of this was the great Laingsburg flood of
1981. Heavy rains falling on overgrazed and denuded land in the Great Karoo
caused a wall of water to hit the town of Laingsburg with such ferocity
that there was great loss of life and much damage to property. Until and
unless vegetation is restored to the Karoo, water will continue to run off
the land like water off a corrugated-iron roof, damaging all in its path.

The same applies to the rest of the country. First of all we have to
protect our mountain catchments and wetland areas from unwise land use.
They are the sponges which should be holding the flood waters back. But
they are not. They have almost without exception been overexploited. Land
which should not be ploughed has been ploughed and land which should not
have been grazed has been grazed, and trees have been planted where trees
should never have been planted. Worst of all, large catchment areas which
should serve as a massive water storage reservoir have been burnt and
overstocked with the result that heavy rain falls on the land, disgorging
water into rivers and streams without hindrance, and the results are before
us today.

The message that I would like to convey to the hon the Minister is simply
this: Until and unless we improve our land management practices, floods
will continue to devastate our land with ever-increasing frequency and
intensity. As the old saying has it: Control the mountain, control the
river.

Ms S A SEATON: Madam Speaker, one really only understands the devastation
of any natural disaster when it hits home, and sadly that it has done.

The torrential rain of past weeks and the resultant flooding in large parts
of Mpumalanga, Gauteng, Northern Province, KwaZulu-Natal and our
neighbouring country Mozambique have yet again focused the attentions of
South Africans on the enormous forces of destruction that nature can
unleash on the unexpecting and largely unprepared public.

The facts relating to the disaster that struck our country are well known.
At least, fifty people are believed to have been killed, and to their
families we extend our sincere and heartfelt condolences. Hundreds of homes
and thousands of informal dwellings have been destroyed or abandoned.
Dozens of roads and bridges were destroyed or have become impassable and
hundreds of thousands of people are without clean drinking water and proper
shelter.

What is not being determined is a total cost of the disaster to South
Africa and our neighbouring countries. It is impossible to calculate the
cost of lost lives, but some estimates put the total cost to South Africa
at more than R1 billion, and that is probably conservative. The fact is
that virtually all economic activities in the affected areas have ground to
a halt. The effects of this will only be felt later.

And what about our communities? What has this disaster costs them? Death,
fear of the unknown, displacement, destruction and despair of thousands of
people who are without clean drinking water and proper shelter. I have
personally received telephone calls from my own area where such things have
happened. People are left stranded and without accommodation and food and
roads are washed away.

The cost cannot be measured in simple rand terms. The effect on people's
lives will be felt for a long time to come, long after the roads have been
repaired and the bridges have been rebuilt and the tent cities have been
dismantled. Nature is, by definition, unpredictable, but we have to ask
ourselves if we could not have done more to warn our communities that
danger was approaching and was, in some cases, imminent.

Just today, Parliamentarians were informed that a Bill dealing with the
core functions of the SA Weather Bureau was recently tabled in Cabinet.
Surely the core function of the SA Weather Bureau should be weather
forecasting, and the application of that forecasting should be to assist
the relevant authorities in implementing emergency measures to prepare for
the worst effects of natural disasters.

Being told that the National Disaster Management Centre in Pretoria is
underfunded and understaffed does not assist those in need. Surely the
Government must now make it a top priority to fund this body properly and
to provide it with all the means necessary to play its proper role in
disaster management.

We have heard harrowing tales of communities living in informal settlements
on the banks of rivers being swept away by the floods. It is unfortunate
that often by laws and regulations of local authorities either do not apply
or are not adequately enforced to keep them away from potential disaster.
It is perhaps not the most appropriate time while we discuss the suffering
of our people, but we acknowledge that Government has a duty to inform all
citizens of this country what it plans to do to improve our disaster
management abilities.

But more importantly, right now, is the need to provide the affected
communities with food, shelter and drinking water, and to protect them from
diseases that come from such situations. These are crucial things that we
have to do immediately, but we also have to repair and replace the lost and
damaged infrastructure so that normality in family life, education and
economic activity can be re-established as soon as possible.

There are two further aspects that Government should address as soon as
possible. The first one is to address the fragmentary approach to disaster
management that has been evident, and the second one is to improve
communications at all levels when dealing with disaster relief efforts. Our
people simply have to know that there is a possibility of danger before
disaster strikes, and they also have to be informed constantly of
Government rescue and relief efforts that are designed to assist them.

One cannot then, of course, end this debate without praising the formidable
efforts of the SA National Defence Force and other civil and private
emergency services in rescuing trapped and endangered people and
communities. Without their selfish and heroic deeds, the cost in lives may
have been far greater.

Our heartfelt gratitude goes to all the people of South Africa and foreign
donors that have opened their hearts and have donated food, clothing and
other essentials at this time of the greatest need of our people.

Mrs M E OLCKERS: Madam Speaker, on behalf of the New NP, I would like to
express our sincere sympathies and condolences to every person who has been
adversely affected by these recent floods. Our hearts go out to them.

It is clear that the magnitude of the climatic changes that are taking
shape and taking place across the world makes everybody very aware of the
power of nature through God. That necessitates governments to be prepared
in all respects for disaster management. I want to quote from what the
chief executive officer, Mr Ian McDonald, of the Worldwide Fund for Nature
said last week:


  Heatwaves, droughts, floods, hurricanes and tornadoes across the globe
  are happening at frequencies and intensities unprecedented in recorded
  history.

But now we have a situation in which we appeal to people for donations. We
also sincerely thank all organisations and individuals that have already
donated food, groceries, clothes, shoes, blankets, etc.

But while people are left homeless, 1 200 people in Alexandra alone, with
winter upon us, the Government saw fit - through the Minister of Finance,
nogal! - to set alight thousands of rands worth of clothes, tracksuits,
etc, albeit counterfeit goods, last weekend. Is this the face of a caring
government? Most contributions, as far as clothing is concerned, are second-
hand clothes in any case, so who cares if the goods are counterfeit and of
a lesser quality? While they lasted, people would at least have clothes and
shoes to wear, whereas now they have nothing to wear.

The Counterfeit Goods Act, Act 37 of 1997, states in section 8(1):


  Goods that have been seized in terms of section 4(1) must be stored and
  kept in safe custody at a counterfeit goods depot until the person in
  charge of the depot -


      (a)   is ordered by a competent court in terms of this Act to return,
           release, destroy or otherwise dispose of those goods as
           specified in the order ...

In other words, the court gave its consent to the goods being destroyed
after the state had asked for permission to do so. If the Government were a
caring government, especially to the poor, in the way they remind us they
are time and time again, why did they burn those clothes, especially at
this time of dire need? I suggest that all confiscated nonperishable goods,
especially clothing and blankets, should be kept in safe state storage in
order to be used during disasters. Nobody would gain financially, therefore
the action would be within the confines of the said Act.

The rough estimates are already that infrastructure repairs run to over
R800 million. Where are we going to find funds to assist individuals? They,
the poor, are the long-suffering people after a disaster, after the fires,
and when the water has subsided and life goes on. We need to walk tall on
their behalf and be bold.

'n Grootwildjagtersvereniging se lede het mildelik bygedra tot 'n fonds om
die Nasionale Krugerwildtuin te help met die herstel van die park ná die
oorstromings, maar is meegedeel dat hulle geld nie welkom is nie. Dit is
mense wat in die verlede groot bydraes gelewer het tot bewaring, wat gehelp
het om die witrenoster se voortbestaan te waarborg, maar daar word nou vir
hulle gesê dat hulle fondse nie aanvaarbaar is nie. Hoekom nie? Wil sekere
instansies nie hê dat al die mense wat kan en wil bydra tot die herstel van
ons land se natuurskoon ná die rampe wat ons getref het, saamwerk nie? Ek
vra, wat is daardie mense se agendas wat nie die geld wil vat nie?

In 'n tyd van rampe moet burokratiese oefenings nie in die pad staan van
persone wat hulp wil verleen nie. Dit behoort alles deel van die
rampbestuursplan te wees. As die wet dan eers verander moet word, moet ons
dit dan asseblief so gou as moontlik doen. [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The members of a big game hunters' association contributed generously
towards a fund to help the Kruger National Park with the restoration of the
park after the floods, but they were informed that their money was not
wanted. These are people who in the past made big contributions to
conservation, who helped to guarantee the continued existence of the white
rhino, but now they are being told that their funds are unacceptable. Why?
Do certain institutions not want all the people who can and want to
contribute towards the restoration of our country's scenic beauty, after
the disasters we suffered, to work together? I am asking what the agendas
are of those people who do not want to take the money.

In a time of disasters, bureaucratic exercises must not stand in the way of
people who want to render assistance. All of this ought to be part of the
disaster management plan. If the legislation first has to be changed, then
we must please do that as soon as possible. [Time expired.]]

The SPEAKER: Order! I now call upon the hon Mr A G Lyle to make his maiden
speech. [Applause.]

Mr A G LYLE: Madam Speaker, the local government area under the
jurisdiction of Alldays is one of the areas that have been negatively
affected by the heavy rainfall in the Northern Province. The area also
happens to be part of my constituency. Eighty homes collapsed completely
and 340 partially. In the village of Burgerreg, the Moitse family lost
their beloved 13 year old daughter, who was crushed to death by the falling
walls of a rondavel, and I wish to dedicate this input to her. The clay-
structured house collapsed under the continued battering of the incessant
rainfall. In Kramhoek, Mr Sebola, who is currently hospitalised, sustained
a broken hip when he, too, was badly injured by the falling walls of his
rondavel.

A meeting was in session between the Department of Local Government, the
Department of Works and the Department of Social Welfare when I telephoned
to ascertain what measures were being taken to address the plight of the
affected families. That meeting was all about charting the way forward so
as to enable the respective departments to synchronise their activities.

We take note of the wonderful work done by the councillors of all the local
governments and the social workers. Their prompt and efficient action
resulted in the speedy delivery of food and the necessary medical attention
to the affected families. In the interim, arrangements were made for the
delivery of tents. This Parliament extends its profound gratitude to those
families who had the kindness and compassion to accommodate the affected
families whilst tents were in transit to the respective villages.

Much remedial work will have to be carried out in the streets of the
villages. Soil erosion is high. What used to be a dent in the earth has now
become a donga. Most shopkeepers and some families do their shopping in
Pietersburg. The gravel road to Pietersburg was inaccessible for a number
of days and families had to make do with the little they had. Extensive
repair work will have to be carried out on this important link between
Pietersburg and the villages.

Residents in this area practise pastoral, cattle and agricultural farming.
There has been no reported loss in this sector. As a matter of fact, most
of the crops look good, particularly sorghum, with the exception of being
present on a limited scale. However, there are lessons to be learnt from
this disaster. We have to keep the nation in full readiness in the event of
another disaster occurring. The provinces, together with organised local
government, must intensify their disaster management training. This
training must be extended to men and women living both in towns and in the
rural areas. The focus of the training programme must be on preventative
rather than curative measures.

I want to bring to the House's notice that the White Paper on disaster
management has been released, and will soon be followed by a Bill. Those
who think that too little was done too late must remember that the past
apartheid regime did not think it fit to have the necessary disaster
management structures in place in the former black areas, in particular in
the rural areas. [Applause.]

Mr M N RAMODIKE: Madam Speaker, the dawn of millennium 2000 has been
characterised by a number of natural disasters and eventualities. We
witnessed an outburst of tornados in the Western Cape towards the end of
last year and now, recently, the torrential rains that have lashed the
Northern Province, Mpumalanga, parts of KwaZulu-Natal, Gauteng, the Eastern
Cape and the North West.

The infrastructural damage in both the Northern Province and Mpumalanga is
conservatively estimated at R3,5 billion, according to Government
officials. This amount exceeds capital expenditure on infrastructure
delivery by each of the two provinces over the past two years. It is
however important to note that both these provinces manage to spend an
average of only 10%, or R1,1 billion, of their annual budgets on
infrastructure delivery. This means that billions of rands were not
utilised during the previous annual budget. The UDM recommends that these
unutilised amounts should be carried over to this year's budget for
infrastructure delivery to replace the devastated infrastructure.

As I have already mentioned in my motion this morning, we note with great
concern the arrival of cyclone Eline in Mozambique, and the possibility of
further flooding in the northern and north eastern regions of South Africa.
This may add fuel to the fire. We have, however, noted with appreciation
that the Cabinet took a decision recently on the proposed plan of action
during the discussion of floods. The UDM calls for the Government to
present to this House information on the overall cost, the exact amounts
affecting the budgets of each Government department, as well as provincial
governments, and the timescales involved before all disrupted services are
restored to the affected areas. We further call on the Government to
indicate whether contingency plans exist in the event of further flooding.

Komana madula a bapile, mohlang wa mpe ga o tsebje. Mafulameetse a
hlokofaditse batho ba gabo rena. Ba bantsi ba setse ba hloname, ba bantsi
ba hloka mengwako, ba bantsi ba hloka masemo, ba bantsi ba gabo bona ba ile
molete mohlaelathupa. [Legofsi.] [Nako e fedile.] (Translation of Pedi
paragraph follows.)
[One must be prepared for any eventuality. Floods have killed our people.
Many of them are still brooding sullenly as a result of these floods, many
people's houses have been swept away, many do not have ploughing fields any
more, and many have died in the floods. [Applause.] [Time expired.]]

Mrs R M SOUTHGATE: Madam Speaker, according to the SA Weather Bureau, the
estimated structural damage due to the recent storms will be in the region
of R1 billion, and the number of lives lost due to the floods is more than
50. It is not in our abilities to circumvent the wrath of nature,
especially when it comes to structural damage. What is in the range of our
limited powers, however, are sound management and decision-making
judgments.

What is being done about the fact that almost every year hundreds of people
have to be evacuated from their settlements when flooding rivers occur? The
ACDP wishes to make the point quite clearly that it is not socially and
environmentally justified that people are allowed to settle so close to
free-running rivers and canals, where their lives and health are at risk.
Some of the bigger threats facing the people in these regions are that
water supplies will be polluted, which of course comes with other health
hazards such as malaria, cholera and typhoid.

These regions have for decades been ravaged by severe storms and flooding,
yet not much, if anything, has been done to control the strain of
population density on these surroundings. The people who are mainly
affected in the wake of such devastating storms are the people in informal
settlements. If Government does not have a policy to protect these people,
it is equally embarrassing that when disaster strikes, corrective measures
suddenly become imperative. It is not acceptable that a policy vacuum
exists, especially in informal areas, as it is always these people who
suffer the most, irrespective of what the disaster may be.

The ACDP wishes to suggest that in order to assist in minimising the
hazards to our local communities, we look at the possibility of
establishing facilities that allow for a water drainage system, such as
when rivers threaten to flood their banks. What is ultimately required to
avoid major structural collapse in our communities, is for Government to
have an overall impact study on whether our informal settlements are
governed according to correct Government regulations and standards. This is
important.
Muf T J TSHIVHASE: Mulangadzulo na miraḓo i huliseaho ya Phalamennde, ndi
zwa vhukuma uri musi wa tshiwo a u ḓivhiwi nga muthu. Zwoṱhe ndi mukovhe wa
ene Mudzimu we a zwi sika. Ndi zwo bvelelaho fhano shangoni ḽashu kha vhege
dzo fhiraho. Tshiwo tshihulwane tsha dzimvula tsho ita uri hu vhe na miḓalo
i ofhisaho. Vhathu vho kumbiwa, miḓi na thundu dzavho.

Zwenezwo, muvhuso washu a u ngo zwi dzhiela fhasi ngauri wo mbo ḓi rumela
vhaimeleli vho teaho uri vha ye u zwi vhona nga maṱo avho. Kha tshigwada
tshashu tsho yaho u zwi vhona nga maṱo, ro wana uri nangoho vhathu vho
tshinyalelwa vhukuma. Ro lingedza u thusa nga hune ra kona, nga mihumbulo
na zwiṅwe-vho. Zwo ri khaulaho mbilu ndi musi ri tshi vhona vhathu vha tshi
khou phalalana. Ro vha ṱuṱuwedza vhukuma samusi roṱhe ri tshi zwi ḓivha uri
munwe muthihi a u ṱusi mathuthu. Iṱali i tshone tshifhinga tshine
vhadzulapo vha fanela u sumbedza u ḓihumbulela nga u ḓithusa vhunga masunzi
a tshi tanga nḓou e manzhi a kona u i kunda.

Ro kakarika na vhathu vho tshinyalelwaho uri vha wane thuso thanzi. Kha iḽo
fulo ro sumbedzisa nga hune muvhuso wa ḓo thusa nga hune wa ḓo kona
malugana na zwa mutakalo. Zwihulwane vhathu vha fanela u ḓitsireledza kha u
nwa na u shumisa maḓi a re na tshikha. Vha ḓitsireledze kha malwadze a no
nga malaria, kholera na maṅwe ane a nga bvelela nga nṱhani ha tshiwo itsho
tsha miḓalo. Ro sumbedzisa uri zwoṱhe zwi re kha mabunga zwi fanela u vha
kule na vhathu khathihi na zwiḽiwa. Tshihulwane ndi u shumisa maḓi ane
muvhuso wa ḓo ita uri a ṋewe vhathu na uri vha fanela u vhilisa maḓi musi a
sa athu u shumiswa.

Muhasho wa mutakalo wo no thoma u bvisa mishonga na vha dzangano ḽa Red
Cross vha khou phalala nga zwiḽiwa na zwifuko. Ri pfa na uri vha SANDF vho
thusa vhukuma kha u phalala vhathu vho welwaho. Tshihulwane tshine tsha
fanelwa u khoḓiwa ndi u thusana ha vhadzulapo zwo ṱangana na vha dzikereke
na zwiṅwe zwifhaṱo zwihulwane zwo shumiswaho kha u ṋea vhukhudo avho vhe
miḓi yavho ya kumbiwa na thundu dzavho. Hezwo zwo vhonala ngei Mutale,
Vuwani na Sibasa.

Ndi ngazwo ri tshi khou dzinginya ḽa uri hu tea u vha na dzisenthara dza
vhadzulapo kha vhupo vhuṅwe na vhuṅwe uri musi wa tshiwo vhathu vha kone u
vha na hune vha ḓo shavhela hone. Zwi ḓi nga na kale ho vha na hune vhathu
vha swielelwa hone musanda muṅwe na muṅwe.

Iyo miḓalo yo sia vhorabulasi, vhana vha tshikolo, vha shumaho kule na
mahaya, vha re zwibadela na dzikiliniki vha tshi ṱoḓa thuso vhukuma.
Zwifhaṱo, dzibada, dziburoho na zwiṅwe zwi shumiswaho nga vhadzulapo zwo
tea u lugiswa. Huno, muvhuso u na tshikwama tsha ndiliso tshine tsha ḓo
thusa nga hune wa ḓo kona. Zwi ḓo ri vhofha uri ri humbele vhoramabindu na
maṅwe madzangano a dzitshelede uri vha shele mulenzhe kha thuso heyi
khulwane i ṱoḓeaho. Madzangano oṱhe hu si na uri ndi ḽifhio a humbelwa u
dzhenisa tshanḓa. Hezwo zwi khou humbelwa nga ANC.

Mihasho yoṱhe ya muvhuso i fanela u thusa kha u lugisa zwoṱhe zwo
tshinyalaho. Tshumisano ya vhashumeli vha muvhuso, vhadzulapo vhane vha ḓo
shela mulenzhe i a ṱoḓea uri zwithu zwi vhuyelele ngonani, vhathu vha wane
vhudzulo, vhana vha vhuyelele zwikoloni, zwibadela zwi shume na uri vhathu
vha vhe na vhudzulo zwine zwa ḓo ita uri vhutshilo ha vhadzulapo hu
khwinisiwe. Zwoṱhe zwi nga itea arali ra ita khaedu na uri hu vhe na
mutingati. Ri dovha hafhu ra lilisa na u pfela vhuṱungu vhoṱhe vho
kwameaho. ANC i ri kha ri ite mutingati roṱhe hu sa sedziwi uri ndi ḽihoro
ḽifhio. [U vhandelela zwanḓa.] (Translation of Venḓa speech follows.)

[Mrs T J TSHIVHASE: Madam Speaker and hon members of Parliament, it is true
that most disasters are unpredictable, especially by an ordinary person.
Most of these disasters are indeed, or perhaps, an act of God. This is what
happened in our country in the past few weeks. Torrential rainfall resulted
in dangerous floods. People drowned, and their houses and property were
destroyed.

Our Government did not delay in sending representatives to witness and
assess the flood damage. In our group, which also witnessed the recent
flooding, we found that there was indeed great destruction. We made an
effort to assist victims according to our ability. What impressed us most
was observing people on the ground aiding one another in many different
ways. We encouraged them to do so, for it is true that one swallow does not
make a summer. Indeed, it is high time citizens showed solidarity, for the
elephant can only be defeated when all the ants attack at once.

We assisted many homeless people so that they could find help and some form
of protection from the rain. We also indicated how the Government would
assist affected people, especially in preventing infectious diseases such
as malaria and cholera that may be prevalent. We also indicated that people
should relieve themselves far away from their places of accommodation and
not near water that is flowing. When using water, they should use the water
supplied or boil water from springs before usage.

The Department of Health has already embarked on supplying necessary
medicines and is being assisted by the Red Cross in providing shelter and
food to people. We have also heard that the SANDF is helping trapped
victims. Social organisations and churches have to be given credit for also
helping the destitute. We witnessed such activities taking place in the
districts of Mutale, Vuwani and Sibasa.

Therefore, we propose that local governments establish community centres
which will, in future, benefit citizens as shelters in times of disaster,
such as this one. May I also remind the House that in the past every
locality under a headman had reserved accommodation for those in need.

The floods affected farmers, schoolchildren, and especially those workers
from afar, as well as hospitals and clinics. Buildings, bridges and
infrastructure now require urgent repairs. However, the Government has
established a disaster fund which will assist in the reparation. We will
also be forced to request aid from businesspeople and financial
institutions. The ANC is also asking all organisations, irrespective of any
political affiliations, to get involved in assisting the victims of floods.

We also call on all departments of government to get involved in assisting
wherever damage necessitates repairs. The co-operation of government
officials, citizens and those who will be involved is important for
progress. We would like to see people getting homes, schools reopening and
hospitals functioning properly. This will restore life to the victims of
the floods and bring about an improvement in their livelihood. All this is
possible if we all work together.

Lastly, we sympathise with all victims of the floods. The ANC says let us
all pull together, irrespective of party affiliations. [Applause.]]

Genl C L VILJOEN: Mevrou die Speaker, in my twee minute wil ek graag twee
sake bespreek. Ek wil egter begin deur te sê die VF wil ook sy simpatie en
meegevoel betuig met almal in die land wat groot skade en ook lewensverlies
gely het.

Die eerste saak wat ek wil bespreek, is behuising, veral dié van die arm
mense. Ek is teleurgesteld om te sien dat nie een van die Ministers vir wie
hierdie twee sake raak hier is nie, naamlik dié vir landbou en behuising.

'n Mens moet uit teenspoed leer. 'n Mens moet nie foute herhaal nie. Daar
is arm mense dood en daar is arm mense wat alles verloor wat hulle gehad
het, ook hul huise. 'n Mens kan sê dat dit 'n besondere groot vloed was
hierdie. Dit ís so. Dit was 'n besondere groot vloed, maar ek dink daar is
twee sake waaraan ons aandag moet gee.

Die eerste is die bouregulasies. Die agb lid mev Seaton het reeds daarna
verwys. Die bouregulasies moet op so 'n manier toegepas word, ook in die
informele nedersettings, dat hierdie soort rampe nie weer gebeur nie. In
die tweede plek, as daar huise gebou word, moet 'n mens aan die mense in
die informele nedersettings dink en behoorlike dakke gee.

Die tweede saak is die kwessie van landbou, kommersiële landbou sowel as
bestaanslandbou. Dié mense het baie groot verliese gely. Hulle het
bedryfskapitaal verloor met oeste wat in was en toe vernietig is. Hulle het
infrastruktuur verloor, wat duur is om te vervang. Hulle het tyd vir die
volgende oes ook verloor. Hulle sal hard moet werk op die plase. Boonop
gaan baie van die plaaswerkers hul werk verloor, want daar is nie nou
genoegsame werk nie.

In hierdie verband het ek drie spesifieke versoeke. Die eerste gaan oor
Landbank-paaiemente. Daar is tot dusver aan my verslag gedoen dat die
Landbank, baie onsimpatiek, nie bereid is om uitstel te gee nie. Dit moet
gegee word vir die herstel van die infrastruktuur. Ons moet ook vra dat die
boere beskerm sal word teen goedkoop invoere sodat die markte nie vir die
boere verlore gaan nie.

Ten slotte, ons kort 'n volledige verslag van die Regering en 'n
besigheidsplan oor hoe ons hierdie ramp gaan hanteer. (Translation of
Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Gen C L VILJOEN: Madam Speaker, in the two minutes allocated to me I would
like to discuss two matters. However, I want to begin by saying that the FF
also wants to express its sympathy to everyone in the country who has
suffered serious damage and also loss of life.

The first matter which I want to discuss is housing, especially that of the
poor. I am disappointed to see that neither of the Ministers concerned with
these two matters is here, namely the Ministers responsible for agriculture
and housing.

One should learn from adversity. One should not repeat mistakes. There are
poor people who have died and there are poor people who have lost
everything they possessed, including their houses. One can say that this
was a massive flood. That is a fact. It was a massive flood, but I think
there are two matters to which we must pay attention.

Firstly, I want to mention the building regulations. The hon member Mrs
Seaton has already referred to them. The building regulations should be
applied in such a way, also in the informal settlements, that there is no
recurrence of this type of disaster. Secondly, when houses are being built,
one must think of the people in the informal settlements and provide such
houses with proper roofs.

The second matter is the question of agriculture, commercial agriculture as
well as subsistence agriculture. These people have suffered very great
losses. They have lost operating capital in that crops that had been
harvested were subsequently destroyed. They have lost infrastructure, which
is expensive to replace. They have also lost time for the next harvest.
They will have to work hard on the farms. In addition, many of the
farmworkers are going to lose their jobs, because there is not enough work
at present.

I have three specific requests in this regard. The first pertains to Land
Bank instalments. I have been informed to date that the Land Bank is being
most unsympathetic and is not prepared to grant deferment of payment. This
will have to be given so that infrastructure can be repaired. We also have
to request that farmers be protected against cheap imports so that the
markets are not lost to the farmers.

In conclusion, we need a detailed report from the Government and a business
plan on how we are going to deal with this disaster.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Madam Speaker, some months ago the Western Cape was hit by
a tornado. Then, a few weeks ago, we saw some parts of the province being
reduced to bare veld as a result of fire. Then came the ruins and ravines,
the effect of the rain in some of the provinces. One wonders what will
happen next. Are more plagues to follow?

The floods ravaged great parts of the North West province, resulting in the
loss of life, as was the case at Ikageleng in Zeerust. Bridges have been
washed away, making some areas inaccessible and difficult to leave. People
who live in villages such as Masibudule are marooned. In the Thohoyandou
area in the Northern Province people went for three days without potable
water when water pipes were washed away. Even those who have boreholes are
having problems, as these are now out of order, either having sunk in, had
the pumping system jammed or the engines clogged with mud.

Farmers in the Thabazimbi area have lost most of their crops. Fields have
been either flooded or washed away. The implication for such farmers is
great loss, since they will have to pay labourers who will not be
performing any duties, as the crops are gone as a result of the floods. The
flip side of the coin is that the labourers may be sent packing, as it is
not economic to keep them on an unproductive farm. The result could be a
rise in job losses and an increase in crime, or both.

In some parts of the country - at places around Sun City such as Magong,
Mabele-a-pudi and in the Mmabatho-Zeerust area - a number of mud houses
have been destroyed by the floods. We are fortunate that no loss of life
has been reported. The SANDF has provided tents for temporary shelter at
Moshwayaneng, where 60 families have been left without any shelter. At
Lobatla, also in the Zeerust area, 56 families saw their houses being
washed away. These are houses belonging to the poorest of the poor. They
have been affected. It will take quite long for these families to
reconstruct their lives and houses to their original standard.

The integrated rural development plan should come into play here, and very
soon for that matter. It is not only privately ... [Time expired.]

Dr M S MOGOBA: Madam Speaker, in mid-January the Portfolio Committee on
Water Affairs and Forestry undertook an extensive visit to the provinces. I
was part of the delegation that visited Mpumalanga and the Northern
Province. We visited some of the most beautiful areas of our country, from
the border of Mozambique and Swaziland through the Lowveld up to the
Aravidam and Ekhangala Water Board. We were on the whole impressed by what
is being done to bring water to poor communities.

A few weeks later this same area was covered with devastating floods,
bringing massive destruction and death. The PAC joins this House in
expressing sympathy and solidarity with families and communities affected.
We have a relatively dry country with semi-deserts and deserts occupying a
sizable area of our land. It is a great pity that we are ill prepared to
deal with floods.

Most of our houses and shacks cannot withstand heavy rains, let alone
floods, cyclones and hurricanes. Our SABS must prescribe minimum standards
and requirements for houses, storm drainage and bridges. We need to build
dams according to strict safety specifications with the back-up of
catchment dams and overflow reservoir tanks. We cannot allow a scarce
commodity like water to wreak havoc, and then after days or weeks be left
dry and helpless. The least we can do is to capture as much water as
possible to use for irrigation, sanitation and purification. We need all
the water technology that is available to help us lay the foundations for a
modern state which will bring hope to the majority of our people who are
poor and defenceless when natural disasters strike. [Time expired.]

Miss P S SEKGOBELA: Madam Speaker, hon members, I thank you for the
opportunity of briefing this House on the catastrophic flooding which
befell Mpumalanga, the Lowveld and the Northern Province during the past
two weeks. The worst floods since 1984 have hit the area. It is rare for us
to experience a tropical cyclone in South Africa. Weather records indicate
that the country encounters a tropical cyclone in a cycle of about once in
five years, although there has been none for the past eleven years.

The tropical storm Eline has caused estimated damage of R800 million in the
Mpumalanga-Lowveld area alone. This damage has set back the area by an
estimated 20 years. The floods have been disastrous for the Mpumalanga-
Lowveld area. While the urban centres such as Nelspruit, White River and
others have been negatively affected, proper drainage systems in such areas
have to a large degree saved them.

The worst hit areas, as hon members will suspect, are home to the poorest
of the poor of the region. These areas include Nsikazi and Umkomazi, which
were previously part of the apartheid bantustan. Approximately 800 000
people live in these areas. It is estimated that at least 25 people lost
their lives during the tragic floods. The damage to the infrastructure,
which has largely been built during the past five years of the new
democratic Government, led by the ANC, is shocking. In the Ntsinghase area
at least 20 bridges connecting various village and various urban centres
have been washed away.

The water supply system has been completed destroyed. Women and children
queue for instance along the Kanyamazane-Kabokweni Road with buckets from
early morning to early evening. In the deep rural areas such as Lupisi
communities are forced to drink filthy water running down the muddy, dirty
roads. The electricity supply to most villages has been cut off.

A number of schools need to be repaired or rebuilt. In the rural areas,
there has not been any schooling for the past weeks at almost 80% of the
schools. The damage to the road has caused pain to a number of families. On
Sunday 13 at about 07:00, a young boy who went to buy bread for his family
at the nearest shop was washed away on his way back home at the Gujwa-
Khumbula bridge. On the same day, a family from KaBokweni was still
searching for the corpses of two people who were washed away when the Elija
Mango College bridge collapsed.

The White River-Ligogode road has worsened from potholes to drumholes. The
tourism industry has also been severely affected as a number of hiking
trails and other facilities have been ruined. The worst hit is the Kruger
National Park, which has lost an estimated R2 million in revenue during the
last two weeks. The floods at the Kruger National Park have caused damage
estimated at about R150 million.

The cause for concern is that relief efforts, food supplies and emergency
services cannot reach rural areas because of a lack of bridges and roads
which have been swept away. However, repair work to the roads and bridges
started on a good note during the weekend of 18 February. The disaster fund
set up by the executive will address the damage. A number of contractors
were already on site during the past weekend, and started working at a very
fast pace.
In conclusion, although there were other areas we wanted to visit, we could
not do so because of the terrible situation of damaged roads. I also want
to extend our condolences to the families who have lost their loved ones.
[Applause.]

Dr A I VAN NIEKERK: Madam Speaker, the FA would like to associate itself
with the condolences expressed by Prof Ripinga to those who suffered losses
during the recent floods. We thank him for the subject that we are
discussing today.

With the limited time at my disposal, I can only react to a part of the
damage, which will be on agriculture. The South African climate is one of
extremes, and it is interesting in that the same areas which are now
experiencing floods were drought stricken a year ago. The adverse
conditions have a big influence on agriculture, and thus on the economy of
South Africa.

Long after the water levels of the recent floods have returned to normal in
the rivers, the detrimental economical effect which will prevail because of
agricultural crop failures will have an influence much greater than the
flood waters that we now have over a wider area. The restoration of
infrastructure will not be completed overnight. The immediate loss of a
bridge always catches the eye and the publicity, while the long-term effect
on agriculture gets little attention and is usually shifted to the
background. Floods such as we have experienced mean a loss of crops to many
farmers. This causes a chain reaction: a loss of income, employment, money
in the rural areas and more unemployment, a shift of people from the rural
to urban areas and a smaller contribution to the economy.

The FA urgently request the Government to assist the agricultural sector in
overcoming this serious setback to the rural economy of South Africa. The
assistance to agriculture should centre on helping the farmer to come into
production as soon as possible and not on money hand-outs.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, I know it is said that the responsibility
of disaster management in South Africa rests with the Government, but this
does not prevent the community at large from sharing that responsibility.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! I would like to suspend proceedings, for just a
few minutes, until the sound system is sorted out.

Business suspended at 16:47 and resumed at 17:32.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Mr Chairperson, my thanks to the technicians who repaired
the system. I have just been accused of breaking the sound system of
Parliament. [Interjections.] I wanted to ask the Chief Whip for another two
minutes speaking time. [Laughter.]

We all know the responsibility of disaster management in South Africa rests
with the Government, but this does not prevent the community at large from
sharing the responsibility. The responsible authorities, in their handling
of the storms and floods that devastated the relevant areas in South
Africa, have exposed the weaknesses in the system, and in legislation that
deals with disaster.

The key elements of disaster management are prevention, mitigation,
preparedness, speedy response, and relief and rehabilitation for the
victims after the disaster occurs. Attention must be focused on prevention
and risk reduction as this would minimise damages, financial loss and the
loss of human lives.

The MF feels for and sympathises with the people that lost property and
their loved ones in the recent floods in the various areas, and conveys its
sincerest thanks to all who rendered assistance during this devastating
time.

Mr C AUCAMP: Mr Chairperson, the topic of discussion is the effect of the
floods on constituencies. May I ask for a bit of patience on your part, as
you are well aware of the fact that my constituency starts at Table
Mountain and ends at Messina! [Laughter.] However, I will only give you a
glimpse of the damage, especially in the farming community in the Northern
Province, with some attention to my former homebase, Thabazimbi.

Mentioning the farming community reminds me of the teacher who told the
little children about the flood in the days of Noah, the 40 days and 40
nights of rain.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, please put that
newspaper away and listen to the debate.

Mr C AUCAMP: Mr Chairperson, when the teacher told them about the 40 days
and 40 nights of rain, little Jannie asked:

``Juffrou, was die boere toe tevrede?''

Enkele flitse van die skade lui soos volg: voorlopige vloed- en reënskade
in die Noordelike Provinsie beloop nagenoeg R700 miljoen, 20 000
werkgeleenthede is in gedrang, en oorlaatskuld aan koöperasies wat nie
vereffen sal kan word nie, beloop etlike miljoene. In die Moketsi-omgewing
alleen het 25 besproeiingsdamme heeltemal weggespoel - 'n skade van R25
miljoen. In die Thabazimbi-omgewing is daar 'n gebrek aan krag,
kommunikasie en vars drinkwater. Eskom stuur helikopters om kragdrade en
-pale te herstel. Ek het ondervinding gehad van die 1996-vloedskade wat 'n
vernietigende uitwerking op boere gehad het, met etlikes wat moes boedel
oorgee. Hierdie keer is die honderdjaarvloedlyn van die Krokodilrivier naby
Thabazimbi met 2 meter oorskry.

Ek doen 'n beroep op die Regering dat groot dele van die Noordelike
Provinsie tot nasionale rampgebied verklaar word, dat spesifieke aandag aan
duisende dakloses gegee word, dat 'n konkrete plan daargestel word om boere
te help om minstens infrastruktuur te herstel, dat die vooruitsig van die
moontlike 20 000 nuwe werkloses teëgewerk word deur aandag te skenk aan die
bronne waarvan hulle afhanklik is, en dat dit gedoen word met indringende
samesprekings met Agri SA, sowel as die Transvaalse Landbou-unie, wat die
meeste van die boere in dié gebied verteenwoordig, ten einde die beskikbare
hulpbronne ten beste aan te wend. [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[``Miss, were the farmers satisfied?''

A few flashes regarding the damage are as follows: Preliminary flood and
rain damage in the Northern Province amounts to approximately R700 million,
20 000 jobs are in jeopardy, and carry-over debt to co-operatives which it
will not be possible to recoup, amounts to several millions. In the Moketsi
region alone 25 irrigation dams have been washed away completely - damage
amounting to R25 million. In the Thabazimbi region there is no electricity,
communication or fresh drinking water. Eskom is sending helicopters to
repair power lines and poles. I experienced the 1996 flood damage which had
a devastating effect on farmers, with several going bankrupt. This time the
100-year flood line of the Crocodile River near Thabazimbi was exceeded by
2 metres.

I am appealing to the Government to declare large parts of the Northern
Province national disaster areas, that specific attention be given to
thousands of homeless people, that a concrete plan be established to help
farmers at least to repair infrastructure, that the prospect of the
possible 20 000 new unemployed be countered by giving attention to the
sources on which they are dependent, and that this be done in conjunction
with in-depth discussions with Agri SA, as well as the Transvaal
Agricultural Union, which represents most of the farmers in this area, in
order to best utilise the available resources. [Time expired.]]

Mr M A MANGENA: Mr Chairperson, unlike people living in other parts of the
world where the occurrence of natural disasters such as monsoon floods,
earthquakes and the eruption of volcanoes is regular and periodic, we are
relatively free of such things. Accordingly, when they do happen, they
traumatise us more than they do people who are used to them. The damage
might be the same, but the psychological impact is different. Also, because
of the rarity of these disasters in our part of the world, the houses we
build, where we build them, and the kind of bridges we erect across rivers
and streams, by and large, do not allow for floods.

The damage caused in the northern parts of our country does not end with
collapsed houses and washed away bridges and fields. It has also resulted
in waterlogged fields and drowning crops. The harvests of both commercial
and subsistence farmers will be reduced drastically. Whereas physical
damage caused to infrastructure is already being estimated at around R1
billion, the residual damage to communities owing to poor harvests is
likely to be much greater.

It is therefore important that all components of Government, parastatals
and other sectors of our country mobilise themselves, not only to repair
the damaged infrastructure, but also to attend to the residual effects on a
sustained basis long after the media have moved away from these areas. If
that is not done, the negative social effects of this calamity will
manifest themselves several months and years down the line. [Applause.]

Mr M L DA CAMARA: Mr Chairperson ...
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! All members, please allow the
hon member to make his speech. It is his maiden speech, so please give him
extra care and attention. [Interjections.]

Mr M L DA CAMARA: Thank you, Chairperson.

Hon members, the DP would, once again, like to express its condolences with
the families of the victims in the recent floods in Mpumalanga and the
Northern Province. The DP would also like to extend its best wishes and
sympathies to the people of Mozambique who have also been affected by the
recent floods.

If these floods serve any purpose, it is to demonstrate the vulnerability
of people in rural areas. With the destruction of 22 major bridges in
Mpumalanga and the Northern Province, many people were left stranded,
leaving them at the mercy of unscrupulous individuals exacting toll fees of
about R2 from each person crossing their dangerous makeshift bridges.

The spectre of devastating epidemics of waterborne diseases looms large
over at least a million people in Mpumalanga alone as purification plants
and systems collapse. In addition, there are the expected job losses in the
agricultural and tourism sectors, not to mention the destruction of social
infrastructures, thus placing further strain on provincial budgets which
can barely cope as it is. Yet all of this could have been avoided or at
least minimised through the proper management of dams and better
procurement policies regarding the maintenance and building of
infrastructure.

The extent of the damage caused by this latest disaster is, in the words of
The Sunday Independent, ``due to the lack of foresight and planning''. The
article goes on to say that the ``extent of damage may be, at least in
part, a symbol of a misguided attempt to cut corners''. This goes directly
to the heart of this Government's procurement policies. Cheaper roads and
bridges have ultimately come at a great price to the people of Mpumalanga
and the Northern Province.

In conclusion, the DP calls on this Government to revisit its procurement
policies to assist the victims of the floods and, with the greatest of
urgency, to institute the disaster management plan it has so long promised.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! [Interjections.] Order! Hon
members, please pay attention to the debate. Please continue, sir.

Mr W M SKHOSANA: Chairperson, I think we agree today that all of us are in
pain. However, the DP and the ACDP have made certain unacceptable
proposals. I wonder what they mean by saying that there is a need to
control rivers. How does one control a river which has its banks
overflowing some kilometres away? I do not think it is possible. We also
hear other people speaking about the drainage system. The flood could not
flow under the bridge, which was about four metres high. When one speaks
about a drainage system which is about 10 cm in diameter, what does one
mean by that? I think we do agree on proper planning, but before one speaks
about certain things, one needs to make up one's mind.

We meet today, 22 February 2000, on the premises of the National Assembly
to join fellow South Africans who are victims of the floods in our various
provinces, which have been declared disaster areas following last week's
floods. We have lost our beloved friends, relatives and loved ones, and
some are left without homes.

Part of our infrastructure in the North West - in areas like Brits and
Oukasie - and in Mpumalanga, the Northern Province, KwaZulu-Natal, Gauteng
and the Eastern Cape, has been damaged as a result of the floods. Damage to
railway lines in Mpumalanga, KwaZulu-Natal and Gauteng affected the
operation of Spoornet, and South Africa could not export its coal to
Botswana or Maputo because of the floods.

The rain that has fallen over the past week - and is still falling in
certain parts of our country - has caused enormous damage. The collapse of
bridges in various areas makes it very difficult for people to get to work,
clinics, schools and, worst of all, to pension paypoints. We were also
unable to bury the dead because of this flood. National roads, such as the
N4 from Sun City to Pretoria, were closed. The road from Rustenburg to
Thabazimbi was closed for four days.

There was a loss of crops by the farming communities and a loss of
livestock, mainly cattle, pigs, goats, sheep etc, as well as important
documents such as ID books, birth certificates, policy documents and so on,
all because of the floods. Loss of crops in Brits amounts to millions of
rands. There is no electricity supply in most parts of the affected areas.
There is no telecommunication system, including cellphone communication, in
some of the affected areas.

The sewerage system has been flooded and damaged extensively in the
townships. High-risk scenarios may develop if the rain continues.
Structures which are still standing might be faced with intense pressure
and collapse, resulting in more serious damage to the infrastructure. We
are concerned about the problems which might develop as a result of the
high risk of diseases in our areas. We are making an appeal to all South
African to work together in joint operation centres and build the lives of
our people. We call upon big businesspeople to help.

We thank the SA National Defence Force, SA Police Service, the agricultural
union, Eskom, Telkom and Public Works for working together during the time
of the disaster. Due to the inaccessibility of rural areas like the
Ramokokastad, Mantsare and Motjateng we are making a call to communities
that traditional leaders, church organisations and NGOs should work
together. In an area called Modikwe 46 houses collapsed as a result of
this. One house collapsed in Winterveld on Sunday when we thought the whole
thing had settled down. The damage caused by the floods in the North West
amounts to millions of rands. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! By agreement, consideration of
the subject for discussion in the name of Mr E I Ebrahim on the Order Paper
is deferred for discussion on a later date.

House adjourned at 17:49.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                         THURSDAY, 17 FEBRUARY 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     In accordance with the Intelligence Services Control Act, 1994 (as
     amended), Ms N M Nqakula has been appointed Chairperson of the Joint
     Standing Committee on Intelligence.

2.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The following Bill was introduced in the National Assembly on 17
         February 2000 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         Financial Institutions (Investment of Funds) Bill [B 6 - 2000]
         (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Finance -
         National Assembly) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
         of its introduction published in Government Gazette No 20801 of 7
         January 2000.]

3.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 16 February 2000 in terms
         of Joint Rule 160(4), classified the following Bill as a section
         76 Bill:


         (i)     Tourism Amendment Bill [B 3 - 2000] (National Assembly -
              sec 76(1)) - (Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and
              Tourism - National Assembly).


     (2)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 17 February 2000 in terms
         of Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bill as a section
         75 Bill:


         (i)     Cross-Border Insolvency Bill [B 4 - 2000] (National
              Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Justice and
              Constitutional Development - National Assembly).


     (3)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 17 February 2000 in terms
         of Joint Rule 160(4), classified the following Bill as a section
         76 Bill:


         (i)     Chiropractors, Homeopaths and Allied Health Service
              Professions Amendment Bill [B 2 - 2000] (National Council of
              Provinces - sec 76(2)) - (Select Committee on Social Services
              - National Council of Provinces).

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     In accordance with the Intelligence Services Control Act, 1994 (as
     amended), the following members of the National Assembly have been
     appointed to serve on the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence:

     Abram, S; Bloem, D V; Cwele, S C; Ebrahim, E I; Goniwe, T M; Green, L
     M; Landers, L T; Makwetla, S P; Ndabandaba, L B G; Olckers, M E; Scott,
     M I; Van der Merwe, S C.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:
     (1)    Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
         Vote 3 - Parliament for 1998-99 [RP 128-99].


         To be referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration and report and to the Select Committee on Finance
         for information.


     (2)    Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
         Vote 37 - Welfare for 1998-99 [RP 161-99].


         To be referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration and report and to the Portfolio Committee on Welfare
         and Population Development and the Select Committee on Social
         Services for information.

2.    The Minister of Public Works:


     Progress report of the Inter-Ministerial Task Team on Construction
     Industry Development, November 1999.

     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Public Works and the Select
     Committee on Public Service.

3.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development:


     Documents, in terms of section 3(11)(a) of the Public Protector Act,
     1994, on remuneration, allowances and other conditions of employment
     determined by the Public Protector for staff in his office.

     Note: Section 3(11)(b) provides that if Parliament disapproves of any
     determination such determination shall cease to be of force to the
     extent to which it is so disapproved.

     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
     Development and the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
     Affairs.

                          TUESDAY, 22 FEBRUARY 2000

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:
Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
         Vote 24 - Minerals and Energy for 1998-99 [RP 148-99].


         Referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration and report, the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and
         Energy and the Select Committee on Economic Affairs for
         information.


     (2)    Special Report of the Auditor-General on an investigation at the
         South African Telecommunications Regulatory Authority (SATRA)[RP
         47-2000].


         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Communications.


     (3)    Reports of the Auditor-General on the -


         (a)     Financial Statements of Vote 22 - Labour for 1998-99 [RP
              146-99];

         (b)     Financial Statements of Vote 29 - Government
              Communications and Information System [RP 139-99].


         Referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and
     Tourism on the Tourism Amendment Bill [B 3 - 2000] (National Assembly -
     sec 76), dated 22 February 2000, as follows:


         The Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and Tourism,
         having considered the subject of the Tourism Amendment Bill [B 3 -
         2000] (National Assembly - sec 76), referred to it and classified
         by the JTM as a section 76 Bill, reports the Bill without
         amendment.

         The Committee further recommends that the Minister -


         1. when inviting applications for appointment to the Board, should
              advertise, in addition to the notice in the Gazette, the
              vacant positions as broadly as possible in the national and
              other media; and

         2. when considering appointments to the Board, consult as widely
              as possible to ensure compliance with section 3 of the Tourism
              Act, 1993 (Act No. 72 of 1993).


     Report to be considered.

