---
title: 'National Assembly - 18 April 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: APRIL
month_slug: Apr
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2000-04-18
---

TUESDAY, 18 APRIL 2000
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:05.

The Chairperson of Committees took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I hereby give notice
that on the next sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the
ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the statement by the Deputy President, the hon Jacob Zuma, at
       the SADC Parliamentary Forum workshop yesterday, viz that
       ``parliaments in the region should question whether they are
       defending their people's rights and freedoms and preventing the abuse
       and manipulation of power'';

  (2) further notes that abuse of power and undemocratic practices in one
       member state may lead to political instability in others and this can
       have an adverse effect on the development of the region as a whole;
       and

   (3)      endorses the Deputy President's call for parliaments in the
       region to be guardians of human rights, the rule of law and
       democracy.


[Applause.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: Nice try, Tony!

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Yes, that was a good one! [Laughter.]
[Applause.]

Mr N J CLELLAND: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with shock reports that the Government is planning to spend
       R300 million on a new jet for President Mbeki;

  (2) further notes that the current Falcon 900, good enough for President
       Mandela, is still capable of flying to all corners of the earth in
       all weather conditions;

  (3) notes that R300 million could provide AZT to 6 million mothers
       infected with Aids, saving at least half of these babies from Aids
       infection, or could provide 17 647 housing subsidies to homeless
       families; and

  (4) calls on the Presidency to confirm or deny these reports and, more
       importantly, to justify this kind of expenditure to the nation.

[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mrs S A SEATON: Chairperson, I give notice that at the next sitting of the
House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the revenue budget overrun of R12 million, arising from
       greater efficiency in collection over the past two tax years, has
       allowed for a reduced budget deficit, a reduction in tax rates and
       more social spending;

  (2) recognises that the SA Revenue Service will find it very difficult to
       make further efficiency gains if it is constrained on account of
       existing capacity, especially in view of the additional
       administrative burden caused by recently introduced tax arrangements;
       and

  (3) calls on the Minister of Finance to give the SA Revenue Service the
       resources and autonomy necessary for it to achieve optional success
       in its efforts to stamp out tax evasion and to achieve a high level
       of tax morality in South Africa, leading to further tax benefits and
       greater social spending on education, health and welfare.

[Time expired.]

Ms L A ABRAHAMS: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the ANC has received complaints from citizens in the
       Western Cape, alleging that financial institutions are discriminating
       against them on racial grounds;

  (2) believes that such discrimination is in conflict with the fundamental
       principle of the equality of all South African citizens on which our
       democratic constitutional state is based;

  (3) deplores the statement of the DP that the ANC action is aimed at the
       local government elections;
  (4) reminds the DP that the fight of the ANC for equality and
       nondiscrimination is an historic commitment dating back to its
       founding in 1912 and not adopted for political expedience and vote-
       catching; and

  (5) supports the call of the Western Cape ANC for an investigation.

[Applause.]

Dr B L GELDENHUYS: Chair, I give notice that on the next sitting day of the
House I will move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) congratulates Zimbabwe on its independence anniversary, but reminds
       that country that freedom without the rule of law is a hollow
       concept;

  (2) calls on President Mugabe to honour article 3 of the African Charter
       on Human and Peoples' Rights, which reads as follows: Every
       individual shall be entitled to equal protection of the law; and
  (3) calls on the South African Government to honour its obligations in
       terms of article 47 of the charter, which reads as follows:


         If a state party to the present charter has good reason to believe
         that another state party to this charter has violated the
         provisions of the charter, it may draw, by written communication,
         the attention of that state to the matter.

Mr S ABRAM: Chairperson, I give notice that at the next sitting of the
House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with deep concern -


       (a)  the increase in the number of informal settlers in many parts of
           our country;

       (b)  the shockingly slow pace at which claims before the Land Claims
           Commission are being processed, considered and finalised; and

       (c)  the lack of a co-ordinated nationwide campaign to address
           poverty and unemployment and also the lack of adequate housing;


  (2) congratulates all stakeholders on the reported finalisation of the
       1 800 Nongqongqo land claims on the West Bank at East London; and

  (3) calls upon the Government to -


       (a)  speed up the process of providing serviced building sites to the
           homeless;

       (b)  devise means which will speed up the processing and settlement
           of land claims;

       (c)  evaluate the potential of all Government-owned land for future
           agricultural use;

       (d)  create mechanisms for the allocation of such land to would-be
           farmers; and

       (e)  empower such entrepreneurs by creating agri-co-operatives which
           can provide seeds ...
[Time expired.]

Mr N M NENE: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of the
House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the call by our Minister of Finance at the IMF to revise the
       strategies agreed upon last year to speed up debt relief for the
       world's poorest countries, as they are not working;

  (2) believes that the requirements to receive relief are a significant
       obstacle to faster debt relief;

  (3) further notes that to obtain relief from the IMF and World Bank, the
       principal creditors, often other developing countries, have to secure
       similar levels of debt collection from bilateral lenders, which, in
       the words of Minister Manuel, is ``immoral and unjustifiable''; and

     4) calls upon the IMF to look for realistic ways of ensuring that debt
        relief for the poorest countries is implemented speedily to end the
        suffering of the people of those nations.
[Applause.]

Mnr C AUCAMP: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag namens die AEB sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) met waardering kennis neem van die aanwysing en werk van die tegniese
       advieskomitee insake die beoogde wetgewing oor die Kommissie vir die
       Bevordering en Beskerming van die Regte van Kultuur-, Godsdiens- en
       Taalgemeenskappe, soos vervat in artikel 185 van die Grondwet;

  (2) vra dat die insette van hierdie tegniese komitee, wat saamgestel is
       uit verteenwoordigers van die verskillende gemeenskappe in Suid-
       Afrika, op die hoogste vlak aandag sal kry, sodat die produk nie die
       eindresultaat van politieke agendas sal wees nie, maar ruimte sal
       bied vir die noodsaaklike uitlewing van diversiteit in Suid-Afrika;


  (3) van mening is, in die lig van die kritieke belang van die beskerming
       en bevordering van die regte van gemeenskappe vir vrede en
       stabiliteit binne die diverse Suid-Afrikaanse samelewing, dat
       toegesien moet word dat die beoogde kommissie gelyke status sal hê
       met ander grondwetlike kommissies, soos die Menseregtekommissie;

  (4) van mening is, in die lig van die omvattende aard van die
       werksaamhede van die beoogde kommissie, dat die kommissie direk in
       die Presidentskantoor moet setel ...

[Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr C AUCAMP: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the AEB:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with appreciation the appointment and deliberations of the
       technical advisory committee on the envisaged legislation on the
       Commission for the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of
       Cultural, Religious and Linguistic Communities contained in section
       185 of the Constitution;

  (2) asks that the inputs of this technical committee, which consists of
       representatives from the various communities in South Africa, receive
       attention at the highest level, so that the product will not be the
       final result of political agendas, but will leave room for the
       essential realisation of diversity in South Africa;

  (3) in the light of the critical importance of the protection and
       promotion of the rights of communities to peace and stability within
       the diverse South African community, is of the opinion that it will
       have to be ensured that the envisaged commission has a status equal
       to that of other commissions, such as Human Rights Commission;

  (4) in the light of the wide-ranging nature of the activities of the
       envisaged commission, is of the opinion that the commission should
       reside directly in the Office of the President ...

[Time expired.]]

Mr M S MANIE: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  tomorrow evening is the first day of the Jewish festival of
           Passover, which celebrates the Jewish people's liberation from
           slavery and persecution more than 3 300 years ago; and

       (b)  Passover teaches that no oppressive regime, based on injustice
           and exploitation, can survive for any length of time before
           justice and freedom ultimately prevail; and


  (2) resolves to -


       (a)  wish all Jewish South Africans a joyous Pesach;
       (b)  remind ourselves, on this symbolic holiday to celebrate freedom,
           of all South Africans' success in casting off the yoke of
           oppression and creating a free and just nation; and

       (c)  call on all those involved in the Middle Eastern peace process
           to redouble their efforts at this time to ensure that all the
           people are able to live in peace, security, justice and freedom.

[Applause.]

Mr G B D McINTOSH: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the illegal occupation of state land at Dukuduku, KwaZulu-Natal,
           continues;

       (b)  this occupation by people, many of whom are illegal immigrants,
           has virtually destroyed a valuable national asset in the
           pristine coastal forest where the land invasion has taken place;

       (c)  this state of affairs has existed for nearly 10 years;

       (d)  both the provincial government of KwaZulu-Natal and the
           Department of Water Affairs and Forestry have been ineffectual
           in resolving this matter;

       (e)  despite efforts to negotiate, offer alternative land and find
           sensible, fair and rational solutions, nothing has happened; and

       (f)  a tiny minority of the community refuses to co-operate and has
           threatened violence against both the state and other Dukuduku
           land invaders ...

[Time expired.]

Mrs I MARS: Chairperson, I give notice that at the next sitting of the
House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) congratulates the various tiers of government for giving satisfactory
       service to the South African public, as established by a recent
       survey conducted on behalf of Business Day by Market Research AC-
       Nielsen MRA; and

  (2) encourages everyone concerned to improve further on the good ratings.

Ms H F MALEBANA: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that child labour is still prevalent at coalyards in Soweto,
       despite the promulgation of the Basic Conditions of Employment Act;

  (2) further notes that owners of the coalyards insist on employing and
       exploiting children;


  (3) recognises that this kind of labour practice is detrimental to
       children's health, safety and wellbeing;

  (4) calls on all employers who abuse children in this way to stop this
       despicable practice; and

  (5) calls on the public to support the laws that relate to child labour
       and basic conditions of employment.

[Applause.]

Mnr F BEUKMAN: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek gee kennis dat ek op die volgende
sittingsdag namens die Nuwe NP sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) sy ernstige kommer uitspreek oor die bevinding van die
       Wêreldnatuurfonds dat die oorontginning van see- en skulpvis in
       Valsbaai en die Kaapse suidkus die ekostelsel finaal kan vernietig;

  (2) 'n beroep op die Minister van Omgewingsake en Toerisme doen om
       dringend 'n kommissie van ondersoek aan te stel om die vernietiging
       van marienebronne in die gebied te ondersoek en aanbevelings aan die
       Parlement te doen;

  (3) versoek dat bykomende fondse deur die Regering bewillig word om
       wetstoepassing en strafregtelike vervolgings teen die onwettige
       ontginning van marienebronne op te knap en te versterk;

  (4) die Regering versoek om onmiddellik stappe te doen om die voorkoms
       van onwettige treknetvangste in Valsbaai te beëindig; en

    5) 'n beroep op die Departement van Omgewingsake en Toerisme doen om
       dringend 'n openbare opvoedingsprogram te begin om by plaaslike
       gemeenskappe die belang van bewaring en volhoubare ontginning van
       marienebronne in te skerp.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr F BEUKMAN: Mr Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day I
shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -
  (1) expresses its serious concern at the finding by the World Wide Fund
       for Nature that the overexploitation of marine fish and shellfish in
       False Bay and along the Cape South Coast could finally destroy the
       ecosystem;

  (2) appeals to the Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism urgently
       to appoint a commission of inquiry to investigate the destruction of
       marine resources in the area and to make recommendations to
       Parliament;

  (3) requests that additional funding be voted by Government to improve
       and strengthen law enforcement and criminal prosecutions with regard
       to the illegal exploitation of marine resources;

  (4) requests the Government immediately to take steps to bring to an end
       the occurrence of illegal trawl-net catches in False Bay; and

  (5) appeals to the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism
       urgently to launch a public awareness programme to impress upon local
       communities the importance of conservation and sustainable
       utilisation of marine resources.]

Chief N Z MTIRARA: Chairperson, I give notice that at the next sitting of
the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with great concern that match fixing has become endemic in
       South African sports codes and threatens to destroy the healthy
       competitive spirit that always characterised South African sport in
       the past;

  (2) notes that a case in point is the recently reported taped
       conversation between officials allegedly discussing the fixing of the
       MTN League match between Dynamos and City Sharks, where Dynamos won
       the match; and

  (3) calls on the Minister of Sport and Recreation to appoint a commission
       of inquiry to probe into and root out this cancer before it gets out
       of control.

                  CONGRATULATIONS TO NATIONAL CRICKET TEAM
                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr J J DOWRY: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek stel sonder kennisgewing voor:


  Dat die huis:


  (1) kennis neem en die Protea Krieketspan gelukwens met sy skitterende
       oorwinning in die reeks van drie eendagwedstryde teen die
       wêreldkampioen, Australië;

  (2) kennis neem dat die oorwinning soveel merkwaardiger is, in die lig
       van die ongelukkige gebeure die afgelope twee weke rondom die span;

  (3) van mening is dat Shaun Pollock en sy span die ware durf en wil van
       'n wennasie het soos Suid-Afrika beklemtoon deur behoorlik wraak te
       neem vir die teleurstelling van Edgbaston-wêreldbekertoernooi in
       1999;

  (4) verder van mening is dat die oorwinning tekenend is van die veggees
       en vermoëns van alle Suid-Afrikaners wat hulle nie laat onderkry deur
       terugslae nie; en
  (5) die span sterkte toewens vir die toer na Sri-Lanka en later vanjaar
       se herontmoeting met die wêreldkampioen in Australië.

Goedgekeur. (Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Mr J J DOWRY: Mr Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) takes cognisance of and congratulates the Protea cricket team on its
       splendid victory in the series of three one-day matches against the
       world champions, Australia;

  (2) notes that the victory is so much more remarkable in view of the
       unfortunate events of the past two weeks with regard to the team;

  (3) is of the opinion that Shaun Pollock and his team emphasised the true
       bravery and willpower of a winning nation like South Africa by
       properly revenging the disappointment of the Edgbaston World Cup
       Tournament in 1999;

  (4) is further of the opinion that the victory is an example of the
       fighting spirit and abilities of all South Africans, who do not allow
       themselves to be beaten by setbacks; and

  (5) wishes the team everything of the best for the tour to Sri Lanka and
       the next meeting with the world champions in Australia.

Applause.

Agreed to.]

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 25 - Welfare:

The MINISTER FOR WELFARE AND POPULATION DEVELOPMENT: Mr Chairperson, hon
members, MECs for social welfare and distinguished members of civil society
organisations seated on the public gallery ... [Applause] ... in his
opening address to Parliament in February this year, hon President Mbeki
made a statement that is of particular significance to social welfare and
development. He stated:


  ... at no other point in time have we ever been as well placed as we are
  today to take decisive forward steps towards the creation of the humane
  and people-centred society for which the organisations that were unbanned
  10 years ago struggled for many decades.

Today I wish to focus on what steps we have taken towards the creation of
the humane and people-centred society that our President referred to in his
speech.

During the first period of democratic government, the foundations were laid
for a fundamental restructuring of the social welfare system. My
predecessor led the introduction of significant policy and legislative
changes within the framework of the Constitution and the Reconstruction and
Development Programme. The White Paper on Social Welfare and a number of
other policies provide examples of policy changes in social welfare.

Establishing an enabling policy and legislative environment to deal with
the legacy of apartheid in social welfare provision was an essential and
necessary first step in securing basic welfare rights for all, especially
the most marginalised and alienated sectors of our society. During this
term of Government, the challenge is to consolidate these policy gains and
to translate them into programmatic changes so that every citizen,
especially those who experience the worst forms of poverty, can begin to
see evidence of real change in their daily lives.

The nature and extent of social fragmentation and alienation highlighted
the need for a vision and strategy that is responsive to both the
structural causes of problems and their social manifestations. These were
the imperatives that led to a national consultative process that brought
together a range of organisations representing women, children, the
disabled, the homeless, poor people, development workers and professional
associations during October last year.

Changes at the national level have yet to be translated into real gains for
the excluded, particularly women, children and poor people, at provincial
and local levels. Transformation, if it has to have meaning for the poor
majority, has to be felt at the household level. It is at this level that
economic and social conditions are manifested in profoundly unequal gender
relations and gender-based violence. The challenge therefore is to sustain
the changes in the political sphere and to extend these to households and
the poor communities. In many ways, this is the most difficult aspect of
the transformation process.

There can be no doubt that persistent and increasing levels of poverty,
violence, social inequality and unfulfilled expectations place an enormous
challenge on existing social services. The violence experienced by
children, women and the elderly is an affront to the type of society that
we are building. Added to this is one of the fastest-growing incidences of
HIV/Aids in the world. It is poor people who are the most vulnerable to
HIV/Aids and HIV/Aids exacerbates poverty.

The age, gender and racial characteristics of South Africa's population
indicate that the most vulnerable households are in the rural, peri-urban
and township areas. It is in these areas that infrastructure and services
are virtually nonexistent. Low economic growth and high levels of
unemployment place increasing demands on the social welfare services.

Since I have been in the Welfare and Population Development portfolio I
have had many opportunities to interact with the sector and our intended
beneficiaries at provincial and other levels. I met the grandmother in the
rural village of Inanda caring for a HIV-positive daughter, the girl-child
taken from school to care for her siblings, and the single mother who
cannot find a job. I saw the pain on the face of a young child who had been
abused and raped in Claremont near Durban. I heard the frustration of a
father with a disability who wants to learn new skills in Maokeng,
Kroonstad, but has nowhere to turn to. I listened to the anguish of the
devastating effect of the loss of a pension or grant in poor families.

All this has been a true journey of discovery. What I have heard and seen
has brought me to one conclusion. Despite many courageous and sensitive
responses to the challenges faced by the most vulnerable, much more needs
to be done. At every level of our society, we need to reverse the
degradation and narrative of marginalisation of the poor people, especially
women, children and the elderly. This is why we need to act now and act
together in unity.
But we have to set about this task with a full understanding of our
achievements and the challenges that lie ahead. Such an appreciation
creates a foundation from which we can translate President Thabo Mbeki's
call for a caring society into reality. To be responsive in this way means
that the Department of Welfare has to mobilise our communities to establish
a caring society, based on the principle of people first, Batho Pele, for
sustainable development. In the light of our mandate and what we heard
during the national consultative process, the department has identified the
following priorities that we need to address during our term of government.

I will now outline some of our activities and plans which give effect to
the social welfare programmes of Government and those of the NGO and
voluntary welfare sector in our country. Firstly, the ethic of care and
human development must be infused into all our programmes. Our
developmental welfare programmes are being redesigned to promote social
integration at the level of households, families and communities. We have
begun working with civil society organisations, the faith-based community
and youth organisations to promote a culture of voluntarism and civic
responsibility.
We continue to implement an integrated poverty eradication strategy that
provides direct benefits to those who are in greatest need, with a
sustainable development approach. In other words, we are addressing poverty
in rural and urban areas with the prime beneficiaries being women,
children, the disabled and the youth. During the past year, we supported 1
933 programmes in all provinces and 15 national programmes. These projects
assisted approximately 11 197 women, 2 904 men, 2 055 youth and disabled
persons. Detailed information on the projects that have received funds is
available on the department's website. This can be found at
www.welfare.gov.za.

Corrective measures have been instituted to deal with problems related to
the initial delays in the disbursement of poverty relief funds. These
measures include, firstly, a financial audit of the poverty relief
disbursements made in the 1997-98 and 1998-99 financial years. Secondly,
the responsibilities and roles of national and provincial departments have
been clarified and a more varied disbursement process is being negotiated.
Accountability structures with detailed guidelines are to be established
for all sectors. In addition, I have held a series of meetings with a
number of faith-based organisations and NGOs working in the area of poverty
relief. Based on these consultations, guidelines are being drawn up on ways
of improving the programme management processes in the poverty relief
funds.

The role of the Independent Development Trust, IDT, as a disbursement
agency, has been very invaluable in the poverty relief programme. Their
disbursement role will be enhanced to encompass a monitoring and capacity-
building function. This monitoring and evaluation will include a central
role for the NGOs and faith-based organisations, and we take this
opportunity to thank the IDT for all its endeavours to ensure that all the
funds have been distributed.

These protocols will need to have acceptable guidelines for the selection
of projects and disbursement procedures, as well as financial and
professional accountability and evaluation. We will ensure that the
national and provincial departments of welfare have the requisite
procedures and systems for effective financial control, management,
monitoring and accountability. In this regard we have already acquired the
services of financial consultants to provide the necessary assistance.
Immediate steps that have been taken to improve the financial management
and administrative measures of the welfare function include, firstly,
processing the appointment of a chief financial officer; secondly, basic
financial training of all officials in the welfare sector; thirdly, filling
vacant posts in the finance and internal audit sections as a priority; and,
lastly, drafting of a plan with the Department of State Expenditure to
improve the expenditure performance of the department.

Further initiatives, as part of the integrated poverty eradication
strategy, include community empowerment programmes currently being piloted
in the North West and the Eastern Cape. Plans are under way to extend these
programmes to Mpumalanga. The main aim of these programmes is to build
community capacity to plan and manage a range of locally based development
initiatives.

We are expanding the microsave programme in KwaZulu-Natal to the Northern
Province and the Eastern Cape, as part of the integrated rural development
strategy. These programmes are aimed at strengthening the stokvel-type
savings collectives to promote a culture of savings and the economic
viability of micro enterprises for poor households, especially for women.
We value the partnership with the people's dialogue, and appreciate the
technical support provided by the UNDP and ILO in these programmes.

A key policy objective of our social security system is to provide social
assistance to those citizens who are not able to provide for themselves.
The social assistance programmes provide benefits to approximately 3
million of the most vulnerable people in our society, namely older persons,
persons with disabilities and children under the age of seven.

A major success in the past year was ensuring that the computer systems
throughout the welfare system were upgraded to avoid the Y2K bug. Last year
all social assistance benefits were paid before the Christmas holidays, so
that all our people could enjoy the festive season without undue concern.
During the same year, 127 mobile units were deployed in the rural areas to
help people obtain identity cards and apply for social assistance benefits.
We hereby thank all the MECs in the provinces for the assistance that they
gave to this programme.

The uptake rate of the child support grant has increased from 36 000 in
April 1999 to 334 000 in March 2000. This represents an increase of almost
1 000%. We acknowledge the role played by faith-based organisations and
NGOs in accomplishing this increase, and appeal for their continued
support. In seven of the provinces the reregistration process is almost
complete. This process is designed to clean the database and eliminate
fraud from the system. In the past year, a national call centre was
established, which responds to over 100 telephone queries per day from the
public concerning social welfare services.

Our disaster relief fund has processed applications for assistance in
response to various floods, tornados and veldfires across the country. The
department has played a key co-ordinating role in disaster relief within
the country and in the region.

Our region is beset with a number of problems requiring us to provide
humanitarian assistance. As part of this initiative, we call upon all South
Africans to support our solidarity with Angola during the week of 15 May.
We want to mobilise the people of South Africa to provide humanitarian
assistance to the people of Angola.
The objects for enhancing social protection were also adopted by the
international community at the World Summit for Social Development in
Copenhagen in 1995. The declaration adopted by the summit contained a
commitment to ``implement policies that ensure that all people have
adequate economic and social protection during unemployment, ill-health,
maternity, child-rearing, widowhood, disability and old age''.

The South African Constitution grants everyone the right to have access to
social security and appropriate soci*al assistance for those individuals
who are unable to support themselves. It also obliges the state to
implement measures to ensure the progressive realisation of these rights.
It is, therefore, crucial that we develop a comprehensive social security
system that links contributory and noncontributory schemes and prioritises
the most vulnerable households.

The Welfare department is leading a critical process this year,
investigating issues and proposals for a comprehensive social security
system. The ministerial committee established by Cabinet, as part of its
brief, has to investigate the extension of social protection to the working
poor, unwaged workers and all those currently not covered by any form of
assistance.

A new welfare payment system and information service are being established
to improve operational efficiency of the welfare system. However, all these
initiatives need to be supported by appropriate infrastructural development
at provincial level to ensure that pensioners do not suffer in long queues.
To ensure that our social security services are reaching those in the
greatest need in the most effective manner, we are currently designing a
social security audit and monitoring audit. Such a unit will incorporate
both Government and civil society representatives.

According to the latest available census information, there are about 2,6
million persons with disabilities in South Africa. This number constitutes
about 6% of the total population of this country. The current social
assistance programme provides disability benefits to about 610 000
beneficiaries, representing a coverage of over 23% of all people with
disabilities in South Africa. The Financial and Fiscal Commission estimates
that this coverage constitutes about 56% of all those who are eligible. A
review process of services to people with disabilities has been undertaken.
This is to ensure that disabled persons participate in planning programmes
that promote their human rights and economic development.

A key challenge that we face, not only as a department, but also as a
nation, is the ever-increasing violence against women, children and older
persons. We have strengthened programmes to respond to the brutal effects
of all forms of violence against women, children and older persons. We are
also developing effective strategies to deal with the perpetrators. The
department has established 60 one-stop service centres through which abused
women and children can receive assistance. A commission of inquiry into
elderly abuse has been established. The high levels of abuse against
elderly persons are unacceptable and need to be addressed urgently. I can
clearly inform the House that that committee has already started working.

We have begun consultative work on a national strategic framework for
children infected and affected by HIV/Aids. Our developmental welfare
programme includes the provision of a range of services to support
community-based care for people living with HIV/Aids and those affected,
such as Aids orphans.

Urgent attention has been given to the development of a national strategy
to reduce the number of young people in trouble with the law and to promote
youth development. Our prevention and remedial services for youth have
sought to accelerate the transformation of the child and youth care systems
to ensure that our interventions are developmental.

We have introduced 15 child and youth care service projects in eight
provinces, with development assistance from the government of the
Netherlands. One of these projects, Stepping Stones in the Eastern Cape,
won an award for innovative service delivery. The government of the
Netherlands recommended that it should become an international learning
site. These projects have provided best practice models for ongoing work in
this field.

Making social welfare services accessible and available to people in rural,
peri-urban and informal settlements, as well as ensuring equity in service
provision, is critical to the transformation process. In this regard I am
pleased to report that in respect of access and coverage, our service
provision is increasingly reaching the poorest members of our communities.
There is a significant shift away from a race-based welfare system to one
that is needs-based. In addition, social welfare services have become more
socially and community development oriented. The welfare financing policy
is being refined and phased in through an agreed process to ensure the
direction of resources to underresourced areas.

Our work is based on our commitment to co-operative governance that
includes working with different spheres of government and civil society. In
this regard I am pleased to announce that the MECs of the provincial
welfare departments, as well as the full range of civil society
organisations - including the voluntary welfare sector and faith-based
organisations - have engaged with me and the department to find practical
solutions to the problems we face. I commend their commitment to addressing
the needs of the poorest people, and I am sure that together we can develop
a process based on accountability, responsiveness, efficiency and equity.

The Department of Welfare and Population Development has undergone a
process of strategic planning to ensure that its programmes are in line
with the national priorities identified through the consultative process.
Provincial welfare departments have also completed similar processes to
align themselves with the national priorities. The national population unit
has developed programmes to promote research, capacity-building and
advocacy in support of the developmental thrust of the department and
Government's work at both national and provincial level.

A key focus of the unit during this current year, is the research into the
socioeconomic impact of HIV/Aids in this country. The national population
unit hosted the third African Population Conference in December 1999. The
conference gave further impetus to research and policy partnerships in
Africa. The United Nations Population Fund is a key partner in this
process. On the regional and international front, the department has played
a key role in leading initiatives on social development. As chair of the
United Nations Commission for Social Development, I have had the privilege
of being part of the review and appraisal of Government's implementation of
the Copenhagen commitments on social development.

That there have been many advances in social welfare and development is not
in question. However, our capacity as a department to accelerate the
delivery of services to those in greatest need is constrained by the
limited institutional reforms within the national and provincial
departments. Changing the organisational culture, service orientation,
training and recruiting of professionals with appropriate skills and
knowledge remain a challenge that has to be addressed. An audit of the
skills, organisational structure and organisational processes in the entire
department has just been completed. This information will contribute to a
thorough and systematic overhaul of systems, procedures, human resource
planning and performance management processes.

Critical to the process of reorientation is the role of the SA Council for
Social Service Professions and its engagement with the social service
workers who contribute much-needed services under extremely difficult
conditions. With the assistance of the council, we plan to ensure that
there are changes to such conditions. Efficient and effective service
delivery is a reflection of the calibre of staff in both Government and
nongovernmental organisations and agencies. For this reason, it is
essential that the full range of social service workers are provided with
appropriate training and education relevant to South Africa's needs. These
workers include development, probation, child and youth care, social work
and social security staff.

These priorities form part of a systematic, co-ordinated strategy for
social development over the next year. They are linked to the department's
medium-term expenditure framework. The mobilisation of national and
international resources, including the use of a wider pool of technical
expertise, will help us to accelerate service delivery. Many of our
achievements are due to the dedicated work of key individuals within the
department, members of the Portfolio Committee on Welfare and a range of
other organisations in the development sector, and even in civil society.
To them I extend my thanks and appreciation.

I would like to invite hon members of this House to join me as I continue
my journey in the Welfare and Population Development portfolio. In more
concrete terms, they can join me in monitoring the implementation of these
national priorities through joint civil society and Government processes.
We need to move quickly at all levels to link social development and
population concerns to economic strategies, so as to establish socially
integrated and caring communities. In reclaiming South Africa's place in
the global community, let us work towards a social development renaissance
to eradicate poverty, social inequality, women's marginalisation, violence
and alienation, and to mitigate the impact of HIV/Aids. Let us promote
sustainable human development that builds social solidarity. Let us
mobilise for a caring society. [Applause.]

Mr E SALOOJEE: Mr Chairperson, hon Deputy President, hon Minister for
Welfare and Population Development and hon members, on 4 February 2000, in
this very Chamber, our President, Thabo Mbeki, called upon all of us to
continue to intensify the fight against poverty in our country. In the
words of the President:


  The elimination of poverty remains one of the central objectives of the
  Government and the country. Its elimination is fundamental to the
  realisation of the goal of the restoration of the dignity of all our
  people.

Furthermore, in giving effect to our vision of a better life for all, we
are committed to creating a situation of hope in the lives of millions of
people for whom despair has been a way of life.

It is, indeed, not surprising that the media and the opposition have deemed
it expedient to focus on one aspect of poverty relief. This Government, in
the past year, has spent approximately R18 billion on poverty relief. We
should remind ourselves that pensions are poverty relief, disability grants
are poverty relief and the child support grants are poverty relief. I
intend to address myself here today to the issue of this Government's
significant poverty relief funds and the antipoverty programme in the
broader context.

I want to submit that our long-standing and real commitment to the poor and
the vulnerable is unquestionable when considering the increase of about
R1,2 billion allocated to welfare in the present budget. Furthermore,
provincial welfare departments pay monthly benefits to welfare
beneficiaries at the cost of about R1,4 billion a month. These benefits go
to the most vulnerable in society, the elderly and disabled, as well as to
poor families with children.

It is within the broader socioeconomic context that we as the ANC
Government have recognised that in South Africa the poorest 40% of
households still live below the minimum household subsistence level, and
many have no real source of income. However, an example of the process of
support for the survival of the poorest and most vulnerable people in our
country is Government's provision of a social safety net in the form of a
cash transfer to poor households.

Under the ANC Government, social spending targeted at the poor has shown an
increase of approximately 34% between 1994 and 1997. This increased
allocation was a direct result of programmes aimed at the poor, such as
housing subsidies, poverty relief, child support and a whole host of other
benefits. In addition, since 1994, there has been a steady increase in
pension and disability grants, particularly for beneficiaries from the
rural areas. Old age pensions remain the major component of grant
expenditure within welfare.

Recent research has highlighted that 75% of poor households have older
persons in receipt of an old age pension, who have children living with
them. This point is important to bear in mind. This must be seen as a
poverty relief measure of huge significance in our present context, not
only in our country but, as researchers will tell you, in the world. It is
one of the more equitable grants given in the world.

In the light of this, the value of old age pensions cannot be emphasised
enough, as this form of social security targets the poor more generally and
is, thus, an effective redistributive and affordable poverty relief
measure. In fact, research undertaken last year confirmed that Government's
spending programmes have become more effectively targeted in favour of the
poor, with an estimated 50% of spending now going to the poorest 40% of our
people.

There is talk that the solution to the widespread poverty in South Africa
will come only on the back of high economic growth and the creation of jobs
that must result from such growth. Indeed, we have witnessed the effective
restructuring and improved international competitiveness of our economy. We
are striving towards ever-increasing economic growth and an economic
environment favourable for investments. However, let us recognise that in
many instances very little benefits have reached those plagued by
unemployment and extreme poverty in the deep rural areas, which we must
remedy.

The survival of a young child in a very poor household cannot wait for the
promise of eventual delivery under the Government's policy of growth,
employment and redistribution. For millions of poor people, the battle to
survive is becoming increasingly more difficult and the urgency with which
we, as the ANC Government, have to respond has never been more apparent,
and that determination to do it is there.

It is not by accident that the welfare sector is fourth in line in terms of
the share it received from the 2000-01 Budget. A total of R20,92 billion
has been allocated to welfare in the new Budget. The largest part of this
Welfare budget is dedicated to poverty relief, to social pensions and to
developmental welfare services. However, it remains a serious challenge to
us to ensure that welfare recipients benefit from this allocation in a
timeous and effective manner.

While it is clear that the ANC Government has provided benefits that
directly target those most in need, we must strive to make the social
safety net and delivery mechanisms within the welfare sector more
efficient. We say that we are the ones who are really determined to see
that that efficiency comes about. It is unacceptable that administrative
delays may have resulted in increased hardships for poor people who could
have benefited from some of these funds. Furthermore, we are compelled to
ensure that such administrative shortcomings and blockages within the
welfare system do not further add to the suffering of beneficiaries who
have had their grants temporarily suspended, often with little warning. Our
Minister says that, too, and he commits himself to that.

One of the ways in which to strengthen delivery of poverty funds in the
short run is by implementing an integrated poverty strategy. Such an
integrated poverty strategy must have as its ultimate aims to decrease the
economic vulnerability of the poor and unemployed and to attain, in the
words of our President, the realisation of the goal of the restoration of
the dignity of all our people.

However, in effecting significant transformation on the scale that we have
done, with an inherited apartheid-style welfare administration, is no mean
feat. It is, therefore, not reasonable to expect efficient delivery of
services over a relatively short period of time, given the structural
obstacles we have had to overcome. In acknowledging the shortcomings and,
in some instances, nondelivery, we want to say that we do not want to tell
lies nor do we want to claim easy victories.

In addressing ourselves to the issue of unspent poverty funds, the welfare
portfolio committee's recent engagement with the director-general and other
senior welfare officials has sought to highlight, and bring into focus, the
lack of administrative and financial management capacity within the
Department of Welfare. We would have been remiss in our responsibilities to
the poor, if we did not address the shortcomings in the department. We have
proposed that developing such capacity is necessary, and it is overdue.
Significant changes such as the filling of key posts, the development of
financial management competence and the establishment of systems for
monitoring and evaluation will result in more effective delivery of funds
and services.

Such effective, targeted spending on poverty relief will impact positively
on the lives of beneficiaries. Furthermore, we have to make sure that our
developmental policies bear fruit for those who depend on our commitment
and our support. We are confident that these proposed improvements will be
effected within the Department of Welfare. They will change profoundly the
way in which allocations are disbursed and money is spent.

We are very encouraged by the Minister's commitment to making the
development of capacity and transformation within the department his
highest priority within the coming months. We have also expressed our
concern at the slow take-off rate of the child support grant, as a target
of reaching 3 million of the poorest children was established. We are
encouraged to hear from the Minister that the current number of
beneficiaries will increase dramatically in the months ahead. This is
something that we are determined to do and it is something that the
portfolio committee will be overseeing in a very careful way.

The initial strategy for targeting our country's poorest children is to be
followed by broader coverage, to ultimately include all the country's poor.
In the light of the slow pace of delivery, it seems clear that
comprehensive coverage will be somewhat delayed. If these children remain
hungry and have parents with no visible means of support, we have failed
those children by not providing them with support to ensure their
protection and development.

Allow me to consider our collective responsibility and commitment to the
children who are in need of care in our country. Our children's youth
should be seen as a time of hope that can either blossom or be stifled by
the challenges they face. Comprehensive child care legislation is in its
final stage of development. This will afford children additional legal
protection to affirm their rights.

I offer further proof of the ANC Government's commitment to the elderly,
children, the nonprofit welfare sector and the disabled. In recognition of
our responsibility, we have seen fit, in the present Budget, to include a
provision of tax relief for nonprofit organisations that provide essential
services to the poor, including services for disabled people. A further
positive aspect of the Budget is that private donations to preprimary and
primary schools, children's homes and organisations caring for the aged
will be tax deductible. We expect that these organisations will benefit
from increased community contributions.
On the issue of the underspending of poverty funds, let me give members the
facts. We, as members of the ANC within the Portfolio Committee on Welfare,
see our oversight role as one of the key aspects ... [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Mrs P W CUPIDO: Mr Chairperson and hon colleagues, President Mbeki, in his
address at the start of the second term of Parliament in June 1999, opened
with the words [Hansard, Joint Sitting, 1999, col 2]:


  Steadily, the dark clouds of despair are lifting, giving way to our
  season of hope.

  At the dawn of a new life, our practical actions must ensure that none
  can challenge us when we say - we are a nation at work to build a better
  life!

Daar is geen twyfel nie dat dié beter lewe slegs vir sekeres bedoel is.
Miljoene Suid-Afrikaners word gefolter deur verwaarlosing, teleurstelling
en hopeloosheid en is nou vir die sesde jaar van die nuwe regering
vasgevang in 'n groef van armoede, sonder 'n teken van verligting in sig.

Niks kan nader aan die waarheid wees nie as die realiteit van die dag. Die
realiteit is dat die Departement van Welsyn reeds as 'n noodtoestand
verklaar moes gewees het. [Tussenwerpsels.] Sedert 1994 het hierdie
departement al vyf direkteurs-generaal in vyf jaar gehad en drie Ministers
in ses jaar. Daar was ook die uitvloei van 50 top-personeellede in drie
jaar, vele wie se poste nog vakant is. Daar is wel begroot vir 40 poste,
maar geen aanstellings is gedoen nie. Nog 'n realiteit is dat die poste van
die direkteur, adjunkdirekteur en selfs sekretaresse in die interne
ouditafdeling nog vakant is. Vir die afgelope vier jaar was daar geen
finansiële bestuurder in hierdie departement nie. Die staat het nou geëis
dat dié pos binne drie maande gevul word.

Altesame R500 miljoen wat vir die vorige boekjaar begroot is, is oorgerol
omdat dit nie gebruik is nie. 'n Bedrag van R203 miljoen hiervan was beoog
vir armoedeverligting. Die Minister en sy departement beskik nie oor die
vermoë om geld wat vir die armes beoog is aan hulle beskikbaar te stel nie.

Die voormalige Minister vir Welsyn en Bevolkingsontwikkeling, Geraldine
Fraser-Moleketi, het in die verlede 10 uit 10 gekry vir haar hantering van
haar departement. Met dié dilemma wat tans in die departement heers, weet
ek nie of die Minister in die verlede enige punte werd was nie. Die Kabinet
het haar verskoon, maar ek meen dat sy aan hierdie Huis 'n verduideliking
verskuldig is.

Dit is die eerste keer dat die staat by 'n departement moes ingryp, soos
die Komitee oor Openbare Rekenings moes doen. Dit op sigself dui op 'n
mosie van wantroue in die huidige Minister, wat reeds 10 maande lank
hierdie pos beklee sonder enige duidelike, konstruktiewe beplanning met
haalbare doelwitte en sperdatums om sy departement reg te ruk. (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[There is no doubt that this better life is only intended for certain
people. Millions of South Africans are being tortured by neglect,
disappointment and hopelessness and are still, in the sixth year of the new
Government, trapped in poverty, with no sign of relief at all.

Nothing can be closer to the truth than the reality of the day. The reality
is that the Department of Welfare should already have been declared a state
of emergency. [Interjections.] Since 1994, this department has had five
directors-general in five years, and three Ministers in six years. Then
there was also the resignation of 50 top staff members in three years, many
of whose posts are still vacant. Forty posts were, in fact, budgeted for,
but no appointments have been made. Another reality is that the posts of
the director, the deputy director and even the secretary in the internal
audit division, are still vacant. For the past four years there has been no
financial manager in this department. The state has now demanded that this
post be filled within three months.

A total amount of R500 million budgeted for the previous financial year was
rolled over because it was not utilised. Of this, an amount of R203 million
was intended for poverty relief. The Minister and his department are not
able to make money intended for the poor available to them.

The former Minister for Welfare and Population Development, Geraldine
Fraser-Moleketi, scored 10 out of 10 in the past for her management of her
department. With this dilemma prevailing in the department at present, I do
not know whether the Minister should have earned any points in the past.
The Cabinet excused her, but I think she owes this House an explanation.

This is the first time that the state has had to intervene in a department,
as the Committee on Public Accounts had to do. This in itself can be
regarded as a motion of no confidence in the present Minister, who has held
this post for 10 months now without any clear, constructive planning with
feasible goals and deadlines to put his department in order.]

Dr Zola Skweyiya must stop hiding behind the bad performance of his
predecessor. He must take the initiative and transform his department into
a delivery machine.

Die huidige direkteur-generaal, me Angela Bester, het duidelike leiding en
ondersteuning nodig om stabiliteit in haar departement te verseker en om
sodoende rigting en moed aan haar personeel te gee. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The present director-general, Ms Angela Bester, needs clear guidance and
support to ensure stability in her department and in this way to give her
staff direction and courage.]
I do, however, foresee extreme difficulties for Ms Bester, because of the
history of mismanagement and fraudulent activities within her department.
[Interjections.] Will money for the poor ever reach them while we have some
Government officials who have no concern for their wellbeing and while
there is no proper ministerial guidance to oversee effective management,
which has resulted in the unauthorised payment of Government funds, as
stated by the Auditor-General in his report of 31 March 1999?

My colleague Aumi Singh, in his speech, will address all the issues
regarding pensioners, disabled persons and children, while I will highlight
a few findings concerning young people at risk.

Prepayments totalling R766 000 were made to 13 organisations without the
required Treasury approval. That reminds me of the fact that the
Independent Development Trust has just reported to the portfolio committee
that it had received a list of approved projects from the department that
it needed to fund from the unspent roll-over millions, but apparently it
was found ...

Mr B W KANNEMEYER: Chairperson, I want to find out if the hon member is
prepared to take a question.

Mrs P W CUPIDO: No! [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! No, she is not prepared to take a
question. [Interjections.] Order! Members, you are making rather too much
noise! Please continue, hon member.

Mrs P W CUPIDO: The department gave a list of approved projects to the IDT
which were supposed to be funded from the roll-over millions, but
apparently the IDT found that 350 of the 2 300 approved projects did not
even exist or were irregular. An unauthorised payment of R350 000 was made
to an organisation before a contract was entered into, R50 000 was paid to
a project that was not even related to welfare and the Auditor-General also
disclosed that a person who is not a Government official had countersigned
numerous payment advices. Furthermore, an amount of R2,7 million that was
budgeted for the flagship programme, Unemployed Women with Children under
Five, was not utilised and never reached the people it was intended for.

Where do we go from here? The DP says that the ANC Government must stop
struggling and start governing. The struggle is supposed to be over.
[Interjections.] [Applause.] It must implement significant
interdepartmental training programmes in order to lift the level of
competency in all departments; eradicate all racial appointments and
appoint people with the necessary qualifications and skills, irrespective
of race or colour; and create economic growth so that the signs will read
``Employees wanted, apply within'' and not ``Sorry, no jobs!''. Cabinet
Ministers must be held accountable for their departments, improve internal
controls and restructure finance and procurement measures.

The DP exercises its mandate from the voters to be an effective watchdog
over Government matters. It will surely work towards becoming the
alternative government, and with the flood of people, including traditional
ANC supporters, who are now coming over to the DP, the alternative
government will be realised sooner rather than later.

Hierdie Regering moet Suid-Afrika op die weg van hoër groei en beter
lewering van dienste plaas, sodat daar verligting kan kom vir die armstes
van die armes. President Mbeki moet self agter die stuur inklim. Mense wat
nie aan die taak toegewyd is nie, moet langs die pad afgelaai word. Maak
die mense van hierdie land 'n trotse nasie. Laat die vlag van Suid-Afrika
in elke klaskamer, elke werkplek en elke huis wapper. Dit sal tot nasiebou
en patriotisme lei, wat tans nêrens te bespeur is nie.

Mense wil gelukkig wees. 'n Man soek 'n werk om sy gesin te onderhou. Hy
soek brood op sy tafel en sy kinders moet in die skool wees. (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[This Government must place South Africa on the road to higher growth and
better delivery of services, so that there can be relief for the poorest of
the poor. President Mbeki must take the lead himself. People who are not
dedicated to the task, should be dropped off along the way. Make the people
of this country a proud nation. Let the flag of South Africa fly in every
classroom, every workplace and every home. This will lead to nation-
building and patriotism, of which there is no sign at the moment.

People want to be happy. A man wants employment so he can support his
family. He wants bread on his table, and his children must be at school.]
If they cannot deliver that, they must remember that the people voted them
into Government and if they fail them, they will vote them out of
Government. That is why an alternative government will have to be prepared.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mrs I MARS: Mr Chairman, Mr Minister, in his state of the nation address
the President said:


  The good that has been done puts into very sharp relief everything that
  still has to be done to extricate millions of our people from the
  conditions of poverty ...

He also said:


  The elimination of poverty remains one of the central objectives of the
  Government and the country.

In view of the damaging publicity given to the poverty relief programme, it
is actually necessary to examine the facts surrounding this issue. It is
our understanding that the department engaged in a number of poverty relief
projects and we know from the department's 1998-99 annual report that there
are currently 1 933 provincial and 15 national projects.

During an extensive briefing by the IDT we confirmed that its role is
clearly defined by a memorandum of agreement which defines its role as that
of a disbursement agency and, furthermore, that the building of financial
and administrative capacity of cluster agents who actually deal with the
projects is a further requirement of the service. Payments are made in
terms of three tranches and the money is only transferred when certain
conditions have been fulfilled. It is, therefore, reasonable to have a
certain roll-over which, in any case, requires Treasury approval. It is our
understanding that all available funds have either been spent or are
committed.

This understanding, however, does not necessarily imply approval of the
system. Poverty alleviation is a fairly recent additional activity of the
department. My party feels that the portfolio committee's oversight role
can be vastly enhanced once the department releases to it a detailed list
of all projects undertaken in terms of the poverty relief programme, with
details of their location, cost, number of beneficiaries and the names of
cluster agents.
We understand that this information is readily available from the
department's data bank, which contains all the information that has been
supplied to it by the IDT. My party will formally request this information
and we hope that the Minister will support this request.

At the public accounts committee meeting on Welfare, the chairman asked the
department to prioritise the appointment of a well-qualified financial
manager, a request which the IFP fully endorses. The urgency of this matter
cannot be overemphasised.

It should also be noted that the chairperson of the public accounts
committee was critical of the welfare committee for its perceived lack of
oversight. I would like to state that the Chairperson of the welfare
committee drew our and the department's attention to a number of issues.
Obviously, the many presentations that we attended did not reveal to us the
fact that there was an urgent need for the appointment of a financial
manager. Once again, we ask the department for an organogram that gives
details of the heads of departments, with contact numbers and descriptions
of their line functions.

In welfare, where all functions are people-oriented - vulnerable people at
that - lines of communication between the departments, those at national
and provincial level, need to be opened up so that we as public
representatives are able to address problems on the ground with minimal
bureaucracy. It also appears to us that no matter how good the planning,
authorisation, management and monitoring processes appear to be in theory,
empowering the elected representatives with information can only add to the
effectiveness of the over 2 000 projects and other programmes.

The department needs to understand that when we return to our
constituencies, we are able to receive first-hand information of the
standing of a project from the community. It is the politicians who are
held responsible by the public, and not the department. The IFP also wishes
to record that the pension increase of R20 is welcome. However, in real
terms, taking inflation into account, there is a decrease in the spending
power of 1,7%. We urge the Minister to keep this in mind when he next
increases pensions. We have to accept the realities. Old age pensions are,
and have been for a considerable time, the main contribution to poor
households, which, with job losses and the addition of Aids orphans, carry
an ever-increasing burden.

My party also wants urgent attention focused on the many Aids orphans. It
is expected that there could be 700 000 to 1 million by the end of the year
2000. We have to consider how we can give these children an opportunity to
obtain an education, without relying on grandparents, siblings and other
family members to further share their meagre incomes. We need to ask
ourselves; what happens to these children when their grandparents die,
pension income is no longer available to the household, and the unemployed
siblings and other care-givers are unable to fulfil even the most basic
requirements of these children? Perhaps the department has thought this
matter through and has plans in hand. If so, this is part of the
information that we urgently require.

Welfare has R75 million available to fight the HIV/Aids epidemic. The
planned amount for 2000-01 is R125 million and R300 million for 2002-03.
May we be informed how this money is to be applied and what programmes are
in place, or do we assume that these amounts will be given to provincial
governments?

We find it encouraging that the partnership with NGOs, church organisations
and others - something that we have pleaded for - appears to be accepted.
We would urge that the partnership protocols be finalised as a matter of
urgency in order to strengthen these organisations in the valuable work
undertaken by them. We also support the Minister's proposal that at
provincial level, the monitoring and assessment structures include NGOs and
other concerned organisations.

Further concerns expressed by the IFP caucus revolve around programmes for
the physically challenged and senior citizens. Programmes need to be
devised and implemented at NGO and local government levels. We therefore
plead that attention be paid to these special needs. We note with pleasure
that nonprofit organisations that are caring for the aged, the handicapped
and offer other essential services to the poor will benefit from some
financial relief.

There are, of course, many other issues arising from the budget which need
to be addressed. I have already raised the question of the low uptake of
the child support grant which, incidentally, has not been increased from
R100, thereby losing 5,5% in real terms. We understand that there will be
an increased uptake, with the ultimate aim of reaching 3 million children.
The current monthly addition of an integrated R20 000 raises the question
of the decreased budget provision from R91 million to R90 million for the
year 2000-01.

There are many more questions and concerns, but we feel that with improved
communication between the portfolio committee and the department, resulting
in a more productive dialogue, many of these concerns can be addressed
before they become controversial budget issues. We wish to express our
thanks to the hon the Minister for his 10-point plan which defines
Welfare's obligation to our citizens and assure him that the IFP wants to
be an effective partner in implementing the goals set by him. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Mr B G MBULAWA-HANS: Mr Chairperson and hon Minister, I do not think that I
should waste my time with the hon member Cupido who does not even
understand when presentations are made in the portfolio committee. She is a
shame, because she does not even understand the constitutional obligations
of the present Government.
I am not sure whether the DP is really a watchdog or a noisemaker.
[Laughter.] Mrs Cupido needs to remember that when she was a member of the
NP, Abe Williams was the Minister of Welfare. What did he do, and what
would she do to help? She should not come and waste our time here. She is
actually a shame to her party because she does not understand why she is in
Parliament. [Interjections.]

We are aware of certain problems in our social security system, but I think
that it is necessary to reflect on the progress that we have made as the
ANC-led Government in providing this crucial safety net. In 1980 pensions
for Africans were R33, paid every two months, compared to R122 for whites.
During a parliamentary debate on the health and welfare Vote, a certain Mr
Brian Goodall of the then PFP said that there would be a rapid increase in
the number of older persons, and the cost of old age pensions could ...
[Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: Chairperson, is the hon member prepared to take a question?

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, would you take a
question?
Dr B G MBULAWA-HANS: Nonsense, I am not taking any questions! [Laughter.]

The cost of the equalisation of pensions for coloureds and Indians would be
considerable, he said. He suggested that legislation should be introduced
to compel employers to create compulsory pension funds for their employees.
The gist of the member's sentiment was clearly that the Government could
not be expected to carry the burden of equalising pensions. Yet this
Government does provide such pensions, costing about R12 billion annually.
The point is that the member I have just referred to is now the leader of
the DP in Gauteng. This is the party which is suddenly the champion of the
poor. No wonder that they have to do a meet-the-people tour at the
beginning of the year - the poor are very new to their constituency.

The ANC, however, has struggled since 1912 and has a history of being
concerned with, and driven by, the needs of the poor. Amongst these are, of
course, older persons, who are often frail, with no families left and
dependent on care and protection from elsewhere. The abuse of older persons
is a matter of grave concern to the ANC-led Government. Section 12(1) of
the Constitution clearly states that all persons shall have the right to be
free from all forms of violence from either public or private sources, as
well as the right not to be treated or punished in a cruel, inhuman or
degrading way. The passing of the Aged Persons Amendment Act must be seen
as an important milestone in our effort to protect and defend the human
dignity of all our senior citizens. This Act aims to prevent the abuse of
older persons, and draft regulations in this regard have been completed by
the department.

One of the features of these regulations is the proposed establishment of a
national register, in which the particulars of abusers of older persons
will be recorded. The regulations focus on people in institutional care,
but we know that abuse is not limited to these institutions. Therefore we
need to sensitise our communities to the fact that older persons also have
a recourse to protection in terms of the Domestic Violence Act. Here co-
operation would be required between welfare service providers, community
policing forums and the Departments of Justice and of Safety and Security
to ensure that communities - in this case specifically older persons - are
informed of the protection they enjoy in terms of this Act.

Planning for social welfare services, therefore, never included making
provision for the majority of the population, that is by the previous NP
government in which the hon Cupido was serving. Therefore we have inherited
an unrealistic overemphasis on institutional care. Coupled with these,
there are few real alternatives in place for disadvantaged communities,
where often social support systems have disintegrated.

Institutional care is no longer seen as a large-scale feasibility - our
approach is focused rather on the family as the first line of care and
support - because it is unaffordable, impersonal and removes people from
their communities. There is general consensus that we should develop models
for community frail care services. The department has, therefore put in
place a policy framework to enable a shift from limited state resources in
institutions for the older persons to a community-based social care system
which will be accessible to all.

An important principle in this approach is the sharing of the
responsibility of caring for older persons by individuals, families,
communities and Government. It means not just sending older people away
because it has become difficult for us to care for them, but accepting the
responsibility to care for those people who, in the past, had been the care-
givers and strength of our communities. One of the advantages of this
paradigm shift is that when older persons are kept within the community,
they can contribute and continue to contribute to that community.

Providing home-based care involves training members of the community to
respond to older persons' needs in respect of nutrition, exercise, social
interaction and medical care. In this regard, Government must seek to
strengthen the partnership it has with NGOs and faith-based organisations,
because these are the people best positioned to provide such care.

This must serve as another indication of our commitment to enhancing the
quality of life for all our senior citizens. However, Government cannot do
it alone. Therefore, we call on our partners in civil society to continue
the work they are doing, and to serve the people and the Government of the
day. [Applause.]

Mr A Z A VAN JAARSVELD: Mr Chairperson, in addressing this Vote today, one
is tempted to fall into the same trap as the DP, viz that of spending a lot
of time on the unspent funds that were budgeted for poverty relief in the
country. I am of the opinion that this debate has already taken place in
the media and in the portfolio committee. All that remains to be said, once
again, is that the Government has failed dismally to fulfil its promises to
the poor and the destitute. Let it echo in their ears, but even more, let
it burn into their hearts: They have failed, they have failed, they have
failed! [Laughter.]

I want to be positive by turning my attention to the road ahead and some of
the challenges that will face the department in the near future and in the
years to come. I want to quote from a statement by the hon the Minister
during the launch of a 10-point programme of action during January this
year. He said:


  This disintegration of our social fabric - of family and community life -
  is a reality that has not been acknowledged at a fundamental level.

Our special policies assume the ability of families and communities to
respond to the crisis. Welfare has proceeded as if these social
institutions are fully functional and provide the full range of social
support that is required to restore the wellbeing of the people. Such a
business-as-usual-approach cannot continue.

In spite of the restructuring of the department it still lacks the ability
to address the fragmentation of the policy network between the various
branches within the department. The department will have to redesign its
operational system and maximise its resources towards service delivery. The
fact that there are still 147 vacant posts within the department's staff
requirement of 389 is a major contributory factor to poor service delivery.

Die departement sal homself moet toespits op die behoorlike opleiding van
personeel op bestuursvlak aangesien dit een van die grootste leemtes is wat
deur nuwe direkteur-generaal geïdentifiseer is. Laat my dan toe om in
hierdie stadium me Bester alle sterkte toe te wens met die enorme taak wat
sy het om die departement van die grond af op te tel. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The department will have to concentrate on the proper training of staff at
management level, as this is one of the biggest shortcomings identified by
the new director-general. Allow me then at this stage to wish Ms Bester
everything of the best with the enormous task she has to get the department
on a sound footing.]

I trust that she, unlike her predecessors, will have the necessary staying
power.

Section 27(1) of the Constitution stipulates that all citizens are entitled
to social security and that social assistance will be given to people who
are unable to provide for themselves. It is unfortunate, therefore, that
the department lacks the ability to deliver to these people. How does one
explain to a person who qualifies for an old age grant that she has to wait
for more than two years, from March 1998 to April 2000, when she complied
with all the requirements? Mrs O'Reilley from Helenvale in northern Port
Elizabeth is one of the many thousands of South African citizens who are
suffering this fate. I can show the Minister proof - here is the copy. The
first application is dated March 1997. The enquiry was in October 1999. The
second application was made in December 1999. It is now April 2000, but
there is nothing yet. There is no trace of the second application in the
department. What is the department going to do? [Interjections.]
Although there are some people in society who benefit from the Government's
child support grant, there are also thousands of people who are suffering
due to the Government's new belief that a child stops being a child at the
age of seven years. I believe that the Government will have to review its
policy on the payment of the child support grant.

We, in the New NP, believe that the provision of money on a monthly basis
for people who are poor and destitute and who are making use of the system
to provide for themselves can never be the long-term solution. Eradicating
poverty is a very complex process, a process that needs to be driven
tirelessly by people who are motivated and who understand the process. The
most important key factor in poverty alleviation is job creation. The
Government has a role to play by creating a climate for economic growth.

Coming from the Eastern Cape ... [Interjections.]

Mr E S MAGASHULE: Mr Chairperson, will the hon member take a question?

Mr A Z A VAN JAARSVELD: Mr Chairperson, I will not take a question now.

Coming from the Eastern Cape, I want to thank the Ministers concerned for
the announcement of the Coega development project in Port Elizabeth. I
trust that the Eastern Cape as a whole will benefit by this project. In a
province in which the unemployment figure is estimated at 54%, creating
jobs should be the number one priority.

Poverty eradication should not only be the responsibility of one Government
department. There must be an integrated poverty eradication strategy with
interministerial collaboration and interdepartmental co-operation. The
Government must build on the foundation that was laid at the national
consultative process during October last year and should consult the key
role-players on an ongoing basis. The full process of the public-private
partnerships must be managed and monitored continuously to optimise the
intended benefit to the beneficiary communities.

In conclusion, one has to realise that the role and the responsibility of
this department is to utilise the funds and the resources available to
touch and improve the lives of all those people who lack because of
circumstances beyond their control. The task of the Government is to
improve the quality of life of the poor, to protect the children, to take
care of the elderly and the disabled and to drive the process, but it is
also expected of every responsible member of this Parliament actively to
contribute towards the process. The New NP will support the Vote.

Mrs T J TSHIVHASE: Mr Chairperson, I am a rural woman who was marginalised
and disadvantaged by the whites who are here.

Ndi wone uyu muhasho u dzhielaho tshumelo ... [U dzhenelela.] [It is this
department that renders services ... [Interjections.]]

Dr C P MULDER: Mr Chairperson, on a point of order: I would suggest that
the context within which the member made that statement is an incitement to
racism. I would like her to withdraw that remark.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, would you please withdraw
those words.

Mrs T J TSHIVHASE: Mr Chairperson, I do not see the relevance of
withdrawing. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, that is my ruling. Could
you withdraw those words?

Mrs T J TSHIVHASE: Mr Chairperson, I withdraw.

Ndi wone Muhasho wa Vhulondavhathu wo zwi dzhielaho nṱha uri vhafumakadzi
vha mahayani vha vhavhalelwe ngauri ndi vhone vho shayesaho zwihulwanesa.
Kha miṅwaha miṱanu, sa zwe Phuresidennde wa shango vha amba uri hu fanela u
fheliswa vhushai kha vhafumakadzi vha mahayani vho tambulaho vhukuma.

Muhasho wo vhetshela thungo R9 milioni uri hu khwinisiwe vhutshilo ha
vharema na vhafumakadzi vha mahayani. Ri tshi sedza zwo bveledzwaho nga
muhasho uyu, ri wana zwi zwinzhi. Muhasho wo vhea dzikomiti dzi no nga
Minmec uri dzi lavhelese mvelaphanḓa ine ya khou itea kha thandela dzi re
mahayani.

Phuresidennde vho zwi sumbedza uri ndi rine ri fanelaho u rangela phanḓa
lushaka, ri na vhusedzi ha u vhona uri vhathu vhashu vha khou tshila nga
nḓila ifhio. Ra sedza vhutshilo ha mahayani, zwihulwane vhafumakadzi vho
tsikeledziwaho, muhasho washu wo zwi vhona uri vhathu vha mahayani vha tea
uri vhutshilo havho hu shanduke. Ra sedza kha thandela dzi re hone, zwo
vhonala uri hu fanela u itiwa ngudiso uri vha vhe na nḓivho ya u tshimbidza
thandela dzine vha vha nadzo nga nḓila yone na uri masheleni a vhulungiwe
hani. Ndi wonoyu Muhasho wa Vhulondavhathu une wa nea ngudiso idzo uri
vhathu vha tshile nga nḓila i fushaho. Arali ra sedza vhushayi hu re
mahayani, ri a kona u zwi vhona uri vhafumakadzi vha mahayani vho
tsikeledzwa zwi vhavhaho u bva murahu. Muhasho washu wo kona kha u ita
zwithu zwinzhi. (Translation of Tshivenḓa paragraphs follows.)

[It is the Department of Welfare which recognised that rural women should
be taken care of because of their poor condition. This was also echoed by
the hon the President who supported the eradication of poverty amongst
rural women.

The department has set aside R9 million for the improvement of rural black
people including women. We have observed that this department has improved
a lot of things. The department has also established committees like Minmec
in order to monitor rural development projects.

The hon the President has indicated that we should be the first to look
into the livelihood of our people. That is why our department has realised
the necessity of uplifting the lives of rural people. When we look at the
projects involved, we realise that training and management of financial
resources are important. The department has therefore embarked on the kind
of training required, which will benefit people. The process has improved
rural women's lives, for they are emerging from their disadvantaged
situation of the past.]

The co-operation of the department with other Government departments such
as Water Affairs, Trade and Industry, Agriculture, Transport, Tourism and
others achieved the following: Firstly, rural-based projects aligned with
integrated, sustainable rural development strategies; secondly, the
development of workers identified and appointed urgently from benefiting
communities, thus ensuring that the poverty relief fund is directed to the
poorest of the poor; and, thirdly, immediate attention to the training
development of workers in facilitating development and management of
projects.

Minisiṱa vho zwi sumbedza zwino kha tshipitshi tshavho uri ri funa u vhona
tshanduko kha vhutshilo ha vhathu vha mahayani vho tambulaho. Ḽihoro ḽa NP
ḽe ḽa vhusa nga itsho tshifhinga, ḽine ḽa ri zwino ndi ḽiswa, ḽo ita mini
zwine ra khou vhona zwi zwiswa? Ri khou vhona vhukwila hu itiwaho nga nḓila
ntswa. Vhushayi ha vhathu mahayani ndi hune na vhafumakadzi vha lusa nga u
ḓitika vhutshiloni havho nga mavu.

Mulayo wa 1913 wa Mavu wo itisa uri vhatshena vha dzhie mavu a 87% ngeno
vharema vho sala na 13%. A ho ngo lavheleswa uri vhathu vhanzhi shangoni
ḽashu ndi riṋe na uri ri tshila nga mavu. Zwibveledzwa zwa mavu zwo ita uri
vhathu vha kone u rengisa zwiṅwe uri vhana vhavho vha ye zwikoloni. Muvhuso
uno u rangiwaho phanḓa nga ANC ndi wone une zwino wa khou ita tshanduko ya
u vhuyedzedza mavu kha vhaṋe vhao. Ndi hone vhathu vha tshi khou thoma u
tshila khwine.

Maambiwa a mahoro mahanedzi ha khou ḓisa tshanduko ngauri tshe ra
thetshelesa ṋamusi a ri khou pfa na muthihi a ambaho nga ha vhafumakadzi
vha mahayani vha ṱoḓaho tshanduko. Hu na dzithandela dzine dza khou
bveledza zwiṅwe zwi no nga hezwi zwe nda ambara. Dzi luka makunda, malungu
na u runga miṅwenda. Vhafumakadzi vha dovha vha vhumba dzikhali, u suka
zwidina na zwiṅwe zwinzhi. Hezwo ndi vhuṱanzi ho fhelelaho ngauri na
muvhuso u khou dzhenisa tshanḓa khazwo uri vhutshilo hu khwinisiwe.

Ndi uno muvhuso wa ANC une wa khou vhuedzedza tshirunzi tsha vhafumakadzi
uri vha zwi ḓivhe uri na vhone ndi vhadzulapo vha Afurika Tshipembe. Ri
vhona zwi zwihulwane zwo itwaho nga uyu muhasho. U dovha wa shumisana na
madzangano ane a si vhe a muvhuso na IDT ine ya thusa sa dzhendedzi ḽa
mvelaphanḓa.

Murangaphanḓa wa uyu muhasho Vho-Skweyiya vha na bono ḽine vha ḓivha uri
lushaka lu ya ngafhi. Vhafumakadzi vha mahayani kha vha ḓihudze nga uyu
muhasho une wa ḓivha uri hu na Vho-Nyamasindi, Vho-Nyasivhe na vhaṅwe-vho.

Kha zwiṅwe zwi itwaho nga vhafumakadzi, ri vhona fhano Western Cape hu na
thandela ya u foroma zwidina zwo fhaṱaho dzinnḓu dze dza leludza mushumo wa
Muhasho wa Zwa Nnḓu. Vhathu vha renga nnḓu nga mutengo wa fhasi, zwine zwa
vha mvelaphanḓa.

Ri tshi ya Mpumalanga, vhathu vha na thandela ya u ita na u akha ḓaraṱa,
ine ya vha mushumo u vhuyedzaho. Ndi a livhuha ngauri ANC yo ita
zwihulwanesa. [U fhela ha tshifhinga.] [U vhanda zwanḓa.] (Translation of
Tshivenḓa paragraphs follows.)

[The hon the Minister has indicated in his speech that we have to see a
change in the lives of the rural communities that suffered before. What new
things did the NP, which now claims to be new, do during its term of
governance? All that we see is a new way of misleading us. The poor rural
people and women depend on land for their survival.

The Land Act of 1913 made 87% of land available to whites and blacks were
left with only 13%. There was no consideration for the majority of the
people and the fact that we blacks survive on land. The produce from
agriculture allowed us to live well and we had an income for other
expenses, such as educating our children. The ANC-led Government is making
changes by also giving land back to its rightful owners. This will indeed
improve the lives of people.

The opposition parties are not in favour of change, since they do not even
say anything about changing the lives of rural women. Women are involved in
projects that are making clothes and traditional wear similar to what I am
now wearing. They make bangles and do beadwork, including traditional
dresses. Women also do pottery, make bricks and other things. This is proof
of their progress and the contribution that the Government is making
towards their improvement.

It is this ANC-led Government which is restoring the dignity of women so
that they realise that they are also citizens of South Africa. We applaud
this Government for doing these great things. It is also working with NGOs,
including the IDT which is a vehicle of development.

The hon Minister Skweyiya has a progressive vision for leading our people.
Rural women should be proud of his department which recognises women like
Nyamasindi, Nyasivhe and others.

Amongst other things being done by women, we see a brick-making project in
the Western Cape, which has facilitated the building of houses by the
Department of Housing. People are buying low-cost houses and that is
progress.

In Mpumalanga, people have wire-making projects which are profitable. I am
grateful to the ANC for the work done. [Time expired.] [Applause.]]

Prof L M MBADI: Madam Speaker, Deputy President, Ministers of various
departments and colleagues, allow me, firstly, to congratulate the
Minister, Dr Zola Skweyiya, on his appointment as Minister for Welfare and
Population Development, and his equally newly appointed director-general,
Angela Bester, who, by the looks of things, is rallying to the task of
delivering. The UDM wishes the two the best of everything in their mammoth
tasks of delivering services to the poorest of the poor.

The department's aim to facilitate sustainable human development through
the provision of welfare services and developmental projects is reflected
in the budget, through the amount allocated for the year 2000-01, which is
R341,906 million, and the amount allocated for 1999-2000, which was
R185,429 million. The difference of R156 477 million represents an increase
of 84,39%. The UDM appreciates this increase and hopes it will go where it
is intended.

However, when one looks at critical areas such as social security, one
realises that there is a decrease in the allocation. For example, the
amount allocated for the year 1999-2000 was R75,874 million, and the amount
voted for the year 2000-01 is R73,110 million. This is a difference of
R2,764 million, which represents a decrease of 3,62%. The reason given for
this decrease is that this is the result of the restructuring of the
department and the redeployment of officials in the department.

The social development programme sees an increase of R153,848 million. The
increase is ascribed to the restructuring of the department and
redeployment of officials in the department. The increase will enable the
department to fulfil its aim of developing, implementing and monitoring
policies, strategies and regulation of social development and public-
private partnerships.

A fair share of the national Budget has been allocated to the department
for poverty alleviation. These poverty relief funds are being used in
development projects at community level, strengthening the developmental
thrust of the work of the department. The fact that these funds are
allocated to a range of NGOs that focus on poverty alleviation through
community programmes will enable the communities to own the projects and to
participate fully in the implementation. The involvement of communities is
highly commendable.

However, concerns have been expressed over the increasing proportion of
underexpenditure by the Department of Welfare since 1996-97. I have the
privilege of having received an explanation for this underexpenditure from
the Minister, for which I am very grateful. I am now going to share that
information with Parliament, the details of which are as follows: For 1996-
97 the underexpenditure rate was 43%; for 1997-98, it was 43,3%; and for
1998/99 it was 78,5%.

The huge underexpenditure in 1998-99 was attributed to the poverty relief
fund. The Department of Welfare received R203 million in 1998-99 from the
infrastructure and investment fund for the poverty relief programme. When
the Department of Welfare appointed the Independent Development Trust as
its investment agency, it transferred to it a sum of R81 million towards
the end of the 1998-99 financial year. As the amount was paid from the
suspense account for control purposes, it was not reflected as expenditure
in 1998-99.

Furthermore, the Department of Welfare obtained approval from the
Department of State Expenditure to roll over R202 950 million from the
poverty relief allocation for the 1999-2000 financial year. The original
allocation of R50 million for 1999-2000 was reduced to R40 million. The
total amount of funds allocated for poverty relief in 1999-2000 was,
therefore, R242 950 million.

The allocation for the poverty relief fund is divided as follows: For 1998-
99, an amount of R203 million funded 193 provincial projects amounting to
R111 583 297 and 38 national projects costing R91 446 703. [Time expired.]

Ms O R KASIENYANE: Madam Speaker, hon Minister and hon members, the need
for an effective social security system is increasingly important in South
Africa, especially because of its impact on income levels in the poorest of
poor households.

The gap between the rich and the very poor is becoming even wider. Our
challenge is whether we can meet these expectations. I believe that we will
only have met these expectations when the hunger of the poor has been
stilled. The reality is that some of our people who receive welfare grants
are not always convinced that their conditions have improved since 1994. We
must therefore ensure that the improvements that we have legislated are
translated into reality.

The department is currently responsible for the monthly payment of 11
different grants to approximately 2,8 million beneficiaries throughout
South Africa. Seen together with other forms of social spending on health,
education and developmental welfare services, this represents a very
substantial portion of our Budget.

Pensioners countrywide have welcomed the R20 increase in pensions. However,
we must acknowledge that this increase does not fully take the rate of
inflation into account. We must also not underestimate the importance of
this safety net for our people, as it is a reality that the pension paid to
a grant beneficiary reaches the whole family and sustains whole
communities.

We must therefore congratulate the ANC Government on its commitment not to
cut down on this form of social spending, but to sustain it and even
increase it. For example, through the child support grant, rural women feed
between five and nine people. The broadening of the child support grant, is
very important, because it confirms that ntima, mme o mphele ngwana [I can
be denied food, but my child must be fed]. However, we must step up our
efforts to reach more and more beneficiaries with this grant. The slow take-
up rate of the child support grant is one example of a number of problems
we are experiencing with the social security system.

It is unfortunate that the process of reviewing beneficiaries has caused so
many problems. In many cases, those of our people who have been permanently
disabled are removed from the system and can only be reinstated after a
minimum of three months. This sends a wrong message to our people. The
department needs to re-examine the policy on disability grants and ensure
that the policy is properly implemented.

The process of reregistration of beneficiaries was a necessary part of the
transformation of the welfare system. However, it caused some discomfort
and anxiety to beneficiaries. We hope that this process will be completed
by June this year. We have pointed out some of the problems; now we must
look at what is being done to improve the situation. Out of the
department's budget of R520 million, R75 874 has been allocated to
facilitate the development, implementation and monitoring of policies and
strategies for a comprehensive social security system. We hope that this
will ensure better lives for our people.

The department has launched training and capacity-building programmes for
officials involved in pension payments as a lack of capacity - especially
in those provinces forgotten by the apartheid past - has been the cause of
many of the problems. Poorer provinces and the deep rural areas have been
targeted for a roll out of fax and telephone lines to improve communication
between beneficiaries, officials and the department.

To improve the take-up rate of the child support grant, a number of
decisive steps have been taken. Among these are important mass
communication strategies, relaxation of the regulations, additional funding
and support to staff and the implementation of regional-specific project
plans. It is important that the department streamlines its registration
system, Socpen, nationally, because we still have people receiving social
security grants from two provinces. Ba kgonwa ke ba ba dinaka. [They have
it both ways.]

The department has tried to improve the conditions under which pensioners
are paid, for example by outsourcing the pension payout to private
companies. This has had a positive impact, but too often pensioners still
have to wait for the whole day for their grants. They are exposed to harsh
weather conditions, waiting in long queues without being under a roof. The
department must ensure that the service levels agreed to with private
companies are adhered to.

We must also establish a system of co-operation between public
representatives and administrators. When we speak to our people in our
constituencies they complain to us about the bad service they receive from
the department, but when these problems are brought to the departmental
officials they see us as interfering in or threatening their jobs.

The relationship must be improved, so that we can proudly say to our needy
that somebody still cares, because fifing go tshwaranwa ka dikobo [when
things get tough we must share what we have].

Finally, in support of the budget, let me say that we can meet these
challenges. The department can do it, even though some detractors claim
that this department is small and ill-equipped for these challenges.
However, let me warn them: It is not the size of the dog that determines
the fight, but the size of the fight in the dog. Hon Van Jaarsveld is
qualified to speak about failures, because his government failed for 48
years to rule this country. [Applause.]

Mrs R M SOUTHGATE: Madam Speaker, the budget debate on welfare reminds me
of a song that goes: ``There are more questions than answers.''

I am tempted to give my enquiring mind some flight and suggest that the
circumstances surrounding the problems in the Department of Welfare are
strewn with questionable intentions. The picture painted after the
performance of the department over the past few years ought to confound the
collective moral mind of the alliance Government. It has been established
that 15,6% of the 1994-95 allocation of the department's budget of
R85 million has not been spent. In the three years subsequent to that, the
figures climbed to 24,2%, 43,9% and 43,3% respectively. Over the 1998-99
period, 78,5% of the department's total budget of R450 million had not been
spent. In fact, as the Auditor-General's report makes mention, less than 1%
of the R204 million earmarked for poverty relief was spent in that year.

It is generally accepted that Government's policy is to uplift the
previously disadvantaged communities. These are the moral obligations that
all members of the Government purportedly support. The poor, as the
Minister says, are the most vulnerable, and the HIV crisis in South Africa
does exacerbate poverty. The Government must ensure that the funds budgeted
for poverty relief gets into the hands of those proven to have made good
use of it by helping and empowering those who most need it. The critical
factor may lie on what processes to follow for Government to achieve its
objectives, and perhaps there are those who may simply not fancy the road
that it has taken. In fact, I dare to state that there may be very many who
may be out of gear with the intentions of Government!

A more probable explanation though, that is generally accepted, are the
irregularities attached to the way in which the department administered its
programmes. Blame must also be laid at the door of the State Expenditure
department for a shoddy job in not detecting the incapacity of the Welfare
department to dispense of its funds, but continuing annually to approve
additional appropriations for Welfare. What needs to be done? Parliament
must make a special ruling to call to account the former Minister for
Welfare and Population Development for her role in allowing the mess that
the department is in at this moment.

Furthermore, Government must dismiss all top Welfare officials for the part
they played regarding the crisis over the unspent millions earmarked for
poverty relief. If Government finds it difficult to keep adequate check on
its employees, it must outsource the monitoring and evaluating functions to
a body equipped to do so. May I add that it is the ANC which is in
Government and not the New NP, so could the ANC please take responsibility?
[Interjections.]

Dr E E JASSAT: Madam Speaker, hon Minister, hon members, this afternoon I
would like to focus on Aids orphans in Africa in general, and in South
Africa in particular. The cumulative number of Aids orphans in the world is
estimated at 8,2 million. About 90% of these orphans live in sub-Saharan
Africa, which, incidentally is home to only one tenth of the world's
population. Within South Africa alone it is estimated that there will be 3
million orphans within the next 10 years.

The most likely impact before the death of a parent is on schooling, as
children may have to work to supplement the household income or stay at
home to care for sick adults or younger siblings. As income may fluctuate,
household expenditure is likely to be reduced. Poor families who have
little or no assets may reduce food consumption, with the nutritional
status of the sick and children being seriously compromised. Psychosocial
distress begins with a parent's illness, and they are left emotionally and
physically vulnerable after the death of the parent or parents. Family
structures and role changes within families will change due to the Aids
epidemic. Children may be fostered or adopted. These orphans could be taken
care of by grandparents, aunts, uncles or their siblings.

In supporting Vote No 35, we would like to commend the mission of the
national population unit of the Department of Welfare, which is to provide
an expert service that facilitates and supports the implementation of
population and development strategies aimed at sustainable human
development of the quality of life of all South Africans. In April 1998 the
White Paper on Population Policy was tabled in this House, reflecting the
interests, hopes and aspirations of all our people, especially those who
remain disadvantaged because of past policies and practices. However, with
the emergence of HIV/Aids with its insidious and devastating effect on the
socioeconomic fabric of our country, expectations of population development
and a better life for all our people are dangerously threatened.

By the beginning of 1998, over 30 million people worldwide were infected
with HIV, and 11,7 million people around the globe have already lost their
lives to this pandemic. Over two-thirds of all the people in the world now
living with HIV, nearly 21 million men, women and children, are in sub-
Saharan Africa and 83% of the world's Aids deaths have occurred in this
region. An estimated 87% of the world's children infected with HIV are in
Africa.

More and more child-headed households will arise. Young people under the
age of 18 will be caring for their younger brothers, sisters, cousins,
nephews and nieces. All the children will leave school in order to work to
supplement the household income. This situation already exists in KwaZulu-
Natal. It is quite often associated with the increase of movement of
children onto the streets of the cities or into commercial sex work.

Child-headed households will increase child labour. Unless families and
communities are strengthened and provisions made for adequate resources and
support structures, the number of children orphaned as a result of Aids
will place an unimaginable strain on extended families, and an overwhelming
pressure on the Department of Welfare, not forgetting the community.

What stares us in the face in South Africa is increasing numbers of
children in distress associated with the escalating Aids epidemic, the
inability of traditional models of surrogate support or care to accommodate
the number of children in difficulty, the inability of poor communities to
absorb these children in distress into informal care facilities without the
introduction of outside support, the stigma associated with HIV/Aids-
infected and affected families and the pressing need to develop
intervention strategies to ensure that the rights of children who are
infected or affected by HIV/Aids are protected.
To meet the above challenges, firstly, we need to transform the care system
to ensure efficiency, effectiveness and appropriateness. Secondly, we have
to identify families and community strengths and build upon them to
maximise the potential to care for the vulnerable children. The department
has already undertaken research in order to inform policy and the
development of programmes. The Women in Partnership against HIV/Aids was
launched on 8 March 1999. A national strategic framework for children
infected and affected by HIV/Aids was approved by Cabinet at its meeting on
25 November last year. The SA National Aids Council, under the chairmanship
of the Deputy President, has taken off.

We, in Parliament, have a moral duty to come up immediately with
innovative, affordable and sustainable plans to contain this horrendous
threat and disaster that we as a people face. I would like to end by
thanking both our President and Deputy President for the very active
support and leadership in this life-and-death fight against HIV/Aids that
they have given to our people and to this country. [Applause.]

Mr A SINGH: Chairperson, it is rather unfortunate that the present Minister
for Welfare and Population Development, Minister Zola Skweyiya, is now
responsible for the unspent funds from the 1999-2000 budget, an amount of
R2,003 billion of unspent roll-over funds. It now his responsibility to
take the unpleasant publicity that he got for it, but the Welfare budget is
the responsibility of this Government and its previous Minister who, in
this case, is also an ANC member.

The Minister has a very important responsibility for unspent funds. The
previous Minister, Geraldine Fraser-Moleketi, should do the honourable
thing and resign from this Parliament. [Interjections.] She has created a
problem in the Welfare portfolio and is responsible for R516 million of
unspent funds over the past three years - R52 million in the 1996-97
financial year, R110 million in 1997-98 and R353 million in 1998-99. It is
like adding fuel to the fire by saying that there is a further R203 million
of unspent funds in the 1999-2000 financial year.

This is a disgraceful situation in which a Minister and a Government that
claim to care for the poor are really not caring. Maybe a code of conduct
for MPs and Cabinet Ministers could censure Ministers who do not perform
their duties responsibly. Have we forgotten the election slogan of the ANC,
``A better life for all''?

On 23 February, the Minister announced, in the Budget, a R20 increase in
the grants to pensioners, the disabled and other grantees. A 3,4% increase
in these difficult times is really a drop in the ocean. To make matters
worse, on 4 April, before the pensioners could even get their increase,
there was a fuel price increase. It dug deeper into their pockets. Some
pensioners and disabled persons have to pay more than R20 to travel in
taxis and buses to collect their pensions.

Our pensioners of this country have built us a strong foundation, and today
we are able to reap the benefits of the land. They have toiled in order for
us to have a better life. I call on the Minister to rethink the 3,4%
increase. A more substantial amount is deemed necessary, and I call for an
increase in pension grants and grants for the disabled.

The DP leadership has gone on a ``sizokubona'' tour - a look-and-see tour -
of this country and found many families and institutions having to make
ends meet without any Government assistance and subsidies. I would like to
quote a heading from the Cape Argus of 16 March 2000, which read: ``Grant
cut leaves poor families facing destitution.'' The subheading read:
``Mother of five Sandra survives on maintenance grants for kids - but she
will get nothing under the new system.''

It is sad that this is the direction in which this Government is moving,
with families left hungry whilst our Ministers hoard millions of rands of
poverty relief funds. Let us give hope to our pensioners and disabled
people who are collecting grants. Let them not be forgotten. According to a
prediction of the figures released by the Minister, only 1 million children
under the age of seven will be reached by the year 2003 by the child
support grant. This is two million short of the Government's target figure.
The Minister needs to seriously consider whether the child support grants
are really working for the people they are intended for.

Only children under seven get this kind of child support grant. What about
the whole schooling life of a child until the age of 18? Where do they get
their support? The child support grant programme has not been accepted by
the larger community. Only 30 000 recipients registered, whilst the
department has budgeted for 370 000 recipients. This is over 12 times fewer
than estimated. [Time expired.]

Ms X C MAKASI: Chairperson, Deputy President, hon Minister, hon members,
South Africa has a rich institutional framework of NGOs, such as voluntary
welfare organisations, religious organisations and community-based
organisations that participate in the delivery of welfare services. They
have a long history of struggle and they made an undeniable contribution to
the political transformation of this country. There is no doubt that they
are an extremely valuable partner in the Government's effort to provide
people with a better life. They have always been close to the people and
because of that, they are often in the best position to deliver effective
services.

Now that the struggle of political liberation is over, for some of these
organisations a new struggle has just begun because of the increasingly
difficult financial position the NGO sector experiences. How has the
Government responded to problems these NGOs have? As a responsible partner,
Government has tried to create an enabling environment for the optional use
of capacity and expertise which NGOs command. The introduction of the
Nonprofit Organisations Act, No 71 of 1997, allows for voluntary
registration of nonprofit organisations. It is encouraging that there are
5 871 organisations currently registered in terms of this Act.

The ANC Government has made an enormous effort to try to redress the
imbalances of the past by way of increasing social spending. A considerable
portion of the budget is now allocated to various programmes in the
developmental welfare service sector. A total of R20 million, of which R8
million is for economic empowerment, has been allocated to people with
disabilities. A further R6 million has been allocated to a clean-and-green
job creation programme for integrated waste management, in partnership with
the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism. A total of R3 million
has been allocated to a project called Ex-offenders, which is a joint
project in partnership with the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry,
and 500 ex-offenders are employed through this initiative. The
implementation of these programmes has been possible through the
contribution of organisations from civil society.

Just under 10% of the Welfare budget is available for spending on
developmental social services. It is, therefore, crucial that the money is
targeted at those programmes and organisations where the best possible
service can be delivered within the constraints of the budget. NGOs have
responsibilities in the partnership. Government cannot provide all the
funding for the services they provide as the traditional funders of NGOs
become less eager to continue channelling money to them. New and innovative
ways of fundraising must be found. NGOs must also be seen to be accountable
to the communities they serve. Registration in terms of the Nonprofit
Organisations Act can assist NGOs and the public to establish some
criteria, enhancing the legitimacy and credibility of the people handling
public money.

In our partnership with NGOs we must ensure that the limited resources
reach the proper targets. This can be improved if they assist communities
in doing careful and appropriate community profiles and needs assessments.
In building and strengthening the partnership, the portfolio committee of
Parliament also has an important role to play. NGOs often develop
alternatives, from their view, and policy on how things should be done, and
they bring expert opinion into the debate. Here we must note that a
continual stronger relationship is being built between the Portfolio
Committee on Welfare and Population Development and role-players in the
welfare delivery system. The relationship must be built even further, as a
dynamic relationship would mean that we have an ear on the ground where it
matters most.

The ANC has always stressed the need to ensure that our policies are
informed by concrete conditions on the ground. The ANC approach to the
integrated social security system means that the focus is on the complete
and integrated development of the human potential of each individual. This
also means that we want to integrate fully the capacity and skills of
organisations of civil society. We must engender the relationship of trust
and openness, as this will facilitate optimal use of our limited resources.

I support today's Vote, because I am convinced that it will go a long way
in addressing what is close to my heart: a better life for all. We believe
that Welfare will deliver. As we confront the challenges of poverty, we
call on all South Africans to support the effort of Government to meet
people's basic needs. I can proudly say: We are on course. [Applause.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Chairperson and hon Deputy President, I want to start with
a quote from someone who most of us in this House hold in high esteem,
Archbishop Ndungane, who said: ``Words, words, words, do not feed the
poor.''

We have seen more than our fair share of summits, conferences and empty
debates about poverty and the suffering of the poor masses of this country.
All we need is delivery. The poor are not asking for hand-outs; they are
asking for access to resources and skills.

We have witnessed how bureaucracy is stifling and, at the same time,
eroding the resources originally designated for the poor, especially the
pensioners. Let us take a few examples. Old age pensions increased from
R410 per month from the 1995-96 financial year to R520 per month for the
1999-2000 financial year, which translates into an overall increase of
approximately 26,8%. Sacob economists, however, have calculated that based
on core inflation rates over the past five years, old age pensions are
effectively 11,5% lower than five years ago, simply because inflation
generally excludes interest rate fluctuations.
Pensions for the elderly increased by R20 per month from R520 to R540 per
month. If the pension kept up with inflation, then it should have been R560
per month. Two million people in this country receive social pensions, and
keeping up with inflation would cost Government approximately R40 million.
Yet, this Government allows tax cuts of R9 billion. Not only is this
unfair, but it is also devastating to a family of five who try to live on a
pension.

The change in individual income tax means that there will be R9 billion
less in Government's Budget. This money could have been used for the basic
income grant programme that is calculated at R7 billion. Instead, the tax
cut actually goes to the wealthy, because they purchase capital goods and
imports that do not create local jobs. A basic income grant would put money
into the hands of those living at the marginal standard and who buy locally
produced goods that, in turn, create jobs.

Expenditure for pensions in the current Budget decreased in real terms by
1,5%, whilst Defence spending increased in real terms by 19%. We have to
ask ourselves the question: Why? The biggest threat to our democracy is not
foreign invasion, but the poor. The only explanation for this is the
failure of Government to look at their Gear policy, which has not met any
of its targets since its inception. [Applause.]

Mr M T MASUTHA: Chairperson, allow me, on behalf of this House and the
nation at large, to convey our most sincere gratitude to the large numbers
of our people, especially women, who relentlessly continue to make a vital
contribution to mending the lives of many of our children by providing them
with care and support in the form of adoption, foster care and acting as
their care-givers. [Applause.]

No amount of budgetary allocations can make a dent in the challenge of
reconstructing our families and communities out of the rubble left by the
social breakdown caused by poverty, disease, joblessness and violent crime.
Our country is one of the few developing nations of the world that
continues to invest heavily in social spending, a significant percentage of
which goes towards child-related programmes. In this budget, an amount of
nearly R21 billion - constituting about 9% of the total national Budget,
and about 2,5% of GDP - is to be invested in social welfare services,
including social security. This confirms our Government's commitment
towards the poor.

In my previous input in a debate on this budget, I reflected on the
international and constitutional obligations regarding our children to
which we as a nation have committed ourselves, and some of the budgetary
allocations aimed at supporting our efforts towards the fulfilment of this
obligation. On this occasion, allow me to reflect on some of the efforts
that we as a nation have undertaken to improve our institutional framework
for the realisation of this goal, and areas that need further development,
especially the area of legislation.

The Child Care Act of 1983 and the Social Assistance Act of 1992 present
themselves as the key pieces of legislation in the field of welfare that
profoundly impacts on the lives of children in this country, in that they
regulate the provision of services, care and support, particularly for
children in especially difficult circumstances, such as abandoned and
abused children and those living on the streets in abject poverty. These
laws, however, were by and large based on the old welfare paradigm that did
not reflect the value systems of the different sectors of our society. In
particular, they were framed with the object of an apartheid state in mind,
namely of promoting white interests, completely disregarding the needs and
aspirations of the majority of our people.

Following the establishment of a democratic state in 1994, one of the
immediate challenges was to transform, amongst other things, the
legislation that defined the nature, content and primary beneficiaries of
services, so as to achieve equity, promote equality and enhance social
justice. In pursuit of this new goal and pending the introduction of
comprehensive new legislation, urgent measures were introduced in the
interim in the fields of childcare and social security in the last
Parliament.

These measures include the passing and implementation of various amendments
to these laws, the first of which was the Child Care Amendment Act of 1996
which, amongst the more important changes that it introduced, was the
substitution of a parent-centred approach with a child-centred approach in
dealing with children in need of care. This new approach was aimed at
empowering families through reconstruction services and other forms of
intervention to enable them to fulfil their responsibilities towards
children, rather than punish them for being ``unfit or unable'' to look
after their children, as was the approach in the past, and removing their
children from them.

The Welfare Laws Amendment Act of 1997 provided for the abolition and
phasing out of the previous maintenance grant and the substitution thereof
with the current child support grant. Although the maintenance grant
covered children up to the age of 18 years - as opposed to the child
support grant, which at this point in time is only limited to children
under the age of seven years - it was only available to single mothers who
could not afford to care for their children, and limited to two children
per beneficiary of the grant. The child-support grant, on the other hand,
recognises the fact that many young children are cared for by other care-
givers, such as grandparents and other members of the extended family, and
covers all children. Provision is made in the legislation for the maximum
amount of the grant payable and the maximum age to increase as and when it
becomes sustainable to do so. It must be acknowledged, however, that the
age limit and the fairly limited amount payable are both factors which will
continue to impact negatively on the social security system for children as
a whole, hence the need to review the situation when the new comprehensive
social security system is developed.

In 1998, following a Constitutional Court ruling, Parliament passed the
Adoption Matters Amendment Act of 1998, in terms of which - for the first
time in our history and in line with our Bill of Rights - responsible
natural fathers, excluding rapists, can now exercise their right to have a
say on the proposed adoption of their children born out of wedlock. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Mr Chairperson, Deputy President, Ministers and hon
members, enabling the individual, empowering the communities and
facilitating development must be the key objects of the Welfare department.

The social Welfare department, political parties, the community,
development institutions and especially local government - that is, the
councillors, who have intimate contact with the people at grass-roots level
- must strategise and co-ordinate a partnership to be actively involved in
assisting communities to establish and create their own future. The aim
must be to transform the status quo towards what they desire personally,
without becoming totally dependent on the Government and empowering
themselves independently with survival skills. In order to sustain human
development through the provision of welfare services, disparities existing
in the communication and administration procedures must be sorted out
first.

Poverty in South Africa is not a joke. It is our harsh reality and is
destroying the livelihood of our people. Policies, legislation and budget
allocations to mobilise human development are well and good, but superior
to policy development is action. We must learn to practise what we preach.
Budget allocations to poverty relief programmes must be sanctioned after an
investigation to avoid the excuse that unforeseen problems were suddenly
detected in the programmes. This delays the distribution of resources in
the country, which is to the greatest disadvantage of the poor.

The trial-and-error period in the new democratic South Africa is over. Our
sacred duty is to focus on delivering the goods and providing services to
our people, which, to a certain degree, the Department of Welfare has
achieved. The evidence is in the numerous poverty relief programmes that
have been implemented to uplift the poorest of the poor, for which we thank
the Welfare department. To improve efficiency and eliminate fraud, the
social security delivery system has been re-engineered. However, due to
clumsy administration by personnel, on re-registration many guarantees and
pensioners who have met the legitimate criteria have either received their
social security only after a long waiting period, while there are others
who, after six months, have not yet received their grants or pensions.

For many, the social security is their only source of income. They depend
on it to survive, and being cut off from their financial resource means
that they are destitute. The fact that most victims are not empowered with
the necessary literacy skills to investigate the delay in the social
security grant, has worsened their plight, leaving them totally helpless.
To eliminate this problem, expert community development trainers must be
appointed to educate the social security beneficiaries and the personnel in
the department. We must meet the challenges of a crucial era in South
Africa, where skills and education are prerequisites for success and
development.

According to the Social Assistance Act of 1992 male beneficiaries of state
pension must be 65 years of age. This the MF disputes. Medical research
proves that the average life span of a South African citizen is 75 years -
I hope members live longer. The MF advocates that, irrespective of gender,
on reaching the age of 60, the individual concerned must qualify for a
pension. This will also make room for younger people to get employment. The
principle of equality in the Constitution must complement the distribution
of resources. Social welfare policies must be engineered to suit the life
span, lifestyle and economic needs of the poor.

The aim of implementing the child support grant is to reach 3 million
children under the age of seven in poor households by the year 2003. In
principle, the MF accepts the child support grant. However, what the MF
does not agree to is the limitation applied in respect of the age of seven
years. We, therefore, request the Government to relook at the limitation of
age. Unemployment, malnutrition and nonmaintenance of children by legal or
biological parents are adverse elements which are fragmenting the family
system, and thus that of children, who are the fabric of our society.

If the above negative social factors persist in an individual's life from
birth until that individual is deemed legally capable of fending for
himself or herself independently, the state, being the supreme guardian, is
automatically ordained with the responsibility to financially aid the child
so that his or her basic psychological needs are met. In other words, the
MF is calling on the Government to allocate the child support grant to
deserving individuals until their school-going years have been completed.

If the child support grant is not increased to a reasonable amount over the
years and is limited to the age of seven, this will, unfortunately,
intensify the social decay amongst our youth, such as care-givers
abandoning their children, a high percentage of school dropouts, gang
formation and an increase in crime, unemployment, drug and alcohol abuse.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M A MANGENA: Mr Chairperson, the Department of Welfare is the tool of
our society to look after the weak in its midst. It is a vehicle through
which the old, the infirm, the disabled and the poor are assisted by
society. More often than not, the Department of Welfare literally stands
between death by starvation and life for a whole family. It stands between
the stunted growth of children, kwashiorkor and poor mental growth due to
malnutrition on the one hand, and the survival of our children on the
other.

The Department of Welfare does help many, but it fails many others. In
theory, it ought not to fail so many. The constitutional arrangements,
legal arrangements and financial provisions are not so bad, but there seems
to be a lot wrong with some people working in the Welfare department. It
seems there are many people in the department who are sloppy, do not care
and are lacking diligence.

One has seen a few letters written by functionaries in the Welfare
department to some old people, informing them that their pensions have been
stopped and will not be reinstated unless and until they produce their own
death certificates. One has seen other letters sent to people who are more
than 80 years old, asking them to produce letters from doctors indicating
if they still qualify for a pension. What kind of logic is that? One would
have thought that one needs one's pension even more as one gets older. The
only way to explain these absurd but shocking happenings is to accept that
there are people in that department who just pull out the pre-printed
letters and mark any box without applying their minds. In the process they
are causing a lot of pain, embarrassment, suffering and anguish to our
senior citizens.

Children under seven years of parents whose monthly income is below a
certain sum are entitled to a child support grant from the Welfare
department. There is a clear legal provision for it. Yet mothers of such
children often have a hard time accessing the grants. Many a mother out
there would throw up her hands in despair because the magistrates' courts
that are supposed to help her get maintenance from the father of her
children are not doing their job.

That, of course, is not exactly a matter for the Welfare department. It is
a matter for the Justice department, except that the failure to get
maintenance forces the mother to seek help from the Welfare department. And
if the Welfare department is not responsive, as is often the case, all
sorts of possibilities open up - child malnutrition, prostitution, street
children, substance abuse and so forth.
We would also like to know why, six years after the end of apartheid,
Africans are the only people who must still queue for their pensions at the
paypoints? If other racial components of our population get their pensions
in a dignified and humane way, why is it that the same methods are not used
for the Africans?

Considering the fact that the Constitution outlaws discrimination on the
basis of gender or sex and the recently passed Promotion of Equality and
Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act does the same; that older men are
hit very hard by joblessness in this era of high unemployment; and also
bearing in mind the fact that, in general, men die younger than women, why
is it that women qualify for old age pension at the age of 60 while men
have to wait until they are 65 years? Is it any wonder then that there are
more women than men in pension queues? When is the discrimination against
men on the basis of their sex going to end? [Interjections.]

The legal framework and finances to deliver a social welfare service
exists. The problems revolve around lack of diligence, application,
compassion, efficiency and care on the part of officials in the Welfare
department. Perhaps the Welfare department should do something drastic
about those of its officials whose hearts are made of stone. [Applause.]

Ms C M P RAMOTSAMAI: Mr Chairperson, hon Deputy President, hon Ministers,
fellow members, the Minister for Welfare and Population Development,
through his detailed speech, has managed to set the record straight about
misgivings on a number of issues in the Welfare department, particularly on
the issue of the poverty relief fund. The ANC prides itself on looking
after its people in South Africa, with emphasis on the poor.

Today all members serving in the portfolio committee have been surprised by
the attitude of Mrs Cupido. Mrs Cupido actually says nothing in the
meetings. In fact, the utterances she made recently to the media ...
[Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Are you rising on a point of order,
hon member?

Mrs P W CUPIDO: Mr Chairperson, on a point of order: I only quoted from the
director-general's report. [Interjections.]
The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! That is not a point of order.
Continue, hon member.

Ms C M P RAMOTSAMAI: Chairperson, the hon Mrs Cupido has surprised most of
us in the committee today. She hardly says anything in the committee
meetings. In fact, the utterances she made to the media recently - and
again in her speech earlier today - are clearly not her views, but those of
her masters. The ignorance she displayed during the briefing by the IDT
last Friday, was seriously embarrassing. Today she misrepresented the IDT.
The IDT did not actually say the projects she was speaking about never
existed. They said those projects did exist, but did not meet the criteria.
[Laughter.]

At that meeting she demanded a document from the IDT officials, not even
realising that the same document she was reading was the one she was asking
for from the IDT. [Laughter.] In fact, her history in the welfare committee
over the past five years leaves much to be desired. I doubt whether the DP
applied their minds when they grabbed her to join them. [Interjections.] I
know that she joined the DP because her husband did not make it onto the
New NP list. [Laughter.] Thereafter she had to join the shorter queue of
the DP. She was harassed by the New NP. She continues to say that the ANC
will not stop struggling as long as our people are discriminated against by
sex, race and class. Who is discriminated against? Who was discriminated
against? Was the DP ever discriminated against?

HON MEMBERS: No!

Ms C M P RAMOTSAMAI: Mr Chairperson, who is she referring to? Or is she
just singing a song! [Laughter.] Recently, the DP reinforced Mrs Cupido in
the committee with the hon Mr Singh, who is just as hopeless in that
committee. [Laughter.] They both discovered that they cannot reduce this
hard-working committee to petty politics and DP media propaganda. Mrs
Cupido mentioned that a state of emergency should be introduced within the
department. What did she do when Abe Williams was in the New NP and was
actually embezzling the funds? [Laughter.] [Applause.]

The hon Mrs Cupido should be ashamed of herself. For instance, the
Barrydale brick-making project in this province of hers, through the
poverty eradication programme, has transformed two people operating a
small, manual machine producing only 200 bricks per day to a major local
development. From the funds allocated to these people, they bought two
modern brick-making machines and are employing 37 people with 150 members
benefiting directly from this project. This brickmaking is now linked to a
local development which is responsible for building 140 low-cost houses, 30
houses for farm workers and 95 water-borne toilets.

I just want to quote Mr Van Jaarsveld. He said: ``You failed! You failed!
You failed!'' His voice echoes the excitement about the failure, which
would not have been if the present Government had not started from no
foundation at all. This department is still in a process of rectifying the
mess made by his party in the past. [Applause.]

The only concern the hon member has on the child support grant is age. The
hon member must remember that the previous state maintenance grant, under
the NP rule, reached only 300 000 by 1996, and only the Western Cape
children were benefiting. Contrary to that, the child support grant, in
only three years, had already reached 273 000 beneficiaries nationally, by
February 2000.

During the briefings by the Department of Welfare, it was clear that there
were good policies, good plans and good intentions, but we do agree that
shortcomings exist. Corrective measures have to be introduced. We call upon
the Minister, through his political leadership, to speed up the capacity-
building of personnel in the department. And I believe the Minister has
already begun to do that. I am not going to mention what he has done,
because he actually, in a detailed manner, was able to do that.

Concerning Mrs Southgate's utterances on unspent money, I think, they were
actually malicious. The only thing that I can say to her is that she does
not listen. Facts have been given here about that unspent money, and
because she had prepared that speech, she continued to talk about unspent
money when that was actually explained. [Laughter.]

To the hon Patricia de Lille, whom we have never seen in the committee, I
do not know where she gets her facts from. [Laughter.] I am appealing to
the member to attend the meetings in order to see what has been discussed
if she is interested in welfare. It is not a matter of just coming to make
statements here without actually participating in the committee.
[Laughter.]

We are positive that we are going to overcome these teething problems.
Today, as the ANC Government, we have managed to get where we are through
the support of the people. The people vote for us because we are working
for the people and we are interested in the poor.

I want to say to the IDT that this department should make use of the IDT
because we commend the good work that they have done, and we think that
they can be used effectively in order for the department to pay more
attention to welfare work and concentrate on other areas which are more
important. As the ANC, we support the budget. [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR WELFARE AND POPULATION DEVELOPMENT: Mr Chairperson, I
think most of the issues that I wanted to raise have been answered by most
of the members here. So, I will not continue to bore this House by
answering some of the questions that were uncalled for, simply because some
members, specifically from the opposition side, are not prepared to listen
or to participate in the work of the portfolio committee. [Interjections.]

It is actually as the hon Ms Ramotsamai has just said. In all that has been
happening in the portfolio committee, there has been very little
contribution from the DP as a whole. [Interjections.] Yes, I do. I listen
and I come up to it. So the issue that arises is: If they cannot contribute
on that platform, why do they come and use this one? What contribution are
they making to alleviating the plight of the poor in this country? It is
simply because, Mrs Stupido wanted to make use of the television more than
anything else. [Laughter.] Is it Stupido? Is she Mrs Stupido or what?
[Laughter.] I am sorry about the name. But I think, in future, she should
make use of the information that is made available to the portfolio
committee. And I think it has been made available many times. The IDT had
to come here and spend three whole hours explaining each and every penny
that has been spent and that is still to be spent. Unfortunately, Mrs
Cupido was not prepared to listen to that. I do not know whether I should
continue to answer her questions.

HON MEMBERS: No!

The MINISTER: I do not think so. [Laughter.] I really do not think so,
because all those questions have been answered here by all the members who
spoke in this House. I think I would really appeal to the DP, when it
recruits members from other parties, to always try to recruit the best ...
[Laughter] [Applause] ... and not people who are about to be thrown away.
And the representatives of the DP in this debate have not been very
exemplary at all. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, let us give the Minister
time to reply. You have had your chance.

The MINISTER: Mr Chairperson, I think they have not been exemplary at all.
I think what Ms Ramotsamai has just said is quite clear. They do not
participate in the portfolio committee at all. They keep quiet and then
somebody from the DP writes speeches for them, and they come and shout
here. Really, we cannot allow such a situation. That member is also paid,
just like me and others. In principle, she should do her work, and should
listen. [Interjections.]

She is only using outdated information. She did not listen to what Ms Lulu
Gwagwa said to the portfolio committee last week. [Interjections.] I have
all the information. I do not think I should continue, but I think that she
has been answered by Ms Ramotsamai and Mr Mike Masutha, on almost all the
issues that have been raised here.
Mrs P W CUPIDO: You lied to the ... [Interjections.]

The MINISTER: I would like to take this opportunity to thank all the other
members of the portfolio committee for their contribution to this debate.
[Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member Mrs Cupido, I heard you
saying that the Minister lied. Could you withdraw that word, please.
[Interjections.]

Mrs P W CUPIDO: Mr Chair, I really quoted from the Auditor-General's report
... [Interjections] ... and from the IDI's report, and I can prove that to
you. It will be incorrect if I withdraw. [Interjections.] [Laughter.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Mrs Cupido, I heard you clearly
saying that the Minister lied to the ... [Interjections.]

Mrs P W CUPIDO: But the Minister also indicated that I lied.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Mrs Cupido, I am ruling. Could you
please withdraw.
Mrs P W CUPIDO: Mr Chairperson, I withdraw. [Interjections.]

The MINISTER: I think I will appeal to hon Stupido and to ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon Minister, the correct surname of
the member is Mrs Cupido. [Laughter.]
 
The MINISTER: Oh, Mrs Cupido! [Laughter.] I think I would like to thank all
the members who participated in this debate ... [Interjections.]

Ms J A SEMPLE: Mr Chairperson, on a point of order: You have already
pointed out the probability of the Minister referring to the hon member as
Stupido. Could he please withdraw? [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! I have corrected the Minister and
asked him to pronounce the surname correctly, and he is definitely doing
that. That is not a point of order. Continue, hon Minister.

The MINISTER: Chairperson, I think I would advise the hon members of the DP
to read my speech and that of all the other members who have spoken, more
importantly that of the hom Mike Masutha, Ramotsamai and all the other
members who have spoken today. I think they have clearly answered all the
questions that have been raised. And if they are not satisfied, I am always
available for them to answer whatever questions they might have.

In so far as people like Mrs Southgate are concerned, I think those
questions have also been answered. And I am very surprised, being a member
of the ACDP, that she has not been able to acknowledge the role that has
been played by the churches in the field of social welfare in general.
[Interjections.] Honestly, she should, at least, have said that the
churches and the faith-based organisations are playing a role, and I think
she should acknowledge that beyond any reasonable doubt.

I think we should trust one another in this debate. It should be based on
trust and openness, not on using this platform for party-political purposes
as such. We have to work together. It is quite obvious that Government
alone cannot work and network with the rest of society in general. We need
the participation of NGOs, the faith-based organisations and the private
sector in order to cure some of the ills of our society. I think when we in
the ANC say ``A better life for all'', we mean the participation of each
and every individual and the participation of each and every organisation
in making that life better for all our people.

I would like to agree with the way in which Dr Jassat contributed in this
debate in so far as clearing up the minds of our people generally - and
that of the members themselves - with regard to Aids. And I want to thank
all the other members, eg the hon Saloojee, the hon Mrs Mars, the hon B
Mbulawa, the hon Mrs Tshivhase, the hon Prof Mbadi, the hon Ms Kasienyane,
the hon M Masutha, the hon X Makasi, the hon Miss Rajbally and the hon Mr
Mangena.

I think the hon Mr Mangena is right: we need - in fact the department is
going through - an audit of all the facilities and infrastructure that is
available for social welfare in this country. We are not satisfied with
that infrastructure, and we will work towards ensuring that it is improved
as much as possible.

The issues that have been raised are quite clearly issues that we will
keep. On the question of the appointment of a chief financial officer, I
think I said - if the member had listened very carefully - that it was in
the process of being done, as agreed. There is a process that is going on
through which we are working towards filling the post. With regard to the
gaps in social assistance which hon Mrs Mars raised, we acknowledge that,
and I think we should work together to ensure that that gap is filled as
soon as possible.

On the question of the child support grant, of course, I said that in
general the increase had been more than 1000% in one year as such, and will
continue to rise. The ANC Deputy Chief Whip has told me that each and every
ANC member of this House is expected to register at least 100 children
every month for the child support grant. [Interjections.] I am sure the IFP
and all the other parties will do the same, as a minimum number. I am not
sure if the DP will do it, simply because they do not represent the poorest
of the poor at all. [Interjections.]

I am pleased that the members of this House share my concerns about the
capacity of the department. As I have indicated in my speech, one of the
corrective measures I have taken is to have a comprehensive review and
skills audit done of the department. This review has just been completed
and we are studying the recommendations. The vacant posts will be filled as
a matter of priority and training will be intensified.

From the responses of the hon members, it is clear that our initiatives are
making a difference. To create conditions that are enabling and to extend
these, we must be mindful that we need the full and active participation of
all members of communities, the private sector and Government to achieve
the goals of social development. That development is no development if it
is voiceless, if it does not have the participation of the poorest of the
poor, if it is rootless, and if it does not take into account our history.

Business suspended at 17:01 and resumed at 17:03.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, we now resume the
debate, but before we do so, can I advise the members that when you are
given a glass of water to drink, do not let the sound system drink it. You
are thirsty, not the system. [Laughter.]
The MINISTER: Chairperson, I was trying to say that we need to work
together as much as possible to ensure that our efforts bear fruit,
specifically for the poorest of the poor in this country. I think the
partnership and co-operation that we are building - specifically with civil
society through faith-based organisations and, more importantly,
nongovernmental organisations and the private sector - should be
strengthened as much as possible. We appeal to all members to participate
in that process to ensure that the lives of our people are improved as much
as possible.

We are aware of the shortage of resources. I think we should accept that
the resources are not enough - everybody knows that - but we should also
not play party-political games over that. We should ensure that our people
receive whatever is possible, and that the efforts that the department is
making should take into consideration hon members' support, so that we can
work together as much as possible. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 17:05.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                            MONDAY, 17 APRIL 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Minister in the Office of the President on 7 April 2000
         submitted a draft of the The National Youth Commission Amendment
         Bill, 2000, and a memorandum explaining the objects of the
         proposed legislation, to the Speaker and the Chairperson in terms
         of Joint Rule 159.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Standing Committee on Private Members' Legislative
     Proposals and Special Petitions on a Petition, dated 12 April 2000:


     The Standing Committee on Private Members' Legislative Proposals and
     Special Petitions, having considered the Special Petition of Ms H E
     Liebenberg, referred to it, reports as follows:


     1.     Ms Liebenberg's husband, who was in the employ of the then South
         African Railways and Harbours Administration for more than 40
         years, passed away in 1996.

     2.     She and her husband were both classified as "coloured" in terms
         of the Population Registration Act, 1950.


     3.     Her husband was a member of a pension fund for "non-whites",
         which did not provide benefits for surviving spouses.

     4.     Accordingly, no legislative authority exists whereby she can
         receive a widow's pension.

     5.     The Committee approached the Ministry of Public Enterprises who,
         through the Transnet Pension Fund, reported that the management of
         that fund identified the rule excluding dependants of black
         pensioners who retired before 1 April 1986 to be an anomaly and
         obtained approval from the Pension Fund's Board of Trustees on 25
         May 1999 to amend the rule in question.

     6.     The proposed amendment also provides that all current widows
         must be approached so that they can register a claim with the fund
         within a period of 12 months.

     7.     Should the amendment to the Transnet Pension Fund rules be
         approved, Ms Liebenberg could qualify to receive a gratuity as
         compensation for loss of income.

     8.     However, the amendment to the Transnet Pension Fund rules must,
         in terms of the Transnet Pension Fund Act, 1990, be approved by
         the Board of Trustees, the Managing Director of Transnet and the
         Minister of Public Enterprises, with the concurrence of the
         Minister of Finance.

     9.     The Committee therefore recommends that Ms Liebenberg be advised
         to approach the Fund and provide it with documentary evidence to
         substantiate her relationship with her deceased husband, so that
         her claim can be settled once the amendment to the rules has been
         effected.


     Report to be considered.

                           TUESDAY, 18 APRIL 2000

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
     Independent Development Trust (Main Fund) for 1997-98 [RP 182-99].
2.    The Minister of Finance:


     (1)    Rider Number one to the Financing Agreement between the
           Government of the Republic of South Africa and the European
           Community concerning Parliamentary Support Programme, to be
           tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (2)    Rider Number one to the Financing Agreement between the
           Government of the Republic of South Africa and the European
           Community concerning Policing in the Eastern Cape, to be tabled
           in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (3)    Rider Number One to the Financing Agreement between the
           Government of the Republic of South Africa and the European
           Community concerning Technical Support to the South African
           Department of Education, to be tabled in terms of section 231(3)
           of the Constitution, 1996.


     (4)    Rider Number One to the Financing Agreement between the
           Government of the Republic of South Africa and the European
           Community concerning Public Service Management Development, to
           be tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (5)    Rider Number One to the Financing Agreement between the
           Government of the Republic of South Africa and the European
           Community concerning the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, to
           be tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (6)    Rider Number One to the Financing Agreement between the
           Government of the Republic of South Africa and the European
           Community concerning the Cato Manor Development Programme, to be
           tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (7)    Rider Number One to the Financing Agreement between the
           Government of the Republic of South Africa and the European
           Community concerning Private Sector Development Programme, to be
           tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (8)    Rider Number One to the Financing Agreement between the
           Government of the Republic of South Africa and the European
           Community concerning FISCU, to be tabled in terms of section
           231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (9)    Rider Number Three to the Financing Agreement between the
           Government of the Republic of South Africa and the European
           Community concerning District Health System, to be tabled in
           terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (10)   Rider Number Three to the Financing Agreement between the
           Government of the Republic of South Africa and the European
           Community concerning Health Technical Support, to be tabled in
           terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (11)   Rider Number Two to the Financing Agreement between the
           Government of the Republic of South Africa and the European
           Community concerning Non-Grid Electrification of Rural Schools,
           to be tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
           1996.


     (12)   Rider Number Two to the Financing Agreement between the
           Government of the Republic of South Africa and the European
           Community concerning Technical Assistance Consultancy Support,
           to be tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
           1996.


     (13)   Rider Number Three to the Financing Agreement between the
           Government of the Republic of South Africa and the European
           Community concerning HIV/AIDS Programme, to be tabled in terms
           of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (14)   Rider Number Four to the Financing Agreement between the
           Government of the Republic of South Africa and the European
           Community concerning District Health System, to be tabled in
           terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (15)   Rider Number Four to the Financing Agreement between the
           Government of the Republic of South Africa and the European
           Community concerning Health Technical Support, to be tabled in
           terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (16)   Rider Number One to the Financing Agreement between the
           Government of the Republic of South Africa and the European
           Community concerning Public Health Sectoral Support Programme,
           to be tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
           1996.


     (17)   Rider Number Two to the Financing Agreement between the
           Government of the Republic of South Africa and the European
           Community concerning SADC Finance and Investment Research
           Programme, to be tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
           Constitution, 1996.


     (18)   Rider Number Two to the Financing Agreement between the
           Government of the Republic of South Africa and the European
           Community concerning Private Sector Development Programme: Small
           and Micro Enterprises, to be tabled in terms of section 231(3)
           of the Constitution, 1996.


     (19)   Financing Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
           South Africa and the European Community concerning Sector
           Support for Community Water Supply and Sanitation, to be tabled
           in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (20)   Agreement between the Government of Sweden and the Government of
           the Republic of South Africa on General Terms and Conditions for
           Development Co-operation, to be tabled in terms of section
           231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (21)   Amendment Agreement between the Government of the United States
           of America and the Government of the Republic of South Africa on
           Community-based Water Board Development Project, to be tabled in
           terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (22)   Amendment Agreement between the Government of the United States
           of America and the Government of the Republic of South Africa on
           Primary Education Results Package Programme: Department of
           Education, to be tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
           Constitution, 1996.

3.    The Minister of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology:


     (1)    Report of the Board of Control of the Woordeboek van die
           Afrikaanse Taal for 1998-99.


     (2)    Government Notice No 1034 published in the Government Gazette No
           20410 dated 3 September 1999, Withdrawal of Government Notice No
           644 of 19 April 1999 made in terms of section 5(1)(c) of the
           National Monuments Act, 1969 (Act No 28 of 1969).


     (3)    Government Notice No 1044 published in the Government Gazette No
           20410 dated 3 September 1999, Entries in the register of
           immovable conservation-worthy property in terms of section
           5(1)(cC) of the National Monuments Act, 1969 (Act No 28 of
           1969).


     (4)    Government Notice No 2063 published in the Government Gazette No
           20436 dated 10 September 1999, European Programme: Support for
           small, medium and micro enterprises in South Africa.


     (5)    Government Notice No 90 published in the Government Gazette No
           20458 dated 10 September 1999, Designation of Provincial
           Language Committee in the North West, made in terms of section
           8(8)(a) of the Pan South African Language Board Act, 1995 (Act
           No 59 of 1995).


     (6)    Government Notice No 92 published in the Government Gazette No
           20458 dated 10 September 1999, Designation of Provincial
           Language Committee in the Western Cape, made in terms of section
           8(8)(a) of the Pan South African Language Board Act, 1995 (Act
           No 59 of 1995).


     (7)    Government Notice No 91 published in the Government Gazette No
           20458 dated 10 September 1999, Publication of a decision in
           terms of section 11(7) of the Pan South African Language Board
           Act, 1995 (Act No 59 of 1995).
     (8)    Government Notice No 1125 published in the Government Gazette No
           20476 dated 23 September 1999, Registration of heraldic
           representations made in terms of section 10 of the Heraldry Act,
           1962 (Act No 18 of 1962).


     (9)    Government Notice No 97 published in the Government Gazette No
           20499 dated 1 October 1999, Designation of Khoi and San National
           Language Body, made in terms of section 8(8)(b) of the Pan South
           African Language Board Act, 1995 (Act No 59 of 1995).


     (10)   Government Notice No 98 published in the Government Gazette No
           20499 dated 1 October 1999, Normative Framework for the
           recognition of Provincial Language Committees made in terms of
           the Pan South African Language Board Act, 1995 (Act No 59 of
           1995).


     (11)   Convention on the Means of Prohibition and Preventing the
           Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural
           Property, to be tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
           Constitution, 1996.


     (12)   Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention.


     (13)   Convention to the International Centre for the Study of the
           Preservation and Restoration of Cultural Property (ICCROM), to
           be tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (14)   Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention.

4.    The Minister of Trade and Industry:


     (1)    Constitution of the United Nations Industrial Development
         Organisation (UNIDO), to be tabled in terms of section 231(2) of
         the Constitution, 1996.

     (2)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Constitution.

