---
title: 'National Assembly - 19 April 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: APRIL
month_slug: Apr
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2000-04-19
---

WEDNESDAY, 19 APRIL 2000
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 15:03.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                     WELCOMING OF PRESIDENT OF BUNDESTAG

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, please take your seats. Before we proceed
with questions, I wish to recognise the presence, in our midst, of the
President of the Bundestag of Germany, the hon Wolfgang Thierse.
[Applause.]

You are welcome, sir, and we hope to develop closer links between ourselves
and your parliament.

QUESTIONS AND REPLIES - see that book.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I hereby give notice
that on the next sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the
ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the reported killings in Zimbabwe of white farmers and killings
       of black supporters of the Movement for Democratic Change;

  (2) believes that violence will erode the hard-won freedom of the people
       of Zimbabwe;

  (3) unequivocally condemns the destruction of life and property in
       Zimbabwe; and

  (4) calls on all those who are involved to resolve their differences
       through meaningful and peaceful dialogue.

[Applause.]
Mrs P W CUPIDO: Mr Chair, I give notice that on the next sitting day of the
House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with concern that Government has effectively spent only 40% of
       the R203 million allocated for poverty relief in the previous
       financial year;

  (2) notes that the child-care grant of R100 per month is totally
       inadequate;

  (3) notes that R300 million is to be spent on a new luxury jet for the
       President while poverty is rife on the ground;

  (4) records the fact that the Leader of the Opposition is in Orange Farm,
       Gauteng, today at the Tebogo Home for Mentally and Physically
       Handicapped Children and through the generosity of the private sector
       has arranged to hand over more than 20 wheelchairs to them, while
       Government and its national and provincial welfare departments have
       done absolutely nothing to improve the cruel and inhuman conditions
       under which the children and staff at that home live;

  (5) notes that I visited this home in December 1999 ...

[Interjections.] [Time expired.]

Mr M F CASSIM: Mr Chairman, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) warmly congratulates Nombulelo Mazibuko of Guguletu, Cape Town, on
       being chosen from 15 finalists from all over Africa as the M-Net Face
       of Africa;

  (2) notes that South Africa rejoices with her and expects her to be a
       worthy ambassador of our country;

  (3) notes that only a few of our national newspapers celebrated this
       achievement on their front pages; and

  (4) congratulates The Citizen and any other newspaper which accorded
       Nombulelo Mazibuko the singular honour she so richly deserves.
[Applause.]

Ms T R MODISE: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the contradictory and opportunistic position adopted by the DP
       regarding the Government's proposal to buy a jet for an estimated
       R300 million to be used by the President;

  (2) notes that the DP and other parties were part of the deliberations
       and adoption by the House two years ago of the Defence Review, whose
       force design included the aspect of VIP transport for the executive;

  (3) recognises that the jet, with its up-to-date technology, will make it
       possible for the President to be contacted in-flight during any
       journey abroad and that it would cut out refuel stops; and

  (4) reiterates its support for the buying of the jet to ensure that the
       President effectively carries out all his duties.

[Applause.]

Mnr F BEUKMAN: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag namens die Nuwe NP sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) sy ernstige kommer uitspreek omdat die openbare vergadering vir
       rolspelers oor die voorgestelde munisipale wyke in die Kaapse Unistad
       gister nie kon plaasvind nie weens 'n gebrek aan bestuur deur die
       Munisipale Afbakeningsraad;

  (2) dit betreur dat geen verteenwoordiger van die Munisipale
       Afbakeningsraad by die vergadering opgedaag het nie;

  (3) dit betreur dat tyd en koste van raadslede, lede van
       belastingbetalersverenigings en lede van die Parlement onnodige
       verspil is en duur advertensies in die dagblaaie dus 'n nuttelose
       uitgawe was;
  (4) 'n beroep op die Minister vir Provinsiale en Plaaslike Regering doen
       om dringend met die Munisipale Afbakeningsraad in verbinding te tree
       om 'n behoorlike en deursigtige openbare konsultasieproses oor
       wyksafbakening in die Kaapse metropool te verseker;

  (5) die Ouditeur-Generaal versoek om ondersoek te doen na die aanstelling
       van Xhakhaza Development Consultants deur die Munisipale
       Afbakeningsraad om die betrokke vergadering te reël; en

  (6) die Ouditeur-Generaal versoek om vas te stel ...

[Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr F BEUKMAN: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) expresses its serious concern that the public meeting for role-
       players on the proposed municipal wards in the Cape Unicity could not
       take place yesterday as a result of a lack of management on the part
       of the Municipal Demarcation Board;

  (2) regrets that no representative from the Municipal Demarcation Board
       arrived at the meeting;

  (3) regrets that the time and money of councillors, members of
       ratepayers' associations and members of Parliament were needlessly
       wasted and that expensive advertisements in the daily newspapers were
       therefore an unnecessary expense;

  (4) appeals to the Minister for Provincial and Local Government urgently
       to contact the Municipal Demarcation Board to ensure a proper and
       transparent process of public consultation on ward demarcation in the
       Cape Metropole;

  (5) requests the Auditor-General to investigate the appointment by the
       Municipal Demarcation Board of Xhakhaza Development Consultants to
       arrange the meeting in question; and
  (6) requests the Auditor-General to ascertain ...

[Time expired.]]

Dr G W KOORNHOF: Mr Chairperson, I give notice that at the next sitting of
the House I will move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with concern the continuously deteriorating situation in
       Zimbabwe with regard to land invasions, coupled with increasing
       political tensions within that country;

  (2) acknowledges that this untenable situation in Zimbabwe has already
       resulted in a negative mood in financial markets, including those in
       South Africa;

  (3) urges President Mugabe, as the custodian of his country's
       constitution, to exercise his moral and legal duty to ensure that law
       and order prevail in Zimbabwe, since it is his duty to prevent any
       further loss of life in his country with regard to this issue;
  (4) urges all the parties involved in the Zimbabwean situation to
       negotiate anew measures and resources to implement the land reform
       programme; and

  (5) emphasises that priority number one is to defuse this situation as a
       matter of urgency, and thereafter to focus on free and fair
       elections, with a result accepted by all, and then to build the
       economy of Zimbabwe.

[Time expired.]

Ms C M P RAMOTSAMAI: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with grave concern the killing of Cape Town bus driver Luvo
       Patrick Ganganu and the disruption of public transport in the
       townships of Cape Town, caused by certain taxi associations;

  (2) recognises the consistent engagement of the ANC in the Western Cape
       in seeking solutions to conflict in the transport sector in the face
       of the inactivity and passivity of the provincial authorities;

  (3) expresses its condolences to the family, loved ones and colleagues of
       the murdered driver;

  (4) calls upon taxi associations to desist from illegal activity and
       encourages them to abide by the laws of the country and listen to the
       wishes of commuters; and

  (5) welcomes yesterday's move by the authorities in the Western Cape to
       end their silence and inaction and act decisively to ensure that taxi
       operators obey the law.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chairman, I give notice that at the next sitting of the House
I shall move on behalf of the ACDP:


  That the House -


  (1) acknowledges that our law currently allows murderers to use drug and
       alcohol abuse as an excuse for their actions and that they thereby
       never have to face any consequences;

  (2) calls on more judges to boldly and firmly stand against injustice, as
       did Judge Hlope in his ruling in the Western Cape on 5 April when he
       sentenced a drug addict to 36 years' imprisonment for the murder of
       his two friends;

  (3) calls on the courts not to override the overwhelming evidence of a
       calculated cold-blooded murder by Jared Jackson, alleged murderer of
       Jodi Williams, by finding him both unfit to stand trial and not in
       control of his mind at the time of the murder; and

  (4) calls on the courts to protect other vulnerable 18-year-olds from
       Jackson and other drug dealers and conment by seeing that justice is
       served and that criminals face the consequences and pay the price.

[Time expired.]

Gen C L VILJOEN: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I will move on behalf of the FF:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with indignation the shameful and lunatic actions comprised of
       racial attacks with weapons, the burning down of houses and farms and
       crude intimidation by so-called Zimbabwean veterans against fellow
       Zimbabweans;

  (2) is alarmed and dismayed that a member of state in our region, with
       the full support of the head of state, could allow the large-scale
       racial violation of the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights
       and that he is allowed to get away with it;

  (3) consequently resolves that the South African Government, as a member
       state, will without delay lay a charge against Zimbabwe at the
       Organisation of African Unity for contravening the said charter; and

  (4) further resolves that the South African Government should consider
       the use of all possible means to bring pressure to bear on the
       government of Zimbabwe to end the instability before it flows across
       the borders into the entire region.

Mr M MPEHLE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the strong leadership by the Government as a whole and in
       particular President Thabo Mbeki in the fight against the HIV/Aids
       pandemic;

  (2) notes that a number of initiatives have been taken to curtail the
       pandemic, including the establishment of the Partnership against
       Aids, the formation of the SA National Aids Council, our
       participation in international fora, former President Mandela acting
       as patron of UNAids, the previous Minister of Health's election as
       vice-president of UNAids and strong leadership by Minister Tshabalala-
       Msimang on health issues in SADC;

  (3) notes the multisectoral approach to the pandemic as evidenced by the
       budgetary allocations to all line departments;

  (4) notes and congratulates the Government on its continuing commitment
       to stem the tide, as manifested by the 0,4% drop in the incidence of
       HIV/Aids; and

  (5) calls on the pharmaceutical industry to lower its prices on
       pharmaceuticals, to withdraw its court action on the Medicines and
       Related Substances Control Amendment Act and to provide voluntary
       licenses to the Government for the local production of
       pharmaceuticals at cost-productive levels.

[Applause.]

Mr M WATERS: Mr Chairman, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  with concern the increasing attacks and murders in Zimbabwe on
           supporters of opposition parties and white farmers;

       (b)  that the High Commission in Harare closes its doors at 09:00
           owing to queues of more than 700 people applying for visas; and

       (c)  that the president of Zimbabwe has deemed certain segments of
           the population as enemies; and


  (2) calls on the Minister of Home Affairs immediately to -


       (a)  invoke section 35 of the Refugees Act which allows the Minister
           to grant automatic refugee status to any group or category of
           persons who qualify for refugee status by a notice in the
           Gazette;

       (b)  ensure that the necessary arrangements are made to accommodate
           the anticipated refugees; and

       (c)  deploy additional staff to the High Commission in Harare to help
           with the increased workload.

Mrs I MARS: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) welcomes the commitment made by the World Bank president, James
       Wolfensohn, that ``There will be no limits to the funds available to
       fight HIV/Aids in the developing world''; and

  (2) expresses its fervent wish that this commitment translates into
       action and encourages our Government to ensure that HIV/Aids
       sufferers gain access to available drugs as soon as possible.

Mr R K SEPTEMBER: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the UN's finding that the world's major commercial fisheries
       are in decline, 40% of agricultural land is degraded and water
       scarcity may soon limit economic development globally;

  (2) further notes that 80% of grasslands are affected by soil
       degradation, fishing fleets are 40% larger that the oceans can
       sustain, 20% of drylands are in danger of becoming deserts and 58% of
       coral reefs are endangered by human activity;

  (3) acknowledges that the mismanagement of our planet has already
       resulted in thousands of deaths, millions of people being left
       homeless after natural disasters and extensive damage being caused to
       international economic activity; and

  (4) calls on all governments, especially in SADC countries, to ensure
       that proper laws and regulatory structures are put in place to
       protect the earth for future generations.

Mr S SIMMONS: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the New NP:
  That the House -


  (1) is appalled at the continuous, escalating conflict between a taxi
       faction serving Khayelitsha on the Cape Flats in Cape Town and the
       Golden Arrow Bus Company;

  (2) is disgusted at the recent death of a bus driver who was shot dead on
       Saturday, 15 April 2000, whilst performing his duties and also at the
       slinging of a petrol bomb at a bus;

  (3) is aware that the conflict between taxis and bus companies has been
       coming on for some time and that the recent actions of a certain taxi
       faction clearly indicate civil disobedience;

  (4) denounces violence as a method of solving problems and believes that
       the principle of ``live and let live'' should be applied in the
       present situation;

  (5) calls on all role-players to get together to find a suitable solution
       to the existing problems; and

  (6) calls on the authorities to act firmly against any taxi drivers or
       associations that take the law into their own hands.

                      RETIREMENT OF MS L A ABRAHAMS, MP

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move the draft
resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:


  That the House -


  (1) noting that Ms Liz "Nana" Abrahams is retiring from Parliament this
       month, and today is her last day in the Chamber;

  (2) recognises Ms Abrahams' long and rich history of involvement and
       commitment to the struggle for a democratic, non-racial and non-
       sexist society in our country;

  (3) acknowledges that she served this new democratic Parliament with
       dignity and dedication; and

  (4) expresses its sincere appreciation to Ms Abrahams for her outstanding
       contribution and wishes her a peaceful and restful period during her
       well-deserved retirement.

Applause.

Agreed to.

                  CALL FOR SAFE TRAVEL DURING EASTER PERIOD

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move the draft
resolution as printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that millions of Christians will, during the weekend,
       commemorate the death and celebrate the resurrection of Jesus Christ;


  (2) recognises that there will be long queues of traffic to and from
       areas of commemoration and celebration;

  (3) calls on drivers to observe traffic rules and to drive carefully; and

  (4) wishes everyone a happy Easter and a safe journey.


       Arrive Alive! Do not speed! Do not drink and drive! God bless all!

[Applause.]

Agreed to.

              ABSENCE OF MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY DURING
                                QUESTION TIME

                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, the next item on the Order Paper is the
subject for discussion. However, before I call upon the Deputy President, I
would like to say the following. As I have said, I did communicate with the
Minister of Minerals and Energy and have received a letter which I will
read to you.

The Minister wishes to convey her humblest apologies, and she then explains
her absence and that of the Deputy Minister. She says that the trip abroad
on which she is was planned in December and has been postponed twice. In
the light of the increase in the petrol price and the need to co-ordinate
and co-operate with other countries which also seek to find a solution to
the problem of the high petrol price, the trip could not be postponed
further. The formation of the state oil company, through the merger of
Soekor and Mossgas, is imminent and, therefore, it became critical that the
Minister familiarise herself with a successful oil company such as
Petrolux.

South Africa is about to introduce gas into the South African economy. The
Deputy Minister is attending a conference that is dealing with some of the
regulatory matters that they intend to raise with the Cabinet, and then put
before Parliament through a gas Bill. It was unforeseeable that the Deputy
Minister would not be able to attend and, once again, she sends sincere
apologies to the House. It is signed on behalf of the Minister of Minerals
and Energy, Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka. So that is the apology to the House,
and the explanation that we have received for the Ministers' absence.

Mr K M ANDREW: Madam Speaker, may I just draw your attention to a problem
that we have. One of the Ministers, the Minister of Environmental Affairs
and Tourism, was not present, probably for a good reason, and the Minister
of Finance is not present, again for a good reason. In each of these cases,
the last occasion that we put oral questions to those Ministers was on 15
March this year. The next occasion that we will have to ask any of those
Ministers who are not present oral questions is in June this year.
[Interjections.] I would ask that this be looked at, because it is clearly
unsatisfactory in terms of our constitutional duty to monitor, call to
account and scrutinise Ministers' performances. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Thank you, Mr Andrew. I would remind you - I do not
think you were at the meeting, but your representatives were - that at the
meeting of the Programme Committee, when we actually discussed this, we
looked at it in the light of the President answering questions as soon as
we come back and we then discussed what we should do. So this matter was
looked at. If there is a view that it was not satisfactorily answered, I am
sure we can look at it again at the next meeting of the Programme
Committee. I think the point may be valid, but it was discussed and agreed
to by all parties.

I should indicate that with regard to the Minister of Environmental Affairs
and Tourism - and I apologise that I did not explain - there was an
unplanned summit meeting with President Chissano this morning, and the
Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism phoned to indicate that he
was held up there and conveyed his apologies to me. As I say, my apologies
to the House that I did not explain that. [Interjections.] I am providing
you with the information I was given.

              PRESIDENT'S APPARENT REFUSAL TO ACCEPT MAINSTREAM
                           SCIENTIFIC VIEW ON AIDS

                          (Subject for Discussion)

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Speaker, as hon members are aware, there are
reports which indicate that sub-Saharan Africa accounts for two thirds of
the world's incidence of HIV/Aids. It has also been reported that millions
of Africans have died of Aids, with even larger numbers destined to die. It
is within this context that we consider today's debate to be very
important. This, indeed, reflects the seriousness with which we regard this
topic. It is, however, regrettable that the manner in which the topic is
phrased is based on wrong assumptions and not on facts.

Neither the President not the rest of our Government has made any
determination, whatsoever, that would prejudge the conclusions of whatever
scientific investigation is happening on HIV/Aids. Accordingly, at no point
has the President said that he challenges the view that HIV causes Aids or
the contrary. All he said is that there are many issues that are in
contention with regard to the matter, and that we need to hear what all the
scientists say to ensure that we respond correctly to the frightening and
pressing challenge of HIV/Aids.

The President, as the head of state, needs to take informed decisions on
all questions that affect the lives of all our people. He is adopting this
position with respect to the matter of HIV/Aids. During the last decade and
a half, and more, a heated debate amongst scientists and others, relating
to this question, has been going on. As the President said in his address
to the NCOP last year, a lot of literature has been generated by this
debate. We reiterate his challenge to hon members to acquaint themselves
with that literature.

As part of Government's effort to respond to this catastrophe currently, we
decided to familiarise ourselves, as extensively as possible, with all
matters relating to this pandemic. We came to the conclusion that no
scientist or group of scientists can claim a monopoly on all knowledge
relating to or regarding this particular matter.

Our view is that it is fundamentally wrong to accept the notion that
established mainstream scientific truths must not be questioned. All views
on HIV/Aids should be interrogated as part of the process of scientific
inquiry and as an attempt to find answers that will enable us to prevail
over this disease.

We should not, and we will not, leave any stone unturned, even if this
means including the views of the so-called dissidents. It should be
remembered that throughout the years, alternative arguments were defined as
dissident views, sometimes even as heresy. However, in the fullness of
time, those views were often proved to be scientifically correct.

In Europe in the 17th century, the mainstream scientific view was that the
sun moved around the earth. An Italian scientist, Galileo, had a different
view and believed that the earth moved around the sun. However, his views
were considered to be so threatening to the scientific establishment that
he was forced to publicly recant. As we all know today, he was right, and
they were wrong.

An HON MEMBER: It was his job!

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Certainly!

In the history of science, and in particular the history of medical
science, there are other examples where solutions were found to difficult
challenges as a result of robust scientific debate between conventional and
alternative views. This House, which is based on the fundamental principle
of the right to differ and to express a different opinion, ought not to
balk at the idea that the hon the President is asking scientists to behave
as scientists.
I would like to refer to a letter written to the hon the President by ACTUP
San Francisco, one of the HIV/Aids NGOs in the United States. They state
that their organisation has been denied the opportunity to exhibit at the
13th International Aids Conference hosted by South Africa. In their letter
to the hon the President they say, and I quote:


  For the past decade in San Francisco, we have witnessed the destruction
  of human life caused by Aids drugs. We hoped, by exhibiting at the
  conference, we would warn participants to prevent a similar catastrophe
  from occurring in their countries. Unfortunately, our voice has been
  silenced by organisers who have, ironically, chosen the theme of ``Break
  the Silence''.

What they are saying is that they are committed to open scientific debate
and the free exchange of ideas.

The ANC's political programme is the mainstream political view in this
country. However, it would be wrong in the extreme to brand, and therefore
shut out, all other political programmes as dissident views. The DP is a
minority party that represents less than 10% of the voters of our country,
but this party, like all other minority parties in this House, has a
programme that appeals to some South Africans. They have a right,
therefore, to have their views represented and heard. This fundamental
right is indeed enshrined in our Constitution.

Broadening the debate on HIV/Aids has not stopped Government from
addressing the pandemic in accordance with the mainstream scientific view.
All existing programmes are continuing and new ones are being developed. A
ministerial task force against HIV/Aids, chaired by the Deputy President,
has been established and meets monthly. We have also established the SA
National Aids Council or Sanac, which also meets monthly and is chaired by
the Deputy President. This forum brings together the Government and civil
society.

Sectors that are represented in Sanac include the youth, women, business,
labour unions, religious communities, traditional leaders, traditional
healers, people living with HIV, NGOs, the hospitality sector, sports,
local government, national Government Ministers and the media. Sanac's
technical task teams have been appointed to address the following priority
areas: firstly, prevention; secondly, treatment, care and support; thirdly,
research, monitoring and surveillance; fourthly, legal and human rights;
and fifthly, social mobilisation, information, education and communication.

We are doing everything we can to increase the level of public awareness
about the importance of safe sex and the use of condoms. Whatever the
outcome of the research by scientists for answers to the pandemic, clearly,
sexually transmitted diseases are an important part of the elements which
result in immune deficiency and, therefore, the inability of the human body
to cope with various infections. Work is also being done on the development
of a vaccine.

As members will recall, we presented to Parliament this year a dedicated
budget to fight HIV/Aids, and trust that this House will support the
allocation of these funds to fight this pandemic. Indeed, we are doing all
we can in the fight against Aids. But suppose we discover, as Galileo did,
that the so-called mainstream scientific view is incorrect? Suppose there
were even a 1% chance of the solution lying elsewhere? Surely the
consequences for all of us would be catastrophic.
As a country, we cannot afford to overlook this possibility. In the light
of this, an international panel of scientists will be convened next month.
It will be expected to openly and candidly discuss all the matters in
contention. This panel includes all points of view in the debate, and is
constituted of the most eminent world scientists who can help to ensure
that we understand HIV/Aids correctly and, therefore, respond to it
correctly.

Unfortunately, this has earned us the anger of some, including scientists,
who argue that through this process we seek to give legitimacy to dangerous
and discredited scientists. They claim that all scientific questions
relating to HIV/Aids were resolved in 1984. Needless to say, we do not
agree with the view that seeks to freeze science at a particular point in
time. Unlike Galileo, we are not in any way suggesting that it is a fact
that the prevailing mainstream scientific view is wrong. All we are saying
is that issues must be debated and all views considered.

Our ultimate goal is to save the lives of the many men, women and children
who are dying daily. We hope that hon members, regardless of political
affiliation, will understand the need for them to support the work that we
are doing on this important matter. This is not an issue that we should be
party politicking about.

Finally, as members of this House, we should consider ourselves as
activists against HIV/Aids and accordingly ensure that, in our activities
among the people, we further promote the campaign against HIV/Aids for the
benefit of our country and its entire people. [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker ...

Mr T M GONIWE: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. I appeal to you
to please give me time to make my point.

The SPEAKER: It will have to be very short and sharp.

Mr T M GONIWE: Madam Speaker, while we have been discussing this matter of
grave national importance, the very speaker who initiated the debate has
not had on an Aids awareness ribbon.

The SPEAKER: Hon member, thank you for that point of order. [Laughter.] It
is not a point of order, but it is a point. [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, that is quite the most pathetic point of order
I have ever heard.

The matter of public importance today is clearly aimed at the President's
apparent refusal to accept the mainstream scientific view that HIV causes
Aids. It is, indeed, a pity that he is not here today. However, I want to
thank the Deputy President very much indeed for taking this debate, and for
participating in it today.

On 17 March David Rasnick, the dissident Aids researcher, released an e-
mail in which he reported on a telephone conversation he had held with
President Mbeki on the subject of HIV/Aids. [Interjections.] Nothing wrong
with that. In the e-mail he states:


  Mbeki is good friends with Clinton, the prime minister of England and the
  German chancellor. He told me that he is going to write these heads of
  state and ask them to join his efforts to bring about an international
  discussion on Aids.

Today's edition of The Washington Post published the letter, dated 3 April,
that the President sent to various heads of state, including President
Clinton of the United States. The Deputy President today has really simply
repeated much that appears in that particular letter. [Interjections.] The
letter reveals that President Mbeki remains steadfast in his defence of the
Aids dissidents and their views, as the Deputy President has done again
today. Its tone and content constitute a serious lack of judgment on the
part of the President, which will further undermine South Africa's
international reputation and harm our efforts to combat Aids effectively.
[Interjections.]

In the letter President Mbeki makes the valid point that Aids in Africa is
a disease that exists on a scale unseen elsewhere in the world. This means
that we, as Africans, must develop and implement a response that is
effective in our context. There is surely no problem with this, and the hon
Mrs Kalyan will deal with elements of what that effective response needs to
be. However, the unfortunate and damaging aspects of the President's letter
needs to be discussed.

In the letter the President accuses his critics of an orchestrated campaign
of condemnation, of being in the ``frontline ... of intellectual
intimidation and terrorism'' and of acting out of ``religious fervour born
of a degree of fanaticism''. [Interjections.] He says:


  The day may not be far off when we will, once again, see books burnt and
  their authors immolated by fire by those who believe that they have a
  duty to conduct a holy crusade against the infidels.

[Interjections.] President Mbeki seems to have become so defensive on the
subject of Aids that he is placing at risk sound judgment and rational
thinking. The consequences for our international standing and reputation
can surely only be negative.

Despite what the hon Deputy President said today, we need to consider all
views relating to HIV/Aids. There is no doubt about it. Hon members must
accept that there is probably more information about HIV/Aids, other than
how to cure it, than about any other single disease known to humankind.
Billions of dollars annually go towards researching causes and cures. The
careers of many of the world's most talented medical scientists are devoted
to this disease.

The hon Deputy President talked about the sun moving around the earth.
Amongst the great wealth of knowledge we have on HIV/Aids, there is a tiny,
widely discredited fringe group that believes Aids does not exist.
[Interjections.] And I say to the Deputy President that this is no great
surprise. There are, after all, flat earthists who believe that it is
possible to fall off the edge of the world. Every theory has its sceptics,
but they are seldom taken seriously. What is surprising is that our
President is openly supporting these Aids sceptics.

The President, in his letter, poses three points which, for him, make
HIV/Aids ``a uniquely African catastrophe'' as opposed to the disease in
the West. [Interjections.] But this does not address the issue of whether
HIV causes or does not cause Aids. The evidence that it does is so
overwhelming that to question it is to place oneself in a scientific cul-de-
sac.

Aids is a testable phenomenon, one that has been tested many times, with
increasing validity. It is tested by scientists in laboratories and doctors
in hospitals who use credible, rigorous time-tested scientific methods.
These are the points that the President misses in his letter, and in his
insistence on dealing with these dissidents.

We are concerned that the reason President Mbeki and his loyal Health
Minister want this issue debated, is to obscure the truth that the problem
they face is essentially a political one. The issue is not about HIV/Aids,
but about what they are going to do to limit its spread. The issue is now
not about the success or otherwise of the scientific method, but about the
success of the political method. This Government has turned the issue into
a serious political one, with serious effects for this country, both
nationally and internationally.

This Government has failed dismally to date, and the failures are many:
Sarafina 2, which proved beyond doubt that throwing money at the problem
does not help at all; the Virodene saga, when, ironically enough, the same
President - who was the Deputy President at the time - was prepared to
entertain at length a small group of people who claimed to have found a
cure for Aids, but this obviously turned into a total scam and also led to
the firing of the chairman of the Medicines Control Council, which in
itself was a major blow to this country's medical profession, and perhaps
ultimately to the fight against HIV/Aids as well; castigating the
pharmaceutical industry in such a way that they became the villains of the
piece, rather than the potential heroes they might well prove to be in the
race to find a cure for HIV/Aids; and refusing to supply antiretroviral
drugs, even to pregnant women, despite the fact that prices of that are
hugely discounted, and regarded as cheap worldwide. The failures go on and
on.

But perhaps, worst of all, is this whole question of the connection between
HIV and Aids. To place the country's wellbeing into the hands of a few
dissidents, whom even the president of our own Medical Research Council has
indicated in the most recent Financial Mail - in an article which I believe
the Deputy President should read - are not welcome in this debate. He
states very pointedly what will happen if we do not heed these
implications, and I quote:


  ... history may judge us to have collaborated in the greatest genocide of
  our time.

  The dissidents with their theories, like the seasons, will come and go.
  When they are gone, we South Africans will still face the consequences of
  this unrelenting epidemic and the daunting challenges of the African
  renaissance.

I want to say to the Deputy President that for someone so committed to this
African renaissance, I sincerely hope that he will listen very carefully to
what his president of the Medical Research Council has said. [Applause.]

Dr A S NKOMO: Madam Speaker, Deputy President, we contend that Government
action is influenced by ANC policy, an ANC policy which forever seeks the
truth, and does not worship at the altars of transient calves.

In 1994 the ANC health plan came out with a policy position based on five
basic tenets, programming 10 mechanisms of implementation for an holistic
approach to the pandemic. I refer hon members to page 42 of the ANC health
plan. [Applause.] Already in 1988 the ANC participated with the frontline
states at the Maputo Conference in charting a course for the fight against
Aids.

We do recognise that most illnesses, including Aids, exhibit essential
traits which make for their identification, but they do subject themselves
in manifestation to the elements of geography, climate and social
conditions. Therefore we see the prevalence of a subtype c-variant of the
virus in Southern Africa. It is a subtype whose severity and rapid rate of
progression differs significantly from the strain found in the United
States.

What is the essence of this difference? Is it the strain itself? Is it the
difference in locale? Or is it the difference that one is in the First
World and the other one is in the Third World? Can we explain why more than
25% of the adults in Zimbabwe are HIV-positive, while in Madagascar there
are only 37 reported cases of Aids, and yet sexually transmitted diseases
are common in both countries? Can we explain why, in our country, the
subtype variant differs even amongst black and white?

These are questions begging for answers, certainly questions that are worth
asking if we are up to arming ourselves with effective and efficacious
responses. The result is that we have elicited the help of scientists, not
only of local pedigree, but also of wide-ranging international experience,
not to reinvent the wheel, but to reinforce our interventions both around
prevention strategies and treatment programmes. This is the core, the heart
of the matter.

Whilst there is a set of fixed conventional programmes which we are
implementing, so much still has to be done in order to come to terms with
the full meaning of the pandemic. Yet what do we hear from the hon member
Sandy Kalyan and Mike Ellis? They say to us: ``Do not think. Listen to us.
We know it all.'' This is the blissful chorus to which they dance and they
invite us to join in this clean-hands charade. Is this not reminiscent of
the censorship and jackboots of Vorster, Strijdom and the others before?
[Interjections.] Government is charged with a grave responsibility ...

The SPEAKER: Order! Mr Ellis, are you rising on a point of order?

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. May I point out
that the hon Mrs Kalyan has not yet spoken so the member cannot respond to
her speech.

The SPEAKER: Order! Thank you, but that is not a point of order. Please
proceed.

Dr A S NKOMO: Madam Speaker, she has syndicated various articles to various
newspapers which we read every day and she is going to repeat those
viewpoints this afternoon.

Government is charged with a grave responsibility to care for the
afflicted, and actively prevent and lower the rate of new incidences of the
disease. We enjoin people to join all progressive forces in finding new
qualitative levels of scientific enquiry, in plumbing new depths in
relation to the manufacture and cost of pharmaceuticals and vaccines.
Should we not challenge the big manufacturers to respond with such new
approaches as offering voluntary licensing of pharmaceutical agents so that
they may be produced cost-effectively in this country? Should they not
begin with persuading their allies to withdraw their court action against
the Medicines and Related Substances Control Act which is languishing in
the courts of this country? Why not join the call for the rights of
patients who submit themselves to trials, the results of which will benefit
all of humankind, including themselves? [Interjections.]

Government has not instructed Government-subsidised regulatory authorities
to ban the use of antiretrovirals. They are available to this day in the
private sector to those who can afford them. But what is strange about
this? Whenever legislative action has been taken to extend the availability
of the selfsame products to the public sector for all to benefit, it is the
same forces who have vehemently opposed and attempted to block such
efforts. They want to keep the prices high so that the profits of the
pharmaceutical industry should keep rising. [Interjections.]

While orthodoxies are challenged in order to extend the frontiers of access
to treatment against the pandemic, it is the same forces who cry wolf. Let
us pray that they are themselves not wolves in sheep's skin.
[Interjections.] What is being orchestrated here is that scientific
enquiry, which may challenge the profits of the pharmaceutical industry
into perhaps effective, homegrown, and therefore cheaper, cost-effective
treatment which will be discovered in this process, may in fact ruin the
basis upon which the profits of the multinational industries are based.
Precisely because there is this possibility, we are not surprised to hear
this chorus, this charade of ill-founded opposition. [Applause.]
We have here communication, which has been made available to us,
intercepted correspondence between presidents of countries, President Mbeki
and President Clinton. I do not know if this is not a breach of protocol.
Where I come from it is, but this is the level to which people are prepared
to sink in order to obfuscate and blur the real issues at hand. May the
people of South Africa cease to be used as guinea pigs ... [Interjections]
... for products which are effective and have been tested in the First
World but which may not necessarily be useful here. [Interjections.]

They do not want us to produce pharmaceutical agents which are relevant and
peculiar to our conditions here. They want these things to be exported to
Britain and the United States and come back at a cost which we cannot
afford. [Applause.] Is it not the same thing as what is happening in the
mines, where diamonds and gold are extracted by our own people in the
mines, and yet, when those products come back, the people cannot afford to
buy them?

What is happening today is that products will be produced here, processed
in the First World countries, and when they come back here, we will not be
able to afford them. The President asked this question and we contend that
this question should continue to be asked. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF ARTS, CULTURE, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Madam Speaker, I
think it is very important that we should have a sense of balance on this
issue. The President has not said that HIV does not cause Aids. He has
never said that. What he has said is that he wants to get as much
information as possible, so that the basis of decision-making on this
issue, which is so crucial and serious, is a sound one.

Let us take an example. About 4 million people are said to be living with
HIV in this country. If we were going to start giving them antiretrovirals,
it would cost the Health department about R223 billion. At the moment, they
only have R22 billion. Perhaps we are saying that only a certain group of
people will get this treatment, but not everyone. That is the only basis on
which we can do that. Otherwise, the country cannot afford it.
[Interjections.] No, that is nonsense! [Laughter.]

We are thus looking for ways that are meaningful, such as treating the
intercurrent infections and the opportunistic infections in those people,
which in itself costs a lot of money. Treating cryptococcal meningitis and
the TBs that are usually resistant to the general anti-TB drugs costs a lot
of money. And that is where our priority is - to help those people who have
been infected and to allow them to have sustainable lives through constant
medication.

If we are going to go for AZT in pregnancy, people seem to think that one
can just do it anyhow. One cannot. One needs very extensive infrastructure
if one is going to do this, because people must be hospitalised; and it
would also mean that every pregnant woman with HIV must have access. But
the tendency is that the cities can afford it and the rest of the country
cannot. We cannot discriminate when we give this drug intervention. It must
be available and affordable to everybody. Under the present circumstances,
it is impossible to achieve that.

I was at a meeting with the head of UNAids, and he said that they quite
accept that breast milk carries the virus, but, at the same time, they
cannot recommend formula feeding for these mothers, because most of them in
the developing world live in rural areas where water is not clean and the
children will die of diarrhoea anyway. Thus, they have decided that,
although they know that HIV is transmitted in breast milk, the mothers
should feed the babies. Now where is the logic in spending huge sums of
money giving AZT during pregnancy, only for the mother to go back home and
breast-feed. One immediately annuls whatever benefit the intervention would
have had.

It is issues like these that the President is asking us to look at
seriously and thoughtfully, and to find solutions that are applicable. We
should not just think of the urban areas, of the rich people, but what also
can apply right across the whole nation. Therefore, emphasising the
treatment of STDs, TB, fungal infections and so on, is what we need to
proceed with. We must also identify those interventions that will be
affordable but effective.

At this stage, we cannot even supply iron tablets and vitamins to every
pregnant women in this country. That is where we must begin. One needs to
support these pregnant women so that they have healthy children and their
immune systems are healthy. Why should we jump to implement expensive
interventions when we cannot even provide the basics? That is the nub of
the matter. [Applause.]

I have here some print-outs saying that the drug nevirapine causes serious
liver damage. If people are on nevirapine or AZT, they need to be
constantly monitored medically, because the complications themselves kill
people. So, as soon as one sees the elevation of a transaminase - the liver
enzymes and so on - one then immediately stops the treatment. Where is one
going to have that kind of medical supervision available out there in the
rural areas? We know that it is not there, and yet we are expected ...
[Interjections.] No, no. This is the whole essence of the approach which
says ... [Interjections.] No, dissidents are one element of the story here.
[Interjections.]

In 1974 ... [Interjections.]No. In 1960, Howard Temin identified the theory
of the provirus as the factor which leads to the perpetuation of the virus
in infected cells. It took 10 years before the scientific community would
even accept that theory. So we have these occurrences in science where
someone comes up with an idea but there are many other people who do not
see it, and therefore they look for other options. They look for other
alternatives, and this is what is happening in this area.

So dissidents are not, by nature, saying that one should not carry on with
research or not look for the right explanations, because we do not have all
the explanations. One cannot tell me that a child infected at birth in
Africa lives only for 10 years, and that a child infected at birth in the
UK and America lives beyond 10 years of age in most cases. Why is that? Is
this a racist virus that kills the African child sooner? [Laughter.]

Clearly, there are many other factors that are involved in this issue. How
can we be so simplistic and lambaste the President when he says that we
should hear all views, get ideas from all sides, and then conclude, when we
have had these discussions with all the experts, on what strategy to adopt
for this country? That is the direction that we are moving in. [Applause.]

So let us not confuse the people in South Africa. We have never said that
they must not use condoms, that they must not alter their lifestyles and
that promiscuity is not dangerous. The President has never said that. We
are carrying this work on forcefully in the communities. The department is
working on plans for voluntary counselling and testing because we want to
come to a situation where the majority of people in this country have been
tested. We are working on the Aids vaccine, at a tremendous cost to the
country. We are funding it. This is a priority, because we realise that we
must find a solution to HIV/Aids and we are making strides in this
direction. So why is it that it seems that we are believing dissidents and
doing nothing? It is not the case. It is, in fact, a very bad piece of
disinformation against our President. [Applause.]

Dr S J GOUS: Madam Speaker, the President's contact with the so-called Aids
dissidents has sparked a massive response, especially in the lay press. One
can understand this response from the media because the content and
implications are indeed sensational. Now, whether the intention was that
this interaction become public knowledge, or whether it was merely to
satisfy the inquisitive nature of the President's mind, is not clear.

The fact is that the whole process has been very poorly managed. Whilst we
accept the President's right to speak to whomever and whenever he wants to,
there is also a responsibility on the Office of the President not to create
doubt, chaos or negative publicity. This certainly has done so. It has
created the perception that the President is not sure whether HIV causes
Aids. [Interjections.] It has created a podium for discredited scientists,
given false hope to Aids sufferers and created doubt in the public mind as
to whether HIV causes Aids. This is counterproductive and disruptive, and
has the potential to jeopardise the upcoming World Aids Congress in Durban.

The Aids dissidents believe that Aids does not exist, that HIV does not
cause Aids, and that HIV is not sexually transmitted. They also believe
that poverty, poor sanitation and malnutrition and antiretrovirals cause
Aids. Poverty has never been and shall never be a disease. It is part of a
complex socioeconomic condition that makes certain people more susceptible,
vulnerable and exposed, but is never per se primarily responsible for any
disease. Poverty can, at most, be a contributing factor. The fact is that
affluent and well-nourished people also contract HIV and die from Aids.

As far as conventional scientists are concerned - which are, by the way,
the overwhelming majority - the issue has been settled years ago and is, in
fact, a nonissue. [Interjections.] The Aids dissidents' views were rejected
point by point in a 61-page document published in 1995 by the United States
National Institute for Health.

Many scientists of good standing and repute have the view that one must not
engage in this kind of stale debate or even share a podium with dissidents,
as this affords them undue credibility and is counterproductive as it is
reinventing the wheel. [Interjections.] It would also be easier to convert
flat-earth believers. As Dr Makgoba, the president of the Medical Research
Council, so aptly explained:


  In science, unlike in politics, we never seek consensus. You are either
  right or you are wrong.

Here are some irrefutable facts: The HI-virus has been thoroughly
researched, probably more than any other known virus. It has been isolated,
duplicated, propagated and identified in the most minute detail. No less
attention has been given to the link between HIV and Aids, as well as the
effect of Aids on the human body. Phenomena and so-called mysteries like
immunity, different strains of the virus and different epidemiologies have
been well researched and scientifically explained.

Members should please not confuse misdiagnoses, false positive and false
negative tests with defective science. These are problems inherent to
medicine as a whole. Based on a massive volume of accepted science and
experience, I categorically and emphatically state that HIV does exist. HIV
introduced to humans leads to a disease known as Aids. The virus can be,
and usually is, sexually transmitted. Antiretrovirals have a positive
effect on quality and duration of life, despite side effects. They also
have an effect on the prevention of vertical transmission. I, therefore,
challenge anybody who does not believe that HIV causes Aids to undergo a
five millilitre transfusion of HIV-positive blood. [Interjections.] In
other words, they must put their money where their mouth is.

In conclusion, perhaps the Government has been so blinded by its vendetta
against the pharmaceutical industry that it has allowed itself to be
hijacked and led astray by fringe fanatics and nutcases. This leads to the
collapse of coherent strategy and more people receiving an inescapable
death sentence due to Aids. [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, Deputy President, South Africa's liberal
approach to sex outside of true marriage carries with it a death sentence
that mainly impacts upon our youth.
According to statistics, it is the youth who are most vulnerable to the
Aids pandemic. The Government is aiding and abetting sexual promiscuity by
indiscriminately encouraging a condom avalanche that is steadily
undermining all efforts to get HIV/Aids under control. [Interjections.] It
is the message of abstinence outside of marriage and not safe sex that will
address health and social problems in this nation. Uganda is a good example
of this.

Government's decision regarding an international expert commission which
will examine various aspects of the Aids issue has raised much concern,
mostly because the primary objective is not to do with how to allocate
health care resources in South Africa in an equitable manner, but whether
or not HIV causes Aids. David Lepage of the weekly Mail & Guardian suggests
that the heart of the problem is a profound misunderstanding on the part of
the President, successive Health Ministers and their advisers. An
understanding of the nature of science, how it advances and how to make use
of its insights is apparently lacking.

Former dissidents who questioned HIV as a cause of Aids have since said
that the debate is, quite rightly, dead and buried. This is largely because
of the tremendous gains made with regard to successful Aids treatments
which were developed on the basis of the HIV-causes-Aids hypothesis.

It does not make moral, economic or political sense to ignore the mountain
of evidence that has shown nevirapine and AZT to be effective in reducing
HIV transmission from mother to child, nor does it make sense to ignore the
fact that Government has been giving AZT to health workers and the drug has
proved to be 80% effective in preventing HIV transmission in needle-stick
injuries.

These patients can be monitored and the information is, therefore,
reliable. Based on these findings, it is more than reasonable to assume
that the result would be similar with rape victims. No one is suggesting
AZT is the ultimate answer. Toxicity reports must be taken seriously, but
in light of these facts, the ACDP believes that mothers and rape victims
should be given the choice.

Government's legitimate concern with regard to the cost of AZT cannot be
applied to nevirapine, which costs less than R30 for a full treatment. Many
Aids activists and sufferers, however, cannot accept AZT as simply
unaffordable when Government gives the impression that money is easily
available for millennium bashes and other celebrations. President Mbeki's
view that open debate is useful and a good thing is unquestionable, but
what should - and indeed, must - be questioned is the use of public funds
to allow this decade-old debate to be dug up when no new evidence has
emerged that would justify it.

By the way, breast-feeding alone does not put the baby at risk and the
nevirapine dosage is minute. [Interjections.] [Time expired.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, Deputy President, Ministers and members,
HIV/Aids is not just a health crisis but also a socioeconomic disaster.
Therefore, not planning for or accommodating a vaccine to reduce the rate
of HIV transmission from mother to child, rape victims, accidental
injuries, etc, will cost thousands of lives, especially those of people who
are not economically viable, thus creating a setback in human development.
It is predicted that the average life expectancy is expected to decrease to
31 years by the year 2010. This makes it almost impossible for employers to
reach the quotas required from them by the Employment Equity Act.

An estimated amount of 200 000 children have been orphaned by the disease.
SAA loses at least 10 cabin crew annually through Aids-related illness. It
costs the airline R22 500 to train an airline attendant, 100 of whom have
died over the past 10 years at the cost of R22,25 million.

The HIV/Aids crisis is worsening every day and the hunt for a cure is being
urgently intensified. We need to produce a good, cheaper preventative drug.
Medical research has proved that nevirapine is 15% more effective, less
expensive and easier to administer than AZT. The South African Government
cannot afford to administer AZT to pregnant mothers, nor does medical
insurance companies cover it, even for members who cannot afford the
treatment.

At the moment there is no cure for HIV/Aids. However, the MF advocates
combined antiretroviral therapy, for research indicates that this treatment
delays the onset of the HIV/Aids symptoms. The side effects are
frightening, but which drug does not have side effects? These side effects
must be weighed against the advantage of the drug for the prescribed
condition. Thereafter, with substantial fairness, reasonable adjustment
must prevail. Research shows ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]
Mrs M A A NJOBE: Madam Speaker, as South Africans I believe we are
fortunate to have a President of the country who, from time to time, poses
challenges to the nation on issues impacting seriously on the lives of the
people. And one such challenge is the basis for today's subject for
discussion. Since the establishment of a democratic order in this country,
our President has posed many challenges to this House and to the nation as
a whole. We cannot forget his now famous ``I am an African'' speech to
Parliament. At the end of that debate all who made interventions, including
all the leaders of the opposition parties, concurred without reservation
that they, too, were Africans.

Africa in general, and South Africa in particular, has taken seriously the
challenge for a debate on the African renaissance. Recently this very House
accepted and committed itself to yet another challenge by the President,
viz to make the 21st century an African century.

The question raised by the President on the HI virus should be understood
in the context of these broad challenges. It is conventional practice that
scientific research methodologies and results are tested, questioned and
scrutinised over and over again by other researchers, until most, if not
all, questions have been answered. All the better if there is consistency
in the answers that emerge. Dr Gous, as a medical person, knows that this
is so.

At this stage we cannot claim that all questions about the behaviour of the
HI virus have been answered. Arguments about its origin, for example, keep
surfacing. The Africans and the monkey meat story, experiments that went
wrong in the then Belgian Congo, the link to homosexual males, the linkage
of various strains of the virus to the specific regions of Africa and
methods by which the effects of the virus on the body's immune system are
measured are all still outstanding questions.

The ANC, as an organisation, is committed to addressing the HIV epidemic
within the context of the Bill of Rights. This is reflected in the ANC's
health plan of 1994 and the 1997 Mafikeng conference resolution on
HIV/Aids. The ANC-led Government takes seriously the impact the epidemic
has had and is projected to have on our society. With 1 700 people said to
die of Aids daily in this country, the Government is deeply concerned,
particularly that young people are the most affected.
The seriousness with which the Government regards the epidemic is reflected
in the HIV/Aids policies of the various departments, but more especially in
the budget committed to HIV/Aids awareness campaigns and preventive
measures. This is indeed an acknowledgement by departments that the
HIV/Aids programmes can no longer be the responsibility of the health
department alone. Departments on whose constituencies the pandemic impacts
most have been clustered to work together in order to address the problem.
For example, in its Tirisano co-operative plan, the Department of Education
prioritises HIV/Aids as programme number one. With the disease affecting
young people mostly, the reasons for such prioritisation are obvious.

Meanwhile, the Department of Health continues to play a leading role in
addressing the epidemic. Partnership in Aids programmes allow a common
activity in this country. Consortia of NGOs working together under the
Beyond Awareness campaign are awarded substantial amounts from the HIV/Aids
budget, and that is R34 million to this campaign alone in the last three
financial years. For HIV/Aids programmes, the Department of Health's
budget, for instance, in the 1999-2000 financial year, was R109 721.

Following the intersectoral approach, provinces are also doing just as
much. In July 1999, the Minister of Health initiated the development of an
HIV/Aids strategic plan for South Africa for the next five years. This was
in response to the President's challenge to all sectors of society to
become actively involved in initiatives designed to address the HIV/Aids
epidemic. A wide range of stakeholders identified, discussed and agreed on
priorities for such a plan. These include research, treatment and
evaluation. Structures to take charge of all priorities have either been
formed or are in the process of being established.

The Department of Health supports research conducted by the Medical
Research Council. Unlike in the past when this body concerned itself with
basic research, the MRC, under the leadership of Dr Makgoba, its president,
is now involved in applied research, including relevant research on an Aids
vaccine. The MRC, that is the Medical Research Council, also receives
budget support from the Department of Arts, Culture, Science and
Technology.

Therefore it is clear that the call by the President for an international
panel on HIV/Aids cannot and is not going to stop programmes on HIV/Aids.
The President himself is a signatory to the HIV/Aids pledge signed by MPs
on 11 March 1999. All that the President is saying is: Let us open our
eyes. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mrs S V KALYAN: Chairperson, hon members, the idea of sharing South
Africa's effort in the fight against HIV/Aids with world leaders must
surely be complimented. However, in his letter to world leaders on Aids in
Africa, President Mbeki omitted to highlight the shortcomings of the
programme, and I want to take this opportunity to do just that.

In his letter, President Mbeki says that Government has committed itself to
a partnership against Aids. Now, in order for any partnership to succeed,
there must be mutual trust, sharing, respect and co-operation. What he does
not say is that, in reality, the present Government partnership lacks all
of these essential qualities.

He goes further to mention that a SA National Aids Council, bringing
together Government and civil society, has been established. What he does
not say is that in South Africa we have a bunch of politicians, who lack
the necessary skill and expertise, directing the national Aids programme,
and indulging in a serious power play at the expense of precious human
lives. [Interjections.]

One only has to look at the composition of Sanac to see that Government
does not wish to engage in debate with civil society. [Interjections.] The
council is heavily stacked with 15 Cabinet Ministers and chaired by the
Deputy President. [Interjections.] The 17 people who have been selected to
represent the so-called civil society he refers to have very little history
in dealing with the epidemic and certainly are not experts in the field.
[Interjections.] They are also known not to stand up to Government when
necessary. [Interjections.]

The President further states that his Government works to ensure that no
section of society, whether public or private, discriminates against people
suffering from HIV/Aids. However, this is not completely true, because
although, in principle, free medical care is provided to pregnant women by
the Department of Health, only those women who are HIV-negative qualify.
Those one in three pregnant women who are HIV-positive are not given AZT or
nevirapine, so the stark reality is that they are discriminated against by
virtue of their HIV status. [Interjections.]

President Mbeki also says that, as a government, we are trying to organise
ourselves to ensure that we take care of the children affected by Aids. How
exactly is this being done, may I ask? Despite proven research that
vertical transmission can be reduced by 50%, Government is intent on
further research, preferring to hang its refusal on five deaths that are
unrelated to nevirapine.

There are moves afoot to spend R300 million on a jet for President Mbeki,
yet there is no money for medication to reduce mother-to-child
transmission. [Interjections.] At a cost of R25 per child, he will save
thousands of lives, give hope to their mothers and save a whole generation
of South Africans. [Interjections.]

Forty per cent of the allocated Aids budget was unspent last year.
[Interjections.] The Minister of Health says that it is committed.
Committed to what, I ask? It is committed to funding a small minority of
people to come to South Africa and air sectarian and discredited views,
some 15 years after most Western countries finished the debate.
[Interjections.]
President Mbeki is sceptical about the relevance of Western medical models
to the so-called unique African catastrophe of Aids. [Interjections.] He
feels that it would be a criminal betrayal of his responsibilities to his
people if he were to mimic foreign approaches to treating the disease.
[Interjections.] Therefore he insists on South Africa's right to consult
dissident scientists' views.

The President's communication with Rasnick and Duesberg is not only
dangerous, but also divisive and diversive. In fact, many statutory
scientific bodies worldwide have not given credence to any of their views.
Peter Duesberg says that he would not worry too much if he were HIV-
positive because his hypothesis is that HIV does not cause Aids. Why then
does he not put his money where his mouth is and inject himself with HIV-
infected blood to prove his hypothesis? [Interjections.]

Duesberg, the supposedly brilliant scientist, does not seem able to
differentiate between strains of a virus, because he says that African
Aids, American Aids and European Aids are totally different things, and
that all they have in common is the name. This is the calibre of the debate
which he appears to be capable of, and this is the sort of nonsense that
President Mbeki is going to align himself with if he goes ahead with this
forum.

In being sceptical about the relevance of using Western medical models to
address the so-called catastrophe here, one wonders why President Mbeki
even bothers to wear the Western red ribbon on his lapel in support of
HIV/Aids awareness. He is making a mockery of those people living with it.
[Interjections.]

Surely using Western medical models is a starting point while we search for
the so-called African solution? Where is the urgency that the President
speaks of in fighting the greatest challenge that we are facing? In his
attempt to set up yet another international panel to discuss issues on
which only he needs clarity, Nacosa's comprehensive and sound plan,
completed in 1994 and accepted and approved by the Cabinet five years ago,
which is a plan for the people by the people, is ignored. It is a typical
case of fiddling while Rome burns. [Interjections.]

Mamphela Ramphele says, and I quote:


  No coherent management strategy has yet been developed by the Government.
  This failure results not from lack of expertise in South Africa, but from
  its disregard by those in government - with tragic consequences. The
  present government position on Aids is nothing short of irresponsible,
  for which history will judge it severely.

President Mbeki's intention to force this debate at an international forum
just before the Aids conference ... [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order, hon member!

Mrs S V KALYAN: ... is ill-timed, ill-considered ... [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order, hon member! [Interjections.]

Mrs S V KALYAN: ... and unfortunate. [Interjections.] [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Mr Chairperson, Deputy President, the UCDP welcomes
the snap debate on this dreadful disease. However, we have observed that
the approach towards finding a solution to it has brought about conflicting
opinions. People tend to ignore international medical consensus that the
benefits of AZT outweigh its risks.

In 1995, the United States National Institute of Allergies and Infectious
Diseases published a 61-page scientific rebuttal of the theory that HIV
does not cause Aids, concluding that individuals from different groups, for
example homosexual men, elderly transfusion recipients, heterosexual women
and drug-using heterosexual men, have, in fact, all developed Aids with
only one common denominator, infection with HIV.

At the 1992 international Aids conference in Amsterdam, delegates sported
badges stating: ``It's the virus, you idiot!'' in reference to Duesberg's
theory that HIV does not cause Aids. Then he was the butt of international
jokes. Now South Africa, with this story, is making headlines in the USA.

Glaxo-Wellcome's discounted price for AZT for HIV-positive pregnant women
is R350. At this price, treatment with AZT of every HIV-positive pregnant
woman in South Africa would cost around R28 million. Add to this, testing,
counselling, breast milk substitutes, formula for total ... [Time expired.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Mr Chairperson and the hon the Deputy President, Aids
exists; let us fight it together. The issue of the HIV/Aids epidemic was
identified in January 2000, in the United Nations' proceedings, as the
single greatest threat to Africa's future. Southern Africa stands at the
epicentre of this scourge.

The hon the Deputy President is correct when he says that all views must be
considered. This is my view, viz that Aids exists. Hon President Mbeki's
dream of an African renaissance is more likely to turn into an African
nightmare, as a direct result of these careless and unfounded utterances on
the existence of the Aids virus.

It will be remembered that, together with the former Minister of Health, Dr
Zuma, President Mbeki criticised those who questioned the use of the
industrial solvent Virodene. Today, I want to challenge all the political
leaders in this Parliament, President Mbeki, the Deputy President, Dr
Buthelezi, Marthinus van Schalkwyk and all others, to go for Aids tests
publicly. [Interjections.]
Listen, I said all the leaders! [Interjections.] Leaders must set an
example by publicly going for the test to show their followers that it is
better to know your status rather than to live in ignorance and possibly
infect more people around you. [Interjections.] I will personally make the
arrangements for this test.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Order, hon member, there is a point
of order.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: No, Mr Chairperson, I was just saying to my
sister that if the bishop will go for a test, then I will go for it as
well. [Laughter.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Yes, I said all the leaders, including the bishop.
Everyone! Everyone, I say. [Interjections.] President Mbeki as well.

I wish to draw hon members' attention to a study that was done in the
United States which found that most of the people go into a very strong
denial phase once they are diagnosed with the disease. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!
Mrs P DE LILLE: Am I going to get my time, Chairperson?

Mr D J SITHOLE: Mr Chairperson, I wonder if the hon member would take a
question?

Mrs P DE LILLE: Mr Chairperson, I do not have time. Outside the House I
will take a question, so if he wants to fight I will fight outside. I just
want to draw the attention of the House to a study that was done in the
United States, which found that most people go into a very strong denial
phase once they are diagnosed with the disease, and they question HIV.

My second challenge to all members in this House is to stop talking and
start doing what I did and sponsor at least one HIV orphan.
[Interjections.] [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! [Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Mr Chairperson, is the hon member allowed to
bribe me in the House? [Laughter.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! It is not in order, hon member, but I
have carefully watched it happening in the House. [Laughter.]

Dr P W A MULDER: Mr Chairman, I will not hug the hon the Minister. He does
not need to worry!

Every minute, 11 people in the world are infected by the HI virus. Ten of
those are in Africa south of the Sahara.

Dit is 'n reusekrisis wat 'n gesamentlike veldtog van ons almal verg. In
Suid-Afrika lyk dit of die veldtog teen vigs nou uiteindelik begin momentum
kry. Die probleem is, teen hierdie agtergrond van sukses glo ek dit is 'n
fout van die President om in hierdie stadium 'n openbare debat oor die
verwantskap tussen MIV en vigs aan die gang te sit. Hoekom sê ek dit? Ek
het twee redes.

Ek sê dit omdat die debat só tegnies is dat die gewone man nie verstaan
waaroor dit gaan nie. Wat is nou die resultaat? Daar is verwarring by mense
oor of MIV werklik vigs veroorsaak of nie, en hoe dit elkeen raak. Sommige
veldwerkers berig dat die jeug heel verstaanbaar sê: ``As die Regering
vraagtekens daaroor plaas, waarom moet ons ons bekommer?'' en dan weer
begin terugkeer na hulle ou gewoontes. Jare se werk en miljoene rande kan
deur hierdie verwarring verkwis word. Dit is die eerste rede.

Die tweede rede waarom dit nie nou 'n goeie idee is nie, is dit: die
Adjunkpresident is reg dat Galileo veroordeel is omdat hy gesê het die
aarde draai om die son. Galileo is egter nie deur die wetenskaplikes van
daardie tyd veroordeel nie, maar deur die kerkleiers; kerkleiers wat niks
geweet het van die wetenskap nie en as bewys 'n Bybelteks gebruik het wat
sê die aarde staan op pilare.

Is dit nou die taak van almal van ons as politici wat hier sit, ook van
myself en die agb President, om by hierdie tegniese debat betrokke te raak?
Die agb President, ons almal in hierdie Huis en Suid-Afrika in sy geheel,
loop die risiko om, wat gesondheidsnavorsing betref, ons geloofwaardigheid
in die wêreld daar buite te verloor. Laat die wetenskaplikes die geveg
uitveg sover dit hulle aangaan. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[This is a huge crisis which requires a joint campaign by all of us. It
seems as if the campaign against Aids is at last gaining momentum in South
Africa. Against this background of success, I believe that the problem is
that it is a mistake for the President to start a public debate on the
connection between HIV and Aids at this stage. Why am I saying this? I have
two reasons.

I am saying this because the debate is so technical that the ordinary
person cannot understand what it is about. What is the result of this?
People are confused about the question of whether HIV can really cause Aids
or not, and how it concerns everyone. Some fieldworkers report that young
people are saying, quite understandably: ``If the Government is questioning
it, why should we be concerned about it?'', and then go back to their old
habits. Years of work and millions of rands could be wasted because of this
confusion. That is the first reason.

The second reason why it is not a good idea at present, is this: the Deputy
President is correct in saying that Galileo was condemned because he said
the earth revolved around the sun. However, Galileo was not condemned by
the scientists of his time, but by the church leaders; church leaders who
knew nothing about science and used, as evidence, a text from the Bible
which states that the earth stands on pillars.

Is it the task of all of us, as politicians sitting here, including the hon
the President and myself, to get involved in this technical debate? The hon
the President, all of us in this House and South Africa as a whole, run the
risk of losing our credibility in the outside world, as far as health
research is concerned. Let the scientists sort this matter out between
them.]

The South African Department of Health expects 250 deaths this year from
Aids. Our ultimate goal is to save lives, according to the hon the Deputy
President, and I totally agree with him. Let the scientists fight it out,
because this debate is only causing confusion and does not help anybody.
[Time expired.]

Mnr C AUCAMP: Mnr die Voorsitter, die blote formulering van ons onderwerp
vandag laat reeds rooi ligte flikker. Wat ons vandag bespreek, en die
uitspraak, lê nie op die terrein van 'n president nie. Dit is nie die taak
van 'n regeringshoof om as't ware ex cathedra-uitsprake te lewer oor
ingewikkelde medies-tegniese kwessies nie. In dié opsig skaar ek my by die
agb dr Mulder.

Is dit nie ironies nie? Die agb President maak soos Liewe Heksie. Hy praat
as hy moet swyg, maar hy swyg as hy moet praat! Dit waarvoor hy tot die hoë
amp verkies is, naamlik die beskerming van die demokrasie en die beginsels
van die regstaat, word gruwelik aan ons grense deur mnr Mugabe verkrag. 'n
Krisissituasie ontstaan in die substreek waar mnr Mbeki die leiding moet
neem, spore daarvan masel uit in ons eie land en hy bly doodstil. Hy swyg
soos die graf. [Tussenwerpsels.] Intussen debatteer ons vandag uitsprake
van die agb President wat tuishoort by, nie eens 'n gewone medikus nie,
maar by spesialisnavorsers. Nie eens die man met die stetoskoop nie, slegs
die man met die mikroskoop, kan hieroor uitsluitsel gee.

Hierdie is die vierde uitspraak van tegniese aard in die vigsdebat wat deur
politieke ampsbekleërs in die Regering gemaak word. Dit was eers Virodene,
toe AZT, toe nevirapine en nou die ontdekking dat MIV nie vigs veroorsaak
nie. [Tussenwerpsels.] Is dit moreel regverdigbaar dat welbewese medisyne
om onaanvaarbare redes gedemoniseer word? Is dit regverdigbaar dat
toksologiese en ekonomiese redes met mekaar verwar word? Is dit nie
opvallend nie dat die deskundiges wat oorspronklike navorsing gedoen het
deur die bank die kousaliteit van MIV met vigs onderskryf, terwyl geen
oorspronklike navorsing deur die ``dissidents'' gedoen is nie.
Dit staan soos 'n paal bo water dat vigs in Suid-Afrika seksueel oorgedra
word. Dit staan verder vas dat alle vigs-pasiënte die MI-virus onder lede
het. Ons kan projekte van stapel laat loop, ons kan 'n rooi strikkie om die
Unie-gebou bind as ons wil, maar onverskillige uitsprake soos dié sal die
probleem net vererger en ons samelewing, wat reeds promisku is, kan 'n sein
ontvang van, ``laat waai maar, dit is nie so gevaarlik nie''.

In die laaste plek ... [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech
follows.)

[Mr C AUCAMP: Mr Chairperson, the very formulation of our subject today is
already causing the alarm bells to ring. The subject we are discussing
today, and the pronouncement are not within the province of a president. It
is not the task of a head of state, as it were, to deliver ex cathedra
verdicts about complicated medical technological questions. In this regard
I am siding with the hon Dr Mulder.

Is it not ironic? The hon the President is doing what ``Liewe Heksie''
does. The President speaks when he should remain silent, but he remains
silent when he should speak! What he was elected to the highest office to
do, namely to protect democracy and the principles of the constitutional
state, is being grossly violated on our borders by Mr Mugabe. A crisis
situation has developed in the sub-region in which Mr Mbeki should take the
lead, and there are indications of a similar situation developing in our
own country, but he remains dead quiet. He is as silent as the grave.
[Interjections.] Instead we are today debating statements made by the hon
President which are not even relevant to an ordinary doctor, but to
specialist researchers. Not even the man with the stethoscope, only the man
with the microscope, can pronounce upon this.

This is the fourth statement of a technical nature which has been made by
political office bearers in Government in the Aids debate. First it was
Virodene, then AZT, then nevirapine and now the discovery that HIV does not
cause Aids. [Interjections.] Is it morally justifiable for proven medicines
to be demonised for unacceptable reasons? Is it fair to confuse
toxicological and economic reasons? Is it not significant that the experts
who conducted the original research without exception endorse the causality
of HIV with Aids, while no original research has been done by the
dissidents.

It is as plain as a pikestaff that Aids in South Africa is sexually
transmitted. There is also no doubt that all Aids patients have the HI
virus. We can launch projects, we can tie a red ribbon around the Union
Buildings if we like, but careless remarks such as these will simply
compound the problem and our society, which is already promiscuous, may
receive a message that says, ``go ahead, it is not that dangerous''.

In conclusion ... [Time expired.]]

Mr M A MANGENA: Chairperson, a lot of people have said all sorts of things
about HIV/Aids, but the basic, solid facts are the following: HIV is not a
myth. The existence of the virus has been established scientifically
through research. HIV is passed from one person to another through body
fluids such as blood and sexual secretions. In time, those with HIV go on
to develop Aids. All people with Aids, without exception, are also HIV-
positive. No one has ever developed Aids without being HIV-positive first.
All these facts have been established through scientific research.

A few voices have been heard doubting whether HIV leads to Aids. This
suggests other factors might be responsible for Aids or at least the speed
and the scale of its manifestation. These sceptics have conducted no known
scientific research and their pronouncements are therefore pure
speculation, at least at this point in time. At present, while we may not
smother the voices of the so-called sceptics, we have to wait for them to
produce scientific evidence to back their theories. That is what science
demands of us.

The same science demands that we do not close our minds to anything, as no
one can claim to know everything. This Parliament, as a national
institution, has a duty and responsibility to alert all people to the
dangers of HIV and to urge everyone to take the necessary measures to
prevent infection by that virus. The Government has an added duty to
provide those who have been stricken by HIV/Aids with available and safe
medicines to deal with associated opportunistic infections. Government is
further duty-bound to encourage, facilitate and support attempts geared at
finding a cure or a vaccine for Aids. [Time expired.]

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, I have just returned from Atlanta in
the United States, where I attended a conference representing a
collaborative effort of more than 24 Ministers of Health of Africa, US
representatives of bilateral and multilateral agencies, the private sector
and NGOs. Had Mr Ellis been there to deliver the kind of speech that he
subjected us to this afternoon, I am sure that every one of those
participants would not have believed that he is a South African.
[Interjections.]

What Mr Ellis has said this afternoon about the White House and President
Clinton is also not true, because he is misrepresenting the White House. If
it were true, the White House would not be gearing itself to receive our
President Thabo Mbeki on a state visit in the US. Mr Gous of the New NP is
also really out of step. HIV has not been thoroughly researched. I just got
a book, also in Atlanta, which outlines HIV research being undertaken in
the US and all over the world, including South Africa. Mr Gous might want
to borrow my book.

Let me begin by stating categorically for the record that neither the
President nor, indeed, members of the Cabinet have ever said that they do
not believe that Aids exists, nor have we ever said that we deny the
linkages between HIV and Aids. I trust that, having said this so clearly
today, the opposition parties and the media will now cease to repeat their
lies. [Interjections.]

What we are saying is that there is no consensus on the variety of issues
on HIV and Aids. Questions of science are not always answered directly.
Sure, light bulbs can turn on and the sun rises in the east, but medical
sleuthing always works in strange ways. Researchers often speak of
serendipity or an accident. They focus on one thing and discover something
very different or even more important. Sometimes finding the answers comes
from the study of a clue and self-evidence, creatively acting on a hunch.
So the debate amongst scientists goes on and will always continue to be
there. [Interjections.]

Science has already indicated that there is a clear difference between the
types of HIV that infect the people in the West and sub-Saharan Africa.
Certainly, therefore, our responses to the epidemic can never be identical.
We as South Africans must seek solutions that are specific and targeted, so
that they indeed intensify and enhance our own programmes. Moreover, the
determinants of the HIV/Aids epidemic cannot be explained only in terms of
individual risk-taking behaviour. Some of the other factors that fuel the
epidemic are social deprivation, migrancy, poverty and gender imbalances -
factors to be found mainly amongst the Africans in this country.

In addition, in developed countries the infection is mainly found among men
who have sex with men, people who use drugs by injection and commercial sex
workers. In sub-Saharan Africa, the infection is found mainly amongst
heterosexual people. But the question for us is: Why has there been an
increase of new HIV cases mainly amongst the blacks, in particular
Africans? Is there something that we are no getting right? What about our
communication strategy? Why the racial and gender differentials even
amongst us, the citizens of South Africa?

Despite the propaganda that is being spread to the contrary, in our country
the fight against the disease has intensified greatly. Please hear me when
I say this: the scientific debates that have been going on both here and in
the international arena have not disturbed or derailed our efforts in any
way. The Department of Health has developed a comprehensive five-year
strategic plan for HIV/Aids, with five priorities which have already been
mentioned by the Deputy President.
For those who persist in saying that the Government, under the leadership
of our President Thabo Mbeki, is doing nothing, let me give a brief outline
of what we are doing every day in terms of the strategic plan - and I
expect members of Parliament to know this. In fact, we are procuring and
distributing condoms freely to the public, including at nontraditional
outlets such as youth clubs, hotels and spaza shops. A policy on the
distribution of female condoms will soon be in place. We are tightening and
improving the syndromic management of STDs in the public and private
sector, and the efforts to encourage all businesses to provide care for
their employees in the workplace. Pilot sites have been established in four
provinces in order to address the dual HIV/TB epidemic.

Guidelines on the holistic management of HIV-positive pregnant women have
been developed. We are rolling out voluntary counselling and testing sites
in our country. We are continuing to support research on the use of
antiretrovirals, including nevirapine. Treatment guidelines on the
management of opportunistic infections in adults and children have been
developed. Several models of home-based care have been costed, and
provinces are currently looking at adapting these to suit their own unique
situations. We are consulting widely in order to find creative and suitable
ways of coping with the challenge posed by the growing number of orphans in
our country. All this is about improving the quality of care for those
infected and affected with HIV and Aids.

Countries that have shown success in the fight emphasised the need for a
strong intersectoral response to this silent scourge. Government continues
to fund NGOs and community-based organisations whose activities empower
communities to cope with the impact of the epidemic and to devise their own
interventions for care and support. In this context, the SA National Aids
Council becomes very critical.

The challenge is enormous, but there is hope. Yesterday we released the
1999 antenatal survey findings. These figures are, in fact, slightly down
from those in 1998, despite the opposition parties' conspiracy theories and
dire predictions. The national figure for 1999 is 22,4%, as opposed to
22,8% for 1998. Amongst the youth we have recorded a decline in the
prevalence rates amongst teenagers from 21% to 16,5%. [Applause.]

These figures suggest that the rate of infection might be beginning to
stabilise slightly. Perhaps, despite all the criticisms, some of what we
are actually doing is beginning to show dividends. For those who are
interested in facts, rather than destructive rumour-mongering, the report
is available from the Department of Health.

In the light of the antenatal survey findings, as announced and published
yesterday, if I were Mrs Sandy Kalyan, I would not even have participated
in this debate. [Interjections.] Shame on her for misleading the nation by
saying that the most obvious reason for not releasing the antenatal survey
findings is that the results are embarrassing to Government, because they
indicate a large increase in the number of infections.

Ngithi kuye: Uphoxekile ntombazane! [To her I say: lady you were
disappointed!]

Scientific debate is a healthy and necessary aspect of our response. Mr Jim
Warner, the then White House policy adviser, in January 1998, called for a
similar meeting to the one we are convening in May this year, in order to
deal with some of the concerns of the policy-makers. Warner, at the time,
was concerned that funds spent on Aids research and programmes should not
be misdirected. This meeting did not take place, because Robert Gallo said
that he had no time to waste over such things. I hope that is not what hon
members are saying. Ours will go on. [Interjections.] No general goes to
war without knowing everything there is to know about the enemy at hand.
[Interjections.] We have to be brave in order to face the challenges posed
by the epidemic, even in the face of the opposition's criticism.

Success can only be achieved if everyone contributes to the efforts. Our
success resides in our collective responsibilities, and our efforts should
be within the communities. Government and civil society should continue to
foster new relationships in order to address this epidemic in a united and
comprehensive manner. I am sure most South Africans - I am not sure about
the DP - will rise to the occasion. [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, I want to say that this has really been a
frustrating and debilitating debate, because all it has really done is to
polarise parties on the issue of Aids, and this can really be detrimental
to this country's fight against the disease.

Quite frankly, the vilification today by the ANC of all those who have
expressed serious concern about the President's fraternising with the
HIV/Aids dissidents is appalling. However, what we really have to worry
about is whether this debate on whether HIV leads to Aids or not, is taking
this country back many years. At a time when we should be boldly moving
forward with nonparty-political policies to counter the spread of Aids,
instead, in reality, we are now only debating what the cause of Aids is,
and whether it even exists.

I want to say that the response from the hon Abe Nkomo was exactly what we
expected from him, because opposition parties have become used to him doing
little more than strutting ANC rhetoric, regardless of whether it is
relevant in a health debate or not. We tend to forget that he is a medical
doctor, because most of his statements these days seem to ignore any real
medical facts, and he is there clearly only to please his masters.
[Interjections.] It is hard to believe that he received the Kaizer award
for service in the field of health last year. I believe he should seriously
consider handing back that medal. If he does not, we should at least be
asking the Kaizer Foundation to take it back. [Interjections.]
The Minister clearly does not know what is going on. Here is the letter - I
beg members' pardon: I do not have it with me here - which the Minister
claims was interpreted wrongly. The Minister should do what the President
loves doing: she should go to the Internet and get it off, and then she
will see for herself exactly what the President said. [Interjections.]

Quite frankly, I believe that the hon the Minister will regret her time in
Parliament. She will not be forgiven for having made the pronouncements on
HIV/Aids that she has made. But only time will tell. She will see that I
was right. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, please take your
seats. The House is not adjourned yet. Just sit down and relax a little
bit. I know we have been rubbing shoulders - that is very healthy.

Hon members, on behalf of the presiding officers, I want to wish you a good
stay with your families during the Easter holidays. May God protect you and
keep you safe, until we meet again when we come back in May.

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 18:53.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The following Bill was introduced in the National Assembly by
         the Minister in the Office of the President on 19 April 2000 and
         referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification
         in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     National Youth Commission Amendment Bill [B 25 - 2000]
              (National Assembly - sec 75). The Bill has not yet been
              referred to a committee. [Explanatory summary of Bill and
              prior notice of its introduction published in Government
              Gazette No 21107 of 17 April 2000.]

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     (1)    The National Council of Provinces on 18 April 2000 agreed to the
         Competition Amendment Bill [B 10B - 2000] (National Assembly - sec
         75) subject to proposed amendments (see Announcements, Tablings
         and Committee Reports, p 344). The Bill and proposed amendments
         were thereupon referred to the Portfolio Committee on Trade and
         Industry in accordance with Rule 270.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
     Economic Co-operation Promotion Loan Fund for 1998-99 [RP 63-2000].

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development:


     (1)    Report of the Department of Justice for 1998-99 [RP 52-2000].

     (2)    Report of the South African Law Commission for 1999 [RP 53-
         2000].

     (3)    Report of the Judicial Service Commission for 1998-99.

     (4)    Draft Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples'
         Rights on the Establishment of an African Court on Human and
         Peoples' Rights, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
         Constitution, 1996.

     (5)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Draft Protocol.

