---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 19 September 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2000-09-19
---

TUESDAY, 19 SEPTEMBER 2000
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:08.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon members, could I please ask you to
respond timeously to the bells. I really think it is inappropriate that we
begin sitting as late as we have done this afternoon because we are waiting
for members to come to the House. If members could respond timeously to the
bells, it would help us to complete our business efficiently.

Mr L G LEVER: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I shall move at the
next sitting of the Council:


  That the Council -


  (1) censures the majority party for the standpoint it has adopted in
       relation to questions to the President;


  (2) recognises that the combined opposition parties made every reasonable
       effort to reach a just and workable compromise;


  (3) deplores the fact that the majority party has abrogated the right
       that it has in terms of section 92(2) as read with sections 42(1) and
       91(1) of the Constitution, to hold all members of the executive
       accountable to it; and


  (4) recognises that the President, as part of the executive, is
       accountable to Parliament and the NCOP is, in terms of the
       Constitution, an integral part of Parliament.

Mr P A MATTHEE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I shall move at the
next sitting of the Council:


  That, in the light of the recent unacceptable spate of violent crimes in
  South Africa, as reported by the media, and in the interests of
  transparency and accountability, the Council requests the Minister of
  Safety and Security immediately to lift the moratorium on the release of
  crime statistics in respect of those crimes and those provinces and
  police areas in respect of which there are no serious problems regarding
  the correctness of crime statistics.

Mnr A E VAN NIEKERK: Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek by die
volgende sitting van die Raad sal voorstel:


  Dat die Raad -


  (1) daarvan kennis neem en spesifieke handeling oorweeg om te help soek
       na 'n teenvoeter vir die toenemende dwelmgebruik onder jong kinders;


  (2) onder andere ook kennis neem van die Bevelvoerder van die Polisie in
       die Noord-Kaap se verslag daaroor en die feit dat daar die afgelope
       tyd in die Diamant-streek in Kimberley 25 leerlinge tussen 13 en 17
       jaar aangekeer is vir die besit en gebruik van dwelms; en


  (3) verder daarvan kennis neem dat dié toedoen in al die provinsies
       ernstige afmetings aanneem en dat elke lid van die Raad en die
       burgerlike samelewing 'n verantwoordelikheid het om die dwelmhere aan
       te keer en uit die samelewing te laat verwyder deur die
       regeringsinstellings wat bestaan, te versterk.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that at the next
sitting of the Council I shall move:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes, and is considering specific action to help find a counter to,
       the increasing use of drugs among young children;


  (2) also notes, inter alia, the report of the Chief of Police in the
       Northern Cape in this regard and the fact that in the recent past in
       Kimberley's Diamond District 25 children between the ages of 13 and
       17 have been apprehended for the abuse and possession of drugs; and


  (3) further notes that this state of affairs is assuming serious
       proportions in all the provinces and that every member of this
       Council and civil society has a responsibility to apprehend the drug
       barons and have them removed from society by reinforcing the existing
       Government institutions.]

             OUTBREAK OF FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE IN KWAZULU-NATAL

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr K D S DURR: Madam Chair, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) calls upon the Government to -


       (a)  take and keep in place the most stringent measures to contain
           and eradicate the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease in KwaZulu-
           Natal;
       (b)  take the necessary steps to reduce the risk of a repeat
           performance;


       (c)  urgently arrange for the compensation of farmers and other
           innocent victims of the outbreak; and


       (d)  prosecute anyone that has acted unlawfully that may have caused
           the outbreak; and


   (2)      thanks the Government for steps taken to date.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Is there any objection to the motion?

Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Chairperson, I would like to amend the motion, if I
may. I want to move that we add ``that the culprits who caused the feeding
from abroad to be brought into this country be brought to ... '' What is
the word?

HON MEMBERS: To book!

Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Thank you, ``to book''.

Mr K D S DURR: Madam Chair, I just want to say to my colleague that that is
covered. My motion calls upon the Government to -
  ... prosecute anyone that has acted unlawfully that may have caused the
  outbreak ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! ``Prosecute'' is not necessarily
``bring to book'', but it is an attempt. Is there any objection to the
motion? There is none.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

      RACISM IN SA NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE AND REPORT ON TEMPE SHOOTING

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms E N LUBIDLA: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes the release of a report on the ministerial inquiry into the
       Tempe military base shooting;
  (2) further notes that the report indicates that racism in the South
       African National Defence Force continues to manifest itself in
       various forms, including -


       (a)  the use of abusive language against members based on their
           cultural origin;


       (b)  the failure to empower members; and


       (c)  the use of insults, intimidation and harassment to prevent
           members from reporting cases to the police;


  (3) expresses its concern over this disturbing trend of racism and
       intolerance in our National Defence Force; and


  (4) supports the Minister of Defence in his endeavours to transform the
       SANDF.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                 SOUTH AFRICA'S PERFORMANCE AT OLYMPIC GAMES
                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr N M RAJU: Madam Chair, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes with great delight the sparkling performances of our Olympic
       athletes in Sydney, especially our soccer team under the formidable
       captaincy of field marshall Matthew Booth in inflicting a sound and
       handsome defeat on the much-vaunted Brazil team (SA 3: Brazil 1!),
       thanks to our shooting stars Quinton Fortune, Siyabonga Nomvete and
       Steve Lekoelea;


  (2) further notes the no less admirable performance of our water queen,
       Penny Heyns, who abdicated her throne to an uppity American Megan
       Quann - she was graceful in conceding defeat;


  (3) is of the view that all our representatives have done us proud, and
       will continue to do so; and


  (4) conveys its sincerest congratulations to all our compatriots battling
       it out in Sydney for more than gold: a nation's pride!

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

          MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT INVOLVING HON MEMBER MR B T TAABE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr B J MKHALIPHI: Madam Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes that an ANC NCOP member, Mr B T Taabe, was involved in a car
       accident on Saturday, 9 September 2000;


  (2) further notes that the accident occurred at Barberton in Mpumalanga
       only a kilometre away from his home;


  (3) notes, with gratitude, that he is recovering well at his home;
  (4) expresses its deep concern over the incident and wishes Mr Taabe a
       speedy recovery;


  (5) notes that the lawlessness on our roads is being addressed with
       vigour, determination and consistency; and


  (6) reaffirms that the Department of Transport is going an extra mile to
       ensure that traffic offenders are accountable for their irresponsible
       behaviour.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                          HERITAGE DAY CELEBRATIONS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr A E VAN NIEKERK: Voorsitter, ek stel voor sonder kennisgewing:


  Dat die Raad daarvan kennis neem dat -


  (1) dit eerskomende Sondag Erfenisdag is;
  (2) die tema gedurende die feesvieringe in Pietersburg ``Celebrating our
       Multilingualism'' sal wees en dat die Minister van Kuns, Kultuur,
       Wetenskap en Tegnologie en die Adjunkpresident van Suid-Afrika aan
       die feesvieringe sal deelneem; en


  (3) 'n lid of lede van die Nasionale Raad van Provinsies daar
       verteenwoordig behoort te wees en dat die Raad se verbintenis tot die
       uitvoer van die grondwetlike voorskrifte oor veeltaligheid hierdeur
       geïllustreer sal word.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council notes that -


  (1) this coming Sunday is Heritage Day;


  (2) the theme for the festivities in Pietersburg will be ``Celebrating
       our Multilingualism'' and that the Minister of Arts, Culture, Science
       and Technology and the Deputy President of South Africa will
       participate in the festivities; and
  (3) a member or members of the National Council of Provinces should be
       represented there and that the Council's commitment to the execution
       of the constitutional prescriptions on multilingualism will be
       illustrated in this way.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

              CULTIVATION OF SWORDFISH INDUSTRY IN SOUTH AFRICA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mev A M VERSVELD: Voorsitter, ek stel voor sonder kennisgewing:


  Dat die Raad -


  (1) met dank daarvan kennis neem dat die Direktoraat: Mariene en
       Visbestuur vir die eerste keer in 23 jaar 'n stap geneem het om 'n
       volwaardige swaardvis-industrie vir Suid-Afrika te bou deur middel
       van -


       (a)  die verlaging van permitvoorwaardes vir Suid-Afrikaners;


       (b)  die verlenging van die tydperk waarvoor permitte geldig is van
           twee maande na ses maande;


       (c)  die inisiëring van langtermynregte vir tunalanglyn; en


       (d)  die toestaan van 'n addisionele 1000 metrieke ton swaardvis as
           'n byvangs in die Indiese Oseaan; en


  (2) 'n beroep op die Regering doen -


       (a)  om alle buitelandse permitvoorwaardes te hersien, met spesifieke
           verwysing na Japan, om sodoende te verseker dat buitelandse bote
           onder dieselfde voorwaardes opereer as hul Suid-Afrikaanse
           eweknieë;


       (b)  om alle buitelandse bote te laat visvang onder die Suid-
           Afrikaanse vlag, wat sal meebring dat Suid-Afrika kan bou aan 'n
           bewese vangsrekord, wat nodig is vir die toekenning van 'n
           internasionale totale toelaatbare vangs deur Icat in November;
           en


       (c)  om daadwerklike stappe te neem in gevalle waar bote die
           internasionale ooreenkomste verbreek en om kennis te neem van en
           ondersteuning te gee aan die Verenigde State van Amerika in hul
           veldtog teen Japanese bote in Amerikaanse waters en die VSA se
           voornemens om ekonomiese sanksies teen Japan in te stel as
           gevolg van die verbreking van die internasionale beskerming van
           walvisse.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Mrs A M VERSVELD: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes with gratitude that the Directorate: Marine and Fishing
       Management has, for the first time in 23 years, taken a step towards
       founding a fully fledged swordfish industry for South Africa by way
       of -


       (a)  the lowering of permit conditions for South Africans;
       (b)  the extension of the period for which permits are valid from two
           months to six months;


       (c)  the initiation of long-term rights for long-line tuna; and


       (d)  the allocation of a further 1000 metric tons of swordfish as an
           additional catch in the Indian Ocean; and


  (2) appeals to the Government -


       (a)  to review all foreign permit conditions, with specific reference
           to Japan, so as to ensure that foreign boats operate under the
           same conditions as their South African counterparts;


       (b)  to cause all foreign boats to catch fish under the South African
           flag, which will enable South Africa to work on a proven catch
           record, as needed for the allocation of an international total
           allowable catch by Icat in November; and


       (c)  to take decisive steps in cases where boats violate
           international treaties and to take cognisance of and lend
           support to the United States of America in their campaign
           against Japanese fishing boats in American waters and the USA's
           resolve to impose economic sanctions against Japan consequent to
           the violation of the international protection of whales.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Is there any objection to the motion?

Mr M L MUSHWANA: Yes, Chairperson.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! There is an objection. The motion will
therefore become notice of a motion.

                CONVICTION AND SENTENCING OF SERIAL MURDERER

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms C NKUNA: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -
  (1) notes -


       (a)  that Mr Justice C J Claassen has sentenced Celaphe Ndlangandla
           to life imprisonment 20 times over and to a further 135 years;
           and


       (b)  that he was found guilty on 19 counts of murder, nine counts of
           attempted murder, six counts of robbery with aggravating
           circumstances and on other minor charges;


  (2) reaffirms that our criminal justice system will not tolerate serial
       murderers that bring extreme fear and trauma to the community; and


  (3) congratulates the 22-person investigating team of Piet Retief for
       their excellent detective work in tracking down this serial killer,
       as well as the prosecution team for their competent work.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

     CONVICTION AND SENTENCING OF THOSE RESPONSIBLE FOR TERRORIST ATTACK

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) welcomes the recent conviction and sentences of those responsible for
       the terrorist attack on a mosque in Rustenburg; and


  (2) believes that the arrest and conviction were the result of excellent
       investigative and prosecutorial work and that this will serve as a
       warning to those responsible for the terror campaign in Cape Town
       that the criminal justice system will eventually catch up with them.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

 APPOINTMENT OF AD HOC COMMITTEE TO CONSIDER PROPOSED PAN-AFRICAN PARLIAMENT

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move the draft resolution
printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:


  That the Council appoints an ad hoc committee to consider the proposed
  formation of a Pan-African Parliament, the committee -


     (1)    to consist of 9 members;


     (2)    to exercise those powers in Rule 160 that may assist it in
         carrying out its task;


     (3)    to have power to confer with a corresponding committee in the
         National Assembly; and


     (4)    to complete its task by 6 October 2000.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC AFFAIRS - SMME
                                   SECTOR

Mr M V MOOSA: Comrade Chair, thank you for the opportunity to speak in the
debate. Hon Minister, members of the Banking Council - I think there are a
few of them here - and other stakeholders, today the debate that we are
having the culmination of a very exciting process that has begun in
Parliament over the past few months.

Members will remember that around May this year, the NCOP select committee
hosted a public hearing on the question of SMMEs and the state of SMMEs in
our country. That public hearing was the result of a number of smaller
public hearings that we had in the provinces in terms of which portfolio
committees, which were involved in economic issues, called together
development agencies, NGOs, stakeholders and SMMEs to speak to provinces
about what the needs were of small businesses in our country.

At the public hearing here we had stakeholders from almost every sector
that was involved in this particular matter. We had people from Government,
the Department of Trade and Industry; the Minister was present. We had
people from Khula, Ntsika, banks, private sector businesses; and we had
private sector organisations such as Sacob, Business SA, Nafcoc, and so
forth.

Arising out of that particular hearing, a number of issues emerged which
have started the ball rolling, which I think everybody is grateful for.
Firstly, what emerged there was that many of the findings that were made in
the national enterprise survey, conducted by the President's office, were
being verified by stakeholders who came to speak. These were findings that
suggested that small businesses were concerned about the fact that not
enough services were being delivered to them in order to develop viable
business strategies and viable businesses. The concern people raised was
about the fact that Government and Government agencies were not
popularising the initiatives they were undertaking in order to ensure that
small businesses got to know about them, and so forth.

One of the most important issues that was raised at that particular public
hearing was the financing of small businesses. Arising out of that public
hearing, a decision was taken that the joint committees of Parliament would
put together a public hearing with a banking institution in order to talk
about the financing mechanisms that revolved around small businesses. I
think this discussion is very important for all of us. Initially I had
decided to prepare a speech and read it, but then I thought it might be
better for us just to engage on a one-on-one basis on the issues that came
out of this particular thing. I think it affects everybody in their
constituencies. When members go to their constituency offices and meet with
people there, the first thing that businesspeople come and tell them is
that SMMEs are really suffering, and that they are not getting services,
finance, and so forth.

We have had a very responsible Ministry and department in that their ears
and eyes have been open. They have kept their ears close to the ground on
all the issues in which we have been involved, to the extent that many of
the recommendations we have made have been taken on and put into the works
of the restructuring process.

However, let me just indicate the severity of this problem. We have had,
over and over again, business organisations coming to this Parliament and
telling us that they have been doing business for years and years. Some of
them have been running very viable and successful businesses. One
organisation that came to us represented black professionals, accountants,
building contractors, etc, who have track records and can show that they
have been running very viable businesses. Many of these organisations and
businesspeople say to us that when they approach the banking industry they
are not given the finance to grow.

All of us agree that if we are to create jobs in this country, if we are to
make sure that we fire up the economy in this country, our primary industry
cannot do it. We cannot expect our primary economy in this country, such as
the gold and platinum industries, and so forth, who are vying for global
competitiveness, to expand their operations to such an extent that they
absorb the entire jobless community in this country. I think Government,
stakeholders and everybody agree that the only way in which we can create
jobs in this country is by firing up the secondary economy. We do this by
making sure that we add value to the raw products that we produce from the
bowels of the earth of our country, taking those raw products and adding
value to them, and selling them as completed commodities on the
international market. We can only do that through small businesses. We can
only do that if the small businesses that begin this process in this
country are black small businesses, because, in doing that and in ensuring
that they are black businesses and that they have an economic empowerment
strategy revolving around them, we ensure that we also target our objective
of poverty alleviation.

These black businesses that are struggling and operating very legitimate
and hard-working small businesses are coming to us and saying a number of
things. They say that they are not getting sufficient services or
managerial and other expertise as and when they require it and that they
are not being mentored enough. Most of all, however, they say that when
they secure a Government tender or a big contract from a big company and
they need to expand their production line or buy raw materials in order to
fulfil the requirements of that contract and then go to the local bank that
they have been doing business with, sometimes for 10, 15 or 20 years, that
bank says to them, ``Sorry, we cannot do business with you because you do
not have collateral.'' That situation is resulting in a very difficult
process in our efforts to ensure that our secondary economy develops.

What are the reasons that the banks give? They say that they want to manage
their risks; that any banking institution anywhere in the world that lends
money must ensure that it balances the risk and the bank's exposure to risk
with profitability; and that they cannot do business with small businesses
which do not manage to reduce that risk.

When one goes deeper into the question and tries to find out what they mean
by this, they usually say that the criteria they follow require that small
businesses must provide collateral.

Let us go deeper into the question of collateral. Let us say that I am a
black small businessman operating in an area such as Alexandra, which is
right next to Sandton, a big community with big business initiatives and a
vibrant subeconomy. My business, however, is in the Alexandra region and I
live in that township, where I own my house. I go to the bank, which asks
me for collateral, and I say that I have a house in Alexandra and that they
can have it as collateral. The bank immediately comes back to me and says
that that is a redlined district. They do not say so in so many words, but
they refuse to take such a client's house as collateral.

When collateral in this country operates around apartheid barriers that
were set up before 1994, we cannot possibly be expected by the banks not to
attack them on the basis that they are engaging in practices that tend to
be racist and that tend to be structurally designed in such a way that they
exclude people from historically disadvantaged communities.

The examples that I am giving hon members are real examples. Just recently,
last week, when the Black Economic Empowerment Commission had discussions
with Comrades Cyril Ramaphosa and Job Ndlovu, we asked two simple questions
of these captains of industry and business, who are also people who really
understand black economic empowerment in this country. We asked them what,
in their view, was the perception out there in respect of the financing of
SMMEs. We asked them whether what people were saying was true, namely that
banks are engaged in racist practices because they do not allow finance to
get out to black SMMEs and black small businessmen. Both Cyril Ramaphosa
and Job Ndlovu, without hesitation and with no doubt in their minds, said
yes. The perception out there is that these are racist practices.

At the hearing a woman who owns a string of butcheries in KwaZulu-Natal
called Awethu Butcheries, spoke. We invited her all the way from KwaZulu-
Natal to come and speak to us because her written submission indicated that
there were some problems in the way in which she was doing business in that
province. She told us that she had been running butcheries in KwaZulu-Natal
for the past 10 to 15 years and had been running cash accounts with the
bank. She had never had a problem with regard to bounced cheques, with the
credit bureaux, and so forth.

When this woman recently had a business opportunity to expand her butchery
business and went to the bank to ask for a loan, they told her that they
wanted collateral - after 10 to 15 years of doing business!

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon member, your time has expired.

Mr M V MOOSA: I am sorry, I have not even come to the meat of the issue.
[Laughter.] [Applause.]

Dr E A CONROY: Mevrou die Voorsitter, minister Erwin en kollegas, in die
witskrif oor 'n nasionale strategie vir die ontwikkeling en bevordering van
klein sakeondernemings in Suid-Afrika, wat reeds in Maart 1995 verskyn het,
word dit duidelik gestel dat, en ek haal aan:


  ... there is ample evidence that the labour absorptive capacity of the
  small business sector is high, the average capital cost per job created
  is usually lower than in big business ...


  ... the small business sector is seen as an important force to generate
  employment and more equitable income distribution, to activate
  competition, exploit niche markets (both internally and internationally),
  enhance productivity and technical change, and through all of this
  stimulate economic development.

Bogenoemde is deur die Minister van Finansies - destyds van Handel en
Nywerheid - in die voorwoord tot die witskrif in 'n neutedop saamgevat met
die stelling dat klein-, middelgroot- en mikro-ondernemings die voertuig is
waarmee die uitdagings van werkskepping, ekonomiese groei en
gelykberegtiging in Suid-Afrika aangepak kan word.

Oor die kritiese rol wat die kleinsakesektor in die ekonomiese,
maatskaplike en welvaartontwikkeling van Suid-Afrika kan speel, hoef daar
dus geen twyfel te bestaan nie. Ek sê met opset dat dit 'n belangrike rol
kán speel, want dit wil voorkom asof dit weens verskeie redes nog nie
daarin kon slaag om werklik sy belangrike rol te begin speel nie, ten spyte
van die feit dat die Departement van Handel en Nywerheid in die boekjaar
1999-2000 R106,7 miljoen van sy begroting vir die ontwikkeling van klein
sakeondernemings beskikbaar gestel het. Een van die uitstaande en oorwegend
belangrikste redes is die oënskynlike probleme wat met die verkryging van
kapitaal en bedryfsfinansiering ondervind word. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Dr E A CONROY: Madam Chair, Minister Erwin and colleagues, in the White
Paper on a National Strategy for the Development and Promotion of Small
Business in South Africa, that was published as long ago as March 1995, it
is stated clearly that, and I quote:
  ... there is ample evidence that the labour absorptive capacity of the
  small business sector is high, the average capital cost per job created
  is usually lower than in big business ...


  ... the small business sector is seen as an important force to generate
  employment and more equitable income distribution, to activate
  competition, exploit niche markets (both internally and internationally),
  enhance productivity and technical change, and through all of this
  stimulate economic development.

The above was summarised by the Minister of Finance - at the time of Trade
and Industry - in the foreword to the White Paper in the statement that
small, medium and micro enterprises represented a vehicle to address the
challenges of job creation, economic growth and equity in South Africa.

Therefore there need not be any doubt about the critical role the small
business sector can play in the economic, social and welfare development of
South Africa. I am deliberately saying it can play an important role,
because it seems that, for several reasons, it has not yet been able to
succeed in really beginning to play its important role, despite the fact
that the Department of Trade and Industry made available R106,7 million of
its budget in the 1999-2000 financial year for the development of small
business enterprises. One of the outstanding and predominantly most
important reasons is the problems apparently being experienced with
acquiring capital and operating finance.]

In its submission, the DTI mentioned that these finance-related problems
include an estimated failure rate of 80% amongst start-ups, and
consequently this perception of risk of SMMEs, the lack of sufficient
financial management support systems for SMMEs, the high cost of operating
SMMEs, which is commonly inversely proportional to the size of the
enterprise, and the perceived insufficiency of credit guarantees.

The DTI recognises the global constraints experienced by banks in South
Africa and argues for an approach which balances the need for sound banking
practice against the imperative to extend services to people excluded from
financial services. The Banking Council also mentions the need to maintain
a sound financial sector in line with international best practice.

The Department of Trade and Industry therefore concedes that it would be
simplistic and potentially damaging to suggest that these problems can be
solved simply by new rules for the banking sector, a view which is
apparently supported by the SA Reserve Bank when it strongly argues that
Government should not force banks to lend to SMMEs.

While the New NP supports the acceptance of the report, it might not be
inappropriate at this juncture to refer to the DTI's submission that it is
becoming increasingly difficult to measure the extent of credit extension
to SMMEs due to definitional difficulties. In other words, what exactly is
a small enterprise, what is a medium enterprise and what is a micro
enterprise? In some instances, reference is made to the very small sector.
Is that an intermediate classification between small and micro?

In the 1995 White Paper it is mentioned that, from a broad strategy
perspective, the most important distinction is between survivalist
activities, micro enterprises, small enterprises and medium-sized
enterprises. It is furthermore stated that, due to the similarity of some
of the obstacles facing them, survivalist and micro enterprises are often
lumped together. From the characteristics of the four categories enumerated
in the White Paper, which should be formalised for defining and
classification purposes, it becomes clear that the problems of each of
these four categories need different policy approaches.

I would propose that the Department of Trade and Industry, as custodians of
the small business community in South Africa, give serious consideration to
the grouping together of survivalist, micro and very small enterprises,
while small and medium enterprises should be treated on a completely
different level.

In Denmark a small or medium-sized business operates on an average annual
turnover of US $150 000, or slightly more than R1 million per employee. If
those standards were applied to small and medium enterprises in South
Africa, how could their financial requirements be compared with and treated
on the same level as those of a survivalist enterprise whose lending
requirements would possibly be in the region of, say, R2 000 as start-up
capital?

The problems, expectations and requirements of the former group are worlds
apart from those of the latter, and by lumping them together as SMMEs when
conferences, workshops and important public hearings are held and reports
are compiled, an unacceptable disservice is done to both groupings. That
the micro, very small and survivalist enterprises do have and do experience
particular problems, as has been pointed out in the report, is being
recognised.

They therefore warrant special recognition and special treatment which
requires less rigid approaches than those adopted by the majority of banks.
This would most likely result in less emotional, though possibly warranted,
submissions by those who represent the smallest of small enterprises at
future public hearings and workshops on the subject.

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson, hon Minister of Trade and Industry, Mr A
Erwin, and hon colleagues, today's small customers can easily be tomorrow's
big shots in the business sector. It is therefore important for banks to
support emerging business talent. New loan seekers, like all loan seekers,
are determined people who will not fail because they want to fail. Loan
seekers, big or small, want to develop an idea and exploit a market which
is there. Banks should give careful consideration to those who are willing
to go where others will not dare to. Business cannot be confined to present
business areas. New areas have to be opened up, if the gross domestic
product is to be increased.

It is in the banks' own interest to find new customers, to nurture and to
train them so that such new customers understand cash flow, loan redemption
and capital accumulation. Until the black African entrepreneur comes into
his own, business will remain stagnant. The growth potential is within the
emerging black sector, and therefore business dictates that banks should be
preparing the fertile field for future harvesting.

Stability in our country was a goal which many people thought we would not
achieve. These people were pessimists. Today, too, there are those
pessimists who believe that our country is destined to fail. I wish to say
to them and all other pessimists that South Africa is unique amongst the
countries of Africa. We have more universities, more technikons and more
technical colleges than any other African country. We are therefore poised
to produce accountants, auditors, economists and business managers from the
formerly marginalised communities. Within ten years, business opportunities
will explode and today's small and micro entrepreneurs will be tomorrow's
captains of industry and commerce. Let us therefore call on the banks to
invest in this potential and to grow with the growth of the black business
sector.

Kungaba yisu elibalulekile kakhulu uma osozimali kanye namabhange bengazama
konke okusemandleni abo ukufukula labo abasephansi kwezohwebo. Abantu
abanamakhono kodwa beswele imali yokuqala imisebenzi bayadinga ukusizwa.
Abaqala kancane, kancane bayakwazi ukukhuphuka kancane, kancane baze
badlondlobale babe ngongxiwankulu kwezohwebo.

Masakhane, sisizane futhi sifukulane. Siyoyinqoba indlala sinethezeke
ezweni lethu lobabamkhulu. (Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[It could be an important plan if businesspeople and banks could empower
small businesspeople. People with skills are in need of financial
assistance in order to start their own businesses. Those who started from
scratch are now able to grow gradually until they become big capitalists.
Let us build, help and empower one another. We will conquer poverty and
live comfortably in the land of our ancestors.]

Mr J L THERON: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister and colleagues, South Africa
has a modern, efficient and adaptable banking industry that has been
unblemished by overt political interference for the past 20 years. It has
been left to finance the movement of goods and the provision of services,
and, more lately, housing loans. It does so under prudential constraints
that are appropriate to these markets, but not necessarily to others, where
the judgment of risk is different and prudential constraints need to vary.

Not all banks are all things to all men. The financing of SMMEs falls into
this latter category, where small loans tend to mean high administrative
costs and the measurement of risks is unfamiliar. If the established banks
are coerced into this direction, their commitment will be qualified, their
risk measurement unsure and the consequences for depositors, borrowers and
shareholders uncertain. Yet there is a demand for SMME finance and its
satisfaction will create jobs. Why, therefore, have more appropriate
institutions not endeavoured to satisfy this demand? The reason is that the
costs of doing so and the risk involved are too high.

Dit blyk uit die verslag van die Portefeuljekomitee oor Handel en Nywerheid
dat die verdere regulering van banke oorweeg word om te verseker dat meer
finansiering beskikbaar gestel word aan swart klein, medium en mikro-
ondernemings. Dit sal 'n kwade dag wees indien daar groter regulering van
die banksektor sal wees om hierdie doelstellings te bereik.

Daar is herhaaldelik by die openbare verhore gesê dat banke rassisties
optree in hulle evaluering van lenings aan KMMO's. Hierdie aantygings is
nog hoegenaamd nie bewys nie en kan dus nie bloot vir die waarheid aanvaar
word nie. Banke beoordeel lenings aan enige persoon of besigheid op grond
van koste verbonde aan die lening en die risiko verbonde daaraan dat die
geld terugbetaal kan word. Banke is immers in die mark om wins te maak op
die kapitaal wat beskikbaar gestel word.

Indien die Regering meer lenings aan KMMO's beskikbaar wil hê, is daar ten
minste twee terreine waaraan aandag geskenk kan word. Ten eerste moet banke
nie meer gereguleer word nie, maar moet die staat meer kollaterale fondse
beskikbaar stel wat die banke se risiko in hierdie sektor sal beperk.
Verder moet die staat meer doen vir die opleiding van klein en nuwe sakelui
wat KMMO's wil bedryf. Alleen wanneer hierdie nuwe sakelui oor die nodige
vaardigheid en kennis beskik om ondernemings suksesvol te bedryf, sal banke
bereid wees om meer geld aan hulle te leen. Die geskreeu oor rassisme teen
die banke staan dus op baie wankelrige bene en daar moet eerder na die
basiese sakebeginsels gekyk word om te sien waarom banke nie meer lenings
aan KMMO's toestaan nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[It is apparent from the report of the Portfolio Committee on Trade and
Industry that further regulation of banks is being considered to ensure
that more financing is made available to black small, medium and micro
enterprises. It will be a bad day if there is to be greater regulation of
the banking sector in order to achieve these objectives.

During the public hearings it was said repeatedly that banks act in a
racist way in the evaluation of loans to SMMEs. These allegations have not
been proved by any means and therefore cannot simply be accepted as the
truth. Banks assess loans to any person or business on the basis of costs
associated with the loan and the risk associated with the money being paid
back. After all, banks are in the market to make a profit on the capital
which is made available.

If the Government wants more loans to SMMEs to be made available, there are
at least two areas which must receive attention. Firstly, banks should no
longer be regulated, but the state should rather make more collateral
funding available which will restrict the banks' risk in this sector.
Furthermore, the state must do more with regard to the training of small
and emerging businesspeople who want to operate SMMEs. Only when these
emerging businesspeople have the necessary expertise and knowledge to
manage enterprises successfully will banks be prepared to lend them more
money. The howling about racism against the banks is therefore on very
shaky ground and one should rather look at basic business principles to see
why banks do not grant more loans to SMMEs.]

What is also needed is a more modest legislative environment for people's
banks which are not subjected to onerous labour, equity and other political
constraints and whose prudential requirements are appropriate to the risks
of a particular community. Both the Reserve Bank and Absa Bank made
suggestions on those lines, but the portfolio committee chose not to
explore these.

Indien daar wetlike voorsiening gemaak word vir gemeenskapsgebaseerde
finansiële instellings waaraan die staat groter kollaterale belegging
verskaf wat die risiko aan banke sal verminder, kan daar ver gevorder word
met meer lenings aan KMMO's. Die onaanvaarbaar hoë vlakke van misdaad in
sekere dele van Suid-Afrika is beslis nie die banke se skuld nie. Indien
hulle die tegniek van ``redlining'' of ``rooi lyne'' gebruik om gebiede aan
te toon waar die risiko vir lenings te hoog is, is dit die staat, die
Polisie, die Weermag en Justisie se taak om die misdaad te beperk sodat
normale handel kan plaasvind.

Enige buitelandse belegger of sakepersoon wat tans versigtig is om geld in
die Wes-Kaap te belê waar die bomme so ontplof, kan begryp word. Hierdie
misdaad- of terreursituasie moet eers opgelos word voordat verwag kan word
dat normale besigheid sal plaasvind.

Daar kan ook nie nagelaat word om die Departement van Handel en Nywerheid
hier in oënskou te neem nie. Hierdie departement transformeer nou al hóé
lank. Die vraag wat met reg gevra kan word, is of 'n ander woord vir
``niksdoen'' nou ``transformasie'' is. Wat doen die Departement van Handel
en Nywerheid om die ekonomie van Suid-Afrika vinniger te laat groei? Al wat
'n mens hieroor kan sê, is: beslis nie genoeg nie! Hopelik sal die
departement nou die een of ander tyd klaarkry met transformasie en begin om
die Suid-Afrikaanse ekonomie te stimuleer vir groter groei en werkskepping.

Gisteraand is daar verslag gedoen oor Cosatu se kongres oor die SAUK-nuus.
Cosatu het duidelik gevra dat die ekonomie gestimuleer word vir groter
groei en werkskepping. Pres Thabo Mbeki het daarop gereageer met 'n
stelling dat die ekonomie getransformeer moet word. Transformasie is tog
nie gelyk aan groeistimulering nie en ek dink dit is nou belangrik om groei
te stimuleer. Dit is dus belangrik dat die Departement van Handel en
Nywerheid hieromtrent iets sal doen. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[If legal provision is made for community-based financial institutions to
which the state provides greater collateral investment which will reduce
the risk of banks, greater progress can be made with loans to SMMEs. The
unacceptably high levels of crime in certain parts of South Africa are
certainly not the fault of the banks. If they use the technique of
redlining to indicate areas where the risk with regard to loans is too
high, it is the job of the state, the Police, the Defence Force and Justice
to restrict crime so that normal trading can take place.

Any foreign investor or businessperson who is currently cautious about
investing money in the Western Cape where bombs explode, can be understood.
This situation of crime or terror must first be resolved before one can
expect that normal business can take place.

One can also not neglect looking at the Department of Trade and Industry
here as well. This department has been undergoing transformation for a very
long time now. The question which can justifiably be asked is whether
``transformation'' is now another term for ``doing nothing''. What is the
Department of Trade and Industry doing to allow the economy of South Africa
to grow more rapidly? All one can say in this regard is: certainly not
enough! One hopes at some or other stage the department will complete its
transformation and begin stimulating the South African economy for greater
growth and job creation.

Yesterday evening the SABC News reported on Cosatu's congress. Cosatu
clearly asked that the economy be stimulated for greater growth and job
creation. President Thabo Mbeki responded to this with a statement that the
economy has to be transformed. Transformation is certainly not the same as
growth stimulation and I think it is now important to stimulate growth. It
is therefore important that the Department of Trade and Industry do
something about this matter.]

Mr K D S DURR: Madam Chair, I agree with the hon member who just sat down
that we cannot reslice the economic cake, we have to bake a bigger cake
with bigger slices for all.

I hope that when the Minister speaks he will tell us all the good things
that have happened, because I miss that in this debate, particularly from
the Government benches. I would have hoped that the chairman would have
told us some of the good things which are happening, because it is not all
bad news. There are some wonderful things happening. There is a lot being
done and achieved. There is also a lot more planned by the Government, the
Government's agencies, and more particularly, by the banks themselves.
Every day we read about the banks taking new initiatives, trying to reach
down and to give access to everybody, from both the deposit taking and
developmental points of view.

I welcome this initiative, provided the initiative is not followed by
legislation and does not perpetuate racial division in our country.
However, the fact of the matter is that this has been a good debate. It has
not been acrimonious. The banks are willing to talk, the Government is
willing to talk. The debate has been anything but acrimonious. It has been
a debate of two sectors trying to find each other, and trying to find ways
and means to promote access to the economy, at all levels of our society,
for all of our people who are able to do that.

If one wants to have access to the economy, one has to have access to
capital, and this applies even if one wants to mend lawnmowers and wants a
thousand rand as a kickstart so that one can go and do it in a garage and
join the service economy - which is a very underrated part of this whole
debate. I think, when we talk about small, medium and micro, we are lifting
our sights too high, because there is such a thing - I do not know what to
call it - as a mini category of people in the service industry.

If hon members look at the US, the greatest growth has been in the service
industry, and today's very small entrepreneur who has been kickstarted with
a few thousand rand is tomorrow's bankable person. So access is the
challenge.

When we talk, we must not talk as if nothing has been done. A lot has been
done and is being done. The point is we all know that we want to do more.
For me the wonderful thing is that everybody is willing, and everybody is
attempting to use their resources to do more. What we must not do is skew
the banking system, and that is to allow them to take nonprudential or
undue risks.

We know how good the prudential status is of our banks in the sense that
when we had the Southeast Asian crisis our banks stood firm when banks in
Southeast Asia all quivered and shook. That was a very good thing for our
country. We know that the fact that our banking movement withstood that
crisis so well built and enhanced the financial reputation of our country.
[Time expired.]
Mr G A LUCAS: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister of Trade and Industry, hon
delegates, permanent delegates and special delegates from KwaZulu-Natal, it
is so difficult to speak after Mr Theron from the DP, because he spoiled
the whole debate. It was flowing properly and he then came and lamented the
crime and transformation, which have nothing to do with the nature of the
debate that we are having today.

The debate is about whether the banks are playing their role in building
the South Africa that we seek to build. Are the banks progressive enough to
recognise that there have been inequalities in our country? It is important
that we redress those inequalities. Mr Theron is way out of line when he
speaks about the bombings in Cape Town and other things. He does not speak
about the difficulties which small businesses are experiencing in accessing
finance in our country. I think the mistake Mr Theron and the DP are making
is that they always mistrust the debates taking place and make a noise
about something which is not relevant.

The debate we are engaged in today in this august House is a very important
one. It is important because it deals with issues of transformation in our
country's economy and how the banking sector responds to its challenges.
Secondly, the debate is important, precisely because it focuses on the SMME
sector and its appropriateness in addressing the broader socioeconomic
issues affecting our society. Thirdly, the debate is important because
through the SMME sector we can greatly contribute to the deracialisation of
our country's economy and society as a whole, and in this way also deal
with the demon of racism which continues to bedevil our nation. That is why
Mr Theron cannot argue otherwise.

Unemployment, poverty and underdevelopment are the realities which continue
to face the majority of our people, especially the youth, the women and the
rural masses. These are the masses that feel the brutality, the ignorance
and the reluctance of the banking sector to support SMMEs. Honestly,
Government alone cannot deal with the immense problems that face our
nation. It would require the mobilisation of all our country's resources to
deal with these issues.

In line with the mobilisation of such resources is the critical role that
our banking sector should play in promoting and supporting the SMME sector
by ensuring access to finance and other essential requirements for the
success of the sector. What came out clearly during the interactions we had
with all the relevant stakeholders was that the banks were not doing enough
to ensure access to finance for SMMEs, especially when it relates to those
previously excluded from the mainstream of our economy. In fact, till today
they are seen as high-risk clients whom one cannot trust.

The briefing that we also received on 13 September 2000 from the Black
Economic Empowerment Commission also confirms the above. This report in
front of us today also indicates that despite the Government's commitment
to taking progressive initiatives in the form of Khula and Ntsika, there is
still reluctance or no response from our private banks, and this impacts
negatively on our programme for the creation of a better life for all, in
particular in ensuring the equal distribution of our country's wealth.

The question we should all ask ourselves is: What more should we do for the
banks to join us and be part of our transformative agenda? I am convinced
that only the banks are able to answer this question. We, seated here today
as representative of all our people, cannot answer this question, precisely
because for the past six years we have done our best to satisfy and
alleviate the fears of the banking sector, without much success. Even
today, banks still feel that it is not yet safe to invest in South Africa,
especially within the black community.

The Black Economic Empowerment Commission also confirmed that all banks
were uneasy towards the SMME sector in particular, and that the major
beneficiaries of this were white South Africans and that they got
assistance through Khula. This is an indication that if, indeed, the
Government guarantee scheme can be used appropriately, it can act as a
catalyst for economic development and address the inequalities in our
society. However, because the banks still think that black people in
particular are not reliable clients to do business with, our initiatives do
not bear the intended benefits of stimulating our economy.

Our province, which is the largest in terms of space, but smallest in terms
of population, continues to feel the harsh realities of unemployment,
poverty and underdevelopment which characterise the South Africa of today.
This situation is worsened further by the reluctance of the banks to
provide finance. They always penalise our people for their lack of
collateral, unclear credit history, etc, forgetting it was only six years
ago that the majority of South Africans were allowed to engage in economic
activity without any law prohibiting them from doing so.

These are the excuses banks make in denying our people the right to engage
in constructive and competitive economic activity, resulting in them being
left on the periphery without hope for a better future. This leaves me with
no option but to conclude that being poor and living in poverty is thought
to be acceptable by our banking sector. They think: ``Let the poor fend for
themselves. We, the South African banks, could not care less. As long as
the rich get value for their money, why should we think about the poor.''

Two branches of the First National Bank closed recently in our province,
namely in Galeshewe and Carnarvon. Customers of those branches were left
stranded and had great difficulty in accessing banking facilities. The
situation was worse in Carnarvon as there is no other branch of FNB.
Customers who, in the main, were black suffered the most as they had to
transfer their accounts without any assistance from their original bank.
That is a demonstration of how unimportant we are in the eyes of our banks,
because we do not have the millions to be of importance to them.
Galeshewe is the largest and most populated residential area in our
province. The reason for the withdrawal of FNB is still a mystery to most
of us. It cannot be argued that it was because of crime, as it was close to
a police station and I cannot remember it ever being robbed. The argument
that it was not productive does not hold water either, as most of us used
their banking facilities.

At another level one would view the closure of the banks and their absence
in the previously disadvantaged communities as an indication of lack of
confidence in these communities, thus sending a clear message to all of us
that the future for the development of the SMME sector looks bleak. In
particular, access to finance from the banks will be extremely difficult.

Furthermore, the majority of the banks in the province do not have
facilities to assist people who require information with regard to starting
their own businesses, neither are they friendly to our people. Thus our
people are not feeling the impact of Khula and other funding options
provided by the state, as banks do not make such information accessible to
our citizens. This is an affirmation of the fact that the banks care less
about the poor. ``Let them get poorer,'' is their message to all of us.
``Ours is only about profit-making. We have no social responsibility to you
South Africans.''

Certain things need to and must be done to remedy the situation we find
ourselves in. We might not, as this House, provide all the solutions,
therefore it requires all other role-players to find answers to our
problems. And I hope that the continuous engagement of the banks will be
much more helpful in finding solutions.

Clearly we need, firstly, to get a commitment from the banking sector and
all others to play a more proactive role in assisting the development of
the SMME sector and to the development of our country's economy. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon Minister Erwin, welcome to the
NCOP.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Madam Chair, thank you very much for
this opportunity to respond to this debate on the tabling of the report of
the select committee of the NCOP on this problem.

I think that a good parliament - and here I use it in the sense of both
Houses of our Parliament - is a good parliament if it allows its citizens
to express themselves on complex issues, and to that end, I think, we must
congratulate Parliament on setting up these hearings and setting the
conference we had here in the NCOP. Many matters of life and the economy
are very complex indeed, and they are not dealt with in the ordinary
electoral processes. No political party will put up a detailed and
comprehensive account of how it is going to deal with specific problems.

So if problems exist, I think for this Parliament to allow people to
express themselves is fundamentally correct and does a service to
everybody. I think there is little mileage to be gained out of political
point-scoring on these matters. The real mileage to be gained is to make
people aware, in a forum of Parliament with some proper processes, of what
the realities of the economy are in a particular area.

Now I think we all agree, everyone including the banks, that we have a
major problem in the provision of finance for small enterprises and that,
as every single study has shown, the problem is far more severe for black-
owned enterprises. We would be, I think, unrealistic and naive not to have
expected that, after decades of a government system where the banks did not
lend to black business and where black businesses' basic rights to wealth
and collateral were restricted.

So what we should be doing, and what the NCOP's hearings have done, is to
hold up a mirror to everybody and say: ``Look, this is the system that was
working. It is failing now, so what are we going to do about it?'' The
banks - and I think they are doing this - realise that any commercial
organisation must listen to its clients. If one does not listen to one's
clients one is going to have problems, particularly the banks. The way they
are seen by ordinary people is very important for their activities and
business.

We have all been saying to the banks - I think they acknowledge it, and I
have a statement issued by the Banking Council's Bob Tucker - that there is
a range of different types of problem. I am not going to go through them
all in detail. Speakers here have outlined them and my department has
outlined them at some length in the hearings. But certainly one of the
problems - and there can be no walking away from this - is that in their
managerial practices the banks must take the provision of small loans to
everybody, particularly black persons, more seriously. They have to devise
strategies to do this. They have to think through how they are doing it.
And I agree with the hon member Durr that there are moves in this direction
in some areas.

However, it is a big problem, and pressure from ordinary people and
pressure from Parliament does make managers in the banking system, the
chief executives of the banks, think about this issue, to try and move
things forward. So the debate we are having is important and I think we
should treat it in the measured way in which the majority of speakers here
have treated it.

The hon member Theron and his party are making a mistake. They are making a
mistake because they are confused as to which way they want to go, and we
should not be confused on this matter because the issue is relatively
simple. What is the nature of that confusion? It is that they say, as that
party, that the market is fundamentally important. But when the market is
not working, they say: ``No, the Government must do everything.'' We cannot
have it both ways.
The Government cannot provide loans to small businesses on the scale that
the banking system can and must. One cannot say to the Government: ``When
the banks do not want to do something, you must do it.'' I think the hon
Vilakazi was quite correct - and this is a point we have been making to the
banking system - to say that this is a market failure. It is not the sort
of market failure that must be replaced by the Government or the public
sector. It is a market failure that emanates from the banks' own decision-
making processes. So they must reflect on those decision-making processes
and they must correct them.

What they cannot say is: ``Just because there is a lot at risk, I am not
prepared to support my future customers.'' That cannot be correct. Anyone
developing their markets must give thought to how they develop those
markets.
Also, what we cannot accept is a bank saying: ``All right, we, the main
bank, think that that is too risky a market, so what we are going to do is
create a little separate entity that must handle all that risk.'' That is
just writing the story of failure. One cannot say that the most risky end
of the market must be served by particular groups or empowerment groups,
etc.

Because the market is risky, but because it also involves the banks' future
clients, it requires deep pockets to enter that market. It requires a
strategy to enter it, it requires deep pockets. In the United States - we
cannot attack them for their view on markets, etc - they realised that they
had a structural problem. They realised that the poor were not being
supported in their economic development, and all they said was: ``All
right, to keep you continuously reminded of your responsibilities in these
areas, you must report to us where you lend.'' That is a perfectly sensible
act, to correct market failure. So the notion that if we pass any
legislation on this matter we are interfering in the banking system is
nonsense.

Obviously the Government has made its views clear, and so has the Reserve
Bank: One cannot say the banks must lend to somebody. No one is saying
that, because then the responsibility for risk assessment moves from the
bank to the Government. But to say that one cannot remind the banks of what
their obligations are, through reporting provisions or community
reinvestment acts, or something, is incorrect. This is, really, standard
all over and for us to start getting excited about that is crazy. One has
to keep reminding people that they have certain responsibilities and
certain obligations.

To say that the Government must take everything is not possible. In fact,
it is fundamentally contradictory, because what one is then saying is that
the cost of capital is high, which it is. Why is the cost of capital high?
It is because there is a perception that there is risk in this economic
system. So one says: ``All right, to solve one problem, which is to help
the small and medium enterprises, what you as the Government must do is
take all the risk and increase the risk.'' This is completely
contradictory. One cannot come to the Government and say: ``Yes, we need to
lend money, but it is very risky. Will you lend it?'' and at the same time
complain about the high cost of finance.

This is a much more complex issue. One has to manage the cost of finance
down, and that is not done by asking the Government to take unnecessary
risks in the economic system.

So let us get a sense of perspective on this. Essentially this is about a
partnership, it is about reminding the banks what they could and should do,
and it is about providing support to that. Redlining is unacceptable. A
bank, whose job it is to evaluate risk, which is the essential feature of a
bank, and ameliorate the risk as far as it can, cannot say that it is not
going to take any risk in a whole area - it does not matter who is in it.
It is unacceptable and we cannot tolerate that in any form of commerce. It
is an inverse of an anticompetitive practice. So redlining is unacceptable.
The bank's job is to take risk. That is exactly what we said to the
microlenders. One cannot pretend to make a loan and then have no risk
because government must take all the risk, ie the fact that we make
automatic deduction for them. We are not prepared to do that. That is not
banking, that is exploitation. If one wants to make a loan to somebody, one
must assume the cost and the responsibility for evaluating the risk of
whether that loan will be repaid. One cannot be like the mashonisas
[microlenders] and go and say: ``Okay, we are giving you a loan. I do not
care whether you are rich or poor or anything, as long as you sign a stop
order for your salary to be deducted.'' That, we are not accepting. That is
not banking; that is exploitation.

So what we need to be clear on in our minds is that if we want a banking
system, it must take risk - it cannot not take risk - it must be
responsible for evaluating the risk, and it must assume the responsibility
of growing its market. To grow its market, it must invest in the small and
medium enterprises that will make up our future, and that should be the
nature of our partnership. There are positives, and we here in this House
can do a lot on these positives.

Recently in DTI we expanded the small manufacturing enterprise development
programme to cover a range of sectors, including the IT sector that is
doing so well. Therefore hon members, as members of Parliament and
representatives of people, not parties, should know what these schemes are
and should be helping their constituencies access these schemes. That is
something we can do. These are cash payments. Why are they cash payments?
They are cash payments so that we can reduce the cost of finance and so
that we can deal with the problems of working capital and solvency for
small businesses.

Our responsibility as leaders of our people is to build this economy, and
we have it in our power to do it by getting out there and working with
small businesses, explaining to them what it is that we have to offer,
helping them to take advantage of that and giving them wise counsel. I
think that is the challenge we all face. The banks face challenges, we in
DTI face challenges, and each and every member faces a challenge to build
this economy. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Report adopted in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! I would like
to take this opportunity to thank the hon the Minister for engaging this
House in a lively debate. [Applause.] [Interjections.] I also welcome the
hon the Minister for the Public Service and Administration in our midst.

     BATHO PELE: PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT PERSPECTIVES TOWARDS AN
                   EFFICIENT AND EFFECTIVE PUBLIC SERVICE

                          (Subject for Discussion)

Mr M BHABHA: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon delegates, our role as the NCOP
is to represent the interests of the provinces at the national policy-
making and opinion-forming forum which is Parliament, and to ensure that
provinces are not overwhelmed with unfunded mandates or required to
implement impractical laws.

An important part of our role is to ensure that the central regulatory and
policy-making national departments of government are taking steps and
measures to support the provinces. We must scrutinise the policies and
strategies of these national departments to ensure that they are a help and
not a hindrance. For this reason, occasions such as the speech of the hon
the Minister are most welcome. I would therefore like to thank the hon the
Minister for addressing us this afternoon on the work of her Ministry.
Since its establishment in 1995, the role of the Department of the Public
Service and Administration has been a supportive one rather than a policing
function, in particular since the promulgation of the Public Service
Amendment Act as amended, and the public service regulations on 1 July
1999. The DPSA has dedicated more resources to assisting departments with
the implementation of the framework. The new regulatory framework has given
rise to many challenges for provincial departments. The new framework
affords greater flexibility to MECs, department heads and managers with
regard to the running of their departments.

Where previously every aspect was regulated in the minutest detail,
managers must now develop their own strategies and policies that are suited
to their own unique circumstances. On the one hand, there is a temptation
to blindly adhere to old rules: on the other, some departments have put
very little in place to replace the outmoded rules. This is one of the
challenges facing the DPSA in supporting public service departments.

It is clear that with additional power has come additional responsibility.
To be made more self-sufficient in matters of planning, strategy and
policy, amongst other things, departments require assistance from the DPSA
and, in some instances, even from outside. The DPSA is therefore advising
all those departments who request advice on customising their systems and
procedure to ensure that flexibility produces the benefits that were
intended. Nowadays all public service departments, including provincial
departments, are the clients of the DPSA.

The DPSA is currently providing support to three provinces that I am aware
of under the donor-funded interprovincial support programme. In my own
province, that is Mpumalanga, if the Chairperson still remembers, we are
currently negotiating to join this programme especially because of its
emphasis on sharing experiences and best practices. There is no reason for
each province to reinvent the wheel. We should learn from each other - our
mistakes as well as our successes - so that the good may be replicated and
the problems avoided.

Two of the main focus areas of the IPSP in the provinces where they are
already under way are performance management and the implementation of the
Batho Pele service delivery policy. These two areas are connected in that
they both relate to accountability, that is accountability to the
legislature for the performance of the department and accountability to the
people - the users of public service - for the quality and quantity of
services delivered.

Performance management and assessment must start at the top, and every head
of department is required to enter into a performance agreement with her or
his MEC and then with her or his senior management. I may just add that
there has been a suggestion that even parliamentarians should sign
performance contracts. In any event I do not know how many of us would
survive. The IPSP support is geared mainly towards the system that must
function effectively below this level. In departments such as Health and
Education the system must cover many thousands of employees, so that it is
clearly no straightforward matter to operationalise such a system.

There are, naturally, also labour relations issues which must be
sensitively addressed in creating a set of procedures aimed at evaluating
the performance of employers. Consistency and fairness are of paramount
importance.

Batho Pele, the service delivery transformation policy, is one of three
policies set out at national level that provinces must implement in our
departments. I would like to deal with it in some detail, because I believe
that it has been neglected by some departments and that it is the key to
improvement in the quantity and quality of service delivery. Batho Pele is
a straightforward and unpretentious policy. Its simplicity is deceptive,
though. The changes it seeks to bring about are quite radical - quite
literally, a transformation of the way in which Government departments
interact with the public.

Batho Pele contains eight principles. Firstly, and most importantly,
departments are required to consult service users about the services they
will receive. This may sound obvious to you, Chairperson, but, if you ask
yourself whether black people, poor people or people from rural areas were
even considered, let alone consulted, in the past, you would agree that
this principle is an important first step for most departments. Very few
people can be complacent or argue that they already know exactly what they
want. In this process it is important for departments to pay special
attention to the needs of the previously disadvantaged, many of whom remain
very much disadvantaged. The principle of equal access addresses this need
by demanding equal access to services for all citizens.

After consultation, departments set standards of service. For example, if
one applied for an identity book, one must know how long it should take to
be issued. The Minister or MEC of a department is required, in terms of
Batho Pele, to make a public commitment about the levels of service his or
her department will provide. I would like to point out here that if this is
happening in our provinces, it is happening very quietly. We, as provincial
representatives, have a duty to empower our colleagues in the provincial
legislatures to require this kind of information and undertaking from MECs.

The fourth principle requires that a service user should be treated with
courtesy and consideration. That is obvious. I hear members say that one
should remember that public servants are workers. They come to work and
they have good days and bad days, too. It is necessary to sometimes remind
them that an ethos of service must inform their every interaction with the
public. We should also remember that we are still moving away from the
position in which the Public Service was government's agent of control
rather than the government's agent of delivery. Public servants must also
apologise for poor service and provide redress, and willingly provide
information about the services that the department provides. This requires,
in some instances, a considerable shift in the mind-set from the old way of
doing things. Batho Bele provides guidance.

We should also not forget the requirement of openness and transparency.
This means that the public have a right to know how much the department
gets in its annual budget and what services it renders with the money.
Departments must demonstrate that they are providing value for money. This
is a key performance area for the head of a department, both in terms of
the Public Service Act and the Public Finance Management Act. The public
should also be informed by notices, pamphlets or posters about who is in
charge, such as who is in charge of the counter, the office or department
and how they may be contacted. It is important that we as politicians and
public servants as well, are occasionally reminded that we are elected or
appointed to serve. The Public Service Commission has undertaken important
work in benchmarking departments against the requirements of Batho Pele.

I am sure I am running out of time, but I just want to round off by saying
that we sit here in Parliament and we also have constituency offices. We
have got to find a way. We are also not insulated from these services, from
bad or good service where it is given. We need to feed from our experiences
in the constituency process in this institution. We have to find a way of
getting information in assisting and complementing the work of the
Department of Public Service and Administration so that we can assist it in
its monitoring role. I think, in so doing, we will do justice to our
constituency work also. [Applause.]

Mr N M RAJU: Hon Chair, hon Minister, hon special delegates from my kingdom
of KwaZulu-Natal, hon colleagues, if a visitor from Mars were to survey the
South African political scene, he or she would find a bleak terrain with
skeletons of broken promises, a veritable wasteland of people's
expectations of a better life lying like potsherds around them. The Martian
would be disturbed by the staccato cries of despair from the young, the not-
so-young, the elderly and the aged, each of whom might well be crying: ``I
fall upon the thorns of life. I bleed.''

In commercial parlance, Batho Pele would approximate to meaning customer
satisfaction. Customer satisfaction in the political sense can only mean
putting the people first. Each and every department of Government's Public
Service must work within clearly defined parameters so as to maximise their
efforts to bring about the expected post-apartheid dividends. The long-
suffering peoples of South Africa need no less. Public servants must see
their role not just as Government, Ministers or workers, but they must
evince a vibrant sense of honesty and integrity and rise above personal
aggrandisement.

The World Bank did not surprise the world when it stated recently that
ineffective government and corruption in many societies was one of many
impediments to poverty alleviation. Does each of our Public Service
Ministries have an efficient bureaucracy dedicated to serving the nation
with honesty and integrity? Does this bureaucracy operate on an achievable
framework that prioritises poverty alleviation? Does the Government
machinery run on pragmatic principles to bring dividends and satisfaction
to the true beneficiaries - the people on the ground?

Because of time constraints, I will focus on just one Ministry, the
Ministry of Welfare and Population Development. The beleaguered Minister,
Zola Skweyiya, has just released a report which presents a very bleak
picture of the delivery, or lack thereof, of social welfare services in the
Republic. Some R3,8 million remains unspent. Who are the victims? It is the
most vulnerable in our midst: children, the disabled, mothers and the aged.
This is sheer indifference to efficient delivery by Public Service
bureaucracy. I consider this to be an unforgivable example of Government's
betrayal of the legitimate hopes of the impoverished, the unemployed and
the marginalised. [Interjections.]

In conclusion, lest I seem to be too critical of Government inadequacies,
let me hasten to add that we welcome new plans by Government to cultivate
an elite corps of senior Public Service managers.

I quote from yesterday's editorial column of Business Day:


  The idea of a highly trained, well-paid and motivated echelon with its
  own esprit de corps would serve as a role model for all public servants
  and make state service an attractive career option. As a mobile, trouble-
  shooting resource they would help ease Government's chronic skills
  shortage.

By launching this new senior management service corps, Government easily
acknowledges that the Public Service exists primarily to serve the public,
not to pay wages and provide jobs. [Time expired.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! I now call
upon the hon member J L Theron. Maybe we will hear more about the visitors
from Mars.

Mr J L THERON: About what, Sir? Oh, about Jupiter, Chairman.

Omdat my tyd so beperk is, wil ek net kortliks konsentreer op die
implementering van die Wet op Openbare Finansiële Bestuur - ons het almal
die wetgewing gekry - en die belangrike rol wat dit kan speel om
doeltreffender bestuur in die openbare sektor teweeg te bring. Daar is 'n
nuwe strategiese plan aangekondig om bestuur in die staatsdiens te
verbeter.

Hierdie strategie kom 'n jaar nadat die wet deur die Parlement goedgekeur
is. Die nuwe strategie sal hopelik môre, Woensdag, 20 September 2000, deur
die Kabinet goedgekeur word.

Volgens me Maria Ramos, Direkteur-generaal van Finansies, is die
vertragings te wyte aan personeeltekorte, 'n gebrek aan geskikte strukture
om die wet in werking te stel en die ingewikkeldheid van die nuwe
maatreëls. Maar met die nuwe strategie kan dit nou in werking gestel word.
Volgens me Ramos sal die nuwe wet korrupsie, bedrog en wanbestuur
aansienlik verminder. Dit sal ook openbare finansies deursigtiger maak en
staatsamptenare verplig om groter rekenskap van hul optrede te gee.

Die nuwe wet gaan nie net staatsamptenare geld nie, maar ook alle
provinsies en alle staatskorporasies. Elke departement moet 'n kundige
finansiële hoof en interne ouditkantoor kry om met die beheer van finansies
te help.

Die nuwe strategie om die wet in werking te stel, stel 'n tydskaal voor en
maak ook voorsiening vir opleidingseminare vir alle betrokkenes. Die
probleem is egter dat me Ramos volgens die Beeld van Donderdag, 14
September 2000 sê dat dit vyf tot sewe jaar sal duur om dié wet behoorlik
in werking te stel. Ons wil graag 'n beroep op me Ramos en die tesourie
doen om die inwerkingstelling te versnel en so gou moontlik met opleiding
te begin.

Vir die goeie bestuur van openbare finansies is dit kritiek dat bekwame,
goed opgeleide amptenare hierdie fondse sal bestuur. Ons sien angstig uit
na die spoedige inwerkingstelling van hierdie wetgewing en die nuwe
strategie. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Because my time is so limited, I just want to concentrate briefly on the
implementation of the Public Finance Management Act - we have all received
the legislation - and the important role which it can play in bringing
about more effective management in the public sector.

A new strategic plan has been announced to improve management in the Public
Service. This strategy comes a year after the Act was passed by Parliament.
The new strategy will hopefully be approved by the Cabinet tomorrow,
Wednesday, 20 September 2000.

According to Ms Maria Ramos, Director-General of Finance, the delays are
due to staff shortages, a lack of appropriate structures to implement the
Act and the complexity of the new measures. However, with the new strategy
it can now be implemented. According to Ms Ramos the new Act will
considerably reduce corruption, fraud and mismanagement. It will also make
public finance more transparent and will compel public servants to be more
accountable for their performance.

The new Act will not only apply to public servants, but also to all
provinces and all state corporations. Each department must have an expert
financial head and an internal audit office to assist with the control of
finances.

The new strategy to implement the Act proposes a timeframe and also makes
provision for training seminars for all stakeholders. However, the problem
is that according to Beeld of Thursday, 14 September 2000, Ms Ramos says
that it will take five to seven years to implement this Act properly. We
would like to appeal to Ms Ramos and the Treasury to expedite the
implementation and to begin training as soon as possible.
For the sound management of public finances it is critical that competent,
well-trained officials manage these funds. We are anxiously looking forward
to the speedy implementation of this legislation and the new strategy.]

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson, hon Minister for the Public Service and
Administration, Mrs G Fraser-Moleketi, hon members, if we could remove the
suspicion that this is just another nice phrase, people's hearts would fill
with national pride. We are, after all, the Government of the people,
chosen by the people to work for the people.

The people always expect a government chosen by them to put them first.
However, we know that between government and the people lies the
bureaucracy. It is here that our government urgently needs to find a new
kind of management which practises ubuntu and which therefore is driven by
a constant need to satisfy the citizens.

If ubuntu is to be attained, there has to be continuous improvement in all
organisational processes within the Public Service. I wish to say to the
Minister that ubuntu is attainable if Government harnesses appropriate
information technology. People expect a faster, better and more
professional service from a Public Service directed by a democratic,
transparent Government.

To put people first means that the department has to train, train and train
the personnel within the service. Only then will we have a Public Service
where the ideals of Batho Pele will be realised. Otherwise we are feeding
our people empty promises and nice-sounding phrases. The people do not want
words, they want action. We all definitely want Batho Pele - there is no
hon member here who does not want Batho Pele - but we all want Batho Pele
in action and in no other form.

I want to say to the hon the Minister that she has a steep challenge
inculcating Batho Pele within a service which has not understood the ideals
of people first. In Africa, many countries won liberty, but lost it almost
immediately because of the failure of and the corruption within the public
service. We dare not fail, we must not fail. We owe our people the right to
a good and professional service. In order to inculcate the spirit of Batho
Pele within each civil servant, we need to honour and reward those who
fulfil the sacred obligation to put people first.

The champions of Batho Pele within the civil service must be given the
highest recognition, and from the ranks of such champions should come our
directors, deputy directors, and directors-general. If qualification is
important, then Batho Pele is more important, and therefore the criteria
for selection for top positions in the service should give priority
weighting in favour of those who demonstrate Batho Pele in action.

We, as the African people, must no longer pay lip service to ubuntu. For
us, ubuntu is a central principle of existence. Without ubuntu there can be
no society and without ubuntu the Government cannot claim to be a
government of the people, by the people, for the people.

The IFP endorses the Batho Pele action and waits to see how soon and how
extensively Batho Pele is demonstrated within the Public Service. Forward
to Batho Pele! Forward to the people!

Ngiyabonga. Ke a legoga. [Thank you.] [Applause.]

Mr J HORNE: Chairperson, hon Minister and members of this House, Batho Pele
is the name given to the Government's initiative to improve the delivery of
public services.

In Sesotho, Batho Pele means ``people first''. The name was chosen to
emphasise that it is the first and foremost duty of the Public Service to
serve all the citizens of South Africa. We can ask: How will Batho Pele
transform the service delivery of the Public Service?

The White Paper on Batho Pele lays down eight principles for the
transformation of service delivery in the Public Service. It also lays down
norms to ensure that the Public Service puts these principles into
practice. The principles are as follows.

There must be consultation. Citizens should be consulted about the level
and quality of the public service they receive and, wherever possible,
should be given a choice from the services that are offered.

Regarding service standards, citizens should be told what level and quality
of public service they will receive so that they are aware of what to
expect.
All citizens should have equal access to the services to which they are
entitled.

Citizens should be treated with courtesy and consideration.

Citizens should be given full, accurate information about the public
service they are entitled to.

Regarding redress, if the promised standard of service is not delivered,
citizens should be offered an apology, a full explanation and a swift and
effective remedy, and when complains are made, citizens must receive a
sympathetic, positive response.

There must be value for money. Public services should be provided
economically and efficiently in order to give citizens the best possible
value for money.

Ter aanbeveling kan ons sê Batho Pele sal grootliks slaag as provinsies as
middelman of voertuig tussen die nasionale en plaaslike regering optree.
Provinsies moet ook opleiding aan die amptenary en plaaslike regering
verskaf om sodoende die beginsels van Batho Pele beslag te laat kry en ook
sodat die drie vlakke van regering as 'n span funksioneer om die toepassing
van die beginsels van Batho Pele te verseker.(Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[In recommendation we can say that Batho Pele will largely succeed if
provinces act as the middleman or vehicle between the national and the
local government. Provinces must also provide training to the officials and
local government, thus enabling the principles of Batho Pele to find
expression and also so that the three tiers of government can function as a
team to ensure the implementation of the principles of Batho Pele.]

Government should not hesitate to make use of the thousands of young,
experienced and well-trained retired public servants on a contract basis,
especially for training on the job, as this would promote an efficient and
effective public service.

Batho Pele has the potential to bring about a major change in the way
public services are delivered. The Batho Pele White Paper is the start of a
continuous process of improvement which will, in time, lead to public
services that the public has the right to expect and which the public
servant is proud to provide.

Mr P D N MALOYI: Madam Chair ... [Laughter.] Comrade Chair, every time I
speak, the Chairperson is not here. I do not watch that chair, and that is
why I called you ``Madam Chair''. [Laughter.]
I insisted upon being, and requested the Chief Whip to ensure that I was,
the last speaker, and I will tell hon members why. I thought that members
of the Democratic Alliance were going to misbehave. Unfortunately they
disappointed me. They did not misbehave today.

In the few minutes at my disposal, I have one objective to accomplish, and
that is to try to indicate what it is that my province, in particular, the
North West, which is the model province, has put in place to try to achieve
the most important principles of Batho Pele.

What guides that model province? Fortunately, today we have our former DG
sitting up there, and I will come to them later. What guides our province
is the eight key principles of Batho Pele, and that is consultation,
service standards, access, courtesy, information, openness and
transparency, redress and value for money. I think my chairperson in the
select committee did explain all these concepts and I hope that everybody
understands what we are talking about when we talk about these eight
principles.

Batho Pele service-delivery innovation is an optimum mix of flexible
service-delivery mechanisms and tools that can be strategically used to
achieve government service-delivery objectives, either directly by us as
Government or in collaboration with other sectors, such as the private
sector or through nongovernmental organisations.

As I said earlier, I will try to concentrate on our province and ensure
that I finish within the eight minutes given to me. In our endeavour to
achieve the principles of Batho Pele, the provincial and national
departments organised roadshows from 21 August to 31 September 2000. The
purpose of these roadshows, amongst other things, was to achieve two
important elements of Batho Pele, and that is to publicise the work of
Government and to engage the public and seek their views on service
delivery. I am happy to report, without any fear of contradiction, that the
two objectives were achieved. Senior managers in both the provincial and
national departments, including a number of MECs and members of Parliament,
were able to interact with ordinary people on the ground.

All departments were able to distribute information brochures in all five
regions of our province. Whilst people were generally not happy with our
service, they were excited that for the first time in the history of this
country, Government departments and politicians were now beginning to reach
out to them.

Out of this experience, it is now proposed - and it is still being proposed
- that we should have similar roadshows at least four times a year in all
provinces, where we will be able to interact with our people. When we talk
about consultation, we are referring to those people on the ground - not
consultation with a few people whom one could probably invite to Cape Town
and who have money to pay for air tickets and all that, after which one
would say that Batho Pele is good.

We are expecting the premier of our province, Comrade Popo Molefe, to
present, at least by 24 September, a comprehensive report about these
roadshows and about what it is that we have achieved, what the shortcomings
were and what it is we need to improve on.

The province is reviewing the conditions of service of senior managers. It
has started with the top management echelons. The process of signing
performance contracts, as comrade Bhabha said earlier, which are aligned to
an appropriate reward structure, is already in place in that province.

I think we all agree that Batho Pele cannot be achieved overnight. As a
number of speakers in this House have said today, it is a dynamic and
continuous task which, of course, will not take two or three days to
achieve, but which is an objective that will take time. [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, I
thank all the members of this House for this opportunity for us to join in
this debate this afternoon. It is my first intervention in this House since
my appointment to the portfolio of Minister for the Public Service and
Administration. I would like to thank everyone, and in particular the
chairperson of the select committee for his overview. I am certain I am
allowed to speak on the issues that one of the members of this House, the
hon Mr Maloyi, did not want to speak about, and this is about the Martians.
I will start with Mars and then I will come back to issues that have been
raised, and there are quite a number of issues that I would like to raise
here today. With regard to the hon Raju's comments, I am a bit disappointed
that his Martians decided to come to South Africa in the year 2000 and
behaved as though there was nothing that had happened before! If only his
Martians had come to this wasteland of broken promises! I would sadly say
that I wonder where these Martians were centuries and decades before. If
these Martians had gone to the Free State in 1852, they would not see a
wasteland there today. They actually would have been quite worried in 1852
about whether there would be any fertile ground for anything to grow that
could be considered the beginning of any humanity, never mind Martians,
being able to go anywhere.

Let us not pretend that the world started in the year 2000 and insult the
inhabitants of this land by presenting a warped picture, because then one
would not merely fall on the thorns of life, but one would actually fall on
the thorns of one's own conscience. I think one would actually be trying to
suggest that this is not the alpha and the omega. I am not sure what term I
would use. I am pretty disappointed.
Let me explain why I am disappointed by these Martians he has chosen,
because they clearly come in some tube that is crossing time. Mind you, it
is information technology that is now being synchronised by a democratic
government which is not based on empty promises. It is actually based on
the commitment to a democracy that has been fought for and put in place and
on the blood of the people of this country since 1994. We are about talking
six years. When one is talking about six years one does not need to travel
through time and be a Martian. One only needs to be a South African who is
sixteen years old to tell someone what the harsh realities are of growing
up in a country that, at one point, was a barren wasteland to some. Now,
after six years, we need to create more fertile ground.

So what are we doing about that? We are trying to ensure that the nine
provinces that employ 70% of public servants and which constitute the major
capacity of Government to deliver social services are working efficiently.
We are trying to ensure that we put in place a public service management
framework that will improve both governance and our ability to deliver on
the promise of a better life for all. There may be some of us in this House
who grunt and grumble and pretend we come from nowhere. Shame on those who
are not prepared to listen! But, so be it - let them do that.

The improvement of the delivery of services has been highlighted through
Batho Pele. If any Martian woke up some of the members of this House and
asked them all eight principles of Batho Pele I am sure they would state
them by heart. However, I think it is not just important to know what the
principles are, but also to say how do we work together to ensure that they
are effected in order to ascertain that the major focus of our work does
include the dimensions that will take that forward.

I will reflect on our efforts to improve the management capacity in Public
Service, to look at opportunities for improving service delivery through
information technology and to look at our continued support for provincial
governments in order to improve their performance.

The thrust in reforming Public Service management, as mentioned by various
other members earlier, has been legislative reform designed to devolve
powers to executing authorities at national and provincial levels, to
enhance the accountability of heads of departments, and to modernise
inefficiency and misconduct procedures and enhance representivity. I am
going to come back to that issue a little later. The legislative reform to
the Public Service Act is supported by Public Service regulations, which is
a comprehensive new management framework - I would like to emphasise that I
mean ``new'' as in ``recent'' - that promotes service delivery,
flexibility, performance and accountability through comprehensive capacity-
building programmes.

What have been the achievements of the Public Service Act and the new
regulations? They include management autonomy within departments and
executing authorities, and these are the MECs in the provinces, Ministers,
Premiers, the President and Deputy President. They have the power to decide
on personnel practices and work organisation. They can delegate further and
take responsibility for the performance management of managerial staff.

I think a second and important point is that the role of provincial
directors-general - and this is important for the National Council of
Provinces - and heads of provincial departments was redefined to make them
more accountable for the management of their respective departments, for
good labour relations conduct and for proper care of state property and
resources.

The power of the provinces to arrange their departments and functions was
enhanced in order to enable them to structure themselves according to their
service-delivery needs as effectively and as efficiently as possible. The
inefficiency and misconduct procedures of the Act were given the status of
a collective agreement. As such, these procedures were streamlined, in
collaboration with employee organisations, to ensure swift and corrective,
but just, actions against nonperforming employees and those found guilty of
misconduct.

If there is any head of department who says to any hon member here that we
cannot fire people in the Public Service because there are no rules to that
effect, please note that they simply do not want to do their jobs. If they
are good managers, there is a framework to allow that to happen. We in the
Public Service say we have dealt with mediocrity for too long, and we are
not going to accept that any more. For that reason we have performance
contracts that now place heads of departments on fixed contracts.
Poor Mr Raju reads the papers late. He only read the Business Day
yesterday. It actually carried a story last week about the fact that we are
putting in place, or developing, a senior management service - a corps of
public servants from the level of director upwards that will form part of
the management team that will facilitate our no longer having the situation
which we have now, where we see provinces being undermanaged and, as a
result, not having the best at the level where 70% of 3 000 of the
management corps are serving at this point in time.

We have hence said that through the senior management service process we
will be able to distinguish between managers and professionals. We will
look at rigorous recruitment and selection systems, competency profiling
for all new and current senior executives in relation to their jobs,
performance assessment systems and, of course, training and development
regimes. What is more, we will put in place flexible remuneration systems.

Let us go to Gauteng for half a minute. If we look at the Chris Hani
Baragwanath hospital, at this particular point in time, before the SMS was
put into place and adopted by Cabinet, we could not recruit a manager to
run that hospital at a level that was required. As a result somebody who
needs to manage staff in numbers in certain instances that are larger than
some national Government departments, or even runs a budget larger than
those of some Government departments, was paid less than a director-
general.

That is now coming to an end. We can ensure that we recruit appropriately,
because we want to ensure that senior managers and high-level professionals
concretise the Government's vision of a better life for all through
effective implementation strategies and the efficient utilisation of
resources.

In this demanding environment, as I said before, we cannot and do not want
to accept mediocrity or a lack of commitment. We want only the finest
candidates to serve, those who are imbued with a spirit of selfless service
to the community. Their talents should be carefully nurtured, and once
developed ...

Mrs A M VERSVELD: Chairperson, on a point of order: Is the Minister
prepared to take a question?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): That is not a point
of order. You are asking a question. Is the Minister prepared to take a
question?

The MINISTER: Chairperson, not at this stage. The hon member had an
opportunity through her party, and clearly did not have the courage to
speak to any of those issues, no. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): The Minister is not
prepared to take a question. [Interjections.]

The MINISTER: Chairperson, I would actually want to go further and say that
the senior management service will also allow a greater mobility to enable
government to deploy individuals across departments at national and
provincial levels. On performance management - and this is an issue that
has been reflected upon - as has been stated before, all senior managers,
from directors upward, are required to sign a performance contract. The
monitoring of the implementation of performance management systems will
allow for more rigorous appraisal of outputs, and thus improve the
productivity of the Public Service. The Public Service Commission is
playing quite a central role and will monitor performance management
systems within the Public Service. They have also developed a framework to
evaluate the heads of departments. This framework was approved by Cabinet,
along with the senior management service, in August.

The areas of performance that are being monitored currently will reflect
the goals of government, as well as organisational goals such as
efficiency, employment equity and good management practices. The central
intention is to ensure alignment of all aspects of government performance
from macro to micro levels and thus focus the efforts of government in a
very direct and deliberate manner. This is the kind of thing of which the
hon member Vilakazi said that we do not just want to talk about those
issues, we want to see them in practice.

However, in order to ensure that hon members are able to monitor what
government has tied senior managers to, we need to talk about it in this
Council today in order that we know exactly what monitoring needs to be
done by the NCOP in supporting the areas that have been identified by the
Public Service Commission.
As hon members are aware, the Public Service Commission has been identified
as the flag bearer of the anticorruption campaign. They have been involved
in a comprehensive programme and process throughout the country where they
have gone out to provinces. The comprehensive programmes they have been
involved in include promoting public awareness campaigns, and also look at
whistle-blowing mechanisms and hotlines.

This will also be complemented by strong anticorruption units within
departments. Obviously the Government and Parliament as a whole need to
look at those bits of legislation that need to be revised in order to
ensure that they are suitable for the Public Service.

I just want to reflect a little bit on the management development
programmes, and I am sure this is an area that we would like to look at
today in order to determine whether, indeed, we are improving the Public
Service in terms of capacity-building for senior managers. This challenge
has been acted upon by the SA Management Development Institute, Samdi, and,
again, even if one dreams about the days when Prof Job Mogoro was in the
North West, he is now in charge of that very difficult task. When the hon
member made a reference, I looked at the back here to see if the entire
management team was in place. I see them all and none of them are up for
redeployment. Let me just tell the NCOP that this is the team that is
actually interfacing and ensuring that we have the right toolkit in place
to transform the Public Service in the manner required.

Let me talk a little bit about what Samdi is doing.

Mrs A M VERSVELD: [Inaudible.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! You may
continue, hon Minister.

The MINISTER: I am used to the peanut gallery and I notice more of it here
than in other places, but we indulge that as well.

I want to say that the training programmes that we are dealing with at this
point look at identifying, validating and prioritising customer and
stakeholder training needs and expectations. We do not want a situation
where Samdi just provides training, identified by it in isolation, on the
needs of departments at both national and provincial levels. We are
developing and delivering competency-based training programmes aligned to
the SA Qualifications Authority and, of course, the National Qualification
Framework in priority areas. Of course, we are also developing and phasing
in support systems and processes in marketing, information technology and
course administration.

There is also the issue that was raised around the Public Finance
Management Act, and the hon Mr Horne indicated that he would encourage ...
No, that was on the Public Finance Management Act, but I have forgotten who
it was. Sorry, it was Mr Theron. There was a sort of request that there
should be more training in order to ensure greater readiness for the
implementation of the Public Finance Management Act. Indeed, Samdi is also
involved in the Public Finance Management Act, in line with our commitment
to ensuring that we meet the needs and requirements identified by the
Government.

Furthermore, in acknowledging the fact that it is going to take some time
to fully implement the Public Finance Management Act, there is an
implementation plan, which has been completed by Government departments. We
are looking at the kind of transitional measures required for the Act to be
operational as we move towards full implementation.
I am not going to go into any other areas around training, except to say
that there are flagship programmes, such as the Presidential Strategic
Leadership and Development Programme.

Let me focus a little bit on information technology in Government. In terms
of information, last month the Department of Public Service and
Administration released the first Vulindlela report, which is aimed at
addressing better quality information on and within the Public Service.
Each department received this report, and it is customised for by each
department's use. All Ministers, all MECs, all heads of department and
human resource management within each department can, based on the
comparative data available in that report, benchmark their human resources
against other levels of Government.

This report is designed to give these managers new insights on what the
human resources situation is in Government. This is a first, and I think
that should be acknowledged as one of the achievements. Maybe some will
argue: ``Not enough'', but I would say it is a great start.

On information technology, our IT policy is designed to address IT
security, that is ensuring the confidentiality of personal data. It is also
designed to influence measures geared towards incorporating IT in formal
and informal education.

We are having an E-government seminar in October, which will prioritise
major E-government projects, which include: electronic document management
systems; a government-wide call centre; paperless government and government-
on-line; and electronic procurement.

This is part of what is to be done by the State Information Technology
Agency under the Department of Public Service and Administration which, at
this particular point in time, is responsible for IT in Government. Hon
members are aware that the Government purchases 60% of IT in the country at
this point in time.

I would like to conclude at this point with the Integrated Provincial
Support Programme supporting provinces. Here I would like to confirm that
at the moment the three beneficiaries of the Integrated Implementation
Programme are the Eastern Cape, KwaZulu-Natal and the Northern Province.
These provinces are currrently being supported by means of this programme
and the purpose of the programme is to strengthen the capacity of
provincial administrations.

We expect to integrate Mpumalanga and the Free State before the end of the
year. We are, through the design of the programme, trying to ensure that we
provide the provinces with technical support in key areas such as
performance management and service delivery.

I think that what I have dealt with today has been pretty technical. It has
clearly been out of league for certain members, who have clearly reflected
their boredom and have shown that they should not be here as public
representatives and that they do not represent those constituencies that
have elected them.

I think earlier somebody raised the point - I think it was the Chairperson
- that maybe there is a need for politicians to also have performance
contracts. But I make the assumption that the performance contracts are
drawn by the voters when they elect particular parties into power. They
make the assumption that whoever comes here to represent them will have the
ability to, at least, listen and try to internalise even those aspects that
maybe considered technical.

I do want to say today that public administration may not always be easiest
sounding, but if we do not get it right, then our commitment to a better
life for all will never be achieved. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Thank you, hon
Minister, for engaging us in this lively debate here. I deliberately
allowed you to exceed your 30 minutes.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, could I perhaps take advantage
of this opportunity and make an announcement on behalf of the Minister. She
is extending an invitation to hon members to a cocktail party at the Old
Assembly dining hall at 18:00, that is six o'clock, this evening. I thought
it important to make this announcement in her presence.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! I am sure that
includes Mrs Versveld.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Yes, and the DA as well. [Laughter.]
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Thank you, hon
Minister.

Debate concluded.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC AFFAIRS - UNECE
                     1958 AGREEMENT ON WHEELED VEHICLES

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution (Western
Cape abstaining).

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC AFFAIRS - UNECE
                    GLOBAL AGREEMENT ON WHEELED VEHICLES

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution (Western
Cape abstaining).

Mr M V MOOSA: Chairperson, on a point of order: The Western Cape delegation
is not present, and somebody else abstained on their behalf.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): No, it was Mrs
Witbooi, Mohseen. [Interjections.] Order! There is noise in the House.

    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON LAND AND ENVIRONMENTAL
          AFFAIRS - AFRICAN-EURASIAN MIGRATORY WATERBIRD AGREEMENT

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 16:14.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS
                          FRIDAY, 15 SEPTEMBER 2000

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Communications:


     (1)    Report and Financial Statements of Sentech for 1998-99.


     (2)    Report and Financial Statements of Telkom South Africa Limited
         for 1999-2000.


     (3)    Report and Financial Statements of the Independent Broadcasting
         Authority for 1998-99, including Report of the Auditor-General on
         the Financial Statements for 1998-99.

                          MONDAY, 18 SEPTEMBER 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Minister of Transport on 12 September 2000 submitted a draft
         of the South African Rail Commuter Corporation Limited Financial
         Arrangements Bill, 2000, as well as the memorandum explaining the
         objects of the proposed legislation, to the Speaker and the
         Chairperson in terms of Joint Rule 159. The draft has been
         referred to the Portfolio Committee on Transport and the Select
         Committee on Public Services, respectively, by the Speaker and the
         Chairperson in accordance with Joint Rule 159(2).

2.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 15 September 2000 in terms
         of Joint Rule 160(4), classified the following Bill as a section
         76 Bill:


         (i)     Construction Industry Development Board Bill [B 59 - 2000]
              (National Council of Provinces - sec 76) - (Select Committee
              on Public Services - National Council of Provinces).
                         TUESDAY, 19 SEPTEMBER 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Minister of Finance on 29 August 2000 submitted a draft of
         the South African Reserve Bank Amendment Bill, 2000, as well as
         the memorandum explaining the objects of the proposed legislation,
         to the Speaker and the Chairperson in terms of Joint Rule 159. The
         draft has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance and
         the Select Committee on Finance, respectively, by the Speaker and
         the Chairperson in accordance with Joint Rule 159(2).


     (2)    The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to
         appropriate committees as mentioned below:


         (1)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio
              Committee on Finance and to the Select Committee on Finance
              for consideration and report:


              (a) Second Adjustments Estimate of Expenditure to be defrayed
                  from National Revenue Fund during the Financial Year
                  ending 31 March 2000 [RP 5-2000].


              (b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Adjustments Estimate for
                  1999-2000.


         (2)     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee
              on Transport and to the Select Committee on Public Services.
              The Report of the Auditor-General contained in the report of
              the Road Accident Fund is referred to the Standing Committee
              on Public Accounts:


              Report and Financial Statements of the Road Accident Fund for
              1998-99, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
              Financial Statements for 1998-99.
         (3)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio
              Committee on Communications and to the Select Committee on
              Labour and Public Enterprises:


              (a) Report and Financial Statements of Sentech for 1998-99.


              (b) Report and Financial Statements of Telkom South Africa
                  Limited for 1999-2000.


         (4)     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee
              on Communications and to the Select Committee on Labour and
              Public Enterprises. The Report of the Auditor-General
              contained in the report of the Independent Broadcasting
              Authority is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
              Accounts:


              Report and Financial Statements of the Independent
              Broadcasting Authority for 1998-99, including Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 1998-99.


