---
title: 'National Assembly - 06 April 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: APRIL
month_slug: Apr
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2000-04-06
---

                           THURSDAY, 6 APRIL 2000
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr S D MONTSITSI: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that today is the 21st anniversary of the unjust execution of a
       young South African patriot, Kalushi Solomon Mahlangu;

  (2) salutes this young revolutionary, his mother and the rest of the
       youth of South Africa for their role in the struggle to defeat
       apartheid;

  (3) pledges that such injustice will never again be meted out against the
       youth;

  (4) acknowledges that the struggle that Kalushi Mahlangu died for still
       continues today;

  (5) calls on the youth to intensify the culture of learning, to support
       the national youth service programme, and to intensify the struggle
       against racism, crime and the spread of HIV/Aids; and

  (6) also calls for urgent interventions to address the social injustices
       still suffered by the youth, such as joblessness, crime and poverty.

[Applause.]

Mr K M ANDREW: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that at the next sitting
of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) records its alarm at the rapidly deteriorating situation in Zimbabwe
       which has already led to deaths, economic chaos and constitutional
       instability;

  (2) observes that the Zimbabwean crisis will have seriously adverse
       economic, social and political consequences for South Africa and the
       whole Southern African region;

  (3) notes that foreign investment is being frightened away as Afro-
       pessimism overwhelms any dreams people may have of an African
       renaissance or an African century;

  (4) notes the deafening silence of the South African Cabinet on this
       issue; and

  (5) notes that the Speaker has declined to agree to a request from the DP
       for a special debate on Zimbabwe; and


  therefore calls on the President of South Africa to inform Parliament
  what the Government has done, or intends doing, about the crisis in
  Zimbabwe.

[Applause.]

Prof L B G NDABANDABA: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the Judicial Services Commission bears stupendous
       responsibility in appointing the best candidate for the position of
       Judge-President in the respective provinces;

  (2) further notes that the candidates chosen should have high integrity
       and be acceptable to all South Africans as worthy bearers of the
       judicial mantle;

  (3) applauds the proposed national code of conduct for judges adopted at
       a meeting of senior judges this week; and

  (4) conveys its good wishes to the Judicial Services Commission and
       desires that it will fulfil what this House anticipates.

Mr B H VILAKAZI: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the Africa-European conference held in Cairo was a
       significant step in forming a strategic partnership between Africa
       and the European Union;

  (2) further notes the remarks of President Mbeki that our two continents
       have been in constant interaction, even earlier than the age of the
       Roman Caesars, which interaction very often has brought us bitter
       fruit; and

  (3) welcomes the agreement, in principle, to the African proposals that
       European countries take steps to ensure that money stolen by African
       leaders and deposited in European banks is returned to the countries
       from which that money was stolen.

[Applause.]

Mr A Z A VAN JAARSVELD: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the neglect by the former Minister for Welfare and
       Population Development to identify and act upon the underspending of
       78,5% of her budget is solid proof that the ANC lacks the capacity
       and ability to carry out its election promises to the people of South
       Africa;

  (2) calls on that Minister, instead of blaming the officials, to explain
       to this House why she did not exercise her political oversight of the
       department in a responsible manner;

  (3) agrees that the acknowledgement by the director-general, Ms Angela
       Bester, that the department lacked the capacity at management level
       to drive the process, is a sad reflection on the ability of the
       Government to appoint and train people who really understand the need
       for the Government to transform the department;

  (4) notes that the efforts of the department to try to explain away the
       fact that the money was not spent owing to various reasons does not
       take away the suffering of those people who were supposed to benefit
       from the poverty alleviation programme - the poor and the destitute
       are still suffering; and

  (5) wonders how long it will take to implement the programmes that were
       envisaged four years ago, as the implementation of the backlog will
       put even greater demands on the department in terms of capacity and
       the budget in the future.

[Interjections.] [Time expired.]
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! May I request members to stick to the one minute
they have for notices of motion. Your notice of motion will be printed in
full, but please oblige when the Chair asks you to take your seat.
[Interjections.]

Mr N M RAMODIKE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that at the next
sitting of the House I will move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with dismay and trepidation the squandering of millions of
       rands for housing projects by unscrupulous developers in the Western
       Cape;

  (2) notes with grave concern that these merciless and unscrupulous
       elements have fraudulently coerced the desperate beneficiaries of the
       housing projects to confirm in writing that the projects have been
       completed and are ready for occupation in order to get subsidy
       payments;

  (3) notes, in conclusion, the alarming homelessness and abhorrent health
       hazards at these unfinished housing projects; and

  (4) calls upon the Minister of Housing to take steps to stamp out
       corruption and mismanagement of funds earmarked for housing projects
       in this province.

Ms M P COETZEE-KASPER: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the process of reregistering welfare grant recipients went
       off smoothly in the Goldfields social welfare regional area;

  (2) commends all the officials involved in the process in this area for
       upholding the principle of Batho Pele;

  (3) expresses its sincere thanks for the positive attitude and helpful
       manner in which they dealt with, in particular, the elderly; and

  (4) appeals to officials everywhere to emulate this example and show more
       compassion, understanding and general goodwill in their interaction
       with people on a daily basis.

[Applause.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the PAC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with deep concern the statement by the Minister of Health
       regarding nevirapine and clinical trials being conducted in South
       Africa;

  (2) finds it unfortunate that she has used the tragic event of deaths
       during the trials to make a political point that justifies her doing
       nothing to stop mother-to-child transmissions;

  (3) is of the opinion that the control of drug trials in South Africa is
       useless as the Medicines Control Council and the ethics committees
       have admitted that they cannot monitor these trials after they have
       approved the protocols;

  (4) notes that the Minister did not make it clear in her statement that
       there is a profound difference between using a single dose of
       nevirapine to prevent mother-to-child transmission and as part of a
       triple cocktail aimed at preventing Aids;

  (5) calls on the Minister to be consistent and take nevirapine off the
       shelves of private pharmacies until the long-term toxicity has been
       established;
Â 
  (6) notes that nevirapine has been registered by the Medicines Control
       Council for two years;

  (7) calls on the Minister to withdraw the registration so that there will
       be equity ...

[Interjections.] [Time expired.]

Mr M A MANGENA: Madam Speaker, I give notice that at the next sitting of
the House I shall move on behalf of Azapo:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  women qualify for old-age pension at the age of 60 while men
           qualify for the same pension at the age of 65;

       (b)  this is a source of much dissatisfaction among men, especially
           in this era of high unemployment that has hit older men very
           hard;

       (c)  this amounts to discrimination against men on the basis of their
           gender; and

       (d)  it is a violation of the Constitution that outlaws
           discrimination against anyone on the basis of gender or sex; and


  (2) calls upon the Welfare department to treat men and women as equals by
       rectifying this anomaly as a matter of urgency.

[Applause.]
Mnr J F VAN WYK: Mevrou die Speaker, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag namens die ANC sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) kennis neem van die vorming van 'n alliansie tussen die AEB, die IVP,
       die UDM, die FA en die Nuwe NP om die plaaslike regeringsverkiesings
       in die Noord-Kaap te veg;

  (2) ook kennis neem daarvan dat die meeste van die partye in hierdie
       alliansie die voortsetting van die wit bevoorregting van die ou orde
       steun en fundamentele transformasie in ons land teenstaan;

  (3) glo dat so 'n alliansie sal misluk in sy poging om die steun te wen
       van die meerderheid mense in die Noord-Kaap, wat die ANC en
       verandering in ons land steun; en

  (4) dus 'n beroep doen op alle opposisiepartye wat demokratiese
       verandering steun om hulle aan die alliansie te onttrek en met die
       ANC saam te werk om verandering in diÃ© provinsie te bespoedig.

[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr J F VAN WYK: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the formation of an alliance between the AEB, the IFP, the UDM,
       the FA and the New NP to contest local government elections in the
       Northern Cape;

  (2) further notes that most of the parties in this alliance support the
       perpetuation of white privilege of the old order and fundamentally
       oppose transformation in our country;

  (3) believes that such an alliance will fail in its attempt to win the
       support of the majority of the people in the Northern Cape who
       support the ANC and change in our country; and

  (4) therefore calls on all opposition parties who support democratic
       change to withdraw from this alliance and co-operate with the ANC to
       accelerate change in this province.

[Applause.]]

Mr B G BELL: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House is of the opinion that while Ms Faith Sithole has received
  a magnificent golden handshake and Mr James Nkambule remains on the
  payroll of the Mpumalanga province, no one will take seriously the ANC's
  commitment to fighting corruption.

[Applause.]

Mr M A MZIZI: Madam Speaker, I give notice that at the next sitting of the
House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That, whereas -


  (1) winter is approaching and thousands upon thousands living in informal
       housing will again use braziers and open fires to keep warm; and

  (2) the absence of planning has led to dwellings being built too close to
       one another without adequate roads for easy accessibility and without
       a regular water supply,


  the House therefore calls upon the Minister of Housing to -


       (a)  make an urgent assessment of the fire hazard in such areas;

       (b)  provide guidelines to informal dwellers on how to keep warm this
           winter;

       (c)  provide minimum planning standards which have to be observed in
           respect of, inter alia, the size of the plot, the extent of
           building and the size and layout of roads; and

       (d)  provide for a management committee for each such area.

Mnr P A GERBER: Mevrou die Speaker, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag namens die ANC sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) daarvan kennis neem dat die dogter van genl Constand Viljoen gister
       in die landdroshof in Mpumalanga verskyn het op 'n aanklag dat sy 'n
       werker by haar slaghuis verneder het deur haar rond te stamp en haar
       te forseer om haar klere in die openbaar uit te trek;

  (2) verder daarvan kennis neem dat dit na bewering die gebruik is by diÃ©
       bepaalde slaghuis dat werkers soggens voor werk en smiddae nÃ¡ werk
       geweeg word om vas te stel of hulle vleis onder hul klere wegsteek;

  (3) erken dat hierdie soort verwerplike aantasting van mense se
       menswaardigheid nog algemeen in Suid-Afrika is; en

  (4) 'n beroep op alle Suid-Afrikaners met 'n sin vir geregtigheid en
       respek vir hul medemens doen om sulke gebruike aan die kaak te stel
       en met hand en tand te beveg.

[Tussenwerpsels.] [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion
follows.)

[Mr P A GERBER: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move on
the next sitting day on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the daughter of Gen Constand Viljoen appeared in the
       magistrate's court in Mpumalanga yesterday on a charge that she had
       humiliated a worker at her butchery by pushing her around and forcing
       her to take off her clothes in public;

  (2) further notes that it is allegedly customary at this particular
       butchery to weigh workers before work in the morning and after work
       in the afternoon to establish whether they have hidden meat under
       their clothes;

  (3) acknowledges that this sort of objectionable assailing of the human
       dignity of people is still the order of the day in South Africa; and

  (4) appeals to all South Africans with a sense of justice and respect for
       their fellow humans to expose such practices and to fight them tooth
       and nail.

[Interjections.] [Applause.]]

Dr B L GELDENHUYS: Mevrou die Speaker, ek gee kennis dat ek op die volgende
sittingsdag namens die Nuwe NP sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) daarvan kennis neem dat grootskaalse intimidasie van opposisiekiesers
       in Zimbabwe reeds in volle swang is;

  (2) die internasionale gemeenskap versoek om toe te sien dat die komende
       verkiesing in Zimbabwe wel vry en regverdig is; en

  (3) die Suid-Afrikaanse Regering versoek om 'n veelparty-afvaardiging as
       deel van 'n internasionale waarnemingspan voor die verkiesing na
       Zimbabwe te stuur.
(Translation of Afrikaans Notice of Motion follows.)

[Dr B L GELDENHUYS: Madam Speaker, I give notice that I will move on the
next sitting day of the House on behalf of the New NP -


  That the House -


  (1) notes that large-scale intimidation of opposition voters is already
       taking place in Zimbabwe;

  (2) requests the international community to see to it that the
       forthcoming election in Zimbabwe is indeed free and fair; and

  (3) requests the South African Government to send a multiparty delegation
       to Zimbabwe as part of an international team of observers, prior to
       the election.]

Dr G W KOORNHOF: Madam Speaker, I give notice that at the next sitting of
the House I will move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the reported statements of SACP secretary-general,  Blade
       Nzimande, on 2 April 2000, that his organisation would seek to shape
       budgetary priorities that are more aligned with their vision and,
       furthermore, that economic growth requires an economically active
       state willing to co-ordinate and discipline the capital resources of
       society; and

  (2) calls on the Cabinet, specifically the Ministers of Finance and of
       Public Enterprises, to distance themselves from the view of
       nationalisation expressed by its alliance partner, which is in direct
       contradiction to the expressed views embodied in the Budget speech
       and the medium-term Budget policy statement.

[Interjections.]

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 32 - Trade and Industry:

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Madam Speaker, Deputy President,
members of the National Assembly and members of one of my best teams, Mr
Khaya Ngqula from the Industrial Development Corporation and his team, I am
very privileged to once again have the chance to present the budget of the
Department of Trade and Industry for the consideration of the House. The
portfolio committee has examined the budget and its report is available to
members. The coming period will be an important time for the work of the
Department of Trade and Industry, and the Minister and Deputy Minister
responsible for this department.

As the President indicated in his opening address to this Parliament, we
have never been better placed as an economy to achieve sustainable and more
equitable economic growth. But this is not guaranteed, and all major
economic actors, including the DTI, will have to ensure a maximum effort to
translate this potential into a reality. The DTI has reflected long and
hard on its performance in, and on the experience of, the years of our
democracy. Much has been achieved, but much has to be done.

This year, we are going to carry out an important reorganisation of the
operations of the DTI in order to better focus our efforts and to improve
on our capacity to deliver the economic services that we are responsible
for providing. In doing this, it is essential to reflect on what we are
trying to do, the context in which we are doing it and the prospects for
rapid success. Against this we can measure what we have, in fact, achieved.

The range of work covered by the DTI is very extensive, and I will not be
able to cover it all here. We have tried to improve the quality of
information on all aspects of the work and to make it more accessible to
members. Most of the basic information on the DTI's budget and how it is
expended is set out in the small booklet which I think members have
available to them. There was additional information in the presentation
made to the portfolio committee.

I am pleased to say that our work is very professionally and thoroughly
monitored and assessed by Dr Davies and the portfolio committee in the
House, and by Mr Moosa and the select committee in the NCOP. I would like
to thank them for keeping us on track, and doing so in a very supportive,
but frank, way.

In the commentary from all quarters on the work of the DTI, the three most
frequent criticisms that are made is that we have no industrial strategy,
that we are not creating enough jobs and that we are failing to generate
enough small and medium enterprises. These criticisms are certainly
focusing on the correct area as these are without a doubt at the heart of
the work of the DTI. As Minister I would accept that in each case the DTI
would like to be able to say that there is no cause for criticism, but I
cannot say this.

The task we face is immense, and we always want to do better. In trying to
evaluate the impact that the DTI can and does have on the economy, we have
to try to be as accurate as possible in our assessment so as to take the
correct adjustment measures. I am confident that the basic policy approach
adopted is correct in our circumstances. Given the massive structural
problems that we are dealing with, the effects of a policy change will take
a number of years to be felt.

We can now see that we did underestimate the depth of the structural
problems and, accordingly, the time that it would take to bring about
change. The impact of the international financial crisis was severe and
came just as we were gathering momentum. However, adjusting for this
underestimation, we are doing well. But now is the time to increase the
tempo of positive change and to utilise the greater policy space that we
have built for ourselves.

What did we set out to do? In short, we had to induce a major restructuring
of our economy. This could not be dealt with by the DTI alone, and our work
both complemented and required changes in finance, labour, agriculture and
the public sector. These other areas of change have all proceeded in the
consistent and effective way that has been required.

In this massive campaign to turn around the whole economy, the DTI had to
focus on a particular set of fronts. The real economy that we faced in 1994
can be succinctly described as being overly protected, dependent on primary
and commodity exports, having high costs of domestic production,
characterised by extreme wealth, racial and geographic inequality, and a
crisis of investor confidence. The few support measures used by the old
regime were unfocused and fiscally unsustainable.

South Africa is essentially a trading economy. This is a product of the
imperial period, but now also a requirement of our continued growth
efficacy in the context of the world economy. This basic feature of our
economic life is increasingly understood by economic actors, and the
economy is adjusting to this self-knowledge in a very positive way. There
are those who have not understood this, and they are vocal. In a few short
years, I am quite sure that they will not be active in this economy,
because they will have failed their stakeholders, be they shareholders,
constituencies or members.

When an economy exports some 30% of its production and imports a little
more in exchange, then it is part and parcel of the world economy in all
aspects of its economy. As I have stressed in previous budget debates, the
distinction between the traded and nontraded sectors of an economy is no
longer of great policy significance. The link between the traded and
nontraded as inputs and outputs for each other is too great to make the
separation. Globalisation, that imprecise term but very real phenomenon,
has meant that economies the size of South Africa's  can only follow an
inward-looking economic policy at great cost to their economic wellbeing.

To accept this as the basic starting point for action, one should not see
globalisation as some panacea or new utopia. Like all processes of
political economy, it holds both potential and threat. This is because it
is a process of change. If there is a defining dimension of the present
process, then it must be the speed with which change can now be effected
and knowledge disseminated. This holds great opportunity and equally great
threat.

To take advantage of this requires adaptability in the economy, and at the
level of the individual. Rigidities in the structure of an economy or
public and private sector institutions are a danger, as they resist change.
This could be said to be the case for the market. However, since the market
now acts on the world scale, its inherent weaknesses are elevated to the
world economy as well.

The market is adaptable, but in the absence of institutional direction, it
is expedient and short-sighted. This has an aggregating and often herd-like
effect on economic activity. The speed with which the market can now
respond makes it adapt fast, but it also increases the magnitude of the
mistakes. Mistakes are now punished rapidly, and the recovery is slow
unless the state plays an active and positive role.

This has being graphically illustrated in the recent crisis in Southeast
Asia. The recoveries there have been led by decisive and well-considered
state action. This highlights the role of the state in the economy. This
role is certainly going through profound changes. The challenge facing a
modern state, particularly one responsible for an economy the size of South
Africa's, is to ensure that the market does not just move to where it is
easier to go. If it does this, it will concentrate economic activity and
exacerbate poverty and inequality. However, previous remedies to deal with
this problem are not automatically applicable.

The demands made on the state to actually facilitate growth and development
are more complex than ever before. The state has to define its role and
then carry out the necessary institutional changes to effect this role. We
must avoid the futile policy debates as to whether the state is good or bad
and whether it should directly intervene in economic activity or not. The
state has to change, if it is to have a positive impact on the economy. It
has to change the composition of its resources and the quality of its
actions.

The state will intervene, and the form and content of this intervention
will range from direct intervention in production processes to legislation,
financial support, and providing a vision and persuasive leadership. The
restructuring of the inherited apartheid state is an absolute requirement
for development in South Africa, but the same applies to private
corporations and trade unions in South Africa. This is why we have to work
together in Nedlac to address these very fundamental challenges.

As for the DTI, we have to become more intelligent and the quality of our
interventions on all matters has to rise. This requires the correct
deployment of our human resources and a higher quality of management
systems. It is also for these reasons that we have been so active in
international trade matters. This ranges from bilateral agreements to the
role of the WTO and Unctad. This is not some external preoccupation, but a
realisation that events in these fora can play a decisive role in our
economy.
The challenge of all leadership is to identify the need for change and then
to undertake it with determination, but also with compassion for those who
may be adversely affected by the change. There will always be those who are
hurt by change, and that is why democracy is now so fundamental to
governance in the world economy as it develops. Leaders must be freely
chosen and their propositions on change freely debated and interrogated.

The DTI is charged with the following responsibilities in this very complex
but essential process of transition: To facilitate, firstly, the access to
sustainable economic activity and employment through a restructuring of the
economy; to facilitate and encourage higher levels of investment, both
national and international; to increase market access for South African
products; to strengthen our status as a trading nation; and to establish a
fair, efficient and competitive marketplace for business, workers and
consumers.

These objectives in turn require programmes and strategies that will lead
to these desired outputs. Accordingly, the following are the main thrusts
of the work of the DTI: Adding value to the economy, so that it is capable
of providing more and better quality employment opportunities; contributing
to the international competitiveness of our economy, remembering the
injunction that I outlined earlier, viz that a division between traded and
nontraded sectors is no longer an accurate understanding of the economy;
promoting SMMEs so as to ensure greater participation in the economy, more
employment opportunities, greater efficiency and more equitable
distribution of wealth; and ensuring that there is black economic
empowerment to overcome the economic destruction and reduction of capacity
that has been caused by racism.

All this requires many different actions, but let me say to those who see
this as an unnecessary cost and burden that is driven by racial politics
that they are probably part of those who will not be successful in this new
economy. Maximum growth can only be achieved by empowering all our people
to be part of our economy in all its dimensions. Like all fundamental
causes it is better for being an essentially just cause for our society.

Next, the DTI focuses on the building of the SADC region since we cannot
grow if our neighbours are not growing. We are not a large enough economy
to be able to ignore the importance of the total economic potential of this
region. This is, of course, the very obvious reason why this Government is
particularly concerned about the position in Zimbabwe. But this is also
part of the wider realisation that Africa needs to get out of its present
predicament itself. It is this self-realisation, driven by a pragmatic
need, that is the hallmark of the renaissance that is slowly flowering.

Finally, it is our task to reduce wealth inequity. Poverty may provide the
base for low wages, but, as we see everywhere, do not generate growth and
development. The past has created excessive wealth disparity and distorted
our economy. This is a very dangerous position as it will be reinforced by
a global market that seeks immediate opportunity and takes no
responsibility for the long-range development of society.

Over the next two years, the DTI will begin to present our budget in a
manner that coincides more readily with these strategic objectives and
programmes. Our policy documentation will also align with this approach. In
the short booklet made available, we have made a start on this by
presenting the budget information in a slightly different way.

Regarding the question of whether the DTI has an industrial strategy, the
answer is: Yes, but it is a far from simple formula for success. In fact,
it is part of a larger development strategy, which makes it more complex.
Actions on an industrial strategy can range from detailed negotiations on
investment projects in the auto and steel industries and ecotourism to
industry programmes for the auto, steel or clothing industry, as well as
automacro interventions such as tariff reform or competition law. We are
working to make this information more accessible to all. We have also
realised that the management of such a strategy needs a new institutional
structure and more efficient means of delivering the services we provide.

The size of the rollovers that have characterised the DTI budget over the
last years has been one of the major causes for us to begin focusing on the
efficiency of our delivery mechanism. Can we create jobs in this economy?
The level of unemployment in the economy is quite unacceptable. What that
level is remains imprecise, as does the extent of the structural employment
change in this economy. These latter two issues are crucial in determining
how we may need to adjust policy, but they do not detract from the urgent
need to create more jobs.

The Government made a strategic choice to restructure the economy in a very
profound way. The DTI is responsible for a large part of that restructuring
process that has to take place in the private sector. I have spelt out the
reason for this above. In taking this decision, we knew that there would be
job losses as the inefficiency - and at times the outright decrepitude - of
the old economy was exposed. There can be no doubt that, in general, the
hundreds of thousands of new jobs created since 1994 are of a more
sustainable quality than before. There is a caveat to this, and that is the
extent of casualisation that is occurring in some sectors. Casualisation
that is designed solely to reduce wages is a shortsighted response.

The employment situation is undergoing deep structural change. We have, I
believe, made major and positive structural changes in the old formal
sector of the economy. The employment situation in the more dynamic sector
of the economy is stabilising and its income level has improved. This
formal sector now has to grow at higher rates in order to make a
significant and positive contribution to employment. This will come from
the internal growth of the economy and increased exports.

New sectors and geographic areas of the economy now have to receive
priority. The structural base for employment creation has been laid and the
dangers of rapid de-industrialisation have been avoided. However, to build
on this, we have to work together. There are many who are still whining
because they cannot see the opportunities that exist. They have been used
to an easy life and cannot see the possibilities that are now facing them.
I think it would also be correct to say that the current campaign by Cosatu
against job losses is understandable, and it is to their credit that they
represent the interests of their members with vigour.

However, we must not go too far down this road, as it is a cul-de- sac that
can end up as a self-fulfilling prophecy. We need to ensure a co-ordinated
and collective response that does not deny the rights of each and everyone,
but combines our strengths. It is for this reason that I am very pleased
that the discussions with both business and labour and the DTI have
intensified considerably in the last months.
With regard to small and medium enterprises, our past is coming home to
roost. The destruction of the wealth of the black peoples of this nation
has meant that our ability to increase the rate of growth for small and
medium enterprises was severely hamstrung. The pressure on institutions
such as Khula and Ntsika is immense, and I must say that the formal banking
sector has not made a major contribution in this area. Their aversion to
risk and their lack of understanding of the sociology of black areas and
poor areas has made them sluggish, to say the least. We, as the DTI, intend
to intervene more decisively and will make announcements on this matter
later in the year.

In conclusion, I want to refer to some other matters. As I said, it is not
possible to cover everything in this address. Let me take a matter such as
the great grappa saga. The first of the joint councils with the European
Union has now taken place. Nothing will be easy, but it never is in trade
relations. However, I think it is a major achievement that we now have such
a comprehensive agreement with our major international economic partner. I
would like to thank the House for its cross-party support. Sonqoba simunye
- together we overcame. [Applause.]

The lottery, which is a very topical matter at the moment, has been
launched and some of us are richer and some of us are a little poorer.
Everyone, of course, wants the money from the lottery. I need to say quite
clearly that it is obvious and clear that to pay out from the lottery from
day one is structurally impossible. One has to build up a sufficient
accumulation of funds so that when one begins paying out to the
multiplicity of good causes, one does not pay each of them one cent at a
time; one has to pay them realistic amounts.

Most other countries have taken six months before they started the
payments. Realistically, we will take not less than three months and
possibly a bit more. This is not some attempt to tuck the money away; it
will be paid out. Let me also stress and state quite categorically that the
lottery will not pay out money through cumbersome bureaucratic structures.
It is our intention to pay directly to the good causes themselves so that
they can benefit.

I want to say to my hon colleagues that this will be an exacting year for
the DTI. We have to perform better than we did in the past. I would like to
thank the hon the Deputy Minister and the new director-general, Dr Alistair
Ruiters, and his new team, including my special adviser, Dr Rustomjee. I
also want to thank my colleagues in the provinces. It is going to be a
tough year, but as usual, we shall overcome. [Applause.]

Dr R H DAVIES: Madam Speaker, hon Deputy President, Ministers and
colleagues, strong and effective institutions are those that are, from time
to time, able to examine themselves critically and move beyond their
comfort zones, challenge established practices and take tough decisions
about transforming themselves.

It is precisely this that we are demanding from productive enterprises
operating in our economy. It is essential that this takes place if we are
to achieve the goal of placing our economy on a higher development-
orientated growth path in a rapidly changing global environment. I would
contend that we have every right to demand no less from Government
departments, and particularly those that have major responsibility for
leading and facilitating the process of economic transformation.

The Department of Trade and Industry has an absolutely critical role to
play in the transformation of our economy. Many commentators are now agreed
that one of the most important challenges we face in South Africa at
present is to accelerate micro economic transformation, that is to say,
transformation in the productive economy, transformation both of relations
and of forces of production.

The former World Bank chief economist, Mr Joseph Stiglitz, has reminded us
that, despite the crisis of 1998-99, the Asian model delivered more in
terms of growth and development over a shorter time span than did any
other. Central to this model, I need hardly remind the House, was an
effective and efficient industrial and small, medium and micro enterprise
development policy in which well-designed government programmes facilitated
and led economic restructuring.

As the hon the Minister has indicated, the DTI is currently in the midst of
a major review and restructuring exercise. I believe that most members of
the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry strongly support its aims and
objectives. It is not that the department failed between 1994 and 1999. On
the contrary, the department, under the leadership of Ministers Manuel and
Erwin, and under the direction of the former director-general, Dr Zav
Rustomjee, had a number of significant achievements to their credit.

They took over a department whose role had been to featherbed vested
interests of the old order and which had, quite frankly, ran out of ideas
about what to do in a rapidly changing global environment, and brought
about significant transformation in it. They recruited and placed in key
positions a number of highly talented individuals, some of the brightest
and best in our country, including many who would have been denied an
opportunity to play such a role in the past because of their race or
gender. They assembled a highly effective team of trade negotiators who
have in difficult and complex trade negotiations earned widespread respect,
and enabled South Africa to punch way above its weight in achieving
important successes in trade negotiations.

They undertook a major redesign of policies and support programmes which,
at the conceptual level, are among the best in the world. They succeeded in
engendering a widespread sense within industry that change and
transformation were essential, and had significant successes in leading
real transformation in some key industries, such as the motor industry.

My own perception is that progress over these years was uneven, and that
there were a number of problems of co-ordination and implementation,
particularly with regard to programmes to support the domestic economic
reconstruction. Several of these were identified in reports that were
tabled by the portfolio committee in the past Parliament.

The successes achieved in the motor industry development programme, for
example, have, in my view, yet to be translated into an effective and
comprehensive industrial strategy that reaches across the economy, and
which creates sufficient jobs. There is some uncertainty about precisely
who the various incentive schemes are targeted at, and we have encountered
a number of complaints about bureaucracy and red tape in accessing them.

The small, medium and micro enterprises programme, excellent in its design
and conception, has yet to achieve what it should in terms of practical
implementation. It tends to be ghettoised around the new institutions that
we have created and needs, in our view, to command greater priority
attention of the department as a whole.
The portfolio committee has prepared a report on the Department of Trade
and Industry budget for 2000-01 which was published in the Announcements,
Tablings and Committees bulletin on 3 April 2000. In it we indicated our
support, both for the current review and restructuring exercise and for the
new focus on transformation of the domestic economy, with a hard focus on
small, medium and micro enterprises promotion, empowerment and investment.

These are clearly critical priority challenges if we are to achieve our
goals in economic policy. We have, however, added a proviso. We face, as a
country, critical challenges in trade negotiations in the World Trade
Organisation and in the implementation of the EU and SADC trade agreements.
We cannot, therefore, afford to ignore or downplay trade negotiations.
Rather, the challenge is to improve co-ordination, focus and implementation
of domestic economic support programmes while simultaneously retaining and,
indeed, strengthening our capacity in external trade negotiations.

In view of what we are demanding of productive enterprises and Government
departments, we can hardly demand less of ourselves here in Parliament. The
Department of Trade and Industry's restructuring exercise has forced us in
the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry to re-examine critically our
own role, and to ask ourselves what is it that we can contribute towards
making the Department of Trade and Industry's restructuring exercise a
success. This has forced us to begin to rethink what is meant by the task
of oversight assigned to us by Parliament.  I believe many of us have come
to feel that it simply is no longer adequate merely to receive an annual
report on the department's budget; write our own report on this, and then
engage in a plenary debate like this one.

We are moving towards outcomes-based budgeting in which Parliament is being
challenged to play a more constructive and effective role. Outcomes-based
budgeting requires not just defining vague outcomes and the objectives of
policy but also to identifying measurable outputs against which the various
programmes' performance can be measured. In this way the budget must become
a more effective tool to give effect to policy choices.

The DTI has told us - and the Minister has repeated it now - that it
regards the present budget as work in progress and that it intends
progressively aligning its resources around the three overlapping priority
areas I mentioned earlier. This we have seen in the committee as a hook to
plan what we hope will be more effective oversight. At the beginning of May
this year, we intend to begin a programme of roughly quarterly engagements
with the department, involving several days of quality time interactions to
monitor progress in achieving declared objectives of realignment, to
identify problems and, most importantly, to help identify solutions.

We regard these engagements also as work in progress in which we hope to
define a more effective model of constructive oversight. We hope that,
eventually, these experiences may be of some more general value as we in
Parliament reflect on the issue of budget reform.

Finally, I would like briefly to mention some of the concerns which were
highlighted in our report. We have been informed that the DTI underspent a
sum of some R600 million in the 1999-2000 financial year. A recently
published report of the Auditor- General indicates that the DTI also
seriously underspent in the previous three years, and the Minister
acknowledged that just now. It is, perhaps, small comfort that the amount
underspent in 1999-2000 was somewhat less than the R996 million that was
surrendered to the Treasury in 1998-99.

We understand and appreciate that a sizeable part of the department's
budget involves transfer payments that cannot always be accurately
predicted in advance. We accept, too, that the overspending this year
should be seen as a source of opportunity and earnestly hope that the
Department of State Expenditure will agree to the request for a roll-over
of some of these funds to finance, among others, Khula and the taxi
recapitalisation programme. At the same time we sincerely hope and trust
that this problem will be addressed in the future.

With these few remarks, I have pleasure in supporting Vote No 32.
[Applause.]

Mr N S BRUCE: Madam Speaker, we in South Africa have chosen to be part of
the global economy and hope to reap some of the substantial material
benefits it offers. That is certainly what the direction of our economic
policy indicates, apart from our labour and equity laws.

Some important implications flow from that choice. Firstly, we cannot limit
our participation; it is all or nothing. Quite contrary to what a losing
organisation like the ILO may say, we have to put on what Thomas Friedman
calls a golden straitjacket, which in turn means that we have to constantly
streamline our economy to meet global competition - in other words,
participate in a perpetual revolution.

If we fail, we shall be abandoned to marginalisation and poverty, but if we
are successful the next implication is that the golden straitjacket narrows
the political and economic choices open to Government. It does not matter
whether it is to the left or to the right, all Government's policies
choices are going to have to be roughly the same.

Secondly, as prosperity burgeons, so politics shrinks. This is because it
is not ordinary votes but large institutional investors and those who save
through them who increasingly call the shots, and they have no sentiments.
Ask them to correct the imbalances of the past, and like fickle lovers,
they will have their way and then leave.

What they are seeking are competitive returns in a stable business
environment, which means fair competition and a swift and equitable justice
system. They are not motivated by greed, as the hon the Minister of Labour
so foolishly said on Tuesday. No, they need to generate surpluses to invest
back in the business, so that they continue to innovate and thus survive.
Employees who help them to do that by increasing levels of productivity
inevitably find that their incomes are rising too. No country that has
embraced globalisation has seen the poor get poorer, although income
disparities may widen.

Thirdly, to meet the challenge of globalisation, Government has got to get
smaller and smarter. No longer can it set all the rules, for globalisation
erodes sovereignty, but it needs to see that the exuberance of business
does not mean chaos. Apart from supplying the services that the private
sector cannot provide, Government has to do this less by exercising its
authority and more by encouraging competitive forces. That is the challenge
faced primarily by the Department of Trade and Industry, and its success
will be judged not by whom it employs or what development projects it
launches, but by what progress South Africa makes up the productivity
league from our very low position now.

That means that trade and industry issues must take precedence over
political ones, both domestically and abroad. My impression is that had we
gone to the European Union free trade negotiations without first
flourishing a begging bowl and asking for even more aid and LomÃ©
membership, we would have had a swifter deal negotiated between two parties
that recognised each other's maturity and differing needs.

Our desire to force the pace of establishing the SADC free trade area is
another case in point. The political need to do the deal to bolster the
President's notion of an African renaissance appears to be superseding the
trade advantages. Indeed, there are two dangers in rushing into a trade
pact when the area patently is not yet ready for such an initiative. It
will be ready when the economic policies of the member states begin to
converge. Particularly, there should be a convergence of the foreign
tariffs of the member states and adequate rules of origin capable of being
policed. Without that, imports will come into the enlarged market through
those countries with the lowest tariffs and, without sufficient value being
added in the entry country, pass unhindered into South Africa.

Moreover, no doubt disturbed and recalcitrant, South Africa is lowering its
tariffs within the boundaries of the proposed free trade market quite far
in advance of other members, despite, in some commodities, especially
textiles, a fair balance of trade already existing without adequate
reciprocity. If we are not careful, we will find ourselves in the free
trade area at substantial cost to our own balance of payments and, through
inadequate or leaky rules of origin, allowing competitors from outside easy
access to our market.

We appear to be singling out Zimbabwe and Mozambique, where democracy is
more an illusion than a reality, for special concessions. For instance, as
far as textiles are concerned, instead of a two-stage conversion and 60%
value added, we understand that a one-stage conversion is under
consideration. Of course, what happens in neighbouring economies is
important, although some appear to have political problems for which there
are no economic and political answers. But globalisation opens the world to
us and we should not be blind to the opportunities on offer because we have
not lifted our eyes from the horizon.

According to a recent survey by A T Kerney on investor attitudes to South
Africa, the more investors know about South Africa, the less they expect
SADC to create additional investment opportunities. So we welcome the
Minister's initiative, after Seattle, in galvanising other sizeable and
more compatible trade partners into a bloc capable of mature negotiation
over the realities of especially textile and agricultural access to the
dominant Western markets.

What is certainly disturbing, however, about the Minister's budget is that,
despite spending increases, some services of his department are still
deteriorating. The Office of the Registrar of Companies appears to be in
chaos. One of its problems, apart from a new computer system, is inadequate
human resources - an inadequacy which will be aggravated by the recent
dismissals of several temporary employees. Last year, it took one to two
months to open a closed corporation. It now takes more than four.

There are allegations that the Registrar of the Usury Act cannot cope with
the normal inspection process and contraventions are going undetected. The
former registrar, Herman le Roux, who held the post for 10 years, has been
at home on full pay since 1992. Neither the Finance department, which used
to administer the Act, nor the Department of Trade and Industry, which does
so now, will accept responsibility for a settlement.

It is not the speed of payout from the lottery, which the hon the Minister
mentioned, that concerns my party, it is who the charities are that will
receive that payout and on what basis they will get the money. Until the
department can demonstrate the efficacy of its managerial endeavours, the
DP would have difficulties supporting a budget that contains any increase
in departmental spending. [Applause.]

Mr H J BEKKER: Madam Speaker, the IFP in general is supportative of the
Trade and Industry Vote. For several years, we have worked in close co-
operation with the department and particularly with the Minister and the
Deputy Minister. Where we have been critical on certain matters, we have
always found an attentive ear from the Ministry and due acknowledgement for
our concerns.

The IFP, over the years, has noticed that many of our fundamental economic
principles have, to a certain degree, been adopted by the Government and
particularly by the Ministry of Trade and Industry and the Ministry of
Finance. On a lighter note, the more the ANC steals IFP policy from us, the
more South Africa will benefit. [Interjections.]

Of course, we should deregulate much more and have fewer boards of control
in our fledgling economy. The ongoing saga of the taxi recapitalisation
programme cannot be ignored. In previous parliamentary debates and in media
statements the IFP expressed its concern that certain taxi organisations
with a substantial representative base had alleged that Government had not
consulted with them with regard to the taxi recapitalisation project.

The IFP at that time urged Government, and particularly the Departments of
Transport and of Trade and Industry, urgently to undertake information and
consultation programmes with these taxi organisations, alternatively, that
Government, via the Portfolio Committees on Trade and Industry and on
Transport, should engage in a programme of public hearings. The IFP has
therefore welcomed the approach of the Deputy President to engage in
discussions with some of these associations. The IFP is confident that our
constructive and co-operative approach with regard to the taxi
recapitalisation project played a major part in defusing, at least to a
certain extent, this very volatile situation.

Ironically, Sataco, the Government-created organisation, is now distancing
itself from the taxi recapitalisation programme. The belligerence that is
now resurfacing between the Government and the taxi bodies, particularly
Sataco, is cause for concern. It was surprising that Sataco could just
reverse its previous position, whilst for a long time the Government sought
to convince the public that it was dealing well with them. The Government
insistence on going ahead with the taxi recapitalisation programme despite
protestations by other taxi bodies was based on the supposed progress that
Government claimed to have made with Sataco, which was proclaimed as the
legitimate representative of the taxi bodies.

This latest development vindicates the IFP's warning that the Government
should not steamroller its taxi recapitalisation programme when dealing
with such a sensitive matter. This must underline even more why the
Government and Sataco must ensure that negotiations are inclusive of all
stakeholders. Any display of an aggressive attitude by either side must be
rejected by all peaceloving citizens. When all is said and done, it is the
public, and particularly the commuters, who become the victims.

The IFP will support every move that can improve the safety of commuters
transported daily by the taxi fleet of our country. We therefore agree that
the taxi fleet must be upgraded and properly regulated. The necessity of an
upgrading programme is therefore essential for the ageing part of the taxi
fleet. The IFP, in the interests of the public, passengers and the taxi
industry, has engaged in discussions and consultations with role-players in
the taxi industry, in order to consider an acceptable taxi transport system
for the affected community, being the commuters and the taxi industry. The
IFP in this regard has consulted and will continue to consult, facilitate
and negotiate with stakeholders in order to achieve a more satisfactory
position. The IFP has embarked on a consultation programme with different
taxi associations in different provinces of South Africa.

The IFP, as a strong proponent of private enterprise, has great
appreciation for the role being played by the South African taxi industry,
which has developed into a mega industry by sheer determination and without
Government subsidies. Any future taxi recapitalisation programme must thus
ensure that the basic ownership of taxis remains with small enterprises and
individuals, whilst caution must be taken that newly established groups and
big business do not take over or compete with this multifaceted small
business enterprise.

Substantial industrial development and job creation may occur with an
acceptable recapitalisation project, with the many benefits that such an
upgrading project will have for the entire South African economy. It is
therefore important that South Africa should create such an acceptable taxi
recapitalisation programme.

Consideration should also be given to legislating minimum vehicle
specifications in order to compel existing South African vehicle
manufacturers to comply with such minimum prescribed specifications. Surely
the existing manufacturers in South Africa can play an important role in
producing suitable transport vehicles that will be safe, durable,
affordable and veritable, according to these prescribed specifications. The
IFP, however, also realises that any scheme introduced without proper and
appropriate law enforcement will never be successful.

In the long-term interest of the transport industry, it is imperative that
the concern of taxi stakeholders, and particularly the safety of commuters,
should be taken into consideration. Obviously Government should give
greater attention and consideration to the concerns of all the relevant
stakeholders. The IFP therefore welcomes the statement of the Minister of
Transport that the bolts and nuts of the taxi recapitalisation project
could be reviewed. We take it that, from the Minister's side, the
Department of Trade and Industry also subscribes to this more moderate
approach.

With regard to the threats of disruption by certain taxi groups, the IFP
clearly stated its position. We recognise that in terms of the Constitution
there is a right to demonstration and mass action, but the IFP would be
against any violent or disruptive demonstrations. Such demonstrations and
threats of possible disruptions must be condemned and all responsible
bodies and parties should distance themselves from such actions. We trust
that this contribution will be accepted in the spirit in which it has been
given.

Mrs B M NTULI: Madam Speaker, Ministers, hon members, the President made a
strong statement on growth and economic empowerment in his state of the
nation address earlier this year. Similarly, the Minister, Comrade Alec
Erwin, has today also reiterated and highlighted our Government's continued
support for the development of a vibrant small and medium enterprise
environment, which will ultimately contribute to sustained growth rates and
black economic empowerment.

The task of the trade and industry portfolio committee today and for the
rest of the financial year will be to examine this commitment within the
context of available resources. The committee has interacted on several
occasions with a host of institutions within the stable of the department.
We are going to be focusing particular attention on the smooth functioning
and improved delivery of these organisations. These institutions represent
the first point of contact between Government delivery and our people. We
intend to continue these meetings with the express purpose of improving
oversight.

I would like to take this opportunity to welcome the new administrative
head and accounting officer, Dr Alistair Ruiters, to his new post of
director-general in the Department of Trade and Industry. He will receive
our continued support and we encourage him to develop a critical but co-
operative relationship with the portfolio committee. He can be assured of
our continued oversight. Our doors remain open.

The common vision and direction shared by so many stakeholders over the
past six years is the result of the formulation of difficult but essential
policy choices that Government has introduced and implemented over this
period. We have not deviated from the policy course but have been true to
the joint commitment made by our partners and us. Continuity and
consistency in policy implementation have been the hallmarks of this
period. The policy implementation process has involved the phasing out of
demand-side assistance schemes, which tended to be inefficient and produced
very little value to the economy. This was replaced with a targeted package
of assistance schemes that focused on adding value to the productive
process, improving efficiency, diversifying production, enhancing
technological development, improving price competitiveness and encouraging
investment in South Africa, both domestic and foreign.

However, access to finance and lack of collateral remain obstacles to the
development of SMMEs, especially with regard to black people. Banks are
still reluctant to finance SMMEs. In the department's budget presentation
to the portfolio committee, the director-general highlighted the
department's delivery focus as being the promotion of small, medium and
microenterprises, empowerment and promoting investment.

Sesikhulume kakhulu kwanela ngokuthi kufanele sikhuphule ezomnotho
kumabhizinisi amancane. Sesifuna izenzo manje. Mawabekhona-ke la
mabhizinisi amancane. Mawabonakale akhiwa futhi esebenza. [We have said
enough about the need for us to develop the economy through small business.
Now we want action. Let these small businesses happen. Let us see them
being started and working.]

As a committee we will be measuring the success of the department in
relation to these set objectives. We would like to see how the activities
of the department add value to the trade and industry sector, both
quantitatively and qualitatively. Let us tackle the promotion of SMMEs and
black empowerment with greater determination.

The department has established a range of delivery instruments intended to
make these objectives a living reality. Some of these programmes have been
established over time, others are in the process of being established. The
task of the department is to co-ordinate the clustering of these
programmes, so that combined optimal results are achieved. We, as a
committee, are also tasked with continually measuring the effectiveness of
these programmes and providing counselling to the Minister and Deputy
Minister.

Ngeke-ke sizakhe uma kuzothi minyaka yonke sakhe izinhlelo noma izikhungo,
kuphinde kudilizwe kwakhiwe okunye. KuMnu Alec Erwin, ngithi-ke ngiyethemba
ukuthi lokhu kuhlela kabusha akusho lokho. [We will never develop ourselves
if every year we create new programmes and structures, only to destroy them
and start afresh all the time. To Mr Alec Erwin, I would like to say that I
hope that this reorganisation does not mean that.]

We must remember that these programmes are instruments and that they are
not written in stone. They must act as a vehicle so that we can meet our
collective objectives. The department's delivery instrument must be
sensitive to the volatility and the fluctuations of structural challenges,
and not act in response to situations. Our task is to foresee unfolding
economic development and prepare, where appropriate.

Singalindeli izinkinga ukuthi zibe khona bese kuba yikhona siqala sithi
siyalungisa. [We should not wait until problems develop and only start then
to rectify things.]

In order to promote SMMEs the following support programmes are available to
our entrepreneurs: sectoral partnership funds, small exporters assistance,
franchising support, financial and nonfinancial support services,
technological support, industrial innovations, preferential procurement and
cluster studies.

Yini-ke enye efunekayo kule zikhungo ezikhona? Aziqale zibonakale zisebenza
lapho zidingeka khona, ikakhulukazi ezindaweni zasemakhaya. [What else is
expected of the existing structures? They should start showing that they
are functioning in places where they are needed, particularly in rural
areas.]

It is our responsibility, as public representatives, to familiarise our
constituencies with the support available. Support must filter to where it
is most needed. Similarly, with a view to achieving empowerment, the
department has established the National Empowerment Fund, the industrial
participation programme, the Competitiveness Fund and the Sectoral
Partnership Fund, as well as technology transfer, and financial and
nonfinancial wholesale assistance.

Institutions such as the Industrial Development Corporation, Khula
Enterprise Finance Ltd, Ntsika Enterprise Promotion Agency, the CSIR and
many others administer many of the above programmes. This means that large
portions of this department's budget flow to these organisations. This is
the time to deliver, not to add other institutions. These institutions
have, over time, developed a range of technical skills around supply-side
measures. They have an important role to play. Personnel in these
organisations are crucial to the success of the Government's delivery.

We are happy about the success of the two national advisory centres, Permac
in Port Elizabeth and Dumac in Durban, that were set up by Ntsika. Halala
Ntsika, halala! This places certain responsibilities on its shoulders and
calls for a certain level of commitment to the objectives of promoting the
empowerment of and investment in SMMEs.

Yes, bottlenecks do currently exist, but we are addressing them. The
challenge facing us today is to continually refine what we have and to see
if it works. Our task is to make it work better and to benefit more people.
We are talking about all these institutions and their problems. Let us make
them work and not simply establish new ones.

Mr Alistair Ruiters described the weaknesses in the department and said it
was his plan radically to restructure the department. I am glad that he is
not new to the department. He knows all the problems; he has been part of
the whole SMME strategy. Let us address the problems relating to SMMEs
seriously and very urgently.

Ngiyakholwa-ke ukuthi uMnu u-Alistair Ruiters uzothatha isinyathelo
esiqinile. Ngiyakholwa nokuthi uNgqongqoshe wezoHwebo nezeziMboni uzokwenza
ukuthi lesi sinyathelo sokuthuthukisa amabhizinisi amancane sisebenze
ngokuphuthuma okukhulu. Sethemba ukuthi lokhu kuzoba yimpumelelo enkulu.
Siyasemukela lesi Sabiwomali. (Translation of Zulu paragraph follows.)
[I believe that Mr Alistair Ruiters will make a strong move. I also believe
that the Minister of Trade and Industry will be able to ensure that this
step of developing small businesses starts working as soon as possible. We
hope that this will be a great success, and we support this Vote.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Before I call on the next
speaker, please lower your voices. The noise level in the House is a bit
too high.

Mnr F BEUKMAN: Mnr die Voorsitter, die Direkteur-generaal van Handel en
Nywerheid het op 29 Februarie 2000 tydens die departement se vooruitskouing
van die Begroting die volgende as die departement se hooftake bestempel:


  ... to facilitate access to sustainable economic activity and employment;
  higher levels of investment; increased market access; and a fair,
  efficient and competitive marketplace for business and consumers.

Die Nuwe NP steun hierdie missiestelling as 'n gesonde basis om ekonomiese
groei te verhoog. Wat egter in ag geneem moet word, is die makro-omgewing
waarbinne hierdie doelwitte bereik moet word. Dit is juis die Regering se
vermoÃ« om sy aandeel in die ekonomie tot die minimum te verklein sodat
entrepreneurskap die katalisator vir groei kan word, wat die toets gaan
wees. Die Minister het ook in sy toespraak verwys na die rol van die staat
in die ekonomie.

Die bekende sakeman adv Christo Wiese het verlede week tydens Die Burger se
lesingreeks op Oudtshoorn aangedui dat entrepreneurs, die kern van 'n land
se welvaart, tot sy reg kom wanneer die regering sy aandeel in die ekonomie
tot die minimum verklein. In sy rede het adv Wiese aangevoer dat faktore
wat aandag moet geniet as Suid-Afrika globalisering tot sy maksimum
voordeel wil benut, hoÃ« arbeidskoste en die gepaardgaande lae
produktiwiteit is. 'n Land moet so aantreklik moontlik vir buitelandse
maatskappye en sy eie vervaardigers gemaak word as hy die voordeel van
globalisering wil benut. Dit doen hy deur produksiekoste so mededingend
moontlik te hou en 'n sakevriendelike omgewing te skep.

Die Nuwe NP is van mening dat die mikpunt van die Regering met betrekking
tot investering nie behaal gaan word indien alle rolspelers, wat die
Kabinet van die Minister van Arbeid tot die Minister van Veiligheid en
Sekuriteit insluit, nie ook hulle deel bydra om 'n vriendelike
beleggingsomgewing te skep nie. Die belangrikste is egter dat die agb
Minister se kollegas in die Kabinet sodanig moet presteer dat beleggers
deur die vooruitsig op hoÃ« winsmarges en groei op kapitaal Suid-Afrika as
'n laerisikobeleggingsbestemming sien. Dit begin dus op Kabinetsvlak, waar
die politieke en ekonomiese prioriteite vir uitvoering bepaal word.

Die Nuwe NP verwelkom dit dat die departement op entrepreneurs gaan fokus.
Dit is daarom van kardinale belang dat die huidige reÃ«ls en regulasies vir
die ontwikkeling van klein besighede hersien moet word. Inisiatief en
kreatiewe pogings moenie deur ontoepaslike arbeidswetgewing en
penaliserende heffings aan bande gelÃª word nie.

Die nuwe regulatoriese hersieningseenheid, wat volgens die Minister 'n meer
wetenskaplike benadering sal hÃª om die impak van huidige reÃ«ls op klein
besighede te ondersoek, se werk is van groot belang. Indien daar nou ooit
'n Regeringsinstansie was waarvan die werksaamhede ge-``fast-track'' of
versnel moet word, is dit hierdie betrokke eenheid. Die Nuwe NP wil dit
weer eens aan Minister Erwin beklemtoon: as hy nie die ander
staatsdepartemente en Ministers se samewerking vir die optrede van hierdie
eenheid gaan kry nie, gaan die skepping van 'n verdere papiertier met min
tande en min byt die gevolg wees.

Gear gaan staan of val by die skep van 'n groei-omgewing vir die klein
sakeman. Die Nuwe NP wil dus vandag 'n beroep op die Minister doen om meer
aandag te gee aan programme soos die kleinuitvoerder-bystandsprogram, die
sektorale vennootskapsfonds en die franchise-ondersteuningsprogram.
Instellings soos Khula, Permac en Ntsika se bestuur moet deur
prestasiekontrakte geÃ«valueer word om te bepaal in watter mate hul daartoe
bydra dat klein ondernemings kan slaag. Ongeveer 35% van die departement se
begroting gaan vir die bevordering van KMMO's.

'n Ander belangrike kwessie is dat die klein en medium onderneming wat op
uitvoer fokus, veral in die agri-nywerhede, die nodige bystand van die
departement moet kry. Die Minister het nou self in die onderhandelings oor
die EU-SA-handelsverdrag gesien wat produkbeskerming vir lande soos
Portugal, ItaliÃ« en Griekeland beteken. Produsente se belange word
onbeskaamd en sonder huiwering deur die regerings bevorder. Daar is nie
veel sentiment vir die belang van ontwikkelende lande in die bepaling van
die handelsagenda van nywerheidslande nie. As die Minister 'n deurbraak by
die WHO kan maak oor die oopstel van markte, sal die Nuwe NP die eerste
opposisieparty wees om hom geluk te wens.

Dit bly 'n feit dat die jaarlikse landbousubsidie van $30 miljard wat die
EU aan sy produsente verskaf, die speelveld ongelyk maak. Die Regering moet
dit dus nie moeiliker maak vir Suid-Afrikaanse produsente om te kan
kompeteer in die oorgesubsidieerde wÃªreldekonomie nie. Vir Suid-Afrikaanse
sagtevrugte-, wyn- en graanboere wat spesifiek op die uitvoermark fokus en
derduisende werksgeleenthede skep, is toepaslike bystand 'n prioriteit.
Â 
Die Minister sal die leiding moet neem om Suid-Afrika en die ontwikkelende
lande se saak by die volgende rondte te gaan stel. Daar sal veral op
intensiewe gesprekke met die VSA gefokus moet word, aangesien die kwessie
van subsidies tussen die EU en die VSA bepaal gaan word. Hieroor moet ons
geen illusies hÃª nie. Die Nuwe NP sal, as 'n pro-Suid-Afrikaanse party wat
lojaal en positief oor die land is, stappe steun wat die ekonomie kan laat
groei vir alle Suid-Afrikaners. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech
follows.)

[Mr F BEUKMAN: Mr Chairperson, on 29 February 2000, during the Department
of Trade and Industry's projection of the Budget, the Director of Trade and
Industry described the following as the main tasks of the department:


  ... to facilitate access to sustainable economic activity and employment;
  higher levels of investment; increased market access; and a fair,
  efficient and competitive marketplace for business and consumers.

The New NP supports this mission statement as a sound basis to increase
economic growth. However, what we must take into account is the macro-
environment in which these objectives are to be achieved. The test will in
fact be the Government's ability to reduce its share in the economy to the
minimum so that entrepreneurship can become the catalyst for growth. In his
speech the Minister also referred to the role of the state in the economy.

Last week during the series of lectures presented by Die Burger at
Oudtshoorn, the well-known businessman Adv Christo Wiese indicated that
entrepreneurs, the heart of a country's prosperity, come into their own
right when the Government minimises its share in the economy. In his speech
Adv Wiese argued that factors which must receive attention if South Africa
is to exploit globalisation to the maximum advantage, are high labour costs
and the concomitant low productivity. A country must be made as attractive
as possible to foreign companies and its own manufacturers if it is to
exploit the advantage of globalisation. This can be done by keeping
production costs as competitive as possible and by creating a business-
friendly environment.

The New NP is of the opinion that the Government's aim with regard to
investment will not be achieved unless all role-players, including the
Cabinet from the Minister of Labour to the Minister of Safety and Security,
also contribute their share in order to create an investment-friendly
environment. However, the most important point is that the hon the
Minister's colleagues in the Cabinet should perform so well that investors
see South Africa as a low-risk investment destination owing to the prospect
of high profit margins and capital growth. It therefore starts at Cabinet
level, where the political and economic priorities are determined for
implementation.

The New NP welcomes the fact that the department is going to focus on
entrepreneurs. It is therefore of paramount importance that the present
rules and regulations for the development of small businesses are revised.
Initiative and creative endeavours must not be restricted by inappropriate
labour legislation and penalising levies.

The work of the new regulatory revision unit which, according to the
Minister, will have a more scientific approach to investigate the impact of
present rules on small businesses, is of great importance. If ever there
was a Government institution whose activities should be fast-tracked, it is
this specific unit. The New NP once again wants to emphasise the following
to Minister Erwin: If he does not obtain the co-operation of the other
state departments and Ministers for the functioning of this unit, the
result will be the creation of yet another paper tiger with few teeth and
not much of a bite.

Gear will stand or fall according to whether or not an environment of
growth is created for the small businessman. The New NP therefore wants to
call upon the Minister today to pay more attention to programmes such as
the small exporter assistance programme, the sectorial partnership fund and
the franchise support programme. The management of institutions such as
Khula, Permac and Ntsika must be evaluated by means of achievement
contracts in order to determine to what extent they contribute to the
success of small businesses. Approximately 35% of the department's budget
is being spent on the promotion of SMMEs.

Another important issue is that small and medium enterprises that focus on
exports, especially in the agri industries, should receive the necessary
assistance from the department. The Minister has now seen for himself
during the negotiations on the EU-SA trade agreement what the protection of
products means to countries such as Portugal, Italy and Greece. The
governments promote producers' interests unashamedly and without
hesitation. There is not much sentiment for the interests of developing
countries when the trading agenda of industrial countries is being
determined. If the Minister can make a breakthrough in the WTO regarding
the opening of markets, the New NP will be the first opposition party to
congratulate him.

The fact remains that the annual agricultural subsidy of $30 billion which
the EU provides to its producers makes the playing-field uneven. The
Government must therefore not make it more difficult for South African
producers to compete in the oversubsidised world economy. For South African
deciduous fruit, wine and grain farmers who focus specifically on the
export market and create many thousands of job opportunities, appropriate
assistance is a priority.

The Minister will have to take the lead to put South Africa and the
developing countries' case at the next round. The focus will have to be
especially on intensive talks with the USA, as the question of subsidies
will be determined between the EU and the USA. We must have no illusions
about this. The New NP will, as a pro-South African party which is loyal to
and positive about the country, support steps which can contribute to the
growth of the economy for all South Africans. [Applause.]]

Man N R SHOPE: Eka Mutshami wa Xitulu, vakulukumba va Palamende hinkwenu,
ndza mi losa. Ku yima ka mina laha a ndzi yimeri swin'wana handle ka ku ta
vulavula emahlweni ka Huvo leyi yo hlonipheka, leswaku mina na Nhlangano wa
hina wa ANC hi seketela Mpimanyeto lowu ku vulavuriwaka ha wona namuntlha
wa ``Department of Trade and Industry, Vote No 32''.

Hambi leswi wu vonakaka ingi wa kalarisa hikwalaho ka ku tshikiwa ka
swin'wana swa xiave, ku nghenisiwe tin'wana ta tindlela ta ku pfuna va
nwamabindzu lava lavaka ku rhumela swilo swa vona ku ya swi xavisa
ematikweni ya le handle, xikombiso ``exporting companies in the textile and
clothing industry''. Swipfuno leswi vuriwaka supply side measures swo fana
na ku antswisiwa ka thekinoloji na ku leteriwa ka vatirhi, na ku seketeriwa
hi timali eka swilo leswi yisiwaka ematikweni man'wana.

Mhaka yin'wana leyikulu hi leswaku kwala xikarhi ka migingiriko ya yona
Ndzawulo leyi, yi endle mhaka ya kahle ngopfu hi ku veka munhu loyi a
langutaka ofisi ya rimbewu (gender). ``Gender co-ordinator'' u na
vutihlamuleri eka mulawuri jenerala. Sweswo swi veka timhaka ta vamanana
emilon'weni ya ``department'' hinkwayo na laha tikweni. Futhi yi tlhela yi
tivisa hofisi ya Presidente leswaku timhaka ta vamanana tiva tiri kona tiri
karhi ti langutiwile. Leyi hi yona mhaka leyikulu hikuva loko hi nga
seketeli bajete leyi, timhaka ta mintirho ya mabindzu ya vamanana a ti nga
swi koti ku langutiwa hikuva ku ta va kuri hava mali.

Vamanana va lava mali loko rixile. Hi swona loko ku vulavuriwa hi ikhonomi
ya tiko vamanana va fanela ku yingiseriwa swinene va tlhela va pfuniwa hi
mfumo wa tiko. (Translation of Tsonga paragraphs follows.)

[Mrs N R SHOPE: Chairperson, Deputy President, all members of Parliament, I
greet you! I am standing here today to say before this honourable Assembly
that my party, the ANC, and I support this budget of the Department of
Trade and Industry, Vote No 32.

Even though the funds are insufficient, due to certain aspects of the Vote
which were left out, other methods were used to assist our businesspeople
involved in the exportation of goods to foreign countries, ie exporting
companies such as the textile and clothing industries. Supply-side measures
such as the development of technology, the training of workers, and
financial support have been given in respect of goods which are exported to
foreign countries.

Another very good and important point with regard to this department is the
appointment of an officer who is responsible for gender co-ordination. The
gender co-ordinator has a certain responsibility and reports to the
Director-General. This places issues pertaining to women in a better
position to be heard and understood by everyone. He also reports to the
Office of the President, and this enables matters pertaining to women to be
considered. This is very important, because if we do not support this
budget the businesses of our women may not function properly as money will
not be available.

Women need money every day. And when there is a discussion on the economy
of a country women should be listened to very seriously and they should be
assisted by the Government of our country.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon Sybil Seaton, computers -
laptops or otherwise - are not allowed in the House. Hon Jan Slabbert, the
debate will do you a lot of good educationally. Please continue, hon
member.

Mrs N R SHOPE: Thank you!

A ku na wansati loyi a nga twananiki na timhaka ta ikhonomi na mali hikuva
hi wundla vana na mindyangu na ku lahla vafi na ku ongola vavabyi.
Hikwalaho ke, hi fanela ku seketela ndzawulo hi tlhela hi navela leswaku yi
tiyisisa swinene timhaka ta mabindzu ya vamanana. Naswona ku fanela kuva ku
langutisisiwa swinene na lawaya ya le matiko-xikaya lomuya ka tindhawu to
fana na le ka Nwamitwa na kun'wana lomu vavasati va nga na vutivi byo karhi
byo endla swilo kambe va kayivela swipfuno na tindhawu to xavisela eka tona
na ku rhumeriwa ka swilo swa vona swa vutshila ematikweni yan'wana.

Hi navela leswaku ``gender co-ordinator'' axa matihlweni. Leswi ndzi vula
leswaku a tlhariha, loko ku vulavuriwa timhaka hikuva i na mpingu
lowukulukumba wa ku rhwala timhaka ta nhlayo leyikulukumba ya vamanana
kumbe ya vanhu va tiko ra Afrika Dzonga.

Se, hikwalaho ka mhaka yaleyo, hi navela ku vula ku swa hi tsakisa ku kuma
ari kona loyi a tirhaka timhaka ta vavasati na timhaka ta ``gender''
hinkwato, hikuva i ta veka timhaka ta hina vavasati emahlweni. Na kona u
fanela ku tlhariha hi n'wu kombela swinene leswaku a tlharihisa matihlo. A
xiya-xiya kun'wana na kun'wana lomu timhaka leti ti vulavuriwaka kona kuri
ku nga sali nchumu. Nakona a tlhela a byela lava a fanelaka kuva byela
hinkwavo ku vavasati swi ta va pfuna leswi kumbe a swi nga va pfuni,
leswaku hi ta kota ku tiva ku hi hina hi nga la hi vulavulaka timhaka ta
vavasati hi kota ku hi pfunana na yena.
Â 
Leswi, swi ta ya swiri karhi swi hlamuseleka loko ndziri karhi ndzi
vulavula ndzi ya emahlweni. (Translation of Tsonga paragraphs follows.)

[There is no woman who dislikes matters related to the economy and money.
This is the case because we raise our children and look after our families.
We also bury our dead and look after those who are ill, with money.
Therefore, we should support the department and also request it to improve
matters relating to the business of our women. Consideration should also be
given to those businesses in rural areas, such as Nwamitwa and elsewhere,
where women are equipped with special skills and are able to produce or
manufacture things but lack assistance and places to sell their produce.
They do not have the means to transport or send their goods to other
countries.

We ask that our gender co-ordinator be very active. By saying this I mean
that he must be very alert and attentive whenever issues are being
discussed. This is so because he has the very great responsibility of
working with a large number of people in South Africa. Therefore, that
being the case, we wish to say that we are very happy to find ourselves
having someone who is responsible in working with women's affairs and all
matters related to gender. He will be able to place women's matters on his
priority list. And he must act wisely and work very diligently. He must be
very observant during discussions and nothing should be omitted. He should
also make appropriate reports and inform everyone on important matters,
which can be of great assistance to women, or unimportant matters. By so
doing, we who are present here, discussing matters related to women shall
be in a position to work hand in hand with him.

This will become self-explanatory as I progress with my deliberation.]

Another matter that the department is busy with is the review and
restructuring of SMME supporting institutions, so that they can effectively
develop the entrepreneurial activities of our people.

Though I would like to emphasise attention for rural people, and women in
particular, there are many more measures which the Department of Trade and
Industry and its institutions have taken which make it possible for me to
feel that this Vote should be supported, for example, the environmental
support fund that was initiated to assist industries in achieving the
objectives of the National Environmental Management Act of 1998. The
technology and human resources for industry programmes grew from 5,6
million to 100 million in 1998 and the support programme for industrial
innovation and participation of companies with asset values of less than R1
million grew to 59% of the number of projects in 1999, resulting in income
tax that was four times the amount originally estimated by the Government.

Two projects were launched: the Feasibility Study Support to facilitate
entry by SMMEs during 1998 and the Partnership in Industry Innovation
during 1999. Today the DTI has 42 offices overseas and 10 export councils
were launched in partnership with sectoral firms.

While supporting this budget, I would like to remind Parliament of its
oversight function. We should interact more actively with the department
and the various institutions. If we as members of Parliament are informed,
we will be in a position to assist in communicating all opportunities that
are created by the department.

It is also a significant point that the DTI plays a central role in the
integrated development strategy. Through its activities, our strategies and
policies become all the more clear, such that the private sector finds
space to participate in bringing a better life to our people.

For the reasons I have mentioned above, I support Vote No 32 for the
Department of Trade and Industry. [Applause.]

Mr C T FROLICK: Mr Chairman, hon members, the budget of the Department of
Trade and Industry is divided into four programmes. The UDM's participation
in this Vote will focus on two of these programmes, namely Programme 2 and
Programme 4.

Before dealing with these programmes, the UDM wishes to compliment the
Minister and officials of the department on the constructive role they have
played to ensure beneficial bilateral trade agreements, especially the
complex European Union trade agreement which is a credit to the DTI and the
Minister. However, we should guard against over-reliance on direct foreign
investment at the expense of trade and industrial development in our own
country. Consequently, it seems as if the other priorities, such as SMME
promotion, suffered in the wake of the department's intense involvement in
conducting bilateral trade agreements. This is unfortunate, as the result
is underspending in the department.

Approximately R600 million, which constitutes more than 25% of the total
amount allocated to the department in the 1999-2000 budget remained unspent
at the end of the financial year thus the request from the DTI for these
funds to be rolled over. The opinion of the Auditor-General with regard to
the department's unspent funds, which has been characteristic of the DTI's
budgets for the past four financial years, is well documented. It seems
that our ability to raise Government revenue exceeds our ability to spend
it. An astonishing increase in the collection of taxes has been experienced
by the SA Revenue Service, but we continue to face an uphill battle in
getting these much-needed funds to the SMMEs, who desperately need it to
eradicate poverty and unemployment and to create the much-needed employment
everybody is waiting for.
The request by the DTI for roll-overs to support the taxi recapitalisation
programme and the recapitalisation of Khula and to support SMMEs is a sad
reflection on the ability of the department to provide for such key
strategic activities in the main Budget. Similarly, there seems to be a
lack of focus and commitment with regard to SMMEs. The argument of the
department regarding overlapping spending on priority activities will be
difficult to monitor. The UDM expresses the hope that lack of delivery on
SMME promotion will not be justified by claiming that investment did occur,
as it is an overlapping priority.

The future of Ntsika as the small business promotion agency of Government
is vital for accelerated entrepreneurial development. Reports that the
organisation is in a continual state of disarray is a source of concern and
these allegations must receive priority attention. Simultaneously, Khula is
facing budgetary constraints and will be forced to reduce its activities
without additional funding. Khula indicated that without recapitalisation
funds it will not be able to operate beyond July 2000. The focus of
Government on SMMEs should not be allowed to flounder due to budgetary
constraints and managerial problems.
The UDM advocates a policy of enterprise development to empower all and to
narrow the gap between the haves and the have-nots. The economic cake must
be enlarged so that the poor can be enriched without impoverishing the
wealth creators. We believe that this can be achieved by unleashing the
entrepreneurial spirit inherent in all South Africans. Unless opportunities
are created on a massive scale for all South Africans, real empowerment
will never occur.

According to the department, the increase in Programme 4 in excess of R80
million is mainly for establishing and running the competition commission
and tribunal. Irrespective of concerns about the necessity for such a huge
increase, it cannot be disputed that the existence of such a commission and
tribunal is of great importance to trade and industry in a free-market
society.

The UDM supports the department's refocusing of its activities for this
financial year, which includes SMME promotion, empowerment and investment.
We hope that the department, under the leadership of a new director-
general, will embrace this mandate of SMME promotion with vigour and
enthusiasm. It will be difficult for the department to return to Parliament
in future and repeat the behaviour of previous years by requesting
substantial roll-overs or reporting substantial unspent funds.

In conclusion, the UDM supports and will vigorously encourage the right of
all individuals in South Africa to make a difference through their
entrepreneurial contribution, their decent work ethic, their belief in
themselves and their willingness to take responsibility for the economic
growth of this country, because this is an essential step of nation-
building. The UDM supports this Vote. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! The next speaker is the Deputy
Minister of Trade and Industry, formerly Ngwane, but now Ms Hendricks.
Please note that. We welcome her and wish her well. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Chairperson, hon members,
colleagues, CEOs of the DTI families - Ntsika, Khula and the IDC -
comrades, it is indeed my pleasure and privilege today to participate in my
first budget debate on the Department of Trade and Industry. Seeing that
this is my maiden speech, I am going to try not to be controversial. Hence
I will not respond to a few things that were said by some people on my left
unless, of course, I have time left later on.

Members heard the Minister of Trade and Industry share with them what we
have done, as a department, and what we hope to achieve during this year
and in the future. The Minister has outlined, in broad terms, the changes
we are engaged in at the department in order to allow us to better deliver
on the challenges facing our nation. It is true that a major restructuring
is under way at the Department of Trade and Industry, and its sole purpose
is to achieve maximum service delivery.

I wish to direct the attention of members to the areas that we have elected
to focus on. The new restructured Department of Trade and Industry has a
new management structure which consists of the policy board, the executive
committee and the management committee. These different levels of
management meet at different times and feed to each other decisions taken
at various levels.

In its new form, the department is going to collapse a multitude of
programmes into three main programmes, namely the development of
international trade and investment; the development of enterprise, commerce
and industry, which is fairly new although it encompasses a lot of other
areas that we deal with; and group services. These new divisions are led by
three deputy directors-general, a level of management we have reintroduced
into our corporate governance structure. In our new form, the department is
focused on adding value to the economy, contributing to international
competitiveness, promoting small, medium and micro enterprises, achieving
black economic empowerment, developing the SADC region and reducing the
wealth inequalities.

Because our fundamental task and strategy is to grow our economy through
facilitating access to sustainable economic activity and employment,
promoting higher levels of investment, creating increased market access for
our producers in international markets and through creating a fair,
efficient and competitive market place for business and consumers in our
country, the new DTI is restructuring its relationship with itself and our
sister institutions and creating greater alignment with the economy. This
will enable our institutions to become implementors of policy, and the DTI
to become the policy planning, programme development, monitoring and
evaluation unit that it is supposed to be.

In order to generate investment in our economy, which is necessary for
economic growth, we are focusing more intensely on promoting internal
investment and foreign direct investment. In this regard, we have developed
national, regional and international strategies which members can read
about in the documents that we have provided and can find out about from
the demonstration in the lobby.

Locally, we are further strengthening the paradigm shift from demand-side
measures to supply-side measures in our support schemes for industry. We
are improving our industrial policy to better direct our economic
activities and to strengthen our support of technological development and
innovation in commerce and industry.

The department addresses the needs of our people through empowerment and
sustainable development by focusing on entrepreneurs and research into
development, growth and equity. We are bent on achieving empowerment by
leveraging the economy through the National Empowerment Fund, promoting our
industrial participation programme, small exporters assistance, the
Competitiveness Fund and the Sectoral Partnership Fund. We are intent on
reducing wealth inequalities by promoting socioeconomic stability through
preferential procurement, encouraging partnerships in industrial
innovation, and providing export marketing assistance for small exporters
through our small, medium and micro industry support mechanisms.

Among our notable achievements this past year, the highlight to date, other
than the ones mentioned in the booklets, is the great shift in the
demographic composition of the department. The racial composition in the
department has shifted more towards reflecting the racial composition of
our country. If one looks at the 1993-94 composition of the DTI, the
department was 90% white and 10% black. Figures for 1999-2000 show that we
are now 46% white and 54% black.

We are obviously not happy with the gender representivity in the
department, and this year we intend accelerating this transformation
process by attracting suitable women to top positions in the department,
but we are also going to concentrate on training women that we have in the
department and elsewhere in our agencies so that they can take up positions
of leadership wherever they are capable.

Part of the transformation in the DTI included addressing the issue of
poverty as a strategy towards achieving economic growth. This meant
establishing programmes to address issues of social empowerment. So far,
this has included, among other things, the establishment of women-exclusive
programmes and also consciously identifying them as beneficiaries of our
SMME programmes. As members would see if they were to look carefully at the
beneficiaries of the Khula schemes, most of the beneficiaries have been
women and are mostly those who are in the rural areas.

The challenge we face at the moment is to how to broaden this by making
sure that other previously disadvantaged groups such as the youth and those
with disabilities are included in our programmes. We hope to achieve and
monitor this by establishing an integrated social empowerment programme,
which will be accountable to the Ministry through the office of the
director-general. That same programme will also oversee gender equality and
gender transformation in the department.

As members may recall, we established a dedicated institutional framework
for small business development in 1995. As a result, significant progress
has been made in addressing the needs of small businesses. A network of
support institutions has been established to ensure access to a range of
essential services for SMMEs. We have the Centre for Small Business
Promotion, Khula Enterprise Finance Limited, Ntsika Enterprise Promotion
Agency and the provincial SMME desks. We have also had, as has already been
stated here, major successes with our manufacturing advice centres based in
Port Elizabeth and Durban.

Maybe I should just pause here to say that the issues that members are
raising, especially the issue of problems with support for small business,
are issues that the DTI is well aware of. The latter is an issue that is
well documented. Part of the strategy in the restructuring is to address
exactly those programmes. Some people are asking about the future of
Ntsika, which ``is in disarray''. I do not think that that is true - Ntsika
is not in disarray. Ntsika is well and functioning, and it has never been
stronger than it is at present.

What we are trying to do through the restructuring and our focus on small
business is to ensure that the very good work that our agencies are
performing gets to be known by people, but more than that. We want the
packages, schemes and initiatives we have for small business to be known by
the people whom we want to target and support.

We must admit that transformation and access to information about what
small business is and what it must do, has been a problem. Our focus is
going to be on sharpening those areas and getting the information to the
right people, to make these agencies focus on providing services to the
people whom we want to target, specifically women, the previously
disadvantaged and blacks in rural areas and urban areas where we think
there is a need for renewal. So instead of small business promotion not
being fully provided for, we are going to accelerate provision for and
promotion of small business with this restructuring.

Through these institutions and the financial and nonfinancial support
schemes offered to small business, we were able to service and support a
great number of small, black, women-owned businesses, and the disabled,
particularly in the rural areas. The successes of these programmes have
enabled us to learn from practice and experience and we are currently, as I
have said, in the process of reassessing our impact. Based on our findings,
we are going to improve our efforts in these areas.

The restructured DTI will see us expanding our support for this sector and
concentrating on where the target recipients are. Further, we have
redoubled our efforts to develop the SADC region because, as the Minister
said, it will not be useful to us to think that we are the strongest in the
region while our neighbours are suffering, as that will lead to a lot of
social ills, some of which are a lot of illegal immigrants and refugees.

We are working with our neighbours on the Spatial Development Initiates and
the development of the various corridors we established with them. We are
actively involved in establishing bilateral and multilateral trade
agreements within SADC, improving trade policy and actively restructuring
our tariff regimens. We are engaged in infrastructure development at a
world-scale project level with our regional partners.

Only last week - I do not know if Mr Bruce is here - the SADC Ministers
responsible for Trade and Industry met in Sandton and targeted 1 September
2000 as the implementation date for the SADC Free Trade Agreement. For him
to say that we speeded up this free trade agreement because of political
imperatives - to try to bolster the President's dream of an African
renaissance - is a figment of his imagination. If there is any South
African who does not appreciate that the region has to be strong for South
Africa to be strong, I do not know where that person comes from.
[Interjections.]

At the beginning of this year Ministers from the African, Caribbean and
Pacific countries, as well as the European Union, met in Brussels to
negotiate and conclude a successor agreement to the LomÃ© Four Convention
which expired on 29 February 2000. Again I heard criticism here that we
rushed to finalise our agreement with the EU when, in fact, we could have
gained more by trying to finish our negotiations regarding the successor to
LomÃ© Four. All these things are happening at the same time, so I just do
not understand what the criticism was all about. But I know that the person
who knows best will be able to respond to the people who were raising those
criticisms.

In February, the Minister and I led a South African delegation to the 10th
session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, Unctad,
where the Minister handed over the presidency to Thailand. Unctad's role of
aiding developing countries was reaffirmed at this session, thereby
continuing its contribution to developing countries and their participation
in multilateral fora. South Africa made major interventions at the
conference and we had the distinct honour of having our Deputy President
participating in the high level heads-of-state forum of the conference. I
will not touch the WTO, for the Minister has already spoken about it.

As we have heard, the DTI has taken the challenge of meeting the needs of
our people and the country a step further. The changes mentioned here are
indicative of an institution that has taken stock of the issues that are
confronting our people, and developing the best possible solutions to these
issues by creating the vehicles necessary to deliver on these. The budget
we present today will enable us to meet these challenges.

In conclusion, I wish to thank the Minister, the previous Deputy Minister
in absentia, who has been very supportive to me, the Director-General of
the Department of Trade and Industry, Dr Alistair Ruiters, and the
chairpersons of the standing committees in the National Assembly and the
NCOP for their support. [Applause.]

Miss N B SIGABI: Mr Chairperson and hon members, on the surface the
Government has done everything to attract investment and for job prospects.
The President himself has taken control of the Cabinet committee on job
creation, but underneath the surface, the current is flowing in the
opposite direction.

The South African economy has shed 1 million jobs since 1994, introducing
hundreds of thousands of poor impoverished households and individuals to
the poverty trap. The Government needs to realise that foreign direct
investment is not the panado for all our ills; so much of what is wrong is
internal.

SMMEs should be the primary means of empowerment for all South Africans.
This sector is important to the South African economy as a strategic
balance in addressing job creation. These entrepreneurs will pave the way
for the formation of multisectoral industries in the country. SMMEs provide
scope for young aspirant entrepreneurs to become agents of transformation
and growth. The current policies for black empowerment and small business
development perpetuate top-down dependence, and not economic and
entrepreneurial freedom.

The black empowerment infrastructure breeds uncompetitive and unproductive
businesses which today, in the global context, will never realise their
potential as mechanisms for job creation. [Interjections.] The SMMEs have
the biggest potential for growth and can be the biggest role-players in the
alleviation of poverty and unemployment. It needs capacity-building,
institutional strengthening, coherent development of strategic
interventions mechanisms, efforts at upgrading the status of the
entrepreneurs and benchmarking efforts for impact evaluation.

We have done some selling and we are looking good on paper. But when it
comes to action, it happens elsewhere. [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, sanibonani
[greetings]. The two minutes that the ACDP is normally allocated has now
miraculously turned into six minutes, and all of a sudden I am a little bit
more relaxed than I normally am!

Two minutes obviously does not give the ACDP much time to adequately
comment on any budget, so I have decided to focus on two particular issues.
But as things stand, perhaps I will get to comment on more than that.

The two issues which we believe have enormously detrimental effects on our
economy and the welfare and development of this nation are liquor and
gambling. It is estimated that South Africans consume more than 6 million
litres of alcoholic beverage every year, close to 10 litres of pure alcohol
per adult per year, placing us among the highest alcohol-consuming
countries in the world. [Interjections.]

A large portion of the population does not drink, therefore the per capita
consumption and risky drinking, particularly over weekends, is very high
amongst those who do consume alcohol. [Interjections.] Studies show that a
repeated link is made by commissioners between crime and substance abuse,
particularly alcohol, and that the road accident rate in relation to
drunken driving in South Africa also leaves much to be desired.
[Interjections.]

Health services are also negatively affected through use of trauma services
and treatment costs. The Government has once again sadly failed to
adequately use the alcohol excise tax as a means of addressing these
abuses. While Government is credited with imposing sin tax, the hon the
Minister of Finance has, in fact, only increased duties on all alcoholic
drinks in line with forecast inflation. In other words, the real change in
excise duty will be 0% and, as far as sorghum beer is concerned, -5,5%.

The argument implied by the 1999 Budget Review is that increasing the
excise tax on sorghum beer would affect the poorest sectors of society. It
could, however, equally be argued that the Government has a duty to reduce
alcohol consumption and related problems among this sector, and that
increasing the excise tax on sorghum beer might assist in reducing alcohol
abuse. [Interjections.]

As things stand, the economic costs of alcohol misuse are likely to exceed
the revenue gained from taxes and VAT by at least three times. In the light
of this, the ACDP calls on Trade and Industry to see to it that adequate
duties and levies are applied to these products and that the money be used
...
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, please lower the
noise level in this House. Hon member, please continue.

Ms C DUDLEY: Thank you, Chairperson. The money should be used to educate
the public with regard to the danger of alcohol abuse and in setting up
youth centres, sports and health facilities.

The licensing of shebeens, bottle stores and liquor outlets is another
major concern. These are mushrooming in every community, and even local
cafes are selling alcohol right outside school premises. Our youth are
vulnerable and communities have no say. Ordinary people do not read the
Gazette. We call on Trade and Industry to urgently review the licensing
process and to see that communities are fully consulted before liquor
licenses are awarded.

The ACDP is also opposed to the Lotteries Act and the National Gambling
Act, as hon members know. [Interjections.] We believe gambling is
destructive and cannot contribute to building the nation. The idea that
gambling creates jobs is false. The lottery does not create wealth, but
rather consumes it. If people did not spend money on gambling, they would
spend it on something else, creating more useful jobs in other sectors. The
lottery is of no benefit to our economy. [Interjections.]

Mr J H MOMBERG: Rubbish!

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon Jannie Momberg, please
allow the member to have her time at the podium, sir.

Mr J H MOMBERG: But she is talking rubbish!

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Even if she is, do not worry about
it. You will have your turn. Hon member, please continue.

Mr J H MOMBERG: Ekskuus, antie! [Excuse me, ``auntie''!]

An HON MEMBER: Skaam jou, Jannie! [Shame on you, Jannie!]
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

Ms C DUDLEY: Will I lose some seconds? [Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: Jannie, moenie pla nie! [Jannie, don't be a nuisance!]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Please withdraw the remark
that she is talking rubbish.

Mr J H MOMBERG: I withdraw it.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Thank you. Hon member, please
continue. [Interjections.] [Laughter.]

Ms C DUDLEY: To add insult to injury, Government is now involved in the
selection of good causes to which the pittance gleaned from the lottery
will go. Proverbs 23:21 clearly states that ``drunkards and gluttons become
poor'', and 1 Corinthians 6:9 says:


  Do not be deceived: Neither the sexually immoral ... nor adulterers nor
  male prostitutes nor homosexual offenders nor thieves nor the greedy nor
  drunkards ... nor swindlers will inherit the kingdom of God.

[Interjections.] The ACDP calls on the leaders of this House to lead by
example.

Zimbabwe is featuring in the news at present and causing great concern. Our
Government is, however, curiously quiet. Since this issue obviously affects
the SADC region, we want to know from the hon the Minister to what extent
our trade with Zimbabwe is affected at present or is likely to be affected
in the near future. To what extent is this crisis likely to reverse the
gains that he has made in strengthening the trade between SADC and other
trade blocs? Does the Minister think that the Government should move
quickly to try and resolve this crisis for the sake of the economic growth
of the entire region; and if not, for what reasons? I hope the Minister
will refer to this in his reply.

In conclusion, I just want to comment that the strategic objectives of the
Department of Trade and Industry are commendable, and that the efforts to
develop small, medium and micro enterprises are encouraging. The ACDP is
happy to support these efforts and objectives, and looks forward to seeing
positive results. After all, commitment and hard work is what it is going
to take.

In addition, the Minister's confident handling of ... [Interjections.] The
ACDP will vote in favour of this budget. [Time expired.]

Mr K M ANDREW: Mr Chairperson, on a point of order: When you asked the hon
Momberg to withdraw, surely the hon member should have shown sufficient
respect by standing up as opposed to lounging back in his seat and just
saying: ``I withdraw.'' [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Thank you. [Laughter.] Order! Hon
members, the next speaker will be making her maiden speech. Please, allow
the speaker the courtesy of the House so that she can make her maiden
speech in peace. [Applause.]

Ms C C SEPTEMBER: Mr Chairperson, Minister Alec Erwin and Deputy Minister
Hendricks, we surely welcome the new director-general of the department, Dr
Alistair Ruiters.

I rise to support the Trade and Industry Vote. The aim of the Department of
Trade and Industry is to lead and facilitate access to sustainable economic
activity and employment for all South Africans through higher levels of
investment, and to increase access for South African products in
international markets.
The department also aims to create a fair, competitive and efficient
marketplace in South Africa for domestic and foreign businesses and
consumers with particular reference to the global competitiveness of the
industry, small, medium and micro enterprises' development and economic
empowerment. This is, of course, a tall order for the department, and we
can only wish them well in their work.

My colleagues have already dealt with all the different programmes of the
Department of Trade and Industry. I would like to examine two aspects. One
will deal with commodity prices and trade balances, and the other will deal
with global integration and development.

Most economies of developing countries are oriented towards the production
of primary agricultural products, as opposed to secondary activities. These
primary commodities form the main exports to other countries, developed and
less developed. It is estimated that for most developing countries, primary
products account for over 60% of all exports. Basic foodstuffs, nonfood
cash crops and other raw materials account for a large portion of exports.
Developing countries that export oil and other scarce minerals are in a
better position. It is estimated that in sub-Saharan Africa, primary
products account for over 94% of the total export earnings. In South Africa
primary commodities, mainly minerals, account for two thirds of our
country's exports.

Most developing countries need to obtain foreign exchange, in addition to
promoting domestic savings, in order to finance a domestic growth strategy.
For many developing countries much of the foreign exchange earned through
exports in the 1980s went to pay the interest on earlier borrowing.

Exports form a large share of income for developing countries, but it has
not been able to keep pace with the growth of exports from developed
countries. In addition to the decline in the quantity of market store, the
prices of products from developing countries have been steadily decreasing.

The overall share of world trade for developing countries has been
declining. Developing countries continue to depend on industrialised
countries as a result of low foreign exchange flows, declining export
earnings and commodity prices, and ever decreasing foreign aid.
By 1988 the terms of trade for developing countries deteriorated by about
29% compared to the 1980 prices. The falling commodity prices caused a
massive transfer of resources from the developing countries to the
developed countries, and some studies have even estimated that this
accounted for a transfer of about $83 billion between 1981 and 1986 alone.

International commodity prices for raw materials can be characterised as
unstable, with erratic fluctuations. Many sub-Saharan countries fared
better between 1997 and 1998 in the commodities market. However, this trend
was reversed during 1999.

The Asian crisis, of course, exacerbated falling commodity prices following
some growth from 1994 to 1996, and this decline can be attributed to the
reduced raw materials, energy intensity of production, substitution by
other materials and the fall in commodity prices. Technology changes and
advances in agronomics also changed the structure of production and
international trade.

Falls in agricultural prices were more a result of overproduction than
reduced consumption. Several agricultural products were increased in
production by over 10% between 1996 and 1999. This has far exceeded
previous production records.

The production of metals and minerals also grew significantly without any
significant growth in consumption. Increased production has been attributed
to an increase in investment and technological improvements in refining
between 1995 and 1999. Prices for most commodities continued to decline in
1999.

Developing countries are further faced with market protectionism against
exports of strategic interest to their growth. These include agricultural
products, wines, textiles, steel, petrochemicals and processed tropical
goods, as we have seen in the European Union agreement.

Protectionism, as practised by the developed countries, aggravates the
difficulties faced by developing countries. Protectionism takes the form of
voluntary export restraints, common agricultural policy for the European
Union and orderly marketing arrangements. These measures have the effect of
preventing entry into the market, even for the most efficient producers.
Developing countries are relying on income earned from exports. Declining
commodity prices also contribute to a fall in national income and revenue
earnings. The impact on income and expenditure tends to negatively affect
the vulnerable and developing countries, and the result may, of course, be
the deterioration of the quality of life of many people.

Commodities still remain the bulk of South African exports. Primary
commodities, mainly minerals, account for about two thirds of our country's
exports. I wonder if the DP knows this. [Interjections.] Policy-makers have
frequently emphasised the importance of improving South Africa's
international competitiveness in manufactured products. [Interjections.] I
am glad that the DP is awake now. [Laughter.]

A healthy and competitive manufacturing sector will provide the impetus for
sustained economic growth. Of course, they do not know what I am talking
about. [Laughter.] Several developing countries have begun to promote
export diversification that reduces the reliance on a few products.
[Interjections.] Cosatu wrote this for me. The objective of commodity
diversification is to spread the risk exposure to a wider range of
commodities with the distribution and development of new products, and to
cushion countries from external shocks or price fluctuations.

On the question of global integration and development, there are glaring
imbalances in the trading system which stifle the growth prospects of
developing countries. The Unctad report of 1999 explains that the closer
integration of developing countries into the global trading and financial
system is not bringing faster growth, but increases external deficits and
instability.

Developing countries have been striving hard, often at considerable cost,
to integrate more closely into the world economy. However, protectionism in
the developed countries has prevented them from fully exploiting their
existing or potential competitive advantage. Governments in the North must
expand trade with the south. Market access in the developed countries must
form the centrepiece of a positive trade agenda. [Applause.] [Time
expired.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Before I call on the next
speaker, hon members, please lower your voice levels. There is too much
noise in here and it is difficult to hear. Hon member Kotwal, as a new
member, I advise you, sir, to listen to the debate, and you will be a good
member later on! [Laughter.] [Interjections.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, hon Ministers, and members, may I take this
opportunity to congratulate Deputy Minister Ngwane-Hendricks and Connie
September on their maiden speeches. Well done.

The failure to breach the gap between the developed and developing
countries is due to the lack of organisational structure. Although, on a
global level, steps have been taken to promote trade investments and
entrepreneurial development, issues of trade between developing and
developed countries cannot be viewed in isolation from the problems facing
the international monetary system, especially the devaluation or
revaluation of currencies which are used as tools for trade policies.

South Africa is an economic forerunner on the African continent. The
challenges of the South African industrial policy are to nurture a coherent
vision, to target industries that have potential competitiveness in order
to build a strong, dynamic base for the economy as a whole, and to
correctly determine the linkage between the demand and supply of
commodities. Practical strategies must be implemented to increase physical
investments. Policy co-ordination must give attention to the relationship
between the Government, private business and international investments.
Proper administrative and institutional capabilities are important to
prevent the system from becoming frustrated.

The objective is to facilitate employment creation and to promote the
manufacturing industry so that conditions are sustainable for overall
economic growth. The slow growth in the manufacturing sector is a key
component of the satisfactory performance of the South African economy.
Therefore, initiatives taken by the Government to develop small, medium and
micro businesses will stimulate trade orientation and secure competitive
advantage through improving productivity.

Huge manufacturers, such as the alcohol and motor industries, must have
their benchmarks and some notion of international competitiveness. The
testing of products on the world market is proof of establishing
prominence. South Africa's participation in the Asian and Western Europe
trade blocs will enhance foreign investments. Active implementation of the
European Union-South African trade agreement is urgent to promote and
develop the economy. South Africa must facilitate, with the assistance of
Government and private investment, the manufacture of its own products
instead of depending on the importation of finished goods.

The closure of numerous clothing industries has resulted in major
retrenchments, which is to the detriment of the economy and job creation.
Monopolisation of industrial and commercial institutions must never be
accepted, because it prevents the man in the street from advancing himself
effectively in the respective industries. To promote entrepreneurs amongst
our citizens is of paramount importance in order to intensify trade in
South Africa. Implementation of effective measures to reduce the crime rate
in South Africa is an attractive motivation for foreign investment,
provided that the labour force, at all levels of the economy, is given
priority so that the per capita income in households is increased. Speeding
up the process of black empowerment is crucial to economic growth and the
levelling of the playing fields. The MF supports Vote No 32. [Applause.]

Dr A I VAN NIEKERK: Chairperson, hon Minister, I would like to participate
in this debate and to congratulate the Minister, who is capable and doing a
good job, especially on the gruelling European trade talks, where he showed
his worth. I think it was good that he did that, even with negotiators who
did at times go back on their word. He did a very good job in that regard.

When I therefore put some points on the table, they represent positive
criticism in areas which I think do need attention. That would be with
regard to imports of agricultural products. South African agriculture is
not highly subsidised. Compared to the rest of the world I think we are the
least subsidised. When we sell our products overseas they are sold in a
distorted market. We can compete with the farmers overseas, but we cannot
compete with Uncle Sam's subsidies, which are tremendous, and the surpluses
they produce eventually come into our market. When they come to our market
they destroy the profit potential within South Africa and eventually that
affects big, small and even emerging farmers.

We can look at poultry imports. I have seen small farmers who are
devastated by a small shop next door which sells imported poultry from
America, whereas their poultry does not have a price which allows them a
profit. It is the same with meat. If one looks at the sugar industry at the
moment, where the industrials are importing or buying imported sugar
because there is a dispute with the South African sugar industry, it can
have devastating effects on small farmers in KwaZulu-Natal and everywhere
else. So somewhere something is wrong and I think attention has to be given
to putting tariffs in place to prevent these illegal imports or those
imports which originate from highly subsidised countries to protect our
industry and to give direction to our agricultural resources here to be
used optimally.

If one looks at the statistics over the past ten years, the importing of
agricultural goods increased by 17,3% every year. If we look at job
creation within the agricultura; sector, in 1990 there were 1,4 million
jobs in agriculture, and at the moment there are about 700 000. If we link
these two together we will find that there is something which causes these
job losses.

I also want to look at other areas which I think are important. In terms of
border control there is a serious need to control the influx of any
agricultural products at our border posts. The information that I have is
that only 1% to 2% of the agricultural imports are physically inspected by
officials. That means that 98% comes through on the face value of their
accompanying documents. What is even more disturbing is that the officials
who inspect these agricultural products admit that they do not really know
what they are inspecting or looking for, because it is not their field. I
think a solution of these matters should be urgently attended to.

One of the other aspects which I also think one should look at is the
protection of intellectual property rights. Forged items to the value of
approximately R5 billion are being dumped on South African markets by
Chinese and other Oriental and Mafia-controlled companies. The Minister, as
the responsible Minister, has held talks with concerned groups who have
expressed their concern as to the lack of implementation of measures that
would prevent the dumping of these goods on South African markets. I think
action is needed here.

Another worrying aspect is the red tape involved in the registration of
trademarks. In some cases it takes up to three years to even start
processing a trademark registration application, while the registration of
these trademarks could take even longer. In the event that South Africa
succeeds with its bid for hosting the Soccer World Cup in 2006, those
companies which wish to register trademarks for those purposes must
register now if they want to use trademarks during the Soccer World Cup.
This is an unacceptable state of affairs.

Wat die ekonomie betref, sal ons 'n bydrae probeer lewer, maar dan sal die
departement die bedryf moet help om so wyd as moontlik ... [Tyd verstreke.]
[As far as the economy is concerned, we will try to make a contribution,
but then the department will have to help the industry as widely as
possible ... [Time expired.]]

Mr D LOCKEY: Chairperson, in the RDP and Gear we, in the ANC, committed
ourselves to restructuring our economy, achieving high levels of investment
in sustainable labour-intensive activities and enhancing growth and
employment creation.

The Department has reported progress on the following projects, which have
contributed to new investments and job creation. Up to December 1999
projects were established through the tax holiday scheme with a total
investment of R8,5 billion and a projected creation of 20 000 jobs.
Regional industrial development programmes have established 1 333 projects
with a total investment amount of R20,6 billion. The small, medium and
micro manufacturing development programme has supported 1 514 projects with
an investment of R5,6 billion and an estimated direct creation of 48 200
jobs.

The Minister said today that the task we face is immense, but these figures
certainly prove that we are on course. It is our hope, as the ANC, that in
the coming financial year we will see an acceleration of this process, with
greater emphasis on SMME development and black economic empowerment. This
department has, together with other economic departments, laid the
macroeconomic foundations which have seen the South African economy in its
healthiest state in more than 30 years. What is now required is a greater
emphasis on those issues that impact on our people's daily lives, which
require a greater focus on SMME development and job creation.
We welcome the director-general's commitment in this financial year to
focusing on three critical areas, namely SMME promotion, black economic
empowerment and the stimulation of new investments. We also welcome his
promise for an organisational structure with more simplicity and greater
accountability in the pursuit of these objectives. We have noted that under
Programme 1 of the budget there is an increase of R20 million to provide
for a greater staff complement in the executive management office. Unlike
the DP and Mr Bruce, we believe that this will enhance the administrative
capabilities of the department and, in particular, will improve its
planning, efficiency and co-ordination.

This is vital, because 83% of the department's budget comprises transfer
payments made to the following institutions: the IDC, Ntsika, Khula, the
SABS, the Competition Commission, Investment SA, the CSIR and the Board on
Tariffs and Trade. It is important to ensure that the mandates of all these
institutions are aligned with the stated objectives of the department. We
hope that the new office will institute greater control measures to ensure
that budget expenditure is monitored throughout the year so as to prevent a
reccurrence of large sums of unspent funds at the end of the financial
year.

Unlike the DP we in the ANC are committed to working for wealth creation
throughout the SADC region and the continent. We will endeavour to do so
through trade and investment, co-operation, tourism, environmental
protection, human resource development, culture, sports, science and
technology.

We know that there is still a lot of work outstanding in the facilitation
of trade liberalisation among fellow African countries. Despite the
proliferation of regional trade agreements throughout the continent, trade
between African countries today is less than it was in 1970. Studies have
shown that an inhospitable macroeconomic environment, particularly with
regard to overvalued exchange rates and currency inconvertability, is a
serious obstacle in the expansion of inter-African trade. This trend runs
contrary to the integration of commodity, capital and financial markets
that is now taking place under the process of globalisation.

South Africa currently generates 31,6% of the GDP of the continent, and 80%
of the GDP of the SADC region. We are, therefore, in a very strong position
to make an important contribution to the economic reconstruction of Africa.
It is through instruments like the Maseru protocol on trade that we can
contribute most. This protocol commits SADC member states to progressively
establishing an economically integrated region within which 97% of taxes
will eventually be eliminated within five years. The advantage of such a
free-trade agreement lies in the opening of new markets and the stimulation
of new investment flows. As the strongest economy in the SADC region we
stand to gain the most in investment and trade flows that will result from
this agreement. However, if we want to optimise the potential of this
agreement, we must provide for a comprehensive regional infrastructure and
industrial development strategy also to accompany this process.

There are already many examples of spatial development initiatives, for
example the Maputo and Trans-Kalahari Corridor developments. In this
process of regional economic integration we must strive to build greater
synergies between the economies of our region. We must seek to complement
each other, rather than compete in the areas where we are strong. Our focus
for competition must be directed at penetrating the global market.
Exports from the Southern African Customs Union - which is predominantly
South Africa - to the rest of the SADC region increased threefold, from
R5,8 billion in 1993 to R16,2 billion in 1998. Imports from SADC into SACU
over the same period increased from R1,3 billion to R2,6 billion. The gap
in the trade balance has thus widened in our favour, from R4,521 billion in
1993 to R6,221 billion in 1998.

There are those in this Chamber who have called for economic sanctions
against Zimbabwe, despite the fact that not a single person in that country
has asked for this. Zimbabwe is South Africa's tenth largest trading
partner. If there is an economic collapse in Zimbabwe, there will no doubt
be serious economic repercussions for those South African companies that
are trading with Zimbabwe and subsequent job losses in our economy. It is
clear to us in the ANC that South Africa cannot prosper while fellow
Africans are languishing in poverty, hunger and degradation. It is only
through working together that we will ultimately realise our objective of
economic growth and reconstruction.

There are many challenges that are facing us in our endeavour to build a
vibrant SMME sector in our economy. The hon Sigabi's ignorance, displayed
here by her statement on black economic empowerment, is astonishing, given
the fact that she is supposed to be part of those who had suffered under
apartheid. The massive social and economic inequalities created by decades
of the exclusion of our people from the mainstream of the South African
economy remains an important stumbling block. Unlike Mr Bruce and the DP,
we believe that it is only through the correction of these past imbalances
that we will be able to provide for sustainable economic growth and social
stability in this country.

However, we do not expect better from either the hon Sigabi or Bruce,
because what else can one expect from the DP, given the fact that their
main spokesperson on trade and industry believes British colonialism is the
best thing that ever happened to South Africa. [Interjections.] The fact
remains that our economy is still dominated by conservative financial
institutions. They still function like an old boys' club. Without the right
lineage and the right connections, it is virtually impossible for our
entrepreneurs to gain access to venture capital.

In the review of the SMME strategy that is now being undertaken we must
address the issues of funding, as well as the economic revival of the
townships. We must develop policies and instruments to deal with the
practice of the redlining of townships by financial institutions. The fact
remains that millions of our people live in these areas. We have a duty as
a Government to ensure that these areas become part of the mainstream of
the South African economy and we must ensure that development in these
areas takes place and benefits our people.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Mr Chairperson, I would like to respond
to many of the speakers, but before doing so I would like to thank all
those parties that supported the budget. I notice that even the DP had some
difficulty finding a reason to oppose it, but nonetheless did so in the
end.

I can assure Dr Davies and his committee that we will not ignore trade
negotiations as we adjust many of our activities. These remain fundamental
and critical. I was also pleased to hear - I think it is a challenge that
we all face - that the portfolio committee itself is thinking of how it can
work in a different way. I am also quite convinced from our recent
experience that the role that Parliament can play in shaping and
redirecting much of our policies and work is an extremely positive one. I
am very grateful for the support we get.

Concerning roll-overs, for us this has been one of the most difficult
problems by far. Part of the problem is that we are offering a benefit to
the private sector. The private sector is not taking up that benefit to the
extent that would use the funds. We would make the assessment, therefore,
that we must get out and offer to more people, that we are not getting out
to enough people. But on the other hand, it is fairly clear that the
economy is so structured, as I indicated, that it is very difficult for
small and medium enterprises to actually even enter the economic arena.
That is what I was referring to in my opening address.

With regard to the input from the hon member Mr Bruce of the DP, I think
one can very clearly see the difference between the ANC and the DP in the
input. The ANC has a perspective that embraces all of South Africa's
people. It has a compassion, a sympathy for those who suffer, for those who
are unemployed and for those who are not absorbed in our economy. We do not
believe that economic laws must be slavishly abided by, because they are
not laws that force people to do things they do not have to do.

However, we realise that economies work in a particular way, and I think
the ANC has shown itself to be extremely adept at analysing economies, both
nationally and internationally, and adjusting to those. We do it with the
objective of benefiting ordinary people, not with the objective of
following so-called economic laws. I think this is a profound difference,
and it is why the ANC will govern and the DP will never govern. [Applause.]
No matter how much they dream, it will never happen. [Interjections.]

With regard to the rules of origin in SADC, I also find it disturbing - and
I hope we change this - that when it comes to Europe we are full of
criticism of their protectionism, but when it comes to SADC we suddenly
want to introduce the same protectionism. This is unacceptable and must
change.

The so-called one-stage rule that was referred to is quite clearly not
understood. It is ridiculous to ask countries in our neighbourhood that do
not have the industrial capacity to make a two-stage transformation, to do
so. To do so is merely to condemn them to continuing to produce raw
materials only. What we have done is propose an extremely workable
proposition, in co-operation with them, and that is to do what is often
done - the processes of production must be described. If the DP wants a
lesson on rules of origin, I would gladly oblige because we should all work
together on this, and not make stupid sniping comments when we are trying
to build a region, and we are not going to build it by trying to enforce
unrealistic rules of origin.

I agree with, I think, Dr Kraai Van Niekerk, that we will obviously have to
be vigilant and careful at our border posts. This is a matter we are going
to have to put more effort into. We have put some effort into it already
and we have had some successes on this matter. But he is correct. If we are
going to trade in a free-trade area, the trade must be conducted according
to the rules of the free-trade agreement, and that must apply to everybody.


Members may have watched the recent events in Malawi - not a pleasant or
attractive prospect, but we are not going to condone criminality by South
African companies. They violated the agreement and they are going to be
punished for it. If that means there is some disruption in Malawi, we will
do our best to mitigate the effects. But we are not going to condone
criminality by our own companies, no matter whether they are trading out of
Malawi, South Africa, Mozambique or anywhere else. [Applause.]

With regard to the Companies Office and the Registrar of Patents, we would
have to accept that the performance here must improve. We accept that. One
of the problems we have is that these are essentially processes. These
require processing systems which the Public Service has never used before.
This is going to be one of the main instances of restructuring the
Department of Trade and Industry will carry out.

Wherever we are required to use modern processing methods, we are going to
do it. It is pointless putting people who are analysts and specialists into
managing processes. One has to put the right people in the right place and
that is the DTI's approach to restructuring. I am quite confident, as we
have already done in some parts of the company's office, that we will make
good progress in this regard.

With regard to the hon member Bekker's comments on the taxi
recapitalisation issue, I have spoken on this before. We must separate a
few things here. Firstly, we need a vehicle that is safe, that meets our
specifications and is affordable to ordinary taxi drivers. He is quite
right on that. That is the project that we in the DTI take responsibility
for. We will seek to find such a vehicle and a delivery mechanism to
provide that vehicle to taxi owners.

The arguments that we have with Sataco will continue. There are many vested
interests in Sataco. We would only ask of them that they should conduct
themselves with a modicum of responsibility. Our doors have been open. We
have spoken, and the notion that we have suddenly broken off the
partnership is something that has emanated from them, not from Government.

The fine details of this taxi recapitalisation scheme will always be open
for discussion, as was indicated by the Minister of Transport. It is one of
the most complicated restructurings that we have attempted in South Africa.
It is vital and fundamental that we succeed in it, and that requires
everybody to work together.

Let me then deal with the issues of labour policy and the WTO which were
raised by the hon member from the New NP. I think we should be clear that
within Government there are not different views held by the different
Ministries. We have a very clear perspective on how, as I indicated in my
opening address, the policy on finance links with the policy on trade and
industry, links with the labour market policy and links with the
agricultural policy, as well as the restructuring of state assets. This is
an interconnected set of policy initiatives.

Now we have chosen, as South Africa, not to try to match other economies
for cheap labour. We will never do it. It is not going to work. So what we
need is a labour market that functions on the basis of equity, negotiation
and, if that hon member reads our policy carefully, the principle of so-
called voluntarism, that is, the two parties, labour and business, are
encouraged to solve their differences without incessant and continuous
government interference. It is a very clear strategy.

The Minister of Labour has said time and time again, in recent times, that
as we developed this programme over the past five years, we all acknowledge
- business, Government and labour - that there are things that we are
learning and about which we are all prepared to sit down and negotiate.
This is a perfectly pragmatic, sensible approach. The attempt to veer from
one pillar to the other, and hammer the unions here or hammer labour there,
is not what Government is going to do. Government is going to manage this
process in the best interests of this economy.

Finally, with regard to agriculture, I think that this is an important area
on which I would like to make some comments. South Africa has made amazing
changes in agriculture. These have not been without a cost, as the hon
member correctly indicated. Where we can identify an international
commodity price, we have linked the tariff to the international commodity
price. That is the general rule we have tried to use. One cannot do that on
commodities such as cheeses and poultry and other items. If one attempts to
do that, one is going to get hammered in the WTO. The American poultry
problem is a particular and specific problem that we have to grapple with.

However, I think that we are ahead of most other countries. What we need to
introduce is a combined effort to restructure our production processes. We
can already see it. In agriculture, we are beginning to diversify our
exports and to expand into other markets. It is not an easy process, but it
is one that I think we can work on together. The doors are open. The
processes are there to interact and deal with this.

Nothing is easy when changing an economy. I am grateful, and I think the
Government is grateful that, in general, we get massive support across the
board, because the economy does not belong to a political party; it belongs
to our people. We had better all build it together. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

                          SADC REGIONAL INTEGRATION

                          (Subject for Discussion)

The SPEAKER: Hon members, the next item on the Order Paper is the subject
for discussion, namely SADC regional integration. This subject is of
fundamental importance to South Africans, to our present conditions and to
the achievement of many of the objectives and aspirations which we have
espoused so often in this Chamber.

Integration at a regional level is indeed a prerequisite and a building
block for both African unity and the African renaissance. Lasting unity
cannot be based on emotions or simply be an aspiration. It has to be rooted
in the recognition that we need our neighbours now more than ever before.
No nation can thrive in isolation. South Africa can never be an island of
prosperity in a sea of poverty. Our development can only be enhanced by,
and it is dependent on, the economic development of the region.

Globalisation has accelerated the emergence of powerful regional
organisations which can better assert regional interests in the face of
more powerful and domineering economic and political blocs. Thus, we need
to move closer to our neighbours and to work together for agreed common
objectives. A decade ago we were still at a stage when the apartheid regime
had tried to perpetuate old colonial relationships in which development was
concentrated in the colonies of white settlement, namely South Africa and
Southern Rhodesia, while the rest of the region was maintained as a labour
reservoir from which cheap labour could be drawn to the mines, plantations
and industries.

Democratic South Africa acceded to SADC in 1994. Before that the region had
come together against the apartheid regime which had tried to assert
political, economic and military dominance over Africa south of the Sahara.
In July 1979 a Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference was
established to harmonise economic development among the countries in
Southern Africa, to reduce their dependence on apartheid South Africa, and
to counter the imposition of its hegemony. The then SADCC countries played
a significant role in the liberation of our country and the end of Southern
Africa's destabilisation; and for this, as we know, they paid a heavy
price.

Renamed and rejuvenated, SADC now encompasses 14 countries, including South
Africa, working on a regional basis to increase economic integration and
regional security. The old SADCC achieved a lot, but perhaps its greatest
achievement has been the establishment of a firm foundation for regional
integration in Southern Africa on which the new SADC has built.

The treaty establishing SADC was signed in Windhoek in 1992 and provided
for the harmonisation and rationalisation of policies and strategies for
sustainable development in all areas of human endeavour. The treaty commits
member states to the fundamental principles of the sovereign equality of
member states, solidarity, peace and security, human rights, democracy, the
rule of law, equity and the mutual benefit for all its peoples.

The objectives of SADC are many and they include to achieve development and
economic growth, to alleviate poverty, to enhance the standard and quality
of life of the peoples of Southern Africa and to support the socially
disadvantaged through regional integration. It refers to the evolution of
common political values, systems and institutions, and goes on to include
things such as the sustainable utilisation of natural resources, the
effective protection of the environment, and the strengthening and
consolidation of the long-standing historical, social and cultural
affinities and links amongst the peoples of the region. I believe these
ideals, that are in the treaty, have been put forward and are recognised as
the common objectives of this new South Africa.

Last year this Parliament ratified the SADC Trade Protocol, which now has
to be implemented. SADC is now the most vibrant economic organisation in
Africa, one with a combined GDP of nearly $180 billion. We should note,
however, that the combined GDP of all the countries south of the Sahara,
which goes beyond SADC, only constitutes 1% of the world's GDP.

Addressing the Southern African World Economic Forum last year, President
Mbeki said:


  As a country we are very interested that we do achieve the objective of
  the balanced economic development of our region. We are, therefore, keen
  that the productive capacity of our fellow member states of SADC should
  increase so that trade integration is complemented by investment flows to
  the smaller economies to mitigate their adjustment costs.

  In this regard we commend our own private sector for the interest it has
  shown in the economies of the countries of the region, with over $1
  billion invested in 1997 alone, half of which was direct investment.

  As governments, we will continue to encourage this process, among others
  through such spatial development initiatives as the Maputo Development
  Corridor which brings together Mozambique and South Africa, and the
  Lebombo SDI which brings together Mozambique, Swaziland and South Africa.

As we are aware, SADC defence Ministers have agreed to set up a regional,
rapid-deployment peacekeeping force which will be designed to contain
conflicts within or between member states.

The recent floods and cyclones in our region have illustrated that nature
recognises no political borders. Waters and winds have flowed across
frontiers, just as droughts have done in the past. There are now new
suggestions that we consider establishing within SADC a co-ordinated
disaster response force.

As I have already indicated, there are many other areas of regional
integration on which we have to move. Parliamentarians cannot lag behind as
co-operation is developed. International agreements will have to be
ratified and we need to do so on an informed basis and, ideally, we must be
part of the process through which agreements are reached. This Parliament
has joined the SADC Parliamentary Forum which brings together the
parliaments of the region. Last year we sent observers to the elections in
Mozambique and Namibia and will be doing so for other elections this year
and next. In 10 days' time the forum will be meeting in Cape Town to
develop its new programme. This will be followed by a plenary session in
which one of the debates will be on a Pan-African parliament.

These are just some, and a very minor part, of the formidable challenges
that really lie ahead, and in these challenges Parliament and members have
a very significant role to play. Let us in today's debate look ahead and
exchange ideas on these challenges, identify them and begin to put forward
ideas on how we should meet them in the years ahead.

I will now call on the first member to contribute to this debate, apart
from myself that is, and that is the hon Magasi.

Ms M N MAGAZI: Madam Speaker, Deputy Speaker, Ministers, hon members,
ladies and gentlemen, comrades and friends, the world we live in today
stresses the interdependence of countries and people. No country can
survive on its own. We are all members of the global village. South Africa
knows it, and noÂ one will deny it.

Our country is what it is owing to the labour of our neighbours. The
discovery of gold and diamonds in the 19th century forced the mining
magnates to recruit labour from Southern and Central Africa to come and
work in the mines of Johannesburg and the surrounding mining towns. This
still goes on. The regional integration we are talking about today must be
an integration which benefits all the member countries of Southern Africa,
not South Africa only as was the case before.

The President has declared this century the African century. The African
renaissance is the cornerstone of this African century. Revival and
rejuvenation of our continent must take place within this century. Regional
integration is an essential building block for this renaissance. Regional
integration must encompass many areas that are essential for our very
survival. I will deal with a few of these areas, which are the area of
environmental and nature conservation, the area of peace and security, and
the area of the encouragement of industrial development for the entire
region, to mention but a few.

The area of environment and nature conservation is one important area that
was neglected for many years and, hence, in recent times we have
experienced unfamiliar weather patterns. This calls on us to think in an
integrated way when we think about and plan our development. We must
identify all the areas in which there is the potential for growth in
tourism.

We need to protect endangered species, such as the rhino and the elephant.
We must not only deal effectively with poachers, but we must also educate
our people about the importance of preserving these animals for the
purposes of the tourism industry. Our people must be made to understand
that for every eight people that visit our country, a job is created for a
South African. Preservation of the natural environment can put us in the
unique position of unlocking the secrets of nature. We need to share
expertise in all areas of our mutual interest to enhance our capacity to
protect our environment. We need to encourage joint projects, such as the
Witbank-Maputo Corridor, which will facilitate communication and industrial
development between the two countries involved.

The question of peace and human security is one critical area in our
planning for development and co-operation. The region will not know peace
while there are still millions who swim in the sea of poverty, when senior
civil servants, entrusted will delivering welfare to ordinary citizens in
their countries, decide to rob them and deny them their basic human rights.
As long as this is happening, we will not know peace. The African
renaissance will remain a dream and we will remain a laughing stock the
world over.

The biggest challenge facing the region is ensuring that we eradicate
poverty in all its manifestations, and this cannot be done by one country
alone. The region must rise in unison when dealing with this. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order! I now call on the hon Mr Eglin, who is one of our
representatives on the SADC Parliamentary Forum.

Mr C W EGLIN: Madam Speaker, I would have liked to use this occasion to
have a leisurely look at the process of development and integration of the
SADC region as you did - the achievements, the shortcomings, the obstacles
and the way ahead. However, I am of the opinion that SADC and its hopes for
development and integration are faced with an immediate challenge. This
challenge has to be dealt with before it is too late.

The founding treaty and protocol of SADC signed, as you said, in Windhoek
in 1992, contained a fundamental political commitment, and I quote:


  ... the need to involve the peoples of the region centrally in the
  process of development and integration, particularly through the
  guarantee of democratic rights, the observance of human rights and the
  rule of law. In 1996, when the SADC organ was created, it also had a set
  of guiding principles, one of which was the observance of human rights,
  democracy and the rule of law.

  The question we can ask is: Have the countries comprising SADC, either
  individually or collectively, done enough to ensure that this democratic
  commitment, which is central to regional development and integration,
  becomes a reality? I can only quote what President Mandela thought of
  this way back in 1997 when addressing a summit meeting of SADC in Malawi:


  We, collectively, cannot remain silent when political or civil movements
  are harassed and suppressed through harsh state action.

  Can we continue to give comfort to member states whose actions go so
  diametrically against the values and principles we hold so dear and for
  which we struggled so long and so hard? Where we have, as we sadly do,
  instances of member states denying their citizens these basic rights,
  what should this organisation do or say?

That was Mr Mandela in 1997. Today, I believe, the states of SADC are faced
with a new and greater challenge in this field resulting from the
disturbing, deteriorating situation in Zimbabwe, a situation that could
rapidly develop to crisis proportions. There are two interrelated
components of this challenge to SADC. The one is economic and the other is
political. The economy of Zimbabwe, which should be one of the key
components in the regional economic integration, is in dire straits and in
the process of melting down.

I do not want to give hon members all these sorry statistics, but they are
very, very sad indeed. The reasons? The costly involvement of Zimbabwe in
the war in the Democratic Republic of Congo and, secondly, the political
decisions taken by President Mugabe with reckless disregard for the
economic consequences. I shudder to think what the Mugabe-inspired illegal
invasion of farms is going to do to Zimbabwe's agricultural production and
the threat it poses to investor confidence, not just for Zimbabwe but for
the SADC region as a whole.

The collapse of the Zimbabwean economy will have dire consequences for the
whole Southern African region. However, added to this economic tragedy,
there can be no doubt that President Mugabe's government - and, indeed, the
President himself - are violating the basic democratic provisions enshrined
both in the SADC founding treaty and the protocols of the SADC organ. Just
to recap, these are the guarantee of democratic rights, the observance of
human rights and the rule of law.

We believe that the Mugabe-approved invasion of farms, the destruction of
farming businesses, the assaults on peaceful protestors, and the violence
meted out to its opponents by President Mugabe's ruling party are all
violations of the SADC commitment to uphold human rights. We believe that
the failure of the Zimbabwean police to act against those who are breaking
the law, the failure to protect individuals who are taking part in peaceful
protest from brutal attacks from the cohorts of the Zanu-PF party and the
injunction of President Mugabe to his political cohorts to invade the farms
- and the subsequent injunction to stay on the farms in defiance of the
court order that these people should leave the farms - are all violations
of the SADC commitment to upholding the rule of law.

However, the Zimbabwean democracy itself is being threatened. Opponents of
the ruling party are warned with death should they present opposition to
Mugabe's policies. President Mugabe's veteran cohorts threaten a war should
the ruling party lose the election. Opponents of Zanu-PF are being harassed
and assaulted, supporters of the Movement for Democratic Change - the
opposition party - are threatened when they go and try to register as
voters. These are all violations of the SADC commitment to maintain
democracy, and they all cast doubt on whether President Mugabe, in his
desperation to cling to power, will permit the coming general elections of
Zimbabwe to be genuinely free and fair.

And the question is: What should SADC be doing about all of this? I return
once again to the speech, which I referred to, made by President Mandela.
To quote him further:


  These are difficult questions, but we have to ponder them seriously if we
  wish to retain our credibility as an organisation genuinely committed to
  democracy, human rights and good governance.

Mandela told his fellow heads of state that democracy and human rights were
regional concerns, not national ones protected by the principle of
noninterference. They are regional concerns, not just national ones
protected by the doctrine of noninterference. We believe that the time has
come for the South African Government, through President Mbeki, to state
quite clearly where this country and this Government stands, as a member of
SADC, in relation to the violations of the founding principles that have
been perpetrated by the government in Zimbabwe. [Interjections.]
Secondly, we believe that the SADC states should act collectively, because
we have a collective responsibility. We call on President Mbeki to urge
President Chissano, who is the present chairperson of SADC, to call an
urgent summit meeting of SADC so that the member states, in their
commitment to uphold the founding principles of the protocol, can come to a
collective decision on how to act on the crisis that President Mugabe has
thrust on this region. We believe that SADC owes it to the people of the
region, and I call on the Government of South Africa, as a major player in
this region, to take an initiative. Somebody has to take the initiative:
why not South Africa?

Thirdly, at the very least, South Africa, collectively with other SADC
countries, but possibly even on its own, should take steps to see that
there is effective monitoring of the electoral process in Zimbabwe. This
monitoring should not be delayed to the last few days before the election.
Indeed, with the registration of voters, the election process in Zimbabwe
has already commenced and so should be monitored.

South Africa should do what it can to ensure that democracy is upheld and
that the elections are free and fair. But if it finds that it is not, it
should have the courage to say so. President Mbeki, at the SADC Electoral
Commission meeting in Tanzania, stressed the importance of the fundamental
right to free and fair elections in maintaining democracy in Africa.

We in the DP subscribe to that as well, but we do wish to tell the South
African Government that South Africa, as the leading state in this part of
Africa, has a special regional responsibility. We call on the Government to
face the realities of the threat which the meltdown in Zimbabwe holds, not
just for Zimbabwe, but for the region as a whole. In facing these
realities, it must act with wisdom and courage. [Applause.]

Rev K M ZONDI: Madam Speaker, we in the IFP welcome this debate because it
serves to highlight the important role of SADC in promoting and fostering
regional economic and social integration. In the normal run of things, it
does not dawn on most people how much work has been done within the ambit
of SADC to bring about socioeconomic and regional integration among the
countries of Southern Africa.

The established trend in the world today is that of setting up regional
economic communities in order to make it possible for countries in a
particular region to have a meaningful share of the global economic slice.
Southern Africa has, through the establishment of SADC, also sought to
promote co-operation covering various areas and aspects of life. Such co-
operation is dominated by trade in goods and services, and cross-border
investment.
There has, therefore, to be an ongoing development of trade and investment
if the economic integration of the region is to be achieved. Upon the
realisation that it would be a completely unacceptable situation to have
South Africa as an island of prosperity in a sea of poverty, as mentioned
by the Speaker, it therefore becomes imperative for us as a country to
strive to make SADC work, taking into consideration the dominant nature of
the South African economy in the region.

SADC is a community of developing countries and, therefore, represents a
diversity of economic realities. Most of these economies face daunting
challenges of economic reconstruction and a plethora of other problems
which impact negatively on the efforts of these countries to pull their
economies out of various difficulties. Wars and conflicts of various
natures and origins further complicate the situation, and thus militate
against socioeconomic progress. Apart from wars and conflicts and a lack of
political stability and democracy in some of the SADC countries, there are
problems arising out of the HIV/Aids pandemic and natural disasters.

It is, therefore, heartening to note that, in keeping with the SADC
objectives of promoting regional economic integration, a SADC Trade
Protocol has been put in place. This trade protocol is a very important
instrument at the disposal of countries of Southern Africa to pull
together, with a view to realising the aim of an integrated regional market
that will create new opportunities for a dynamic business sector within the
SADC countries. It also creates a useful framework of trade co-operation
based on equity, fair competition and mutual benefit which will help to
create a viable development community in Southern Africa.

This equitable sharing of economic benefits of regional economic
integration promises tangible benefits to countries of the region,
especially in view of the different levels of economic development of the
member states of SADC. SADC, through this trade protocol, is poised to link
the liberalisation of trade to a process of viable industrial development
and co-operation in the areas of finance, investment and other sectors of
the economy.

One of the important roles of SADC is to work towards the realisation of
the objectives of the Abuja treaty, which calls for the establishment of
regional and subregional economic groupings as building blocks for the
eventual creation of the African economic community. Until that happens,
the unacceptable economic imbalance between the rich north and the poor
south will persist, much to the disadvantage of the poorer nations of the
south. This economic imbalance cannot be allowed to continue forever, hence
the importance of SADC as the regional economic grouping of Southern
Africa.

Our commitment to SADC must be one of the key policy objectives of our
Government. We must begin to think in regional terms and begin to see the
problems of our neighbours as our own. We must begin to see the problems of
Zimbabwe as impacting on our own economy. We must see the problems of
countries such as the Democratic Republic of Congo, Angola, etc, as our
very own problems, because we are part of the region.

The search for solutions to such problems should be our own concern, for
the long-term prosperity and success of Southern Africa is dependent on our
collective efforts as member states of SADC. Indeed, the long-term economic
success and prosperity of our very own country, South Africa, is linked to
the progress and success of our neighbours in SADC. [Applause.]
Dr P J RABIE: Madam Speaker, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister, hon members
...

Suid-Afrika en al die ander SAOG-lande bevind hulle vandag in 'n ekonomiese
wÃªreldorde waarin die ekonomiese speelveld veronderstel is om gelyk te
wees, maar waarin welvarende lande die ekonomiese spelreÃ«ls so dikteer dat
dit die welvarende lande bevoordeel ten koste van ontwikkelende lande. Die
hele SAOG-groep kan as ontwikkelende lande bestempel word, en die onlangse
onderhandelings rakende die EU-handelsooreenkoms toon dat sommige
ontwikkelde lande die doelpaal sal skuif as dit hulle pas.

Vergun my die geleentheid om die woorde van die bekende nyweraar dr Anton
Rupert te gebruik wat soos volg lui: ``As jou buurman honger ly, is dit
moeilik om rustig te slaap.'' In Suid-Afrika, die grootste sogenaamde
nywerheidsland in die SAOG, moet ons besef dat duisende van ons bure in die
omliggende lande werkloos is. Dit is 'n morele verantwoordelikheid waaraan
ons in Suid-Afrika nie kan ontsnap nie. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[South Africa and all the other SADC countries currently find themselves in
an economic world order in which the economic playing field is supposed to
be level, but in which prosperous countries dictate the rules of the game
to such an extent that prosperous countries benefit at the expense of
developing countries.

The entire SADC group can be labelled as developing countries, and the
recent negotiations with regard to the EU trade agreement indicate that
some developed countries will move the goal posts if it suits them.

Allow me the opportunity to use the words of the well-known industrialist
Dr Anton Rupert, which are as follows: ``If your neighbour is starving, it
is difficult to sleep peacefully.'' In South Africa, the biggest so-called
industrialised country in the SADC, we must realise that thousands of our
neighbours in surrounding countries are unemployed. This is a moral
responsibility which we in South Africa cannot escape.]

Within the global socioeconomic environment, economic prospects remain
problematic for the SADC subregion as a whole. The decline in prices of
commodities, slower world trade growth over the past two years and stiffer
international competition, particularly from countries with favourable
exchange rates, have had a negative effect upon the exports of the SADC
subregion.

Endemic adverse weather and poor agricultural conditions prevailed in the
past year in the SADC subregion. Questionable land reform programmes in
countries such as Zimbabwe have resulted in the sharp increase in poverty
income. Primary school enrolment rates have increased globally over the
past decade. Indications, however, are that Zambia and Mozambique both
suffered declines in enrolment in the nineties. Mozambique rates third
lowest in the world regarding access to safe potable water.

Een van die grootste enkele ekonomiese gevare wat die SAOG-streek vandag
bedreig, is die ontstellend hoÃ« toename in die voorkoms van die HI-virus.
Suid-Afrika is die grootste nywerheidsland in hierdie streek, en ek moet
die gegewe syfers noem wat die voorkoms van HIV uitspel. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[One of the largest single economic dangers threatening the SADC region
today is the disturbingly high increase in the incidence of the HI virus.
South Africa is the largest industrialised country in this region and I
must mention the relevant figures which indicate the incidence of HIV.]

Allow me to quote the estimated figures of HIV in 1997. A total of 2,9
million people were living with the Aids virus in South Africa, and 97% of
these people were in the age group 15 to 49 years, 48% were women in the
same age group and 3% were children in the age group 0 to 15 years. By the
end of 1998, 50% of all the new Aids infections in Southern Africa occurred
in South Africa, which has attained a similar status to that of countries
such as Botswana, Namibia, Swaziland and Zimbabwe.

According to the present trend, 0,25 million South Africans will die of
Aids each year by the year 2002, rising to upwards of 1 million by 2008.
Average life expectancy will decline from 60 years to approximately 40
years by the year 2008. Estimates are that by 2005 there could be in excess
of 900 000 Aids orphans in South Africa alone. If the present trend of HIV
infections continues, 18% of the South African workforce will be HIV-
positive by the year 2005 and 21% by the year 2010.

The spread of HIV/Aids has the potential to aggravate poverty and to
inhibit socioeconomic development within our entire subregion. If I may
draw the attention of hon members to the consequences of Aids, first and
foremost is the possible disruption of the family income bases through the
death of one or more of the breadwinners. Secondly, thousands of Aids
orphans in this particular subregion, many of them infected with the
disease, will become a burden upon the extended family. In the absence of
care-givers, they will become the responsibility of the state. It is of the
utmost importance that all the respective governments within this
particular subregion take proactive steps across boundaries to stem this
particular pandemic which is threatening the wellbeing of the entire
subregion.

Op die oomblik bevind miljoene burgers van die SAOG-lande hulle in Suid-
Afrika omdat dit die enigste gebied is wat 'n werklike heenkome aan hierdie
mense kan bied. Ons moet eenvoudig die werklikheid aanvaar: Suid-Afrika kan
nie ekonomies vooruitgaan as die lande binne sy invloedsfeer - die SAOG-
streek - nie ook saam met hom ontwikkel nie. Gisteraand, terwyl ek die
toespraak voorberei het, het ek in die Financial Mail gelees dat die hoof
van die pediatrie-eenheid by die Universiteit van Kaapstad meld dat een uit
elke vyf babas in die Kaapse Metropool HIV-positief is. Die tragiek hiervan
is dat hierdie streek beskou word as die gebied wat die laagste HIV-
prevalensie het in die SAOG-streek. Die verdere tragiek hiervan is dat die
persone wat nou sterf, die werkers, die leiers van die toekoms is.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[At the moment millions of citizens of SADC countries find themselves in
South Africa because it is the only region which can offer these people a
real refuge. We simply have to accept the reality: South Africa cannot
prosper economically if the countries within its sphere of influence - the
SADC region - do not also develop with it. Yesterday evening, while
preparing this speech, I read in the Financial Mail that the head of the
paediatrics unit at the University of Cape Town reported that one out of
every five babies in the Cape Metropole is HIV-positive. The tragedy of
this is that this region is considered to be the area with the lowest HIV
prevalence in the SADC region. The further tragedy of this is that the
people who are dying now are the workers, the leaders of the future.]

The Actuarial Society of South Africa, in its presentation to the
parliamentary budget committee, mentioned the following. The very small
allocation of R500 million over three years by the present Government, of
which only R75 million will be made available in the first year, appears to
indicate that the Government has not grasped the enormity of the HIV/Aids
crisis facing the country. The Actuarial Society's Aids model, ASSA 600,
suggests that South Africa can expect well in excess of 150 000 Aids deaths
in this year. The hopeful and somewhat optimistic projection of medium-term
economic growth appears not to take into account the possible impact of HIV
on the economy.

The SADC region will have to face the threat of Aids. The only solution is
to use more antiretroviral medicine, and not only AZT. I realise that we do
not have the money to pay for everyone, but I think we have a moral duty to
use antiretroviral medicines, especially for the younger infants. [Time
expired.]

Mr M E MABETA: Madam Speaker, hon members, the debate on SADC and
integration is an important one, for it signifies the regional, continental
and global possibilities available to SADC member states for development
and the alteration of dependency relationships with developed countries.

We are aware that these possibilities will always be constrained or limited
by the pervasive persistence of the colonial experience and the apartheid
legacy in the political economy of the SADC member states. The resultant
state of human misery, political instability and uncertainty common to all
these countries is well documented.

Our point of departure should be the acceptance of this painful colonial
experience common to these countries, because it is this experience which
defines the moral basis for solidarity amongst these countries in their
quest for sustainable strategies in the integration agenda. South Africa's
role should be seen in the context of this historical experience, for her
own capacity to contribute to integration initiatives is equally defined by
this past experience of a brutal, oppressive and exploitative special type
of colonialism. South Africa's enormous material resources, her advanced
infrastructure and general universal acceptance as a regional leader with
credible moral standing must be placed in that context.

The political understanding within SADC is that regional integration
initiatives are not defined by hostility to a South Africa whose foreign
policy is informed by ambitions for economic and military hegemony, but by
a strong and deep desire to prevent regional dependence on South Africa and
to activate mutually beneficial co-operation in all socioeconomic and
military spheres as a foundation for regional and continental self-
assertion in South Africa's relations with the developed world.

The UDM accepts and supports the following objectives which define the
integration agenda and South Africa's role in it. These are: South Africa's
role in terms of leadership, co-operation and good neighbourliness; the
partnership with her neighbours in development and wealth creation;
regional security through solidarity and good governance; the alleviation
of poverty and technological co-operation; the promotion of human rights;
and the promotion of multilateral and bilateral relations between SADC and
EU community members.

There are obstacles which include the absence of firm institutional
mechanisms to promote co-operation wherein sectorial co-operation tends to
generate competition rather than co-operation. Membership of multiple
organisations directed at promoting regional co-operation and integration
produces competition. Political instability from economic problems prevents
capital investment flows, marginalises the region and limits its ability to
compete in the global markets.

The reluctance of member states to expunge dictatorships and human rights
abuses from the face of the continent is yet another problem. This
particular problem is exacerbated by a state-centred approach in the SADC
relations. In our view, a people's approach would help to facilitate
intervention by member states in the affairs of other member states without
such interventions being seen as undermining the basic sovereignty of any
of these states.

In Africa, regional integration is viewed as a means to self-reliant
economic growth, but in the developed world it is viewed as an integration
into the world economy. The point that the UDM wants to emphasise here is
that a state-centred intervention into the affairs of other states might be
prevented through the promotion of a people-centred form of intervention at
civic levels, so that such interventions are not seen as serving the so-
called national interest of any particular state, but in the context of a
United Nations or OAU-based universal humanitarian approach to problems
that are faced by other countries.

We need to reinforce these differences from a state-oriented paradigm to a
people-oriented paradigm so that initiatives by nonstate actors can be
given support materially, morally, legally and otherwise. This will help to
change our own attitude towards the people in these other countries that we
deal with, and thus helping to inform our governments in their approach to
problems that confront them commonly within the region.

Dr R H DAVIES: Madam Speaker, this a very timely and appropriate occasion
to have a debate on this subject. Last week the negotiations provided for
under the SADC Trade Protocol were concluded and a draft agreement to
establish a free-trade area in the SADC region within eight years will be
presented to the SADC summit later this year.

Events in currency and capital markets in the past week have also indicated
that investors are factoring into their decisions about investment in South
Africa the potential impact on us of events in the region, and this has
underscored a fundamental reality. Whether we like it or not, our destiny
is inextricably linked to that of the rest of the region of which we are a
part.

When we joined SADC in 1994 we became part of an organisation
programmatically committed to promoting regional integration. A number of
studies conducted in the early 1990s identified an appropriately structured
programme of regional integration as potentially contributing significantly
to growth and development throughout the region. SADC, though committed
since the 1992 Windhoek Treaty to embarking upon a programme including
trade integration, envisaged this as a component of a broader process which
it described as development integration.

The essential point of departure of the development integration approach is
a recognition of two related, but not identical, points. The first is that
we have in our region economies with very different sizes and levels of
development and the second is that many of the major barriers to the
promotion of interregional trade are not tariffs or regulatory regimes, but
underdeveloped production structures and inadequate infrastructure. From
these follow two fundamental conclusions, firstly, that a trade agreement
must take account of the different sizes of the economies and therefore be
asymmetrically structured in favour of the less-developed partners, and
secondly, that the process of trade integration must be accompanied by and
indeed become a spur to more effective programmes of sectoral co-operation
and investment promotion.

The draft trade agreement just concluded provides for significant
asymmetry. The Southern South African Customs Union, of which South Africa
is part, will remove duties on 97% of imports from the rest of the region
over five years - 69% immediately upon the coming into effect of the
agreement. Less-developed partners will have longer, up to eight years, to
implement less onerous tariff phase-downs. In the final rounds of
negotiations, our negotiators have also made a further concession. We
agreed to soften the stance which had previously insisted on two stages of
manufacture under the rules of origin for clothing products in the region
to allow those from less-developed countries to come in with only one stage
of manufacturing.

I am aware that both the asymmetry and this latest concession will be a
matter of concern to some vested interests in our country. But I want to
add my voice to the Minister's and say that I believe that we were right in
agreeing to this. Between 1993 and 1998 our exports to SADC, other than
SACU countries, increased nearly threefold, whilst imports increased much
more modestly from a much lower base. Though the agreement may create some
challenges for some of our sectors, I believe that it is, as the Minister
said, right that we act fairly towards our less-developed neighbours. We
must, as he said, surely be consistent in what we demand of the developed
countries in multilateral or bilateral negotiations and what we do in
relation to our less-developed trading partners in the region. How can we,
for example, champion and support, for good reasons, proposals in the WTO
to provide duty-free access for products of all the 48 recognised least
developed countries if, at the same time, we refuse to make a concession to
those least developed countries in our region?

Mr Eglin raised the issue of Zimbabwe and I would like to make a few
remarks on this. There is clearly good reason for us to be concerned about
the worsening economic situation in Zimbabwe, and about certain aspects of
the political scene in that country. There is clearly an increasingly fluid
and contested political situation emerging in Zimbabwe. I want to remind
the House that on 4 April the ANC introduced a notice of motion, which
``noted with concern the developments in Zimbabwe,'' and, while reaffirming
our close relationship and respect for that country's sovereignty, called
on the government and the people of Zimbabwe to ``abide by the rule of law,
respect the independence of the judiciary and constitutional framework and
seek creative, democratic and just means to address the crisis''.

The central question, of course, is: What should we be doing about the
situation in Zimbabwe? There is a growing mood in some donor countries in
favour of withdrawing development assistance and other forms of co-
operation with Zimbabwe. Those of us who attended the ACP-EU joint assembly
in Abuja, Nigeria, last month were confronted with a motion supported by
almost all the EU delegates, calling on the EU Commission to seriously
consider suspending all forms of nonhumanitarian aid.

This raises a question which I believe all South Africans need to ponder.
Are we right to continue to act to promote economic stability in Zimbabwe?
I believe decisively that we are. Firstly, as Mr Lockey said earlier on,
there is no credible political force in Zimbabwe that believes that its
cause will be enhanced by provoking further economic collapse. I am
certainly not aware of any coherent call for sanctions from any serious
force in Zimbabwe, let alone any call for the withdrawal of development
assistance.

More than that, the fact that we are in an increasingly integrated region
means that the destiny of all of us is impacted on by developments in any
one country in the region. That is why I believe that our President and
Government are right to explore ways in which we can assist in arresting
the economic decline in Zimbabwe, which, after all, is the second strongest
economy in our region.

This decidedly does not mean that we are not concerned about the
developments in Zimbabwe. It decisively does not mean that we are propping
up one side in the political struggle in Zimbabwe. It is an initiative
which is based on the recognition of a fundamental reality that further
economic decline is not in the interests of the people of Zimbabwe and will
do nothing to enhance democracy or good governance in that country. Since
we are now in an increasingly integrated region, economic collapse in one
country would also impact on the region as a whole, including on ourselves.
We are therefore also in this regard, I believe, acting in our own
enlightened self-interest. [Applause.]

Adv Z L MADASA: Madam Speaker, globalisation and regionalism are two sides
of the same coin and are inextricably interwoven with each other. There
have been different economic waves globally - the USA and Japan - but all
this is passing by. Regionalism began in Europe, initially as a defence
mechanism, but has since turned into economic muscle. Asia, South America,
SADC, etc have since become trade blocs. Meaningful trade is no longer done
nation to nation, but bloc to bloc.

South Africa might be a giant in Africa, but it is a dwarf in the world.
Our production lines are too short to compete globally. Regionalism, in
this case through SADC, increases our lines and productive capacity for
outward investment with concomitant attractive inward investment. The more
we regionalise, the more we globalise. The two are not mutually exclusive.
SADC is an imperative for South African and neighbouring states' economic
growth. The international economic players look at us as a region and not
as individual states. When trouble erupts in the region, we are all
affected because to outsiders there is trouble in the region, not in a
particular country.

If South Africa, as it is, is to become an effective and respectable leader
in this region, then we must state our position loud and clear when there
is a crisis in the region, as is the case in Zimbabwe. The crisis in
Zimbabwe strikes at the heart of the development of the region and
threatens all of us, economically, politically and socially. Zimbabwe is
strategically situated at the centre of the region. It gives access to the
economies of the north. South Africa must begin to play an effective role
in ensuring that elections are free and fair in Zimbabwe. Everybody wants
to hear what the country is saying about the situation there.

I submit that we must not confuse the fact that President Mugabe was
democratically elected to power with the cry by Zimbabweans for liberty.
Power and liberty are two different things. The silence by the Minister of
Foreign Affairs on the Zimbabwean issue is appalling, to say the least. We
must emerge from underground tactics. We are a government which has to say
something about the Zimbabwean situation. What are we saying and doing
about Zimbabwe? [Time expired.] [Applause.]
Dr P W A MULDER: Madam Speaker, John Naisbitt is a writer who predicts
future political and social scenarios. His latest book's title is Global
Paradox. On page 11 he explains the title Global Paradox as follows:


  The world's trends point overwhelmingly toward political independence and
  self-rule on the one hand and the formation of economic alliances on the
  other.

From these comes the paradox.

Afrika is reeds in die wÃªreld gemarginaliseer. Suid-Afrika en Suidelike
Afrika word daagliks meer gemarginaliseer. As ons as lande van Suidelike
Afrika nie na onsself gaan kyk nie, kan ons nie verwag dat enige ander land
hom oor ons sal bekommer nie. Daarom is ekonomiese en ander samewerking in
Suidelike Afrika uiters noodsaaklik.

Ek dink die huidige leiers in Afrika kan in twee groepe ingedeel word:
eerstens is daar die realistiese jonger leiers wat Afrika se swakhede en
probleme besef en daadwerklik iets daaraan wil doen, soos president Mbeki,
en tweedens is daar die ouer Afrikaleiers wat met bravade die wÃªreld
uitdaag en glo die wÃªreld en veral die Westerse skuldgevoel teenoor Afrika
sal Afrika se probleme oplos, soos president Mugabe. DiÃ© twee staan teenoor
mekaar. KaÃ¯ro het dit die beste getoon.

Die Weste laat hom nie meer bluf nie. Die lewensverwagting in Zimbabwe het,
sedert president Mugabe aan die bewind gekom het, met 17 jaar gedaal. Die
land bevind hom in 'n ekonomiese krisis ... [Tussenwerpsels] ... 'n
brandstof krisis en 'n mediese krisis, en ek kan nog 'n klomp ander
krisisse vir agb lede opnoem. As diÃ© agb lid vir Mugabe wil opkom, moet hy
dit buite hierdie Raad gaan sÃª. Ek dink hy maak 'n groot fout.

In 'n debat oor buitelandse sake het ek die Minister gevra wat Suid-Afrika
se standpunt is oor die huidige gebeure in Zimbabwe. Ek het geen antwoord
daarop gekry nie. Nou sÃª ek, as Suid-Afrika en die SAOG geloofwaardigheid
wil opbou in die oÃ« van die wÃªreld, sal ons nie moet terugdeins daarvan om
die waarheid te praat teenoor ons buurlande nie. Dit sluit Zimbabwe, Angola
en die DRK in. Hulle raak 'n verleentheid vir die streek.

Die een se probleme is almal se probleme. Leiers moet hul eie selfsugtige
belange op die agtergrond plaas ter wille van die groter geheel. Ons is vas
aanmekaar. As die skip sink, sink ons almal saam. Ons gaan nie een-een sink
nie, en dit moet aan mekaar gesÃª word sonder om daaroor te huiwer.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Africa has already been marginalised in the world. South Africa and
Southern Africa are becoming more marginalised by the day. If we as
countries of Southern Africa do not take care of ourselves, we cannot
expect any other country to concern itself with us. That is why economic
and other co-operation is vital in Southern Africa.

I think the present leaders in Africa can be divided into two groups:
Firstly there are the realistic younger leaders who are aware of Africa's
weaknesses and problems and really want to do something about this, such as
President Mbeki, and secondly there are the older leaders in Africa, who
defiantly challenge the world and believe that the world, and especially
the Western feelings of guilt toward Africa, will resolve Africa's
problems, such as President Mugabe. These two stand opposite one another.
Cairo indicated this the best.

The West can no longer be bluffed. Since President Mugabe has come into
power life expectancy in Zimbabwe has declined by 17 years. The country
finds itself in an economic crisis ... [Interjections] ... a fuel crisis
and a medical crisis, and I can mention quite a number of other crises to
hon members. If that hon member wants to come to Mugabe's defence, he
should go and say that outside this House. I think he is making a big
mistake.

During a debate on foreign affairs I asked the Minister what South Africa's
standpoint was in respect of the current events in Zimbabwe. I received no
reply to that. Now I want to say, if South Africa and the SADC wish to
retain their credibility in the eyes of the world, we must not shy away
from speaking the truth in connection with our neighbouring countries. This
includes Zimbabwe, Angola and the DRC. They are becoming an embarrassment
for the region.

One's problem is everyone's problem. Leaders should keep their own selfish
interests in the background for the sake of the greater whole. We are
connected to one another. If the ship sinks, we all sink together. We are
not going to sink one by one, and we should tell one another this without
any hesitation.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Madam Speaker and hon members, South Africa and our
Southern African neighbours are moving away from a harsh past of
destabilisation to a future of mutual co-operation and regional
development, which is intended to be in the interests of all our countries.

South Africa believes in being at peace with her neighbours and hence the
concern about what is going on in Zimbabwe. To this end, one of the
priorities after the inauguration of the first democratic Government was to
accede to SADC in August 1994. In 1996 heads of states of 11 SADC countries
signed a trade protocol in Maseru which created the framework for
negotiating a free-trade area and, unfortunately, South Africa assented to
this only last year.

Member countries of SADC continue to receive technical assistance from
South Africa. Such assistance serves as an instrument to promote economic
development, peace and stability in the region. Assistance is wide-ranging
and includes visits by agriculturalists, the conservation of the
environment, the rendering of medical assistance and technology exchange
programmes.

South Africa is a torch-bearer in tariff liberalisation in the region. It
is for this reason that South Africa has to liberalise tariffs faster vis-Ã -
vis the SADC partners, while the other SADC member states will bide their
time vis-Ã -vis their liberalisation towards South Africa.

SADC recognises that to enhance human capital is of critical importance in
order for member states to participate effectively in an increasingly
integrated and knowledge-based economy. Countries within SADC hope that
within a reasonable timeframe they will be able to offer universal primary
education, reduce adult illiteracy, eliminate gender disparity in primary
and secondary education, improve the quality of education and strengthen
linkages between education and employment.

To this end, the success of the region depends on the following: Firstly,
establishing and maintaining a sound macroeconomic policy framework and an
open economy based on continued and enhanced economic reforms; secondly,
ensuring sufficient physical infrastructure through regulatory reforms;
thirdly, prompting regional integration by removing obstacles in the way of
cross-border trade and investment, including harmonising tax and investment
... [Time expired.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, the integration of the 14 member countries
of the Southern African Development Community into the global economy has
prompted the Industrial Development Corporation to undergo a gradual
renaissance. The restructuring and transformation of the region's economies
encourage open-trade markets to expand, which is necessary for the speeding-
up of economic growth in underdeveloped countries. However, built-in
control mechanisms must be used to ensure that the free-market process is
not detrimental to job creation.

The concept of globalisation is a worrying factor to underdeveloped
countries, for they are in an economic and moral dilemma with regard to
submitting to the pressure from the First World countries. These countries
may manipulate or monopolise the developing countries' economic policies in
exchange for writing off their foreign debt. The MF's fundamental concern
is that in the process of globalisation the unemployed are neglected. The
poor face eviction and live in an unhealthy economic environment which is
not conducive to their upliftment.

All countries participating in the activities of SADC have the enormous
task of strengthening the economy of the southern hemisphere. The collapse
of Zimbabwe's economy is not a good sign for SADC. The creativity of
manufacturers of commodities is necessary to ensure active participation in
globalisation.

South Africa is the economic leader in respect of science and technology in
SADC. Therefore it will be instrumental in leading SADC into economic
competitiveness with the rest of the world. South Africa must be able to
sustain a flexible economic growth so that it will be in a position to
survive any economic collapse in the world.

Mnr C AUCAMP: Mevrou die Speaker, die spreekwoord lui: ``As jou buurman
honger is, slaap jy nie rustig nie.'' Dit is absoluut waar ten opsigte van
Suid-Afrika se situasie in die subkontinent van Afrika. [Tussenwerpsels.]
Daarom steun die AEB die beginsel van subkontinentale samewerking en
koÃ¶rdinering, in die besonder binne die SAOG-opset. Ons is deel van hierdie
Afrika en ons kan dit met trots wees. As Afrikaner kan ek ook Suid-
Afrikaner wees, en ook Afrikaan. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[Mr C AUCAMP: Madam Speaker, the saying goes: ``If one's neighbour is
starving, one cannot sleep peacefully.'' This is absolutely true as far as
South Africa's situation on the subcontinent of Africa is concerned.
[Interjections.] For this reason the AEB supports the principle of co-
operation and co-ordination on the subcontinent, and in particular in the
context of the SADC. We are part of this Africa and we can be proud of it.
As an Afrikaner I can also be a South African, as well as an African.]

Of course, South Africa, as a leading country on the continent of Africa
for the past decades has an obligation to the continent as a whole, and to
the subcontinent in particular. On the other hand, we must remember that
charity begins at home. Let us first make sure that the 21st century will
be known as the South African century, with a modern dispensation in which
all the peoples of this country can co-operate on the one hand, but live
their diversity on the other, within their own institutions familiar with
their customs, traditions and beliefs.

Dit is vir my 'n ernstige probleem; Suid-Afrika reik die hand na 'n
bedeling waarin verskillende lande van die subkontinent met behoud van eie
integriteit saamwerk vir 'n gemeenskaplike doel. Dit is goed en reg so,
maar ons het nog nie self die oplossing gevind om die verskeidenheid in eie
midde sinvol te hanteer nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[To me this is a serious problem; South Africa is reaching for a
dispensation in which different countries of the subcontinent, while
retaining their own integrity, co-operate to attain a common goal. This is
all very well, but we ourselves have not yet found the solution to deal
meaningfully with the diversity in our own midst.]

To give another warning, the constitution of the SADC Parliamentary Forum
states explicitly in its preamble:


  ... determination to promote respect for the rule of law, individual
  rights and freedom, and to promote peace, democracy, security and
  stability in the subregion.
Every single commitment of this preamble has been broken severely by the
Zimbabwean government. The rule of law was thrown out of the window with
respect to the court ruling on the unlawful occupation of farms.

Individuele regte is aangetas deurdat die regering nie eens respek toon vir
kaart en transport nie. Veiligheid en stabiliteit is oorboord gegooi toe
daar van regeringskant af gewelddadig losgebrand is op vreedsame
optoggangers. Die demokrasie is belaglik gemaak deur mnr Mugabe se
dreigemente teen die opposisie.

Ek sluit af. As hierdie Regering en ander SAOG-lande nie ernstig optree
teen wat in Zimbabwe gebeur nie, is hierdie ooreenkoms nie die papier werd
waarop dit geskryf is nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Individual rights have been assailed in that the government does not even
show respect for title deeds. Security and stability were thrown overboard
when the government violently opened fire on peaceful protesters. Democracy
was made ludicrous by Mr Mugabe's threats against the opposition.

I conclude. If this Government and other SADC countries do not take serious
action against what is happening in Zimbabwe, this agreement is not worth
the paper on which it was written.]

Mr M A MANGENA: Madam Speaker, hon members, some of us were indeed
disappointed when the SADC protocol, designed to ease, facilitate and
promote freer trade amongst Southern African countries, failed to kick in
on 23 January 2000 as anticipated. We do understand that there are many
intricate and difficult technical problems involved in matters like these.

Nobody will argue that issues such as the rules of origin and their
verification are easy to formulate and implement; that, considering the
uneven economic development of our region, it is easy to work out tariff
structures that are fair and equitable; or that we will not have tariff
arrangements that favour the more developed countries in our region and
condemn others to the status of mere economic provinces of the richer
countries. The existence of a customs union that has run for several years
and includes only some members of SADC is an important factor in the whole
question of economic integration in the SADC region.

What we seem to lack most is a strong political will on the part of all of
us in SADC to push this integration forward. With such a strong collective
political will, these problems could have been solved yesterday. We cannot
afford not to have the required strong political will, because Africa is
economically weak. Our weakness shows whenever we interact with others in
the WTO. It showed when Africa met with Europe recently in Cairo. It showed
when this country negotiated a trade deal with the EU. We are always the
weaklings who are bullied and generally pushed around.

One way in which we can strengthen ourselves and, by so doing, improve the
economic status of our people and our bargaining position in respect of the
rest of the world is to make a success of free trade in our region.
However, for that to happen, we need an iron political will. We hope
September 2000 and beyond will manifest this.

Mr D J SITHOLE: Madam Speaker, hon members, this debate presents a
challenge to those who see themselves as Africans and share the hardship of
this continent. We, as South Africa, have the responsibility to contribute
our skills and human resources to the betterment of our continent. During
the apartheid era, we all know that this Chamber was also used to hatch
plans to destabilise our neighbouring countries, and to make sure that they
did not survive and that they did not see the day. Lesotho, Botswana and
Mozambique were all destabilised by apartheid.
Today we are here to debate our contribution to the rebirth and the
integration of the region. This continent was not only destabilised at the
level of politics, but the self-confidence, dignity, culture and
consciousness of its people were also destroyed. We were made to believe
that Africa had not achieved anything except sponsored war and
underdevelopment. Today we have the challenge to promote African
achievements for the coming generation and for ourselves. If we do not do
that, we will be prone to believing that those who wanted to portray us as
failures have indeed succeeded. Africa is engulfed by wars that are
sometimes imposed on us by outsiders who benefit from them.

The OAU, SADC and other continental bodies were formed to encourage and to
build unity and solidarity among African states. These institutions are
occupied with finding solutions for African problems. The challenge is to
make such bodies strong enough to make decisive interventions when they are
needed.

When SADC forces entered Lesotho in defence of democracy, we were condemned
by those who saw an opportunity to make cheap politicking out of a
dangerous and explosive situation. When we propagate the revival of self-
confidence, self-reliance and putting our continent first, those who
benefited from our misery accuse us of wanting to become a big brother.

The truth is that leaders on this continent have the responsibility to
promote and entrench democratic values and institutions. The building of
respect for the rule of law and human rights should not be subjected to
debate. It should be our core responsibility as leaders in this region.

We acknowledge the fact that organs of the OAU and SADC have not performed
well in their endeavour to ensure that those who are accused of human
rights abuses are dealt with firmly. I am aware of the fact that the OAU
now rejects governments which come to power through unconstitutional means.
We need to support the implementation of such resolutions and translate
into these action, thus ensuring that Africa can live in peace and have the
opportunity to create prosperity.

We, as South Africa, having been able to engage in the transformation of
our country peacefully, have the obligation to build and place before the
world the African agenda, while at the same time ensuring that the
leadership to shift this continent away from the mess of charity and hand-
outs lies with Africa itself. The fact that today Europe accepts paying
back the money stolen from Africa by corrupt politicians and officials, is
a step in the right direction. We are a rich region, but our riches have
been used to develop Europe. It is no secret that wars that have engulfed
Europe also involved Africa. This applies to the two World Wars.

What we need to learn from these wars and the suffering they left behind is
how to use reconstruction strategies and to enhance and strengthen our
institutions of democracy and co-operation. It has been proved a number of
times that going alone does not bring progress, nor does it create peace.
Countries in this region depend on one another, therefore, co-operation and
partnerships are crucial prerequisites for our success.

When this House debated the issue of floods in our country and our
neighbouring states, some people used our assistance and the misery of
those who were affected by floods as an opportunity to engage and test
their political theories rather than addressing what was confronting the
humans involved. It is our ambition to ensure that South Africa, together
with other countries, can respond in time with humanitarian assistance and
that we are combat ready to deal with those who seek to intimidate us with
their guns.

We in the ANC and Government have always realised that unless we place our
people at the centre of development, no transformation will take place. We
wish to build the institution of civil society so that it is able to assist
the continent in dealing with the problems and we move from poverty to a
better life. Those who elected us to this Parliament have entrusted their
lives to us. We dare not fail them.

The developed nations are aware that they left their colonies damaged. What
they left will take us centuries to correct. We need to build a spirit of
tolerance and teach our people that military options are not always the
panacea for their problems. The conflict in the DRC, Angola and Burundi and
other problems on the continent should be a wake-up call to all leaders of
the region that all is not well. We have to build our capacity to perform
peacekeeping and, in fact, perform peace enforcement.
SADC has to build its conflict management capacity to deal with conflicts
before they escalate. It must also ensure that member states are bound by
its decisions. The control and elimination of diseases, the creation of
sustainable employment and growth, and proper utilisation of human
resources are priorities for this continent if we want peace.

We need to build a continent that can provide social security and a good
welfare system to eliminate hunger. Crime committed either by politicians
or by officials is something that challenges this continent. For us to be
able to unite and integrate the continent, we cannot avoid committing
ourselves to fighting crime and corruption. Irrespective of whether this
crime is committed by heads of state or bureaucrats, we must indicate to
them that crime is a thing of the past.

We must also ensure that women and children are protected from abuse. The
empowerment of women and their liberation are intricately linked to the
peace and prosperity of this continent. Unless we do that, we will not be
able to integrate the continent and we are therefore prone to fail.
[Applause.]
The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Madam Speaker, one of the most
important and fundamental achievements of our democratic transition in 1994
was that it allowed us to begin the fundamental and crucial task of
regional integration. I must agree with Adv Madasa - this is one of the few
times that I have done so with an ACDP speaker - who pointed out, quite
correctly, that regionalisation, regional integration and globalisation are
part of the same phenomenon.

It is essential, as I also indicated in my opening remarks in the previous
debate, that in the world economy today one has larger and more integrated
economic capacity, and in Southern Africa we have one of the greatest
repositories of natural resources in the world. Our task is to develop
these to the mutual benefit of all. This will require us to go through
complex and difficult processes of industrialising our economies, building
infrastructure, harmonising our economic programmes and policies and
harmonising our political and social structures.

This process, as we see in Europe and elsewhere, is one of the momentums
and one of the logics of what will happen in the world economy in the
coming century. However, to do this one has to move with a degree of
determination and with a long-sightedness and patience that is fundamental.
We are dealing with nation-states that have their own histories and
structures. Bringing such nation-states together cannot be done by fear and
force, but it has to be done by a process of coming together.

I think in SADC we do not often realise just how much had already been
achieved before South Africa came in, and how much we have been able to
achieve since South Africa came in. We are one of the few regional blocs
that, in fact, have protocols far beyond trade and economic matters. We
have protocols dealing with health, transport, electricity, water, crop
sciences and agriculture, and we are talking about movements of natural
persons. It is an extremely extensive exercise in co-operation, and it will
take not just one or two years, but a long time.

We as the South African Government have also taken additional steps in the
past two and a half years to try to intensify and increase the level of
economic integration, and two-way trade and investment into this region.
These have taken the form of somewhat unique structures where the President
of South Africa and the former Deputy President, and now both the President
and Deputy President, lead bilateral meetings and delegations to talk to
our neighbouring countries.

In our discussions with Mozambique, for one, we now deal continuously on a
week-by-week, month-by-month basis with some 30 or 40 major economic
projects, ranging from ecotourism in the Lebombo Corridor, as the Speaker
mentioned, through to the possibilities, or the reality soon I believe, of
pipelines transporting gas from Mozambique to South Africa. Projects such
as Alusaf, or the Mozal project in Maputo, are examples of what can be
achieved by intense and detailed co-operation.

These bilateral meetings have then been extended to Namibia, Zimbabwe and
Tanzania. There are endless and continuous bilateral meetings between South
Africa and Malawi, and we meet with Zambia on many occasions. These
processes are designed to further deepen the economic interaction between
ourselves.

One of the fundamental requirements of building a successful regional bloc
is absolute respect for the rules and processes of the regional bloc.
Therefore I am disappointed that the DP puts forward propositions that are
completely jumbled and which are complete violations of the rules of the
bloc. I am particularly disappointed that such an experienced leader as
Colin Eglin put those forward. Interjections.]

If we are going to say things like that, we are merely going to alienate
the very people we should be talking to. What are the rules of SADC?
Firstly, the rules are that there is an organ for safety and security. The
matters that are set out for discussion in that organ should be discussed
in that organ. Secondly, there are structures, there are councils of
Ministers, there are sectoral Ministerial meetings and there is a summit.
The assumption made by the DP that nothing is happening in regard to
Zimbabwe is fundamentally wrong. [Interjections.]

What is happening is that they are making a noise for election purposes.
What is happening, actually, is the following. [Interjections.] Hon members
should listen. Firstly, the President took a delegation of Ministers, who
have more capacity to deliver than the delegation of opposition politicians
floating around the farms, to Zimbabwe. We had detailed discussions with
Zimbabwe on the fundamentally important issue of the Zimbabwean economy.
Its collapse will not help the Zimbabwean people. It will not help South
Africa or SADC. The number one priority at the moment is not to make noise;
it is to move actively to rebuild that economy.

There are, without doubt, mistakes being made in Zimbabwe. We have not been
shy to indicate that, but we have not done it from the pulpits. We have
been talking to people and indicating, as we ourselves have experienced,
that to rebuild confidence in an economy is a time-consuming and difficult
process. The cost of taking decisions which could backfire should not be
underestimated. We have talked about detailed proposals bilaterally.

The heads of state meeting in Maputo, if members followed events, discussed
Zimbabwe. The assumption made that South Africa must take the lead because
President Chissano is doing nothing is an act of arrogance. President
Chissano has taken a number of steps to intervene and to talk.
[Interjections.] The rule of regional integration is clear. If one is going
to use the structure, one must use the structure. We, as South Africa,
complained - correctly - that what happened in the DRC was a violation of
the procedures of the SADC structure. Now we are told that we must act
unilaterally if we think it is the right thing to do. This can never build
regional integration.

What has to happen now is, firstly, that the use of SADC structures must be
first and foremost on our agenda. Secondly, we have to keep a cool head
because what is at stake here is some, potentially, extremely serious
damage to our neighbour. That is in no one's interests, and it is certainly
not going to be solved by a lot of chirping and advice which is completely
contrary to the rules of SADC, which is contradictory in its own logical
terms, because we are told that we should build SADC but then we must also
act unilaterally. What are we? The united states of Africa?
[Interjections.]

We must act with circumspection, wisdom and patience. This is not an
election campaign. This is about the people of our region, and making sure
that the people of our region have a better life. It is not about getting
the DP into the municipal government! [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 17:55.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The following Bills were introduced in the National Assembly on
         6 April 2000 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Council for the Built Environment Bill [B 16 - 2000]
                  (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on
                  Public Works - National Assembly) [Explanatory summary of
                  Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
                  Government Gazette No 20994 of 24 March 2000.]

         (ii)    Architectural Profession Bill [B 17 - 2000] (National
                  Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Public Works
                  - National Assembly) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
                  prior notice of its introduction published in Government
                  Gazette No 20994 of 24 March 2000.]

         (iii)   Landscape Architectural Profession Bill [B 18 - 2000]
                  (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on
                  Public Works - National Assembly) [Explanatory summary of
                  Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
                  Government Gazette No 20994 of 24 March 2000.]

         (iv)    Engineering Profession Bill [B 19 - 2000] (National
                  Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Public Works
                  - National Assembly) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
                  prior notice of its introduction published in Government
                  Gazette No 20994 of 24 March 2000.]

         (v)     Property Valuers Profession Bill [B 20 - 2000] (National
                  Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Public Works
                  - National Assembly) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
                  prior notice of its introduction published in Government
                  Gazette No 20994 of 24 March 2000.]

         (vi)    Project and Construction Management Professions Bill [B 21
                  - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio
                  Committee on Public Works - National Assembly)
                  [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
                  introduction published in Government Gazette No 20994 of
                  24 March 2000.]

         (vii)   Quantity Surveying Profession Bill [B 22 - 2000] (National
                  Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Public Works
                  - National Assembly) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
                  prior notice of its introduction published in Government
                  Gazette No 20994 of 24 March 2000.]

