---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 17 May 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2000-05-17
---

WEDNESDAY, 17 MAY 2000
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:02.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Mr J O TLHAGALE: Chairperson, I give notice that at the next sitting of the
Council I shall move:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes with concern the appointment of the same preferable persons to
       various boards of the North West Housing Corporation and its
       parastatals;
  (2) further notes that contracts and tenders are awarded to unregistered
       companies owned by a clique of these preferable persons who evade
       payment of tax; and


  (3) requests the Minister of Housing to set up a commission of inquiry to
       investigate -


       (a)  the malpractices in the Housing Corporation and its parastatals;


       (b)  why there are several parastatals responsible for overlapping
           functions under the Housing MEC's control; and


       (c)  whether or not the awarding of contracts to companies owned by
           the clique of Vryburgers is not calculated to enrich them with
           the public's money; and


  (4) further requests the Minister to make the results of the
       investigation publicly known.

             BIRTH OF CONJOINED TWINS AT GROOTE SCHUUR HOSPITAL

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes the birth of another set of conjoined twins at Groote Schuur
       Hospital;


  (2) commends the professional explanation that one in 75 000 children is
       born as a conjoined twin;


  (3) looks forward to a time when medical science will be able to develop
       a mechanism of separating the fertilised egg, when conjoined twins
       are detected early;


  (4) also commends the enlightenment of the use of the terminology
       ``conjoined twin'' instead of ``siamese twin''; and


  (5) therefore wishes the mother and all the caregivers who attend to the
       babies the best of luck in the extensive surgery of separating the
       twins.
Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

           SHOOTING INCIDENT AT THE UNIVERSITY OF DURBAN-WESTVILLE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms E N LUBIDLA: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) takes cognisance of the shooting of a student and the injury of five
       other people by police at the University of Durban-Westville
       yesterday afternoon;


  (2) notes that the students were protesting against deregistration of
       over 500 students who have not paid their fees;


  (3) requests the Independent Complaints Directorate to make sure that
       there is no stone left unturned as the students were demonstrating
       and posed no threat to the police; and


  (4) extends its sincere condolences to victims and family members and
       wishes a speedy recovery to those injured.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

              ILLEGAL OCCUPATION OF FARMS IN THE NORTHERN CAPE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr A E VAN NIEKERK: Voorsitter, ek stel voor sonder kennisgewing:


  Dat die Raad -


  (1) daarvan kennis neem dat -


       (a)  daar vandag berig is dat daar in die Noord-Kaap mense is wat
           kommersiële plase onwettig beset; en


       (b)  die rede aangevoer word dat die besettings voortspruit uit
           frustrasie oor die restitusie- en grondhervormingsproses in die
           Noord-Kaap, wat nie volgens plan verloop nie;


  (2) met dank daarvan kennis neem dat die LUR vir Landbou en Grondsake in
       die Noord-Kaap, mnr Makweya, dit openlik gestel het dat sulke
       besettings nie geduld sal word nie;


  (3) hom uitspreek teen onwettige besettings; en


  (4) versoek dat hy op die hoogte gehou word oor die vordering van
       restitusie en grondhervorming in die Noord-Kaap as 'n saak van
       dringende belang, sodat Suid-Afrika nie in 'n situasie soos dié in
       Zimbabwe verval nie.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Mr Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  it was reported today that there are people in the Northern Cape
           who are illegally occupying commercial farms; and


       (b)  the reason is given that the occupations arise from frustration
           about the restitution and land reform process in the Northern
           Cape, which is not proceeding according to plan;


  (2) notes with thanks that the MEC for Agriculture and Land Affairs in
       the Northern Cape, Mr Makweya, has stated openly that such
       occupations will not be tolerated;


  (3) declares itself against illegal occupations; and


  (4) requests that it be kept informed about the progress of restitution
       and land reform in the Northern Cape as a matter of pressing
       importance, so that South Africa does not degenerate into a situation
       such as that in Zimbabwe.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.
    CORRUPTION AND MALPRACTICES BY OFFICIALS OF THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr P A MATTHEE: Voorsitter, ek stel voor sonder kennisgewing:


  Dat die Raad -


  (1) kennis neem van die mediaberigte ten opsigte van 'n omsendbrief vanaf
       die Direkteur-generaal van Justisie waarvolgens daar grootskaalse
       korrupsie en wanpraktyke in gemelde departement deur Justisie-
       amptenare gepleeg word; en


  (2) die Minister vir Justisie en Staatkundige Ontwikkeling versoek om so
       gou as moontlik, maar op of voor 31 Mei 2000, die Raad te voorsien
       van 'n verslag waarin die besonderhede van gemelde korrupsie en
       wanpraktyke uiteengesit word en waarin aangedui word welke stappe
       gedoen word om die betrokke amptenare te vervolg en om verdere
       korrupsie en wanpraktyke in die departement te verhoed.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Mr P A MATTHEE: Mr Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes the media reports in respect of a circular from the Director-
       General of Justice according to which large-scale corruption and
       malpractices are committed by Justice officials in the said
       department; and


  (2) requests the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development as
       soon as possible, but on or before 31 May 2000, to provide the
       Council with a report in which the details of the corruption and
       malpractices mentioned are expounded and in which is indicated what
       steps must be taken to prosecute the relevant officials and prevent
       further corruption and malpractices in the department.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Is there any
objection to the motion?

Mr A MARAIS: Chairperson, I do not have an objection; it is an amendment I
am proposing.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): What is the
amendment?

Mr A MARAIS: Chairperson, I propose:


  That, in paragraph (2), the words ``as soon as possible, but on or before
  31 May 2000,'' be substituted by ``within reasonable time''.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Are you agreed, Mr
Matthee?

Mr P A MATTHEE: Yes, Chairperson.

Amendment agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

Motion, as amended, agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution, namely: That the Council -


  (1) notes the media reports in respect of a circular from the Director-
       General of Justice according to which large-scale corruption and
       malpractices are committed by Justice officials in the said
       department; and


  (2) requests the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development
       within reasonable time to provide the Council with a report in which
       the details of the corruption and malpractices mentioned are
       expounded and in which is indicated what steps must be taken to
       prosecute the relevant officials and prevent further corruption and
       malpractices in the department.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                             (Review of Policy)

Vote No 33 - Transport:

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): I take this
opportunity to welcome the hon the Minister of Transport, our MECs from the
various provinces and some special delegates who are also present here. We
do, indeed, appreciate your presence in this Chamber.
The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Chairperson, fellow Ministers, hon members and
delegates, I thank the members for the opportunity to participate with them
in debating my department's Budget Vote for the year 2000-01. Let us get
straight down to business. What is Transport's mission? It is to provide
safe, reliable, effective, efficient and fully integrated transport
operations and infrastructure aimed at improving levels of service and cost
to customers in support of Government's strategy to redress inequality and
promote economic and social development. This is a very broad statement.
There are many things that have to be done to ensure that we fulfil this
mission in a dynamic and sustainable way, both short-term and long-term.

I would like to use this opportunity to focus on three specific sets of
issues. Firstly, there is the issue of intergovernmental co-operation.
Secondly, we have public passenger transport and, thirdly, road safety in
general. I could, of course, speak at length about our long-term strategic
plans which may be the more normal thing to do in a budget debate but,
instead, I have decided, perhaps arbitrarily, to bring members up to date
on what we are doing right now in key areas of public concern.

As delegates of provincial government, hon members' understanding of our
priorities and actions as the executive and as national Government is
absolutely vital. Everything flows from the objective of accelerated
delivery. But to deliver in the right way to the right constituencies
requires a high degree of planned co-operation between the different
spheres of government. The core responsibilities of the national Ministry
and the Department of Transport are: policy, planning, regulation and the
co-ordination of intergovernmental and public-private sector resources. Our
task is to create the strategic framework for rational and equitable
competition, to ensure safety and security in the transport sector, to
empower emerging entrepreneurs, to help create sustainable jobs and to
generate energy, enthusiasm and commitment around these goals.

The task of provincial government in transport is creative implementation
in co-operation with and in support of the many hundreds of metropolitan
and local councils across the face of South Africa. They are at the sharp
end of delivery every day - here I am referring to provincial government.
Our co-ordination agenda may not be very visible to the public, but it
quickly becomes so when seen from the perspective of our constituents'
expectations. The quality of the co-ordination directly determines the
quality of the delivery.

We have much work to do and there is really no space for relaxation. I am
not complaining. How are we doing? How well are our national and provincial
co-ordination structures and mechanisms working? Are they starting to make
an impact where it counts - in our people's day-to-day experience as
passengers in public transport and as users of South Africa's road network?
How do we move from where we are now to a sustainable rise in the quality
of the services provided in public transport and a sustainable decline in
our road fatality rate?

Let me begin with the co-ordination issues that relate to road traffic
management and safety specifically. The system and structures that are in
place at the moment show both clear strengths and weaknesses. We have quite
a good rational set of mechanisms for co-ordinating national and provincial
actions, both at the political level and at senior government official
level.

Firstly, I have recently resuscitated and revitalised the Road Traffic
Safety Board with the express purpose of giving us an instrument for
formulating and agreeing to strategy at the highest level. It is a body
made up of five national Ministers, ie the Minister of Transport, the
Minister for Safety and Security, the Minister of Defence, the Minister of
Health and the Minister of Education, all the provincial transport MECs and
a group of key stakeholders from the transport industry and civil society
in general. These include business associations representing their members
in the transport industry, safety pressure groups, statisticians, technical
standards experts, civil society generally, and so forth.

Members will easily recognise bodies such as the SA Road Freight
Association, Saboa, Sataco, the Automobile Association, the Road Accident
Fund, the CSIR, the SA Bureau of Standards, Drive Alive and the major
labour unions in the industry. The Road Traffic Safety Board is not just a
talkshop, it is about creating joint ownership of road safety strategy and
building the long-term understandings and working relationships that help
us to translate strategy into delivery.

Just last week we had a very constructive meeting which looked at the range
of road safety matters and considered the recently released Strategy 2000,
which is a discussion document focusing on the formulation of a
comprehensive road safety strategy for South Africa. The degree of
commitment shown by participants and the collective will to move quickly
towards implementation were extremely encouraging, and I do want to thank
our fellow Ministers for their co-operation in this regard. A broadly
representative and clearly focused implementation working group has already
been set up to handle feedback on the discussion document and to produce an
action plan and timetable.

In a few moments, I will share with the House the immediate actions we are
already in a position to launch, some of them as from today. But, in the
meantime, I would like to remind members who have not yet seen a copy of
Strategy 2000 that it is available from my department's offices in both
Cape Town and Pretoria, and that they are most welcome to share their
thoughts on it with us. I have brought a copy of the document along with
me, and I would welcome the participation by all members in our discussions
relating to this document.
The deadline for comments, it should be noted, is 15 June. All inputs will
be welcomed and we are not waiting until 15 June to start moving. The
implementation group has been given the green light to start its work and
has committed itself to submitting its full implementation plan by
September. This will deal in detail with timeframes, the necessary
consultation processes with trade unions and associations, the launch and
roll-out, scheduled priority programmes, the allocation of resources and
delivery responsibilities and the legislative and regulatory amendments
that will be required.

I will return to road safety and the document, Strategy 2000, shortly. Let
us focus on the co-ordination issue a bit further, because it is very
important to understand how we get from strategy to delivery, making sure
that all those who need to be on board are in fact on board and know
exactly what they have to do.

The Strategy 2000 implementation working group will not be working in a
vacuum. Before it reports back to the Road Traffic Safety Board in
September, it will have thrashed out the finer details of the plan with
Colto, the Committee of Land Transport Officials, which will in turn
present a report to the committee of Ministers of Transport, Mincom, to
make sure that the necessary political consensus is in place.

We can follow this streamlined approach to implementation precisely because
the MECs' presence on the Road Traffic Safety Board has already enabled us
to clear the way politically in advance. Working together with Colto will
ensure that all key officials and technical staff who will have to do the
operational work to carry out the plan are fully in tune with the route
being taken and properly set up to manage the workload. This will require
the full involvement of Colto's substructures - mainly the Road Traffic
Management Co-ordinating Committee and its 12 technical subcommittees. Road
safety is complex and is a multidimensional process. However fast we want
to move, we have to recognise that there are no shortcuts to good practice
- only good systems.

In this regard, I want to pay tribute today to the extremely valuable role
that Colto is playing, under its chairperson, Mr Jack van der Merwe. They
have worked tirelessly to provide my ministerial colleagues and myself with
the information and analysis that Mincom needs to make informed strategic
decisions. We are in the process of reviewing the future workings of Colto,
and I have no doubt that it is a matter we will be discussing with Colto in
due course. Let me not take up any more time with further details of the
Mincom-Colto structure. However, this House will see that the written
version of our comments here today has attached to it at the end an
organogram which shows how this structure, that is, the Mincom-Colto
structure, fits together.

The point I want to make today is that, within certain limitations due
mainly to financial resource constraints, these are structures which are
working well. They ensure sufficient political consensus, they enable
information to pass up and down effectively and they are open, at a number
of levels, to direct participation by business, trade union and civil
society representatives.

On the other hand, big problems arise when we move from the planning sphere
into the sphere of the day-to-day road traffic and safety operational
management, enforcement and adjudication, at the interface between
provincial and local government.

Here we have, for a long time, faced a situation of severe structural
fragmentation. We are going to radically shake up the system so that we get
beyond the current intolerable situation where our courts are clogged with
long backlogs of traffic offences, where drivers routinely tear up their
traffic summonses because they know they can get away with it - I hope
there is nobody here who does that - and where enforcement is fragmented
between some 800 provincial and local authorities, acting in accordance
with different norms and operational standards, with different levels of
pay and working conditions. We are going to urgently inject coherence into
these systems and instil respect for the law amongst our road users.

Over the last three years, we have learnt the lessons of Arrive Alive -
that is, our road safety campaign - and see now clearly that it has to
become an all-year programme of targeted and prioritised enforcement,
education and communication. This can only be achieved through a
fundamental restructuring of road traffic adjudication, management and
operational systems, and the development of a wide range of participatory
public-private sector and community safety initiatives.

Fortunately, we are now at the point where we will soon have two very
important new tools at our disposal to make sure that we succeed. These are
the Road Traffic Management Corporation, or RTMC, and the Administrative
Adjudication of Road Traffic Offences, or Aarto system, together with its
operational arm, the Road Traffic Infringement Agency. These are two very
important instruments. It is imperative that we get these up and running as
soon as possible - hopefully by early next year at the latest.

Let me remind the House briefly why these two institutions have such a
valuable role to play. The RTMC offers both a new structure for co-
ordinated implementation of national road traffic strategy and a new deal
for the traffic officers' profession. The RTMC will be headed by a full-
time CEO, will be run on business principles and will become partly self-
financing through user-charges for the services it provides.

It will pool together national and provincial resources under a single
management umbrella, and will be empowered to enter into contracts with the
private sector to provide specific services wherever appropriate. It will
be responsible for overall co-ordination and performance standard-setting
in road traffic management, for systematically developing the inspectorates
and monitoring regimes which will enable us to stamp out fraud and
corruption in vehicle and driver licensing, and it will be fully dedicated
to enhancing the professionalism of traffic officers and their support
staff.

It will control and regulate vehicle and driver licensing, testing and
registration. It will work hand in hand with provincial government to
improve traffic safety communication and education. It will ensure that
computerised management, enforcement and statistical information systems
are fully implemented in all appropriate structures.

It will set up a traffic academy to fast-track managerial talent, will
implement proper career-pathing and will upgrade traffic officer training
programmes across the board. It will commission and carry out original
research and conduct regular infrastructure safety audits. Above all, its
aim will be to restore optimal efficiency to road traffic management and
safety, and to inject a new self-esteem and dynamism into the profession.

I now come to our second set of weapons: Aarto and the Road Traffic
Infringement Agency. Through the Aarto Act and regulations, and with the
establishment of the infringement agency, we have given ourselves the
necessary instruments to ensure, firstly, that we can standardise and
increase, where necessary, demerit points for critical traffic offences;
secondly, that we can take the vast majority of infringements and
infringers out of the overloaded judicial system and penalise those who
frivolously frustrate the adjudication process and try and avoid fines by
making them pay the costs of both the fine and the process in the event of
their being found guilty; thirdly, that all road traffic fines are indeed
collected, quickly and efficiently, and that stubborn defaulters can be
assured of having their property attached for nonpayment; fourthly, that
annual vehicle licences are not renewed when fines have not been paid; and
finally, fifthly, that we are able to administratively suspend a licence
when the threshold value of demerit points has been exceeded and, in the
same manner, revoke a licence at the third suspension. These are tough
measures, and I hope that none of us fall foul of them. [Laughter.]

Let me turn to the state of affairs of public passenger transport, in
particular the recent developments in the minibus-taxi industry. As we sit
here in Cape Town, hon members will be well aware of the events which have
been taking place in Khayelitsha, and elsewhere, in recent days and weeks.
I want to send out some very clear messages from this House today, and I
would welcome the support of the House in this regard.

Firstly, let me say that I am prepared to accept that the minibus-taxi
industry still has some legitimate concerns with regard to existing
processes for the issuing of operators' licences in various parts of the
country, including the Western Cape. These need to be attended to, and I
know that MECs are paying careful attention to this issue.

What is unacceptable is for taxi or bus operators, or anyone else, to
oppose or ignore the requirement to comply with basic driver and vehicle
safety standards as a condition for registration. What is even more
unacceptable is for anyone to take the law into their own hands and resort
to disruptions of other services, blockades of communities, threats or acts
of violence. I want to make it clear that I stand firmly behind the actions
taken by provincial MECs to restore order in the industry, to ensure that
matters under dispute are resolved by peaceful negotiation and that
passengers are guaranteed free and unrestricted access to the transport
mode of their choice.

I have said repeatedly that the minibus-taxi industry provides a vital
service to over 60% of our commuters going to work each day. We have all
recognised that it is potentially one of the most important forces for
progressive economic empowerment in this country. There is absolutely no
sense in acting in ways which jeopardise the great advances that have been
made in the industry over the past few years.

Let me recapitulate briefly: Firstly, a clear set of processes for the
regulation, formalisation and economic renewal of the industry has been put
in place after three long years of consultation. Secondly, the industry has
worked out its own path towards representative, democratic structures of
governance, and is currently in the process of building towards fully
democratic elections for its national governing body, the SA Taxi Council,
or Sataco, which indeed is the parliament of the taxi industry. This
process will be completed and the results must be respected, just as we all
must respect the democratic process.

Thirdly, the taxi recapitalisation process will go ahead. This is a huge
endeavour which will change the face of the industry forever. Nobody is
being compelled to enter into this process. There is often a misconception
in this regard, namely that there is an element of compulsion. There is no
compulsion. Nobody is compelled to enter into this process. However, the
National Land Transport Transition Bill, which has been passed by this
House and is currently before the National Assembly, lays down that from 1
October 2004, no more licences will be issued in respect of vehicles which
do not comply with the new vehicle safety specifications - a very important
requirement. From the year 2006, any minibus public passenger vehicle which
does not comply with the regulations will not be allowed on South African
roads.

This represents the understanding of Government of the different states of
readiness within the industry with regard to compliance problems. Here I am
referring to the timeframes:
1 April 2004 and 1 April 2006, which are the two stages of compliance.
There is an understanding by Government that we cannot introduce this
change overnight. That is why there is this timeframe. The industry, in
other words, has been given four to six years to fully comply with the new
requirements.

However, the interests of the passenger must come first. We cannot
compromise on safety in the taxi industry, or, indeed, in any other mode of
land transport, if we are serious about implementing a comprehensive
strategy to reverse the carnage on our roads. Hence the new safety
requirements and the timeframes which I have referred to.

This brings me back to the question of road safety, one of the three areas
which I am addressing today, and to the specific short-term measures to
which I have referred. These are as follows: Firstly, we have to take
immediate steps to implement the direct powers of the inspectorate of
driving licence testing centres and vehicle testing stations established
under the Road Traffic Act to suspend or cancel the registration of centres
or stations which are found to be substandard or where fraud is detected.

These are very drastic steps, and I know that my fellow Ministers and MECs
will warn me to be cautious about its implementation. However, I believe
that the time has come for us to act drastically to ensure that both driver
testing centres and vehicle testing stations are up to standard, so that we
eliminate corruption, and are able to act effectively within the framework
of the law.

Secondly, we have to bind driving licence testing centres geographically to
eliminate scams being carried out across municipal jurisdictions or
interprovincial boundaries. We can explain this if necessary, but the
important word here is ``geographically'', and I am sure that my colleagues
will want to elaborate on that.

Thirdly, we have to introduce a stringent, compulsory, practical test every
two years for the renewal of the professional drivers' permit, and
encourage public passenger transport operators to support this by providing
their employees with advanced driver training. The issue of driver training
is becoming more and more important.

Fourthly, we have to introduce a strict annual medical test for
professional drivers aimed at detecting drug use and hidden medical
conditions such as diabetes, and we should ensure that such tests are
conducted by doctors specifically approved by the SA Medical Council.
Fifthly, we must make it compulsory for public transport operators to
implement safety management systems and employer-employee contracts clearly
stipulating maximum working hours for drivers, and regulating other
conditions of service which have a direct bearing on safety. Hon members
will agree with me that driver fatigue is often the cause of serious
accidents.

Sixthly, we want to give inspectors the powers to conduct unannounced, on-
site inspections of operators' premises to monitor compliance with safety
standards. This will include the power to take direct readings from
electronic, on-board monitoring equipment and to use print-outs as evidence
in court for offences such as speeding, overloading and driving for too
long without taking a compulsory rest stop. We are not promising overnight
results, but these are measures which we want to implement.

Seventhly, we want to get fine levels right. In other words, fine levels
must be proportionate to the gravity of the offence. This implies
immediately reviewing the proposed standardised penalties and demerit
points levels and thresholds under Aarto so as to ensure that repeatedly
offending operators can be punitively fined, have their registration
suspended or be permanently disqualified from operating.

Eighthly, we want to consider the feasibility of banning retreaded tyres
from the steering axles of all heavy trucks and public passenger vehicles,
and phasing in compulsory blowout stabiliser devices.

Ninthly, we want to launch a campaign promoting the use of trailers and
phase in a ban on the use of roofracks on buses and minibus taxis. They
often affect the balance of these vehicles. Beginning as from 2002, we aim
to phase in compulsory annual roadworthiness tests for all private vehicles
over the age of three years.

Tenthly, we intend to directly address the mobility and safety needs of our
poorer communities and young people, by vigorously promoting utility
cycling in South Africa. This can start out from already existing schemes
for the refurbishment and low-cost supply of bicycles and should include
both training, riding and maintenance skills, and local planning which
incorporates the provision of dedicated and well-balanced cycle paths,
traffic priority measures for cyclists, safety law enforcement and cycle
parking facilities. I do not know how many members and delegates know how
to ride a bicycle or repair a puncture of the wheels. It is an art which I
have long forgotten and which I will have to relearn.

I must come to a conclusion, but the last point in this regard is that we
intend to continue with the sterling co-operative work that has already
been done by my department and the Department of Education to embed road
safety education as an integral component of the life skills component of
Curriculum 2005, from grade zero to grade 12, and build practical road
safety awareness into all teacher training courses, so as to create
ambassadors for road safety, both in our schools and in the communities
they serve.

Finally, we intend to concentrate and target the key enforcement actions,
which many of the actions outlined above will require on the road. We will
have to increase the number of roadblocks and 24-hour traffic control
centres to check for overloading, drinking and driving, vehicle fitness,
and licensing offences. We will increasingly involve the private sector in
the operation of static electronic equipment for monitoring speeding and
traffic light offences, and give immediate consideration to what can be
done to start filling vacant traffic officer posts and appointing
additional administrative staff to free officers for on-the-road patrol
duties.

These are all actions which are being or can begin to be implemented
immediately. Strategy 2000 contains a much more extensive list of short-
term, medium-term and long-term actions, and the report of the
implementation working group will spell out all the logistical and
resourcing implications of the total programme.

However, the road users of South Africa should both be warned and take
heart. We are very serious about transforming the culture of road use in
South Africa and, with their co-operation, we will succeed. [Applause.]

Ms P C P MAJODINA: Mr Chairperson, Minister Omar, hon Members of Executive
Councils, and members of the NCOP and special delegates, I would like to
greet everyone and thank them for their presence at this review debate on
transport today.

Everyone came here this morning utilising cars, planes or buses. Nobody has
utilised rail transport. Why is this so? It is because we perceive this
mode of transport as meant for the poor, the unemployed and schoolchildren.
This is not a matter of fact. We should also look at how we can utilise
motorbikes and bicycles. Rail transport is neglected by society and needs a
concerted effort to be upgraded.

Transport is central to development, and good transport infrastructure is
as important a catalyst as education in providing for both social and
economic development.

It is impossible to upgrade rural roads to promote economic development and
employment without sound transport infrastructure and services which can be
expanded and developed to meet the growing needs of our country, hence the
need for an integrated approach and joint programmes between the
Departments of Transport and Public Works, because bad, narrow,
unmaintained roads lead to accidents.

Road safety needs to be strengthened at national level, which goes along
with a budget allocation review to meet the needs of most provinces which
are in need of an increased budget.

Regarding traffic law enforcement agencies, I wish to commend the Transport
Department for a good attempt to keep down Easter holiday fatalities. We
thank all stakeholders, such as traffic officers, police and paramedics,
but we need more personnel on this. We also need a cleansing of the
existing personnel due to the fact that some of them are involved in fraud
and corruption.

One needs to thank responsible road users who declared a state of emergency
on road accidents. We heartily commend the law enforcement officials for
arresting those mad drivers who drive as fast as 218 km per hour.

The Transport Department should, as a matter of urgency, legislate for the
use of handsfree kits on cellular phones. This must be done as soon as
yesterday.

A clear criterion is needed in respect of the mass which can be carried on
our roads. Huge trucks also contribute a lot to road damage and accidents.
How about encouraging big companies to buy containers and utilise rail and
port transport to alleviate the use of huge and overloaded trucks on our
roads?

I want to tell our provincial and local governments that the question of
the roadworthiness of vehicles should not be an issue to be massaged, and
they must act responsibly and vigorously, and as decisively as MEC Kgabisi
Mosunku has done in Gauteng in respect of the Putco Bus Company. Bus limits
of 100 km per hour should be adhered to.

The National Land Transport Transition Bill, which was passed on 18 April
by this House, enables provinces and local councils to act promptly on
public transport regulation. It was a milestone, of course. Its
implementation is necessary in order also to address the question of
violence where there is competition for routes, with special reference to
the Khayelitsha incident.

We need to encourage the workers of this country and everyone else to use
public transport in order to ease the burden of vehicles that flood our
roads every morning and evening, and also encourage interprovincial co-
ordination on road construction. If one travels between Gauteng and
Mpumalanga, one can see a difference in the texture of the road. We need to
narrow this gap.

We need more facilities to curb irregularities on our roads. We do not need
cows, donkeys, sheep and dogs to act as traffic controllers or speed traps
because there are no facilities.

We owe it to the rural or farm schoolchildren who walk exorbitant distances
because there is no transport provided for them which they can access. The
Departments of Education and Transport should look at this matter as a
matter of urgency. Our schoolchildren, too, are entitled to a better life
for all.

Dr T S FARISANI (Northern Province): Mr Chairperson, I have not been in
Cape Town for a long time. Can members hear me? Do I have to press some
button? Is it OK now?

It is a pleasure to join our national Minister of Transport, Comrade Dullah
Omar, and colleagues in Cape Town in the NCOP, to address the issues before
us.

We come from the Northern Province, which has a population of close to 5
million people and also has 250 000 registered vehicles, and lots of
visitors and tourists who come to the province.

We have just emerged from the worst floods in the history of that province,
and perhaps in the history of the country. We believe that the challenges
that we face can only be dealt with if we work together for change.
Therefore we believe in the integration of the work of the department in
the province and a good working relationship with the national department,
which we have.

We also believe that we should interact with our sister departments,
especially Public Works and the SA Police Service in the province,
particularly when it comes to areas of law enforcement.

We believe that in order to achieve the goals set in our vision and in our
mission, we should also work very closely with the traffic departments of
local governments, and that is happening.

We also believe that we should work with all relevant stakeholders. In
spite of the teething problems, we have a very good working relationship
with the bus industry, the taxi industry, the truck industry and the
communities at large. We believe that this good relationship can be
achieved, but not at the expense of law enforcement in the province. Our
youth, our women and our disabled people, and all community members, must
become active role-players in order for us to achieve the goals of the
department.

Let me come to the issue of road safety. The routine road safety and
traffic control measures continue as they have. But in order for the
Northern Province to produce results different from those of the past, it
is critical that extraordinary, even heavenly measures, are considered, and
we have considered them.

Our Operation Thibela, while involving blocking traffic on the roads, must
actually be understood more deeply, in a heavenly way, to refer to a way of
``thibeling'' death - stopping death from befalling our road users.

Our Operation Thari ea tsela, in which the department has co-operated with
SABC's Thobela FM and Ukhango Communications, has brought out the most
positive side of the department. We say to road users: We are not there
only to lambaste you, but we are also there to create an acceptable
environment in which you can drive happily. The launch of this programme
just before and during Easter produced positive, stunning results. On the
N1 especially, we created facilities for rest and relaxation, together with
music and other forms of entertainment. The outcome was astounding. Where
in the previous year 16 people lost their lives on the N1 between Jo'burg
and Pietersburg, this time only two people lost their lives.

However, over and above that, there is another operation to promote road
safety. We shall not hide it. It is an elite, specialist operation called
Operation Ndadzi. That is Tshivenda for lightening - tladi. It is part of
the MEC's unit, which he uses intelligently at appropriate times and in
appropriate places, and the results have been impressive. It is a select
team made up of one capable traffic officer from each of our 25 different
traffic stations in the province and it strikes from time to time.
Initially, we used to catch approximately 48 people under the influence of
liquor in an operation. This time, for example, when we took the operation
to N1, the number came down to between three and five in four to five days.
The message has hit home.

It also deals with elements of corruption where government vehicles are
used in unacceptable ways. Initially we used to catch in the region of 38
culprits per operation. The number has gone down to 3 per operation, which
means that the message has hit home. To know more about Operation Ndadzi,
one needs to get statistics, which we do not have time to make available
here.

When it comes to law enforcement, it is quite clear that, on its own, the
Department of Transport cannot achieve a lot. Therefore our interaction
with the Department of Justice and with the police is beginning to show
dividends.

We also take HIV/Aids very seriously. We have launched a programme, in
consultation with the Department of Health and Welfare in the province, in
which we have interacted with the taxi industry, the relevant unions and
the truck industry. If, during our operations, one does not get a ticket at
our roadblocks - thank God - it will be difficult to go without a condom!
[Laughter.] We do not force people to accept them, but we found it a very
useful operation. During Easter, at Kranskop, we had tables full of
HIV/Aids material, including condoms, and the condoms were not being taken
at the rate we would have liked, so we took them to the toilets, and they
moved very fast. [Interjections.]

We have challenges. In order to bite, one must have teeth. Initially, this
MEC did not have powers to impound illegal taxi operators, now he has. But
we have not used them yet, because people are beginning to listen.

We also have challenges around corruption, and we have made a few arrests,
and I hope we will make more.

Our problem is the shortage of personnel. We would like to work around the
clock for 24 hours, but we do not have the resources. Another important
aspect is to perhaps make sure that all legal instruments are in place.
Among the dead one has pedestrians who allegedly were knocked down while
under the influence of liquor.

I have not done enough research to establish whether we have the legal
instruments to arrest, charge and punish them. My latest information is
that the best we can do is to keep them in a cell until they are sober, and
then let them go.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): On that note, hon
member, your time has expired.

Dr T S FARASANI: Thank you very much.

On that note we want to contribute to a healthier, safer South Africa, and
to do everything in our power to work together with the national Minister
so that our province is not left behind as we take South Africa into the
future. [Applause.]

Dr P J C NEL: Chairperson, hon Minister, thank you for this opportunity.

According to the Department of Transport, between 9 000 and 10 000 people
still die on our roads every year and almost 150 000 people are injured.
Most of these accidents are caused by people disobeying the rules, in other
words, driver error.

In his opening address at the Saboa 2000 conference, the hon the Minister
released some statistics on bus accidents. In his address he stated, and I
quote:


  From 6 September to 7 October 1999 - in one month - 10 crashes involving
  12 buses and two trucks occurred in various parts of the country killing
  98 passengers and seriously injuring 108 passengers.

He further stated that 70% of the causes of the crashes could be attributed
to driver error. It is therefore quite clear that motor vehicle accidents
in South Africa are frequently attributed to driver error.

A recent survey performed by Medexec, consisting of a standardised medical
examination performed on a group of 580 professional drivers, all of whom
were in possession of valid professional drivers' permits and medical
certificates at the time of the examination, revealed that 299 drivers, or
51,5% of this group, were found to be suffering from significant disease
and, of those, 98 were found to be suffering from pathology severe enough
to declare them permanently unfit to drive.

There is no reason to believe that the position would be any different in
other groups of professional drivers. It clearly illustrates the inadequacy
of the current medical examination for a professional driver permit.

The average professional driver spends an average of 10 to 12 hours a day
on the road. This is longer than the maximum hours of continuous duty
permitted for pilots. The health requirements for a professional driver
should thus be at least of the same standard as that demanded of pilots.

I was therefore very pleased to hear today that the hon the Minister is
going to implement a system of more frequent medical examinations performed
by a limited panel of accredited medical doctors. I want to suggest to the
Minister that the medical examinations be in line with the current aviation
medical examinations.

Dit bring my by 'n ander aangeleentheid, naamlik die algemene swak toestand
en die konstante agteruitgang van ons paaie in die Vrystaat.

As die paaie-infrastruktuur van die Vrystaat agteruitgaan, raak dit die
hele land. Paaie wat eintlik die slagare van die ekonomie is, vloei uit
alle windrigtings deur die Vrystaat. Hierdie slagare is besig om vinnig
verstop te raak. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[That brings me to another matter, namely the generally poor condition and
constant deterioration of our roads in the Free State.

If the road infrastructure of the Free State deteriorates, it affects the
entire country. Roads which are in fact the arteries of the economy flow
through the Free State from all directions. These arteries are quickly
becoming blocked.]

To illustrate this, I would like to quote from the budget speech delivered
by the hon MEC Mr Malebo on 28 March 2000 in the Free State legislature:


  The 7 000 km of paved road and 21 000 km of gravel road in the Free State
  have a replacement value of R10 billion. More than 50% of the road
  network can be classified as in a poor to very poor condition. The
  estimated cost of restoring the network to a good condition within a
  realistic timeframe of five years is now R800 million per annum. Only
  R146 million is allocated for the current financial year to the road
  infrastructure programme.

Poor road maintenance has a devastating effect on agriculture, tourism and
commercial output.

Daarom maak die karige fondse wat vir hierdie doel beskikbaar gestel word
net eenvoudig nie sin nie. Sonder behoorlike fisieke toegang tot
werksplekke, klinieke, hospitale en skole word die lewenstandaard van ons
mense verlaag en kan die ekonomie nie groei nie.

Die agb Minister het onlangs op 'n vergadering van die Portefeuljekomitee
oor Vervoer gesê die voortdurende agteruitgang in die vervoerinfrastruktuur
word veroorsaak deurdat die ontwikkeling van paaie, spoorlyne, hawens en
lughawens voortdurend moet plek maak vir oënskynlik dringender probleme
wanneer dit by die toekenning van geld vir die onderskeie begrotingsposte
kom.

Miskien is dit omdat daar meer as een Minister in die Kabinet is wat voel
soos die agb Minister van Onderwys, wat onlangs in die Vrystaat gesê het hy
het nie een slapelose nag oor die slaggate in die Vrystaatse paaie nie.

Ons besef gesindhede soos hierdie maak dit vir die agb Minister moeilik om
fondse vir paaie te kry. Ek wil egter vandag by hom pleit om tog fondse te
vind om vir hierdie baie belangrike doel beskikbaar te stel. (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Therefore the meagre funding made available for this purpose simply does
not make sense. Without adequate physical access to workplaces, clinics,
hospitals and schools our people's standard of living drops and the economy
cannot grow.

At a recent meeting of the Portfolio Committee on Transport the hon the
Minister said that the continued deterioration of the transport
infrastructure is caused because the development of roads, railway lines,
harbours and airports continuously has to make way for apparently more
urgent problems when it comes to the allocation of money for the various
Votes.

Perhaps this is because there is more than one Minister in the Cabinet who
feels the way the hon the Minister of Education does, who recently said in
the Free State that he does not have a single sleepless night about the
potholes in the roads of the Free State.

We realise that attitudes such as this make it difficult for the hon the
Minister to obtain funding for roads. However, I want to appeal to him
today nevertheless to find funding to make available for this very
important purpose.]

I want to conclude by quoting a former administrator of the USA Federal
Highway Administration:


  It was not our wealth which made our good roads possible, but rather our
  good roads that made our wealth possible.

[Applause.]

Mr N M RAJU: Hon Madam Chair, hon Minister Omar, hon MECs, hon special
delegates from the provinces and hon colleagues in the House, at the best
of times it is never easy to interpret faithfully the intentions or
expectations of a particular people, culture or interest group.
However, when it comes to focusing on the relative merits and demerits of
the transport industry in South Africa, the issue, at least for the DP, is
quite clear. However, I will refrain from dwelling on statistics regarding
the spending of funds in Government departments, nor will I dwell on the
parlous state of affairs in the Road Accident Fund. I will instead speak on
the apparent lack of law enforcement which has allowed a deplorable
situation to develop in which taxi operators can cock a snook at attempts
to get them in line with legality.

If we survey the current transport scene right here in Cape Town, namely in
Khayelitsha and surrounding townships, we have a microcosm of the problems
afflicting the transport situation in the country as a whole, and it is a
sorry scene. Buses are attacked, bus and taxi drivers are shot and killed,
the stoning of buses and blocking of routes continues unabated, and taxi
associations have veritably lost control over their members.

To quote a Cape Argus editorial the other day:


  The minibus-taxi industry has become a law unto itself. It is seeking to
  impose a transport monopoly on the townships by blocking the entry of
  buses. It enforces its will by way of violence. Commuters prefer to use
  safer bus transport rather than subject themselves to the whims of the
  ill-disciplined taxi industry with its dangerous driving and unroadworthy
  vehicles.

There is no gainsaying the fact that the taxi industry in South Africa has
emerged as one of the finest examples of private enterprise anywhere in
Africa. The unshackling from the chains of apartheid and its narrow
monopolistic confines has unleashed the taxi industry onto the centre stage
of South Africa's free and private enterprise arena.

It was a veritable boon for black aspirant entrepreneurs, who were freed
from restrictions and financial restraints. It was a boon not only to the
nouveau riche among the taxi operators, but to the masses as well, the long-
suffering commuters who now had access to and freedom of quick movement
from home to work and back, or from home to grandmother's house across the
township or, indeed, across the province. Schools, universities, sports
stadiums and shopping malls came within easy reach.

But, what is the scenario we face after the relaxation of restrictions and
the scrapping of licences and permits for taxi operators? The new-found
freedom to operate these four-wheeled machines that travel and commute
freely has created a plethora of problems in its wake. Dark clouds have
darkened the horizon. The joys of easy and quick travel have been overtaken
by grief and more grief, grief for everyone connected with the land travel
motor industry, from the now greedy and selfish taxi operator and the
hapless commuter who has become an unwilling captive to the money madcaps
who pretend to be service providers, to other legitimate road users and
even to the innocent pedestrians on our roads and in communities. And, I
dare say, it has brought grief also to the Ministry of Transport.

It is almost trite to state that the taxi industry is overtraded, let alone
overcrowded. And what is more tragic, in fact, is that the industry has
spawned a new breed of cutthroat entrepreneurs who evince no qualms about
flouting the law. Unlimited competition and intense rivalries over
lucrative routes have made taxi violence a national concern.

I read once in a poem that ``freedom is a noble thing''. But freedom in the
taxi world, I am afraid, has become blurred with licence: licence to
literally do as one pleases; licence to abuse this noble freedom by showing
scant regard for lawful operation of taxis, scant regard for keeping
vehicles in roadworthy condition, scant regard for observing speed limits,
scant regard for employing competent and licensed drivers, scant regard for
the use of properly demarcated taxi ranks and, of course, scant regard for
the most important role-player in the taxi industry, the ubiquitous
commuter, the taxi owner's walking bank.

The Ministry must concede that there is a public perception that the
Government's performance, in its feeble attempts at law enforcement, is
lacklustre. Let me hasten to say the DP does acknowledge that the taxi
industry is on the verge of being completely revamped so that safer, better
regulated travel will become the norm, but then again, the Ministry finds
itself in an unenviable situation. I want to name just a few problems
lurking around the corner: the clamour for operating permits, the refusal
to get vehicles checked for roadworthiness, the proposed new demarcated
municipal boundaries and the consequent integration of traffic departments.
I was happy to listen to the Minister. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Rre S M A MALEBO (Freistata): Motlotlegi modulasetulo, ke lebogela tshono
eno. [Chairperson, I thank you for giving me the opportunity.]

Hon members, colleagues from provinces and Comrade Minister, it is indeed a
pleasure, this afternoon, to have an opportunity to participate in the
deliberations of this august Council. Having listened to the colleague from
the Free State making a point about the state of our road network, it
reminds me of a very famous radio personality at Radio Oranje, which is
broadcast to most of the province where the road network is in serious
trouble, and I want to quote what he said. He suggested a change in the
title that is accorded by the Constitution to those who have the
responsibility to look after our road network, and he said:


  Ek hoor dat daar in verskeie provinsies 'n LUR vir paaie is, maar as ek
  na die toestand van ons paaie kyk, dan dink ek wat ons het, is die LUR
  vir slaggate! [I hear that in various provinces there is an MEC for
  roads, but when I look at the condition of our roads, I think that what
  we have is the MEC for potholes!]

[Laughter.]

During the 1999 Easter period, a total of 31 people died on the Free State
roads as compared to 35 people who lost their lives during the Easter
period this year. It should be borne in mind that the Easter 2000 period
was extended over two weekends owing to additional public holidays as
compared to the previous year. During Easter 2000, 75 motor vehicles,
mainly taxis, were taken off the road because of road unworthiness, whilst
19 people were arrested for exceeding the speed limit, the highest speed
recorded in the province being 240 km/h. One person was arrested for
bribing a traffic officer, and may I conclude by saying a total of 3 970
fines were issued, of which 1 236 were for speed violations.

A specialised traffic court similar to the tax courts is being considered
for more serious offences such as drunken driving, overloading and speeding
in order to introduce scientific evidence proving the seriousness of the
offence, and the final sentence will be delivered in accordance with the
offence.

In due course, I will be launching a communication centre which will
operate throughout the year and not only over Easter and Christmas holiday
periods, as is currently the case. A toll-free number will be displayed
along all major roads throughout the province for the convenience of the
public to phone in all complaints, enquiries, reports, etc. This will
include updated weather reports, and reports on road works, road
conditions, road closures and traffic volumes. The public will be in a
position to report traffic offences and corrupt traffic officials.
Identities will be protected, and all information will be treated as
confidential. A help desk service will be in place to advise the public and
various industries on the provisions of the Road Traffic Act. An accident
bureau will also be in operation with updated data on a daily basis. This
implies that the centre will provide the latest provincial accident
statistics up to the previous day accurately. It needs to be mentioned that
only statistics involving injuries and fatalities will be recorded. The
collated accident statistics will in turn determine our selective law
enforcement programmes in the province.
A contravention history in relation to the category of road user vehicle
about those who are overloading or speeding and about buses and minibuses,
etc will be created on a database for prosecutional purposes to be used as
aggravating factors when the court is determining appropriate sentences. In
instances of continuous offenders, fines will not be issued to the traffic
offender. Instead, the offenders and the operator will be referred to court
for an appropriate sentence if found guilty.

It is in this context that my province and executive council support the
proposed strategy, called Strategy 2000, of the Minister of Transport.
Therein, we believe, the lessons learned over the years of Arrive Alive are
consolidated in the form of a strategy that can unfold over a period of
years and which can help us finally to arrest the road incident problem
that we are faced with.

May I quickly share with this august Council that, given the problems that
we face in the department, we have come up with a strategic framework,
named Free State on the Move, as a direct answer to the challenges that we
are facing. Within the framework we seek to answer the national call for
accelerated service delivery, building the economy and creating jobs and
impacting on the transformation of state machinery, but the major focus
will be on alleviating the poverty that our people are suffering under. The
Free State on the Move framework further repositions us to enable us to
contribute towards the challenges, as put forward in our provincial
strategic plan, and the broader objectives of the Batho Pele service
delivery programme. This paradigm shift is necessary if we are to move from
administering the past into the future.

The strategic objectives put forward in this strategic document are as
follows. The first objective is to refocus the department through the
unbundling of its current roles of policy-making, regulation, execution and
management, by way of reassigning each role to appropriate institutions
which would in turn render each function in a more effective and efficient
manner.

The second objective is to implement alternative service delivery
mechanisms through outsourcing, commercialisation and public-private
partnership. Thirdly, we will further promote the principle of cost
recovery with regard to the provision of nonsocial services. Fourthly,
where feasible, we will implement the principle of competition and
increased exposure to the markets. In the fifth instance, we will further
commit ourselves to maximising revenue collection and exploring new revenue
sources. Lastly, we will facilitate sustainable economic growth and job
creation, and further create an enabling environment for SMME development.

In line with the provincial priorities, we will increase our focus on
poverty alleviation and make the impact on our rural development
objectives. All of these plans were almost thrown into the dustbin
immediately after we experienced the disasters that were caused by the
recent floods. The disasters occurred after we had finalised the provincial
plans and after we had also concluded the budget priorities and programmes.
As it stands at this point in time, I can point out to this House that we
sit with bridges and roads that are destroyed.

There are some in our communities in the eastern Free State that are unable
to reach clinics, where the roads leading to schools are no longer
negotiable, where agricultural produce can no longer reach the markets, and
where people can no longer reach their graveyards, simply because there are
no longer roads - even the 4x4s are unable to travel on such roads.

What does this teach us? This is the best lesson for us to understand that
indeed co-ordinated infrastructural development is the answer, because we
do have the schools, we do have the clinics, we do have the shopping
complexes, we do have some products to take to the markets, but we lack the
most important link, namely the roads. We can provide all of these things,
but unless there is a road leading there and there is transport leading
there, all of this would not be beneficial to all of us.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon member, your time has expired.

Rre S M A MALEBO: Ke go lebogile, Motlotlegi. [Thank you, Chairperson.]

Mrs R A NDZANGA: Madam Chair, we from Gauteng are in support of this Budget
Vote. The provision of public transport, both national and provincial,
through parliamentary allocations, augurs well for the country's economic
development. Public transport, such as investment in roads, rail and buses,
is part of our infrastructure and makes an important contribution to the
economy.

Public sector involvement in the provision of safe, efficient and
inexpensive transport for our citizens benefits private sector activities
as well. Public sector participation in the transport industry should be
encouraged, as long as the public sector achieves some of our RDP goals.
Here public sector intervention crowds out private sector participation,
implying that the public sector does not substitute or replace private
sector activity, but rather stimulates it. This phenomenon is observed in
respect of private road concessions for, for example, the upgrading and
maintenance of the N3 road between Heidelberg and Cedara. The investment
will be recouped from the proceeds of the toll road over 20 years.

In the light of a key strategy of the provision of public transport, as
established in the Road Traffic Corporation, whose objective is to improve
traffic management and reduce deaths and injuries, Gauteng has embarked on
various programmes to address road safety, for example through the Arrive
Alive programme, where local authorities, including the Defence Force, work
together during the festive season to ensure road discipline. Gauteng is
determined to rid the roads of ``coffins on wheels'', be they big or small.

Secondly, the control of overloading is now one of the top priorities of
the transport department. Gauteng has started an ongoing campaign called
Operation Buyima, that is Operation Overweight to ensure that less damage
is caused to roads, to lower maintenance costs and decrease the number of
accidents.

Thirdly, we want to increase the visible policing of our roads. In this
regard I am pleased to announce that our provincial department of transport
is currently in the process of training officers and transport inspectors.
Once these officers and inspectors are deployed, it will increase visible
policing on our roads and the province by about 30%.

With regard to pedestrian management plans it should be emphasised that
more than 40% of road accidents happen to pedestrians. Gauteng will soon be
implementing a pedestrian management plan to address the problem. Gauteng
will begin to address the communication strategy to inform pedestrians of
the dangers of drinking and walking along main roads, especially at night.

Finally, one of my colleagues in Parliament recently visited Holland. They
were amazed at the high visibility of public transport. There were trams,
buses and trains everywhere, almost twenty-four hours a day, seven days a
week. Of course my province and the country landscape are different to
those of Holland, but an expansion of some form of public transport could
substantially reduce road accidents and traffic congestion.

Secondly, we could increase the visible policing of our roads when
upgrading and rehabilitating the section of road in Moloto, doubling the
K15 linking Protea Glen and Lenasia, and upgrading the Bon Accord Road,
K97, north of Pretoria.

Both our provincial and national departments of transport have displayed
the political will to reduce the menacingly high death toll on our roads.
The fruit of our policies will slowly and increasingly be felt. This is an
unavoidable outcome of policy-making. [Applause.]

Mr K D S DURR: Madam Chair, when the Minister began his address to us he
referred to Khayelitsha and he asked for support for his position that the
message to the Khayelitsha taxi owners should be that their behaviour was
unacceptable, that it was unacceptable for them to take the law into their
own hands, and that the problems should be dealt with by peaceful
negotiation. I am quite sure that I speak for all of my colleagues in this
House when I tell the Minister that he has that support.

We can say incontrovertibly that when we look at the current costs of
construction, the current infrastructure of our country is irreplaceable.
There is no question about that. There are many bad legacies of the past,
but there are also a few good ones. One of the good ones is this
unbelievable infrastructure of which we are all proud and to which we all
refer when we are trying to attract investors to our country.

Therefore we need to preserve that infrastructure at all costs, because we
cannot replace it. How do we preserve it? We preserve it by maintaining it.
Lord Clarke, when he spoke about civilisation, said civilisation equalled
maintenance. That was his definition of civilisation. And it is quite
interesting that poor roads lead to increases in vehicle maintenance and
repair costs and more and more severe accidents, and generally add to the
loss of efficiency, loss of convenience and loss of health of society. That
has been known since Roman times.

I have to mention the situation in the Western Cape, which is chronic as
far as road maintenance is concerned. I am sure I am not telling the
Minister something he does not know, but I would like to put this on
record. We would need R750 million now to bring our roads up to the
standard of repair we had five years ago. Even the blacktop roads that look
good are crumbling, and the foundations are being heavily pounded. I have
been told by the highest technical authority that they need resealing
urgently lest they crumble faster.

The western part of our province - the rural parts of our province - which
I have the privilege of representing and where I travel on the roads a lot,
have road surfaces with less than 50 mm of gravel topping, when the minimum
required is 100 mm or 10 cm. Over the whole province regravelling needs to
take place.

The budget shortfall we have is alarming, and in terms of the three-year
projected budget we do not see any light at the end of the tunnel. We have
done what we can. We have increased road-licensing fees, which was not
popular, in order to make an additional contribution. But that additional
contribution will only raise R70 million in revenue, and we need R750
million. However, that is our contribution of sincerity.

Can we prevail upon the Minister, in his road maintenance budget, to think
of us and our chronic situation? If we reach the conclusion that the
maintenance required is impossible to meet in order to get our roads back
to what they should be or were, then I think that, frankly, it would be
better that we knew that. Apart from having a shortfall and building up
imaginary backlogs that can never be met - even though I think we should
try to meet them - I think it would be better that we knew if we really
could not meet the backlogs and planned accordingly. [Time expired.]

Mr P D N MALOYI: Chairperson, I have realised that somebody may have
deliberately written my initials incorrectly. On the Order Paper they are D
D N. On the speakers' list they are P D S. My initials are P for Patrick, D
for Dumile and N for Nono. [Laughter.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Which part of the transport debate is that?
[Laughter.]

Mr P D N MALOYI: Comrade Chair, before I start allow me to greet your
Council from corner to corner, starting with you. Hon Minister of
Transport, MECs present here, permanent and special delegates, ladies and
gentlemen, I greet you all. [Interjections.]

Let me join the choir by saying that the recent floods in our province, as
in all other provinces, destroyed the already constructed roads, as well as
those which were in the process of construction. The maintenance levels,
particularly in our province, have not been reached owing to a lack of
funding. The road infrastructure of our provincial roads is too narrow.
Between Mafikeng and Zeerust a bus is involved in an accident every year,
as well as a car, and we are losing a lot of young people on those roads.

Those roads are not even able to accommodate other types of vehicles, such
as trucks and buses, because if one were to share those roads with trucks
and buses it would be a problem. We think that it is more than necessary,
and I think we are also duty-bound, to correct that situation.

The theft of fences around areas where livestock is held has become a major
factor in regard to stray animals. We are of the opinion that the fencing
in of livestock areas, for example in farms and villages, should become a
shared responsibility between Government and livestock owners in those
villages and on those farms. We suggest this because most of the livestock
farmers have become increasingly negligent, especially livestock farmers in
villages adjacent to provincial roads.

The chairperson of the select committee referred to all those animals,
including donkeys, sheep, goats, etc, as law-enforcement agencies of a
special type. [Laughter.] We need to correct that situation and not begin
to refer to them as law-enforcement agencies.

The other thing which is very important is that we should begin a process
of engaging farmers in a road safety education campaign, because if we do
not do that I do not think they will be able to understand what we are
talking about. We need to take a conscious decision, develop a programme
and engage them.

Insurance companies and NGOs need to be involved in the policy formulation
of, amongst other things, actual testing of drivers and vehicles, to rid
our roads of unbecoming drivers. Insurance companies insure the vehicle,
without knowing the full capability of the driver of the vehicle.

It is therefore necessary for us to begin to involve them in all these
processes. A public-private partnership needs to be established between
Government and communities in order for the said communities to form road
safety organisations at provincial and local levels. This would assist us,
as Government, in not having to be responsible for the actual campaigning
and all that. We would then be able to concentrate on own-policy
formulation. I think this is necessary. The department and the Minister
will have to investigate those possibilities.

Private testing stations are contributing to the unroadworthiness of
vehicles, because profits are maximised and not law enforcement. Those
people are just interested in money and nothing else. They will do anything
in their power to ensure that their company becomes rich and the owner
becomes richer and richer. We need to correct this situation.

We also need to come up with standards by which public passenger vehicles,
as was said earlier on - I am making a few amendments - are tested on a
semester basis and any other vehicle on an annual basis. Drivers should
also be eye-tested annually, because we cannot assume that one's eyes are
okay for the next five years. Therefore it would be necessary that, from
time to time, we check whether one is still able to see properly.

The demerit system should be finalised in order to ensure that any driver
to be retested with a record against him or her loses points on retesting.
We need to speed up this process, because if we do not do so we are
allowing these people to be irresponsible from time to time. If the
Transport Department is in partnership with the judicial system it should
ensure that that partnership does work to ensure that law enforcement is
obeyed at all levels.

Finally, because I do not have enough time, we wish to support the hon the
Minister when he said to us - I am saying this in relation on what the hon
Ken Durr said - that we need to take strong action against people who are
not willing to assist in terms of transforming this country, including taxi
drivers. We should not allow lawlessness in Khayelitsha or in any other
area. Tough action must be taken, and that tough action was supposed to be
taken yesterday. I am saying to the Minister that we should take it now
before it is too late. [Applause.]

Mnu M MALAKOANE (KwaZulu-Natal): Sihlalo, malungu ePhalamende ahlomphekile,
Ngqongqoshe [Chairperson, hon members of Parliament and Minister], in his
speech the hon the Minister, raised some questions which I am convinced I
will be able to respond to as my speech progresses. As my point of
departure, my premise is that a properly controlled public transport system
is essential to the smooth running of any economy. It should be noted that
the Department of Transport's budget has been increased from R3,4 billion
in 1999-2000 to R4,9 billion for this year, which translates directly in an
increase of about R598 million. This is mainly due to an increase of R759
million in Programme 3 which is policy, strategy and implementation, minus
a decrease of R164 million from Programme 2 which is regulation and safety.

The above enunciation triggers an important question in terms of the role
that can be played by the provincial and local governments in ensuring that
road safety is practised at all cost. It is on this basis that I draw the
attention of this Council to the pivotal role that has been played by the
department of transport in KwaZulu-Natal, headed by the hon Minister of
Transport, MEC Ndebele, in awareness-creation programmes that have been
developed by the department.

The department was the first ever to start the Asiphephe campaign, which
has even been a copycat of the national Arrive Alive campaign. The hon the
national Minister of Transport can bear testimony to that. Over the Easter
holidays there were fewer road accidents and fatalities reported,
particularly in KwaZulu-Natal as a result of the stringent and unyielding
rules enforced by the Minister of transport in the province, Minister
Ndebele.

It is therefore fundamental to develop rules that tighten up general law
enforcement on South African roads. Still on the subject of safety, public
education, through various institutions, workplaces and other important
stakeholders, has played a fundamental role in drumming in the importance
of road safety into the ears of road users, especially in KwaZulu-Natal. If
perchance the national Department of Transport can give more to the coffers
of the provincial department of transport's budget in KwaZulu-Natal, road
safety could be a realisable dream, because one of the 10 golden rules of
life stipulates ``Drive to save lives, not to take lives''.

I referred initially to the decrease of R164 million in Programme 2 which
has mainly been engendered by the decrease in the allocation to the SA
National Roads Agency and to aviation and maritime regulation. One is
tempted to ask whether it is not one of the major functions of aviation and
maritime regulation to maintain the safety standards of ships and aircraft
in order to try to curb accidents from devastating our lives and
environment. I am, in fact, referring to the fundamentality of having law
enforcement agencies in place, because these are able to enforce the
standards that are set.

Enforcement bodies are a need, more especially when they act as a catalyst
for the department in the enforcement of law. It is therefore important to
ensure that their participation, in whatever form necessary, is fostered
and instigated. These bodies play a cardinal role, mainly in curbing
advertent or inadvertent committing of offences. The hon the Minister
acknowledged earlier in his deliberations that there are other taxi
operators who have some concerns about minibus passenger vehicles. One
could only say to the hon the Minister that he must continue in engaging
all the stakeholders in negotiations, because this is an instrument which
can be used to resolve whatever differences and uneasiness there are.

It is indeed an acknowledgement, I am convinced, which all of us have to
make that if we did not have a taxi industry, our economy would perchance
be worse off than it is said to be right now. If it remains unregulated,
consultative processes should be engaged in both by the Department of
Transport and other stakeholders.

May I now point out the importance of intergovernmental co-operation that
the hon the Minister referred to earlier regarding the co-operation between
the Department of Transport and the Department of Education for instance,
or between the Department of Transport and the Department of Public Works.
This should be encouraged, because it could not only be cost-effective but
could also be effective in terms of service delivery.

If we are serious about succeeding in ensuring the implementation of set
standards by the Department of Transport, it is important to consider the
constitutional co-operation that should exist between the national,
provincial and local governments, and intergovernmental co-operation.

In conclusion, one would encourage the national Department of Transport to
look seriously into Programme 3 because only 9% has been allocated as an
increase in bus subsidies, while an increase of over 53% has been allocated
in rail commuter commuter subsidies.

Should the Government or the Department of Transport be involved to this
extent? Perhaps the hon the Minister will just clarify that point.
Otherwise, as he might have actually detected from my speech, we are in
support of the Vote. Siyabonga. Siyathokoza. [Thank you. Thank you very
much.]

Mr J O TLHAGALE: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister in the Council, in the light
of the limited time I have been allocated, I intend to focus primarily on
the road safety programme in this presentation. The sole purpose of the
road safety programme is to reduce accidents and fatalities on our roads.

In the North West province, the road between Mafikeng and Rustenburg is the
one that claims the most lives, when compared to accidents occurring on
other roads. This is probably due to the sharp curves, slopes, elevations
and its width, as my colleague Mr Maloyi has already pointed out. However,
the road itself is well demarcated and has all the necessary road signs. So
it is due to the irresponsibility of a driver who flouts and disregards the
road signs, exceeds the speed limit and overtakes at blind corners, that he
has to pay with his life or those of his passengers. The Arrive Alive
campaign has been in operation for two years. It is bearing fruit, except
with those pig-headed drivers who have no regard for their passengers'
interests and those of other road users.
Another area of concern is the conflict and killings emanating from the
taxi industry. Selfishness is largely the root cause of the conflict where
drivers are usually hurrying to reach their destinations within a limited
timeframe.

In the North West, we have seen the hon MEC for transport joining the
traffic cops to man certain main routes. We have seen him mediating between
warring groups. We have seen him taking unprecedented steps such as
deregistering certain taxis of the warring groups in an effort to bring
about order and security on our roads. All these measures are formulated
for road users who do not listen or obey.

Today we have listened to the hon the Minister coming up with detailed and
elaborate prevention strategies in an attempt to save lives on our roads.
These measures and strategies are costly, not only in terms of monetary
value, but also in terms of precious time lost and the sleeplessness they
cause.

In conclusion, I wish to commend the hon the Minister for his tireless
efforts to bring about order on our roads. [Applause.]
Mr P MEYER (Western Cape): Chairperson, hon Minister, colleagues from the
provinces, members of the NCOP and delegates, I believe that the role of
transport in the growing economy is still not fully appreciated and that
insufficient weight is allocated to this matter by our colleagues in the
financial and economic sectors. Even the so-called 4X4 committees regarding
transport funding are largely dysfunctional and have disappointed in the
progress they have achieved.

Where our country is plagued by unemployment, the potential for job
creation through transport and transport infrastructure projects is not
being utilised and requires serious attention. Although there are a number
of concerns regarding the proposed RTMC which I raised in previous meetings
with the Minister and which have not as yet been addressed by the
Department of Transport, I remain in full support of the implementation of
this mechanism to address the urgent need to restructure and remanage the
road traffic situation.

I believe that it would be in the interests of all provinces to get the
RTMC show on the road without delay. Traffic law enforcement is the crucial
component in achieving a change of attitude on our roads and hence
improving road safety. We cannot afford further delays in this regard.
Effective law enforcement is also crucial for the success of the taxi
recapitalisation project, indeed to the achievement of the stabilisation
and formalisation of the taxi industry. I am concerned by the fact that the
training for the implementation of traffic officers and inspectors as
envisaged by the recapitalisation initiative has not been launched. It
would spell disaster not to move rapidly in this respect.

Recent events in my province have shown that elements of the taxi industry
are prepared to challenge even provincial and national government regarding
their operations, with no regard for the constitutional rights of the
community and with flagrant disregard for legal, contractual arrangements,
and safety and lawful pursuit of daily activities. We are at a watershed in
this regard. Yesterday, in my province, I was supported by all parties when
we approved an amendment to the Road Traffic Act, Act 74 of 1977. I am not
going to use the power that I do have now if it were a big stick. I am
going to discuss all the matters relevant to the actions that are taken.

I have had discussions with the national Minister. I have had discussions
this morning with the people from the taxi industry. We will continue
discussing those problems. We will have another meeting on Monday morning,
and I have put aside the whole day to try and restore normality in our
province, and especially in Khayelitsha, Guguletu and Nyanga. The community
looks to us for protection and effective transport facilities. If we do not
heed their cry, we would be failing in our mandate as Government to respect
them. I am particularly appreciative of the strong support the national
Minister has afforded me in this situation in my province. Transport issues
transcend political boundaries. The needs, safety and rights of our
communities are at stake, irrespective of our political alignments.
Therefore the broad spectrum of political co-operation regarding the
provision of transport is essential.

The hon Mr Durr referred to the problem of the state of our roads, and
especially the rural roads. I have a pie chart which I am going to give to
the Minister, which shows the state of our roads in this province. I am not
going to ask the Minister now for finance. I know the Minister is also hard-
pressed for funds, but we want to bring the state of the rural roads in
this province to the attention of the Minister. Those roads are being used
by the farmers to bring their produce to the markets for export.

The Minister's concern and support regarding the serious deterioration of
the road infrastructure is welcome. The Western Cape agricultural sector
contributes to a very large extent to our country's economy. Yet the rural
roads which serve the farm-to-market and farm-to-export transport
requirements are in a serious state of disrepair due to insufficient funds
for maintenance and regravelling.

The perception is that Sanral funds are sometimes spent on postponable
upgrading while fundamental maintenance of rural gravel roads is delayed
repeatedly. I am aware that two different funding channels are involved,
but the communities in the rural areas are dismayed at this situation.

In conclusion, I would like to express my appreciation for the excellent
working relationship that we enjoy amongst ourselves as colleagues in the
provinces and with the national Minister. I would like to encourage the
further promotion of this co-operation in order that we, in this country,
can look forward to a brighter future. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I do not have an opportunity to speak in this
debate, but, Minister, I have had occasion to drive from East London
through Port Alfred to Port Elizabeth, and really, there is a lot of work
to be done there! [Laughter.]

Ms L TSHABALALA (KwaZulu-Natal): Madam Chairperson, hon Minister, permanent
delegates and special delegates, when dealing with the road safety issue,
it is critical to deal with transformation as a measurement of democracy.
When the Department of Transport launched the Siyabakhumbula Road Safety
Campaign, community stakeholders were all involved. The implementation
marked the mass participation of the local councillors and community
representatives from different sectors.

The community, through organising the events and being educated on this
campaign, became legitimate owners of this programme. Some of us will argue
that people were educated about this before the democratically elected
Government came into power, but I wish to indicate that this knowledge did
not reach the marginalised, remote communities. As hon members would
recall, even school patrols did not exist in black schools. Our children's
safety depended on the colour of their skins.

The Siyabakhumbula, Asiphephe, Arrive Alive and Omela ngasekhaya campaigns
were attended by thousands of people, with the biggest event in Durban
attracting a crowd of more than 10 000. The attitudes of the communities to
the traffic officers marked the beginning of a positive relationship. In
the course of these events, Minister Sbu Ndebele argued passionately about
why people ignored Ndebele's department in KwaZulu-Natal and headed to
KwaNdebele to aquire their drivers' licences.

Have the programmes been able to make an impact? They did, to a certain
extent, in KwaZulu-Natal. We recorded a decline in accidents over the
Easter weekend. The establishment of the community road safety councils
throughout the province confirms that the activity has been democratised,
and is people-driven.

Law enforcement is always marred by some corrupt officers who accept bribes
at, for example, the testing stations where they issue fitness certificates
without even seeing the car, without caring about the loss of lives on our
roads. It is appreciated that local councils and the provincial traffic
officers have embarked on a massive campaign to fine offenders. However,
prosecution is often faked, and offenders go free. An example of this
happened in KwaZulu-Natal, where a lady who was speeding was arrested, but
was freed by the court on the basis that she was going to be emigrating.

Enforcement of traffic regulations contributes to the revenue of the
department, but instead, many offenders sit with many unpaid fines. The
vision of Aarto and the establishment of the agency is a bold step by the
department to address the backlog and the shortfalls, and to effect fixed
penalties and demerits.

I wish to support the Minister's call for action to be taken to quell the
violence in Khayalitsha. It is clear that the legacy of apartheid will be
with us for a very long time. We have to leave behind the culture of
intolerance, lawlessness and the divisions amongst our people.

I wish also to refer to success stories: In our province, we have been able
to support the Minister of transport in his endeavour to be involved in the
road safety campaigns. Having lost his eldest son, who was his dearest
first child, he overcame his misery by focusing on this activity. The
director of the Asiphephe Road Safety campaign, Mr Musa Zulu, is wheelchair-
bound because of the car accident he was involved in some years ago. He did
not sit down and mourn his fate, but overcame his tragedy by leading the
campaign vigorously to prevent more deaths on the roads. [Applause.]

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Madam Chairperson, let me start off by saying, regarding
lawlessness and the taxi violence that is taking place in the Khayelitsha
area, that the hon the Minister has our support if steps need to be taken.
We cannot allow a situation where people take the law into their own hands.
We, as members of the NCOP, will support him in his efforts.

This debate provides us with an excellent opportunity to review the
progress that has been made concerning the transformation of our transport
system. It is impossible to appreciate this progress without taking into
account the objective conditions which existed in our various provinces
because of the legacies we inherited.

The Northern Cape, as hon members all know, is one of the largest provinces
in South Africa. To be more precise, it covers about a third of the surface
of South Africa. If we look at our roads in the province, we have about 66
000 km of roads, of which only 6 000 km are tarred roads.

We do not want to use this platform to complain here today, but I think I
need to mention some of these issues so that hon members will have an idea
of what is really going on in the Northern Cape. As they did with the rest
of our country's rural areas, successive apartheid governments largely
ignored the vast rural areas of the Northern Cape. The lack of adequate
facilities and services meant that people staying in the rural areas had to
travel to bigger towns to access these facilities and services.

Affordable, safe and accessible transport therefore became an important
issue in the daily lives of our people staying in the rural areas of our
province. It is partly because of this fact that the Department of
Transport realised the need for the fundamental transformation of the
transportation system. This, however, was not the only reason. The
apartheid transport policy deprived the majority of our people of a say in
transport matters. It exposed commuters to vast walking distances and
insecure rail travel, failed to adequately regulate the taxi industry,
largely ignored the country's road safety record and paid little attention
to the environmental impact of transport projects.

These are all issues that are very important for the people in our
province, because its consequences are still affecting their lives to this
very day. Since 1994, the Department of Transport has made significant
progress in unwinding the above legacy through new policy developments,
institutional reform and transformation.

As we enter the 2000-01 financial year, it is clear that the basic
institutional platform of the Department of Transport is now in place. For
the first time, we now have a long-term vision of where transport will be
going over the next 20 years through the Moving South Africa initiative.

This strategy provides the context for provinces, local government and
other stakeholders in the transport sector to find innovative ways to
improve the transport system in the various provinces and localities in a
situation of relative certainty.

The department has also embarked on a process whereby the existing fleet of
taxis, most of which are in a very dangerous condition and are not safe to
travel in, will be replaced by modern vehicles which are safer and more
commuter-friendly.

The department has also initiated the Arrive Alive campaign, through which
road accidents can be reduced. This is very important, given the huge
social and financial cost implications of road accidents. The billions of
rands that are spent annually on road crashes are resources which could be
put to better use to speed up the eradication of the inequalities in our
country.

The Northern Cape achieved major successes in the Arrive Alive campaign
during the Easter weekend. These successes would have been impossible
without the extremely good co-operation that existed between provincial and
local authorities and the SA Police Service.

The provincial government has also received excellent support from the
local business community and Telkom, who sponsored the campaign with
vehicles and caravans, and provided exhibitions where motorists could
receive information on road and weather conditions in our province.

The Arrive Alive campaign is marketed extensively across the province to
make motorists aware of the need for safe driving. Through the successful
implementation of our Arrive Alive campaign, we have saved millions of
rands for our province.

The past policies of apartheid transport have resulted in the Department of
Transport becoming the largest player in the transport industry, being
responsible for both the provision and implementation of infrastructure
operations. A large part of previous budgets was therefore used to finance
operational activities, which left very little money for the building of
new roads and the maintenance of existing roads.

The department has done well to change this situation. It has divested
itself of many operational aspects by involving the private sector,
although it continues to provide the regulatory framework to ensure fair
competition.

Four new agencies, the National Roads Agency, the SA Maritime Safety
Authority, the Cross-Border Road Transport Agency and the SA Civil Aviation
Authority have been established to perform functions and services
previously provided by the national department.

This step has freed up much-needed resources which can now be used for
other activities such as the maintenance of our road infrastructure and the
improvement of the public transport system.

Provinces themselves will have to come up with innovative ideas on how to
improve the public transport system and to deal with deteriorating roads.
If people in our province can count on high-quality, safe public transport,
they will be able to rely less on cars, freeing valuable road space and
avoiding the need to construct major new roads.

The money that is saved by this can then be used for the maintenance of
existing roads and to prepare for new transportation plans which will
accommodate the growing number of transport users, which is expected to be
brought about by our population growth.

In conclusion, I have no doubt that the department has done well under
extremely difficult conditions and budgetary constraints. It has succeeded
in putting into place the framework for a future transportation system in
our country, which would be responsive to the needs of our people and other
transport customers.

It remains for provinces and local government to add flesh to this
framework by encouraging people and students to develop innovative ideas
which will make our transport system the envy of this world.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I now call on Mr Marais.

Mr A MARAIS: Madam Chairperson, I think there must have been a mistake.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: According to the list in front of me, you are
supposed to speak now.

Mr A MARAIS: Madam Chairperson, I think there must have been a mistake,
because another list was printed. If you have the list in front of you, it
indicates that I was allocated four minutes.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: No, no, I am now being given what I understand
is the correct list, and therefore you can sit down, Mr Marais! [Laughter.]

Mr T MHLAHLO (Eastern Cape): Madam Chairperson, I hope the change will not
be viewed as a bias on your part towards the Eastern Cape. [Laughter.]

I want to join the Chair in raising the need for the roads from East London
to Port Alfred to be attended to, because this area is part of the belt
that will make an impact on our tourism in this country.

Today I am here representing the legislature and join the Minister in this
review debate on transport to submit our observations as a legislature as
far as transport in our province is concerned.

The standing committee, together with the legislature, has debated the
budget and programme of implementation for the year 2000-01. We have done
that based on the understanding of the programme of the Department of
Transport and I think we have managed to review the budget and programme in
the light of the six-year period in the past.

The Department of Transport is currently handling the recapitalisation
programme properly in our province. I think almost all stakeholders are
part of the process, and the indications are clear that there is co-
operation around this programme.

The Arrive Alive campaign is well-managed by the Department of Transport.
We welcome the chance to reduce the number of deaths on our roads, because
the Eastern Cape has always had the highest number of deaths on the roads
in the past. I therefore believe that the impact of the Arrive Alive
campaign is beginning to be felt generally.

Regarding stray animal projects, I want to say that because our province is
rural, this programme is very important. The Department of Transport is co-
ordinating this very important programme. Akuseleko, a pedestrian project,
is also part of the department's programme.

As chairperson of the standing committee in that province, I am convinced
that the department is doing very well in managing this programme together
with traffic safety education for school patrols.

I want to come to the critical challenges that confront the Eastern Cape
province. We have inherited a province which is constituted by two of the
strongest homelands in this country, namely Ciskei and Transkei. These two
regions were neglected in the past, and currently we are managing poverty,
in so far as infrastructure is concerned. We want to submit to this
important institution that, without the support of the NCOP and the
intervention of the Minister, it cannot be done. The infrastructure that we
are managing at the present moment needs to be attended to.

At present we are proceeding, together with all role-players, with
recapitalisation, as I have indicated, and I think this programme is doing
very well.

Having said that, we are also concerned about the present tension and
violence in the Western Cape. It is our duty as a province to consider the
challenges facing this country. The violence in the Western Cape needs to
be attended to. The taxi industry and bus operators must be able to sit
down and discuss problems and come up with solutions, because we do not
want a situation where violence, particularly violence directed against
ordinary passengers, becomes dominant in our society. We have passed that
stage.

I highlighted previous successes with the intention of securing the support
of this important House. The Eastern Cape is the second largest province,
after KwaZulu-Natal, in terms of population size numbers in this country.
The Minister knows very well that the migrant labour force in this country
resides in that province. As soon as the mining industry experiences a
decline, the Eastern Cape has to embrace all those workers who have lost
their jobs, across all sectors of this country. If one draws lines around
the biggest area with the lowest per capita income in our country, as
depicted on page 14 of the publication Moving South Africa: The agenda, one
more or less covers the Eastern Cape area in doing so.

The need for Government intervention which could lead to the creation of
jobs in this area must be one of our highest priorities. Unemployment is,
indeed, our enemy number one. Plans for major road development in support
of the Wild Coast SDI, as referred to by the Minister in his budget speech,
is a very welcome indication of further action being taken in this regard.

Development in the Eastern Cape, particularly around the SDI, will not be
realised until we have major intervention in our infrastructural
development. At present our hope lies in tourism in this country. I think
all members of this House will agree that the present atmosphere favours
our intentions, particularly if the road network in the Eastern Cape is
addressed. We therefore welcome the programme of the National Roads Agency,
which aims to upgrade N2 roads, including those at Kei Cuttings. At the
moment, that programme is doing very well and we fully welcome this
intervention.

We fully support the Minister's idea of a dedicated programme for transport
infrastructure in order to also address the alarming rate at which our
provincial local roads are declining. Our provincial budget simply does not
allow essential maintenance to be done on our infrastructure, and the road
network in particular, because it is not enough.

Tourism is one of the best options we have in our development strategy, but
without a road network, again, we cannot realise that potential.

Lastly, I think the hon the Minister's intervention in terms of
establishing agencies and co-ordinating transport management policy will go
a long way. His strategic intervention, through legislation, is well
supported in our province. We believe that, through his intervention,
infrastructural requirements will then be met.

In closing, I want to raise the issue of HIV/Aids which needs the attention
of the national Department of Transport. We cannot fail to realise the need
to develop a well-co-ordinated HIV/Aids programme for truck drivers who
travel throughout the Eastern Cape. The Coega Development Strategy is going
to be realised, and we acknowledge the fact that there is going to be a
flow of traffic as well as people moving in and out of our province. We
need Government intervention so that we can be ready for this important
project which we are looking forward to achieving and embracing with open
arms sooner, rather than later.

With those few words, we support the policy direction, we support the
budget and we support the Minister's intervention in this department.

Lastly ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Mr Chairperson, I would like to take this
opportunity to express my appreciation to all members of this Council who
participated in this debate. All the contributions, save one, have been
very positive. I have noted the progress made in the various provinces, and
I want to compliment the provinces for their achievements.

I want to thank my colleagues, the MECs, all of them, for the way we have
been able to work together. Without their participation in this way, I do
not think we would have achieved what we have in this period of time.
I said that all the contributions were positive, save one. I see,
fortunately, that the hon Raju has walked in ... [Laughter.] ... because he
is the odd man out. I do not know whether it is the trademark of the DP ...
[Laughter.] ... to be out of step. Unfortunately, he was not present to
hear some of the positive contributions which were made, so that the very
negative picture which he painted would have been counterbalanced by some
of the positive features which we have witnessed in the various provinces.
Of course, all of us have much to learn, and I hope that he will also learn
from what is happening in the provinces. It is not a good thing to adopt a
dogmatic attitude. I think one must look at the facts.

I also want to thank the various officials, at national and provincial
levels, for their sterling work. I have indicated this in my input, and I
think that what we have achieved is largely due to the work that they have
done. The standing committee has also done very good work over this year,
and I want to thank it and its chair for the work that it has done.

May I just touch on a number of issues, a few issues, that have been
raised, but I do want to indicate to all who have participated in the
debate that the points they have made have been noted. The points have been
well made. I note them and, where there are matters which require our
attention, we will, certainly, attend to them. However, just a few of the
matters that have been raised, I think, require comment.

There is the question of the hands-free cellular phone. The Road Traffic
Act makes provision for this. There is a little bit of confusion, which I
regret. In some quarters, it is believed that this particular law came into
operation on 1 May, because initially it was announced that it would come
into operation on 1 May. Once again, I want to remind the House that this
law has not yet come into operation. It will come into operation on 1
August, and provinces are currently busy with their preparations with
regard to practical matters so as to ensure that when the law does come
into operation, we are able to enforce it and that we are able to attend to
the practical matters which arise from the implementation of the law. That
applies to the hands-free cellular phone. It is a matter which is being
attended to, in that context.

Many contributors raised the question of infrastructure and roads. In fact,
everyone raised a concern about the state of roads, so much so, indeed,
that you yourself, Chairperson, took advantage of the gap which was created
between speakers. [Laughter.] As the hon Mhlahlo indicated, you displayed a
degree of bias towards the Eastern Cape. Bias is normally unbecoming of a
Presiding Officer ....

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Towards my car. [Laughter.]

The MINISTER: ... but I think in this instance it is appreciated.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: It is towards my car.

The MINISTER: The cause is good. Perhaps there was a bit of concern for
your motorcar.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: That is right.

The MINISTER: I should indicate that the road you travelled, I am told, is
a provincial road. If you had taken the N2, which is a national road, to
Grahamstown, the position would have been very different. [Laughter.]
More seriously, though, we do have a problem, actually not a problem,
rather a reality. National roads fall under the jurisdiction of the SA
National Roads Agency, that is, the national department. Unfortunately my
provincial colleagues and their departments do not receive their budgetary
allocations through the national Department of Transport. They have to
battle for their allocations through the provincial budgets, and in so far
as local government is concerned, perhaps through Public Works and so on.
This particular problem exists with regard to infrastructure.

All my colleagues and all contributors are quite right that the issue of
transport infrastructure is a very serious and crucial matter for the
economic development of our country and to address the social needs of our
people. Therefore we must find a way of developing an infrastructure
development programme in our country.

However, it is no use developing such a programme unless we have a funding
mechanism. Therefore we need to do both at the same time. My colleagues on
Mincom are fully aware of that. That is what we are working towards,
developing an infrastructure development programme which includes
provincial and local roads. We are also seeking to develop a funding
mechanism so that we can fund such a programme.

I am sure that the public will be prepared to make some sacrifices to
ensure that, over the next 10 years, we transform the infrastructure
situation in our country. We are working on that matter.

In addition, there is the issue of rural roads which a number of members
and delegates have raised. It is true that the situation in our rural areas
is not good. Without going into any detail, Government has initiated an
integrated, sustainable rural development programme. We hope that through
that programme, we will also be able to promote road development in rural
areas.

In so far as the poverty relief programme is concerned, we were allocated
an amount of R100 million, to be shared between the Northern Province and
the Eastern Cape. Yet again, I do not know why the bias to the Eastern
Cape. Those allocations are being used in order to make a contribution to
improving the roads in both of the provinces which I have mentioned.
Hopefully we will receive more allocations which will enable us to make a
positive intervention.

The issue of the flood disaster has also been raised. In that connection
Government has set up an emergency reconstruction committee which meets
every week in order to deal with the flood disaster. It has also set up a
command centre which is an implementing arm, chaired by Deputy Minister
Sisulu. A number of programmes have been channelled through the command
centre for approval by the reconstruction committee, and we hope that the
work in respect of reconstruction in all the provinces will begin soon.

We understand that the proposals will be considered by the emergency
reconstruction committee next week, on 23 May, after which the green light
will be given for reconstruction work to proceed. I know it has taken a
long time, but I think we are well on the road to addressing that problem.

The question of HIV/Aids has been raised by two speakers. It is very
important and I think it is absolutely correct that national Government
must do much more than we are doing, though I should indicate that there
are programmes which are being implemented in co-operation with the private
sector to address the problem of HIV/Aids. I appeal to all provinces to
develop programmes and to implement their programmes to address the
question of HIV/Aids.

A question regarding Khayelitsha was raised. I want to indicate that, as
with other provinces, there is a very close working relationship between
the MEC for Transport of the Western Cape and myself. We speak to each
other, we interact formally and informally to develop common approaches to
problems, of which Khayelitsha is one.

There are some details which the hon MEC could have given the Council but
he will, no doubt, tell us more about it next week. Both of us have taken a
number of steps and I think both of us are confident that we will be able
to bring the situation under control. The bottom line is that we will not
tolerate violence and intimidation, and we will not talk about settlements
unless violence and intimidation are renounced.

Hon MEMBERS: Hear, hear!

The MINISTER: However, both of us agree that there are genuine problems
facing the taxi industry which need to be addressed. I know that the
government of the Western Cape has taken steps to address them and they
enjoy my full support in that regard.

There is one more matter which I want to refer to very briefly. The hon Mr
Malakoane raised a couple of matters which I need to respond to. He asked
some pertinent questions, such as why the reduction in the allocations to
the SA Civil Aviation Authority and the SA Maritime Safety Authority?

The reason is quite simple. These agencies are now almost fully reliant on
user charges and levies to fund their activities. The reduction in a public
subsidy has been accompanied by an increase in service and enforcement
levels. In other words, the services rendered by these two bodies have not
suffered. In point of fact, they are becoming self-financing, relying as
they do on user charges and levies, and therefore the services will improve
in that regard.

The position regarding bus and rail subsidies is that, if one looks at the
programme 3 allocation over the past five years, one will see that there
was, in the three previous years, a cut in allocations to commuter rail. In
each of those years, additional financing had to be applied for through the
adjustment vote. On this occasion the 53% increase referred to, is a
correction on the baseline allocation. This industry still has a major
backlog in capital investment. However, I do appreciate that the question
of funding is a problem throughout the transport sector, and that we need
to address that.

There are a number of other matters, but I think we will deal with them in
our interactions with the provinces. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The Council adjourned at 16:38.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Minister for Intelligence on 18 April 2000 submitted a draft
         of the General Intelligence Law Amendment Bill, 2000, and the
         memorandum explaining the objects of the proposed legislation, to
         the Speaker and the Chairperson in terms of Joint Rule 159.


     (2)    The Minister of Home Affairs on 17 May 2000 submitted a draft of
         the Identification Amendment Bill, 2000, and the memorandum
         explaining the objects of the proposed legislation, to the Speaker
         and the Chairperson in terms of Joint Rule 159. The draft has been
         referred by the Speaker and the Chairperson to the Portfolio
         Committee on Home Affairs and the Select Committee on Social
         Services, respectively, in accordance with Joint Rule 159(2).


     (3)    The following Bill was introduced in the National Assembly on 17
         May 2000 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Identification Amendment Bill [B 33 - 2000] (National
              Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs -
              National Assembly) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
              notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
              21079 of 7 April 2000.]

2.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The following changes have been made to the membership of Joint
         Committees, viz:


         Defence:


         Discharged: Selfe, J.

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:
     Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces:


     Bills passed by National Assembly on 17 May 2000 and transmitted for
     concurrence:


    Road Accident Fund Commission Amendment Bill [B 12 - 2000] (National
    Assembly - sec 75) - (Select Committee on Public Services - National
    Council of Provinces).


    National House of Traditional Leaders Amendment Bill [B 15B - 2000]
    (National Assembly - sec 76) - (Select Committee on Local Government
    and Administration - National Council of Provinces).


    Remuneration of Public Office Bearers Second Amendment Bill [B 23 -
    2000] (National Assembly - sec 76(1)) - (Select Committee on Local
    Government and Administration - National Council of Provinces).


