---
title: 'Joint Sitting - 05 October 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: Joint Sitting
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/joint-sitting/parliamentary-debates-JS-2000-10-05
---

THURSDAY, 5 OCTOBER 2000
                                    ____

                        PROCEEDINGS AT JOINT SITTING
                                    ____

Members of the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces
assembled in the Chamber of the National Assembly at 14:00.

The Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces took the Chair and
requested members to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

                 PEACEKEEPING AND HUMANITARIAN ROLE OF SANDF

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon members, the Speaker of the
National Assembly and I have called a Joint Sitting of the Houses for a
debate to honour members of the SA National Defence Force for their
peacekeeping and humanitarian role. Members would know that our Parliament
is renowned for being first at things, for its uniqueness, and it is,
indeed, unique and unusual for a parliament to create an opportunity to
honour a defence force in this way. It is now my pleasure to call on the
first speaker in this debate. [Applause.]

Mr J L MAHLANGU: Chairperson, our men and women in uniform are, indeed, the
pride of our nation and an asset to the people of South Africa.

Some people may argue, as members of this Parliament, in fact, did on a
motion some time ago, that the role of the SA National Defence Force is to
protect our borders against foreign aggression, and that it should not
become involved in operations other than war, except where it is deployed
to provide assistance to the police. Yet the concept of ``operations other
than war'' is not entirely new in South Africa. It has largely been ignored
because of the role played by the SADF in the conflict which characterised
the relationship between South Africa and its neighbours prior to the 1994
elections.

Indeed, our Constitution provides that although the primary function of the
SANDF is to defend South Africa against external aggression, it may be
employed in secondary functions for services in the preservation of life,
health and property; for services in the provision or maintenance of
essential services; and for services in support of any department or state
for the purpose of socioeconomic upliftment.

It is not difficult to speak about the role which the old SA Defence Force
played during the apartheid period. Many of us, as we are seated here, have
practical experience of the oppressive nature of the old Defence Force,
either as combatants in the liberation armies or as civilians protesting in
the streets against the inhumane apartheid system. It is ironic, therefore,
that, amongst others, the Defence Force that was responsible for so many
gross human rights violations in the past should now be honoured for its
role in peacekeeping and humanitarian assistance. This is indicative of the
positive changes that have occurred in our country since the demise of
apartheid.

Because of our unique experience in ending apartheid peacefully, we are
increasingly called upon to assist in the resolution of armed conflicts on
the African continent. It is important that we should accept this
responsibility because of the leading role we play in the continent. In
doing so, we should be careful that we do not regard peacekeeping as an end
in itself. Sending peacekeeping troops to an area is an interim measure
used to prevent a conflict from escalating. It is not a substitute for
genuine negotiations between parties in order to terminate conflict.

Although the reasons for armed conflict on the continent are numerous,
complex and often deep-rooted, social and economic underdevelopment are two
of the root causes which have the potential to create armed conflict.
Sustainable peace, therefore, and security are closely linked to
development. Our peacekeeping approach should be informed by an
understanding of this critical link. We should therefore strive to develop
our continent so that we reduce the potential for conflict and thus the
need for peacekeeping troops.

With regards to the latter - the domestic humanitarian assistance - since
1994, there has been a new awareness of the benefit of military technology
and expertise to improve the nation's physical and social infrastructure,
and the quality of life of our people whom we stand for. Indeed, we saw the
invaluable contribution made by the SA National Defence Force during the
recent floods which caused enormous damage to large parts of our country,
especially in the province from which I come, Mpumalanga, and the Northern
Province, KwaZulu-Natal, the Eastern Cape as well as the neighbouring
country of Mozambique. Through their assistance, we were able to reduce the
number of losses, both in terms of human life and physical infrastructure.

Given the fact that our disaster management strategy is still in its
infancy and the reality that natural disasters cannot be avoided and could
strike at any time and anywhere, we will, as an interim measure, continue
to rely on the SA National Defence Force to provide relief assistance. It
is not uncommon for defence forces in other countries to have specialised
units which are primarily used for domestic assistance such as disaster
relief. The Canadian defence force, for example, established a disaster
assistance response team which consists of 200 defence force personnel who
can be deployed quickly to conduct emergency relief operations. The US Army
has civil affairs units which are part of the army reserves and are mission-
tasked to prepare for and conduct disaster relief operations together with
civil authorities.

One is fully aware of the argument against the employment of military
personnel for socioeconomic developments, in that it may blur the
distinction between military and civilian spheres. It is also argued that
it could contribute to the militarisation of civil society, undermine the
preparedness of the military with regard to its primary function and
undermine the image of the SANDF in the eyes of sections of our community.
There is an element of truth in this. I visited one of our neighbouring
countries late last year, and I was informed that the members of the
defence force had 10 seats in parliament as an interest body. I hope that
ours will not be demanding such a position. [Interjections.]

It is also argued that the inappropriate use of the military in nonmilitary
activities is economically inefficient, but this has not proved to be true
in the case of the USA and Canada. The reason is that they have establish
special units specifically formed to deal with nonmilitary operations such
as disaster management. Maybe as a country we need to explore the
possibility of establishing a similar unit. We already have a part-time
component, as well as commandos - I am sure all of us are aware of some of
the activities they are alleged to be involved in - which could be modelled
on the Canadian disaster assistance response team and therefore resolve
some of the problems that our country is facing.

We have come together today to do nothing less than salute our men and
women in uniform. I think we as the ANC really appreciate their service to
our country and we honour them very much. [Applause.]

Brig Gen P J SCHALKWYK: Chairperson, hon members, we are here to honour the
SA National Defence Force and not to bury it. We from the DP have nothing
but praise for what the SANDF has achieved, especially in its humanitarian
tasks. Our National Defence Force has always been - and, we are sure, will
always be - a pillar of strength on which we can rely in times of
emergency, whether of a security nature or a natural disaster.

The role of the SANDF in the peacetime situation in South Africa is
threefold: firstly, and easily predicted, our possible involvement in peace
support, peacekeeping or peace enforcement operations anywhere in Africa;
secondly, assisting with border control and internal security; and lastly,
assistance with humanitarian tasks, which invariably cannot be predicted.
Apart from our involvement in Lesotho, the SANDF has not really been
involved during our present state of peace in any external peace operations
in an African country. Africa faces many challenges in the years ahead: the
Western Sahara, Ethiopia, Eritrea, Sudan, Sierra Leone, Guinea-Bissau, the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Burundi and
Angola. Stability in Zimbabwe has also become a cause for concern.  The
result of instability in our neighbouring countries is the migration of the
populace towards South Africa. That immediately places a burden on us, in
that the gap between the workforce available and job opportunities
increases by the day, and so does the burden on our social services. For
this reason border control has become essential.

Recently the SANDF has become better known for the successes which it has
achieved in its participation in humanitarian tasks. The White Paper
specifically makes provision for nonmilitary tasks which they may perform,
but the House must take note of the fact that the SANDF is designed and
equipped chiefly to fulfil its primary mission of defence against
aggression. Nevertheless, the SANDF has soldiers, sailors, airmen and
medics - skills and resources which can be utilised for various nonmilitary
tasks in support of the civil authority. What the House must also take note
of is that the Department of Defence does not budget for expenses incurred
as a result of natural disasters, and that the operational preparedness of
the SANDF is thus progressively and adversely affected if it is overtasked.

Ons Leër het heelwat suksesse met grensbeheer behaal, en gedurende die
oorstromings met die herstel van brûe en paaie en die bou van skuilings en
die voorsiening van skoon water aan die gemeenskappe. [Our Army has
achieved quite a number of successes with border control, and during the
floods with the repair of bridges and roads, the erection of shelters and
the provision of clean water to communities.]

Our Air Force was exceptionally successful. During November and December
last year they provided air transport support during the Mozambican
elections. During the floods in Mozambique this year, the helicopter crews
rescued no fewer than 8 150 adults and 6 241 children.

In conclusion I must warn the House that, firstly, we must not let the
accolades bestowed on the SANDF today cloud the situation in which it finds
itself. The SANDF has been operating on a shoestring budget and has
proverbially started eating the seed potatoes. There are no funds to
replace items such as tents and vehicles, let alone to buy petrol. There
are not sufficient funds to keep aircraft flying as we would like to see
them flying, or vehicles mobile. It has become overstretched and
underfunded, and what is most worrying is the degeneration of the army's
reserve force.

In the past, these units have been the backbone of the army in conventional
operations and for local tasks. They have become practically nonexistent
because of lack of recruits and funds, and there is no incentive, for
example, to train artillerymen and tankers over weekends, because they do
not have the equipment. This situation is a tragedy, and the longer we wait
to rectify the situation, the longer it will take to elevate our forces to
the level they were at before the financial cuts. The ultimate fighting
strength of the SANDF lies in the reserve force, and this has been
demonstrated through history.

Finally, the DP wishes to congratulate the SANDF on their achievements
during the fires, the sea rescue operations, the flood relief operations,
the medical support, the border protection and the very many other
humanitarian tasks which they have been given, and we pledge that we will
support them as much as we can, to ensure that they do not degenerate any
further and that they keep improving. We do not want to see the SANDF
buried. They must always be able to perform with such success that we have
no alternative but to praise them. [Applause.]

Mr N S MIDDLETON: Chairperson, hon Ministers and hon members, the role of
the SA National Defence Force during the severe floods that devastated our
two countries, that is South Africa and Mozambique, was the most remarkable
act of real ubuntu, since World War II.

Members of the SA National Defence Force did us proud, not only on our
borders, but also in the SADC region as well as worldwide. This underlines
the fact that, when a nation is at peace, its army still has a vital role
to play for its people.  For example, when natural disasters occur, such as
earthquakes, floods you name it - an army can be called upon to provide
medical supplies and food and to restore communication links, as well as
water and electricity supplies. Armies are also expected to help to
establish peace in other war-torn countries.

During the severe floods that we witnessed, both in this country and in
Mozambique, approximately 15 000 people were rescued and more than 7 500
tons of food, medical aid and emergency supplies were delivered by the SA
National Defence Force to people in need, both in South Africa and in
Mozambique. In Mozambique alone, our Defence Force rescued almost 14 500
people and delivered more than 2 468 tons of food and other essential aids
to assist the country in its plight, which nearly wiped out all its
villages and their people.

Our Defence Force has made the deliberations of this House on regional co-
operation and peace a realisable dream. It is an undisputed fact that South
Africa has become an authentic member and a staunch supporter of regional
development initiatives. South Africa has diligently fulfilled its mandate
within SADC structures. All these and other initiatives could not and would
not have been achieved if our National Defence Force, in line with other
state functionaries, had not pulled its weight behind such initiatives.
Therefore, the IFP hopes and prays that this spirit of comradeship in our
Defence Force will be a shining example, particularly to those few soldiers
in our Defence Force who are still clinging to racism and refusing to
change their attitudes towards a new democratic South Africa.

We say, in this House: Long live the new National Defence Force of South
Africa! Long live!

HON MEMBERS: Long live! [Applause.]

Mr H A SMIT: Madam Chair, I want to start today with a general statement. I
want to say that close co-operation between the military and politicians is
required before unleashing the dogs of war. The intervention in Lesotho is
perhaps a good example of using the military to support state political
initiatives to diffuse a threat to security inside the country and to the
region. However, I will today refrain from being negative. [Interjections.]
[Laughter.]

Perhaps the fact that the Lesotho security forces were not united amongst
themselves prevented the outbreak of what could have been a short but nasty
war situation between them and the SA National Defence Force or SADC.
Although, ostensibly, there is calm at present, it is still too early to
say that, with the help of the military, political normality has returned
to Lesotho. It is obvious that we should ask whether military intervention
can bring about peace and stability in the long term, either in a regional
or a continental context. A political decision to send the military into a
country that requests assistance will be futile if the military itself is
not fully prepared and the human resources are not trained for conflict
prevention or peacekeeping.

In the modern world, no country can lay claim any longer to an existence of
so-called island isolation. Owing to globalisation, deviations from the
orderly in one country can very easily affect the socioeconomic order in
neighbouring states, and eventually pose a threat to the security of our
beloved region. Security, be it political security or food security, for
example, is no longer a domestic prerogative, but a security issue in the
region and an issue with a larger perspective.

Consideration should be given to developing a comprehensive strategy in
terms of which regional groupings, for example  Ecowas, SADC or Comesa, can
interchange their forces for peacekeeping operations in seeking to bring
about national and regional security and stability. Yes, the SA National
Defence Force has a role to play on our continent and we honour them for
the role they are playing.

Since 1952 Africa has witnessed more than 80 coups d'etat in which the
military has wrested power from civilians and later from state governments.
Oppression and corruption followed in the wake of these takeovers. To name
a few: Burundi in 1988, and the Comoros and Côte d'Ivoire in 1999 saw the
most recent military takeovers of state governments through the age-old
practice of coups d'etat.

The military can and should play an important supportive role to the
civilian authorities. In the field of humanitarian operations, the SA Air
Force, as mentioned here earlier today, played a significant role in
Mozambique during the floods that ravaged that country in March this year.
It not only saved lives, but also rendered logistical support in the
transport of much-needed relief supplies such as food, medicine and
clothing. In the case of droughts, armies have been utilised to transport
water, food and animal fodder to affected areas.

We in the New NP salute the SA National Defence Force for the role they
have played and are still playing. I only hope that Cabinet will ensure
that all the pros and cons have been duly considered before we finally send
our beloved troops to the DRC. We are proud of our Defence Force, but we
also, in this honourable House, have an enormous responsibility towards
this proud force. We salute them. [Applause.]

Mr M E MABETA: Madam Speaker, I am happy to join my colleagues who have
spoken before me in congratulating and commending the SA National Defence
Force on its dedicated and brilliant performance in peacekeeping activites,
particularly in Mozambique during the floods there recently.

It is in situations such as this that we can employ our resources to
benefit the largest number of needy people. It is also this kind of
involvement that must be developed and perfected. There are numerous such
deserving situations in the continent to which we can contribute our
expertise. We can only do so if we are able, as a nation and as a
Government, to develop the capacity of the SA National Defence Force to
carry out these constitutionally-sanctioned peacekeeping activities.

We have several areas that we could focus on to enhance their capacity. One
such area is racism, so that our forces, when involved in peacekeeping
activities outside, can be seen as a united force. Another area is gender
sensitivity, so that the respect between men and women that is displayed
within our peacekeeping forces can be admired by others. [Applause.] The
other issues are professionalism, corruption, crime and the lack of primary
training in different basic areas within the SANDF and, especially, in
specific peacekeeping operations.

Chapter 4 of the White Paper on Defence, our Constitution and the Defence
Review are quite eloquent on the importance of peacekeeping activities. But
central to these documents is the issue or concept of partnership. In
involving our forces in peacekeeping activities, we should not do so as a
hegemonic authority, but as a partner amongst equals, and in doing so,
recognise peace agreements that conflicting parties have achieved, rather
than enter these situations to bully others into decisions that do not
enjoy the democratic sanction of those who are fighting.
The preparations for peacekeeping operations, according to the White Paper,
include the development of an appropriate doctrine in the context of an
apartheid military machine in South Africa, This is very important - the
operational procedures and training  programmes in co-operation with
foreign partners. The Constitution provides for parliamentary and public
oversight and support for such involvement by the people of South Africa.

With this, we salute the SA National Defence Force. [Applause.]

Adv Z L MADASA: Madam Speaker, on behalf of the ACDP, I will confine myself
to this issue - there are many issues that could be raised regarding this
matter. I wish to associate myself with the sentiments of praise for the SA
Defence Force expressed by the previous speakers. I will only emphasise the
sentiments of praise.

Notwithstanding the many challenges that are facing the SA Defence
Forceÿ.ÿ.ÿ.

An HON MEMBER: SA National Defence Force!

Adv Z L MADASA: Notwithstanding the many challenges that are facing the SA
National Defence Force ... [Applause] ... when it was called in at short
notice to act in Mozambique during the flood rescue operation, the force
performed its task with excellence and aplomb. The manner in which our
soldiers worked in Mozambique during the flood rescue operation is
something that will remain in our memories for a long time.

We are very proud of the SA National Defence Force. [Laughter.] [Applause.]
We must all, as we do, salute them. It is comforting to know that, despite
the acute challenges facing our army, when they were faced with national
duty, they were willing and capable, and acted quickly and efficiently
within a short space of time.

The ACDP says: Phambili uge SANDF, phambili [Forward, SANDF, forward].
[Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! It was pleasing to note that the
National Assembly and the NCOP were able to teach the hon Madasa the ``N’’
so quickly. [Laughter.]

Mr J L THERON: Hon Chairperson, today we in the DA can proudly say ...
[Interjections] ... that we salute the SANDF for its peace-time role.

It is indeed a proud day for South Africa and all its people that we in
Parliament can honour the SANDF for its peace-time role. I think all of us
can be even prouder of our Defence Force for their heroic deeds in
Mozambique than we were of our Springbok rugby team when they won the World
Cup.

As we all know, many of those heroic deeds were televised worldwide, which
meant a great deal for South Africa's international image. With the
operations in Mozambique and Lesotho, South Africa definitely proved itself
to be a regional power that can successfully carry out international rescue
and peacekeeping operations with great distinction.

It is also important to honour the SANDF for the education, training and
development of its personnel, which enable them to carry out the
humanitarian operations so effectively. Let us not forget the huge efforts
and resources that go into the education, training and development of
personnel to enhance their capabilities to such high levels.

Van provinsiale perspektief moet ook hulde aan die SANW gebring word vir
die vredesrol wat hy daar vervul. Gedurende die groot oorstromings van
Februarie tot Maart 2000 in veral die Noordelike Provinsie, Mpumalanga,
KwaZulu-Natal en die Oos-Kaap is groot humanitêre werk verrig. Etlike paaie
is herbou, noodbrûe moes opgerig word, tydelike huisvesting in tente en
skoon water en nood mediese dienste moes verskaf word.

Die toenemend belangrike rol wat die SANW in misdaadbekamping en
betogingsbeheer in Suid-Afrika speel, moet ook eervol vermeld word.
Belangrike opleiding en ontwikkeling in dié verband word ook gedoen.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[From the provincial perspective tribute must also be paid to the SANDF for
the peace-time role which it is playing there. During the big floods of
February and March 2000, particularly in the Northern Province, Mpumalanga,
KwaZulu-Natal and the Eastern Cape, great humanitarian work was done. Many
roads were rebuilt, emergency bridges had to be erected, temporary
accommodation in tents and clean water and emergency medical services had
to be provided.

The increasingly important role which the SANDF is playing in combating
crime and controlling riots in South Africa, also deserves an honourable
mention. Important training and development is also being done in this
regard.]

It is necessary to make an urgent appeal to the Minister of Defence and the
executive to protect this valuable national asset that South Africa has in
the SANDF. I want to ask them to ensure that enough funds are budgeted for
the SANDF further to enhance effective personnel education, training and
development, research, infrastructure and equipment, to facilitate the
future peace-time role of the SANDF.

On behalf of the DA I would like to salute the SANDF on its peace-time
role. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Genl C L VILJOEN: Mevrou die Voorsitter, ek wil vandag graag my twee minute
gebruik om, namens my party, die VF, 'n boodskap aan die mense in uniform
te bring.

Hierdie land van ons, en dit is my boodskap, is 'n groot land, 'n land met
baie potensiaal, 'n land met baie probleme, 'n land met baie uitdagings.
Een van die belangrikste bydraes wat die mense in uniform moet lewer, is om
stabiliteit te handhaaf. In die verlede was dit die rol van die mense in
uniform om stabiliteit te handhaaf en daar was nooit probleme nie. Ons het
nie die land in die steek gelaat nie.

In die Eerste Wêreldoorlog en die Tweede Wêreldoorlog het ons uitgeblink in
stabiliteit en ons het hierdie stabiliteit gehandhaaf, ook nou gedurende
hierdie oorgangsproses. Dit is my boodskap aan hulle dat hulle 'n primêre
taak het om uit te voer. Daardie primêre taak is eerstens om te sorg dat
hulle die land  waarin ons almal woon, moet kan beskerm, want ons wil graag
hierdie land 'n mooi, gelukkige land maak vir al die mense wat daarin woon,
en hulle is die beskermer, hulle is die versekeringspolis van hierdie land.
Dit is hulle eerste taak.

Wanneer dit kom by die tweede taak is dit so dat daar in die Weermag 'n
groot potensiaal in die uniformgeledere beskikbaar is. Met die groot
belegging wat ons in die uniformgeledere maak,  moet hulle hul ook tot
beskikking stel van hierdie land, as ons dit nodig vind, vir humanitêre en
ander aangeleenthede. Ek weet, as 'n oud-uniformdraer, dit is nie altyd die
mees  plesierige tipe werk om te doen nie, maar dit is uiters noodsaaklik.
Daarom wil ek namens die VF vir hulle sê baie dankie vir die wyse waarop
hulle stabiliteit gehandhaaf het in die primêre rol, maar ook in die
sekondêre rol.

Ek wil afsluit deur hulle te herinner dat diegene wat die uniforms van
hierdie land dra 'n groot verantwoordelikheid het, naamlik dat hulle die
land waardig moet wees. 'n Mens kan net die land waardig wees as jy jou
altyd só gedra, as jy jou primêre en sekondêre take só vervul dat die land
op jou trots kan wees. So ver het hulle daarin geslaag. Hulle moet
asseblief daarmee volhou en waardige Suid-Afrikaanse uniformdraers wees.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Gen C L VILJOEN: Madam Chairperson, I would like to use my two minutes
today to send a message, on behalf of my party, the FF, to the people in
uniform.

This country of ours, and this is my message, is a large country, a country
with great potential, a country with many problems, a country with many
challenges. One of the most important contributions which the people in
uniform must make is to maintain stability. In the past it was the role of
the people in uniform to maintain stability and there were never any
problems. We did not let the country down.

In the First World War and in the Second World War we excelled as regards
stability, and we maintained this stability, also now during the
transformation process. My message to them is that they have a primary task
to perform. That primary task is, firstly, to see to it that they are able
to protect the country in which all of us live, because we would like to
make this country a beautiful, happy country for all the people that live
in it, and they are the protector, they are the insurance policy of this
country. That is their first task.

When it comes to the second task, it is a fact that in the Defence Force
there is great potential within the uniformed ranks. With the big
investment that we make in the uniformed ranks, they must also place
themselves at the disposal of this country, if we find it necessary, for
humanitarian and other matters. I know, as a person who formerly wore a
uniform, that this is not always the most pleasant kind of work to do, but
it is extremely necessary. Therefore, on behalf of the FF, I want to thank
them very much for the way in which they have maintained stability in the
primary role, but also in the secondary role.

I want to conclude by reminding them that those who wear the uniforms of
this country have a great responsibility, namely that they must be worthy
of the country. One can only be worthy of the country if one always behaves
in such a way, and if one fulfils one's primary and secondary tasks in such
a way that the country can be proud of one. To date they have achieved
this. They must please continue with this and be worthy South African men
and women in uniform. [Applause.]]

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Chairperson, this is indeed a great day today. The
UCDP has long recognised and acknowledged without reservation the crucial
role played by the SA National Defence Force in restoring law and order in
Lesotho, with the assistance of the courts of the Basotho nation and other
countries, in times of need. It is indeed an honour for me to note this
achievement by our forces in bringing about stability in the region.
It has not been an easy task for our men and women in Lesotho. It was an
acid test for our forces to participate in this type of exercise for the
first time. They risked their lives for their country's and SADC's call to
save lives in Lesotho. We therefore honour them for that and for the manner
in which they conducted themselves in Lesotho. We thank every member of
their families for their support and prayers for their safe return to South
Africa. They indeed behaved like a professional peacekeeping force and we
do not doubt that.

Now that the possibility of sending them to the DRC is no longer remote, we
should ensure that they are not treated as bad South African soldiers who
are there to dictate to the locals, but as a peacekeeping force. Our
Ministries of Defence and of Foreign Affairs should ensure that before we
send them away, there is indeed peace in the country. We should not send
our forces to make peace, but to maintain and sustain peace.

We congratulate and salute them. Long live the SANDF! [Applause.]

Dr M S MOGOBA: Chairperson, in our country the national defence forces have
been pre-eminently linked to the disastrous wars of liberation along the
borders of our country, and even across our borders into our neighbouring
states.

In the modern democratic dispensation the question has been put many times
as to what our Defence Force is doing when there is no war. Are they
preparing all the time for a war that may or may not break out? Our view
has also been that our Defence Force  should strike a clear balance between
defence and development,  because if there is no development, there will be
endless instability caused by rumbling stomachs, unemployment and lack of
basic necessities of life like water, power, schools and clinics.

The natural disasters caused by the recent floods brought to the surface
another danger that none of us had planned for. Our Defence Force gallantly
came to the fore and served in a heroic manner by saving people,
particularly in Mozambique. They even helped a mother in labour, itself a
very important symbol of our SANDF being on the side of life, rather than
on the side of death.

We believe that our neighbouring countries in SADC and in Africa have all
noticed that we have brave members in our forces who respond to any threat
to life. It is a service of this nature to one's country and to humanity
that stands out far beyond heroism in war, and which will be remembered
long after war. There are calls upon our forces to help in peacekeeping in
Lesotho and in the African Lake District, and we know that our forces will
be ready when they are needed.

Our country has established a reputation, which is rightly deserved, in the
areas of peace, negotiation and mediation.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Your speaking time has expired, hon
member.

An HON MEMBER: You are being chopped.

Dr M S MOGOBA: I am being chopped. [Laughter.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I did not chop the member.

Like the SANDF, I am a peacekeeper. [Laughter.]

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Madam Chairperson, hon Deputy President, hon members, for
a black South African it is like a dream come true to have a defence force
which one can identify with and be proud of. [Interjections.] Gone are the
circumstances which placed the Defence Force on the side of the enemies of
freedom and democracy.

It is in this spirit that, on behalf of the IFP, I rise to salute our men
and women, who constitute the SA National Defence Force, for the
outstanding role they played during the recent floods which ravaged our
country. Not only did they respond to those in our country, they also went
beyond the call of duty in the true spirit of the African renaissance and
rescued our brothers and sisters in Mozambique.

History has it that during those difficult times they displayed another one
of their skills, which had not previously been known. They managed the
truly historic feat of guiding a woman stuck in a tree through labour.
[Applause.]

Whenever the country has faced a crisis, be it crime, as we saw with the
Golden Arrow Bus Company and taxi conflict here in Cape Town, or be it the
maintenance of law and order in the midst of the worst violence, the SANDF
has never been found wanting. They have never hesitated to put their lives
at risk for the good of the country.

On an occasion like this, the IFP expresses its condolences to the family
members of all the members of the SANDF who have lost their lives in
different violent circumstances. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Chairperson, Ministers, hon members, South Africa is
committed to the ideologies of co-existence, global harmony, world peace,
human dignity and the liberation of the spirit of the human race. The
deployment of SANDF soldiers to the war-torn Democratic Republic of Congo
is a stepping stone for South Africa in actually realising the vision of
world peace and harmony.

The preparedness, operational readiness, mental and physical fitness and
leadership skills displayed by the SA National Defence Force during natural
disasters and social conflicts, strike a balance between morality and
systematic governance. South Africa has become the leading nation on the
African continent, despite our own economic and social problems. We are
all, through the co-operation of the SANDF, trying to re-establish the
messages of love, service to society and basic human rights.

God bless our SA National Defence Force. [Applause.]

Mr P A MATTHEE: Mr Chairperson, we wish to thank and commend the SANDF,
especially our heroes and heroines who selflessly exposed themselves to
mortal danger in their quest to rescue and to save human lives during the
recent natural disasters in South Africa and Mozambique. We are truly proud
of our women and men in the SANDF, and are grateful that we had the
capacity in our National Defence Force  which enabled us to extend a
helping hand and to open our hearts to our compatriots and neighbours who
had to submit to the forces of nature.

Ek wil ook graag van hierdie geleentheid gebruik maak om hulde te bring aan
al die lede wat op 'n vrywillige basis in die burgermag en kommando's dien,
en hulle te bedank vir hulle vrywillige en onbaatsugtige diens aan ons land
en die gemeenskappe wat hulle bedien. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[I would also like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to all the
members who are serving in the citizen force and the commandos on a
voluntary basis, and thank them for their voluntary and unselfish service
to our country and the communities they serve.]

We should always remember that the primary function of the SANDF, as
defined in our Constitution, also during peacetime, is to defend and
protect the Republic, its territorial integrity and its people, in
accordance with the Constitution. This is done in peacetime through
deterrents and by means of nonviolent strategies which are not perceived as
a threat by our neighbours. Deterrents, however, require the existence of a
strong, professional and prepared defence force whose credibility is
sufficient to discourage potential aggressors.

Alhoewel daar nie in die onmiddellike of afsienbare toekoms 'n
konvensionele militêre bedreiging teen Suid-Afrika is nie, maak die
onvoorspelbaarheid van internasionale verhoudings en die potensiaal van
binnelandse konflik dit altyd moontlik dat 'n onvoorsiene bedreiging baie
vinnig kan materialiseer. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)
[Although there is no conventional military threat to South Africa in the
immediate or foreseeable future, the unpredictability of international
relations and the potential for internal conflict always make it possible
that an unforeseen threat could materialise very quickly.]

A democracy can only flourish in a country where there is peace. We can
only succeed in getting our new coat of arms and motto to unite our diverse
people if we have peace. We can only let the rising sun in our coat of arms
- the symbol of the source of life, light and the ultimate wholeness of
humanity - shine over a prosperous South African society, with open
opportunities for all, where every person is free, responsible, equal
before the law, secure and has the chance to improve the quality of his or
her life, if we have peace.

The House will note that the spear and the knobkerrie in our coat of arms,
which are the symbols of defence and authority, are lying down, symbolising
peace. They, in turn, however, also represent the powerful legs of the
secretary bird. For as long as our National Defence Force also represents
the powerful legs of the secretary bird, we will have peace, because a
powerful and prepared National Defence Force, during peacetime, remains one
of the best guarantees for peace, and, therefore, will enable all of us
here to make our new coat of arms and motto a living symbol for all our
diverse people. [Applause.]

Mnr C AUCAMP: Mevrou die Voorsitter, 'n land se nasionale weermag is sy
trots. Dit is meer as 'n mag, dit is eintlik 'n simbool, nie net van
beskerming nie, maar ook van paraatheid.

Ons salueer vandag ons Weermag vir verskeie prestasies, by uitstek vir
humanitêre prestasies in die onlangse verlede. Mosambiek is 'n baie goeie
voorbeeld. Bykans 15 000 lewens is gered. Dit is iets wat ons nog altyd
gedoen het. Ek onthou in 1968 was die Weermag die amptelike brandweer in
Zeerust!

Die Weermag is 'n samelewing op sy eie. Daar is ingenieurs, medici, kokke,
ambagsmanne ensovoorts, en is ideaal geposisioneer om juis hierdie rol te
vervul. Daar is reeds verwys na grensbeheer. Ook met krisisse soos nou in
die geval van die bek-en-klou-seer kan ons Weermag 'n taak vervul sodat die
Polisie se hande los kan bly.

Met betrekking tot die vredesmagrol van die Weermag moet ons onthou 'n
vredesmag kan nie ingestuur word waar daar nog nie vrede is nie. Hy moet
die vrede handhaaf, nie vrede skep nie. Eers wanneer die politieke rol
vervul is, kan die militêre rol daar vervul word. Daarom doen ek ook 'n
beroep op ons Regering om geen vredesmag na die DRK te stuur voor daar nie
vrede is nie.

Met betrekking tot die Weermag se rol in vredestyd moet ons ons vandag
afvra of ons werklik kan praat van vrede in Suid-Afrika as bykans 1 000
boere en hulle afhanklikes sedert 1994 koelbloedig op hulle plase vermoor
is. Die geskikste antwoord hiervoor is dat ons 'n effektiewe, plaaslik
georganiseerde kommandostelsel het wat van die beste ter wêreld is. Hulle
moet bemagtig word om in hierdie situasie te help.

Ek wil afsluit. Hartlik geluk aan ons Weermag. Ek wens hulle sterkte toe
met hulle probleme, ook waar dit soms moeilik is om te onderskei tussen
dissipline en rassisme. Mag hulle hul taak só vervul dat elke Suid-
Afrikaner in veiligheid sy roeping kan vervul en dat elke soldaat nog
steeds kan sing: ``Ag, man, dis lekker in die 'Army'!'' [Gelag.] [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr C AUCAMP: Madam Chairperson, a country's national defence force is its
pride. It is more than a force, it is actually a symbol, not only of
protection, but also of preparedness.

Today we salute our Defence Force for various achievements, especially for
recent humanitarian achievements. Mozambique is a very good example. Nearly
15 000 lives were saved. That is something we have always done. I remember
that in 1968 the Defence Force was the official fire brigade in Zeerust!

The Defence Force is a society on its own. There are engineers, medics,
cooks, artisans, etc and it is ideally positioned to fulfil this specific
role. Mention has already been made of border control. Also during crises
such as the present outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease our Defence Force
can play a role so that the Police can pay attention to other matters.

With regard to the role of the Defence Force as a peacekeeping force, we
have to bear in mind that a peacekeeping force cannot be sent in where
there is not yet peace. It must maintain peace, not create peace. Only
after the political role has been played, can the military role be played
there. For that reason I also appeal to the Government not to send a
peacekeeping force to the DRC before there is peace.

With regard to the role of the Defence Force in times of peace, we have to
ask ourselves today whether we can really talk about peace in South Africa
when approximately 1 000 farmers and their dependants have been murdered in
cold blood on their farms since 1994. The most appropriate answer for this
is that we have an efficient, locally organised commando system which is
among the best in the world. They must be empowered to help in this
situation.

I want to conclude. Sincere congratulations to our Defence Force. I wish
them everything of the best with their problems, also where it is sometimes
difficult to distinguish between discipline and racism. May they fulfil
their task in such a manner that every South African can fulfil his or her
mission in safety and every soldier can still sing: ``Ag, man, dis lekker
in die `Army'!'' [Laughter.] [Applause.]]

Mr M A MANGENA: Chairperson, a few years ago the Defence Force of this
country was a rogue and a villain, whose appearance anywhere in Southern
Africa meant death and destruction. It was an enemy of the majority of the
people in our own country and an enemy of our neighbours. It was a defence
force that was feared and hated by most of us.

It is, therefore, remarkable to see our Defence Force today using its
wonderful skills not to kill, maim and destroy property, but to save lives
in emergencies. It was wonderful and heart-warming to see them risk their
own lives, day in and day out, plucking people from tree-tops and roof-tops
in flood-stricken Mozambique recently, and taking them to safety.

Sitting in our own homes and watching on television, we marvelled at the
skill, courage, endurance and, above all, the humanity of the men and women
in the SA National Defence Force. Our hearts were filled with nothing but
joy and pride. The rescue operations in Mozambique during the floods were
the most dramatic and eye-catching peacetime operations of the SA National
Defence Force. Their operations in their own country during the same
floods, in the Northern Province and Mpumalanga, were less dramatic, but no
less heroic and noble.

This occasion in this House, arranged to allow our national Parliament to
honour the peace-time role of our Defence Force, to recognise in a formal
way their gallant deeds, is both fitting and proper. We are certain that
what is said here today will find a resounding echo in the minds and hearts
of all our people in this country and beyond our borders. Azapo is
enormously proud of this SA National Defence Force and the humanitarian
role it plays, and we wish it success in such missions in the future.
[Applause.]

Mr R M NYAKANE: Chairperson, it is fitting that today our Parliament is
taking stock of the role that the SA National Defence Force played in
bringing peace to the countries riven by political conflicts.

The year 2000 has been proclaimed the International Year for the Culture of
Peace. We salute and commend the SA National Defence Force for the
dedication, commitment and acrobatic feats displayed during their rescue
operations, when the northern part of Mozambique was immersed in flood
water. The world has witnessed the SA National Defence Force's heroism and
the good deeds it displayed. After all, actions speak louder than words.

Yes, there has been the Lesotho episode, and there has been an outbreak of
political conflict. It is often said: ``We learn by our mistakes'', or
rather: ``Experience is the best teacher.'' Criticisms have been levelled
against the SA National Defence Force, because there has been loss of life.

The Lesotho episode was a brush-up - once bitten, twice shy. Yet, the
Democratic Republic of Congo and Angolan political conflicts will soon be
other test cases. The United Nations and the heads of state aspire for a
peaceful resolution of these conflicts. Protracted negotiations should take
precedence, rather than resorting to military intervention which could
tarnish the high respect the Defence Force has earned already. After all,
South Africa has managed to resolve its conflicts without engaging any
military junta.

Long live the SA National Defence Force! [Applause.]
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon members, before calling on the next
speaker, I would like us to recognise the presence of Major General Nyanda,
the chief of the SA National Defence Force and the heads of the various
arms of the SA National Defence Force, the Medical Corps, the Air Force,
the Navy and our other forces. [Applause.]

I would also like to draw your attention to the presence of the corporal
who was responsible for assisting a mother with the delivery of her baby in
a tree in Mozambique. [Applause.] I am not certain where that unique and
heroic individual is in the gallery. I would like to ask him to stand up.
[Applause.]

Mr J N MASHIMBYE: Mevrou die Voorsitter, ek wil graag vir genl Viljoen, die
leier van die VF, dankie sê vir sy positiewe toespraak. [Applous.] [Madam
Chair, I would like to thank Gen Viljoen, the leader of the FF, for his
positive speech. [Applause.]]

The only way in which we can emulate the deeds of our many men and women in
uniform in the areas in question is to request Parliament to lead, as
urgently as possible, the review of the Defence Review which we undertook
in 1994. Clearly, there would need to be a balance between the defence
policy and stance and the resources required to execute their mandate. We
will have to do that. [Applause.]

I do think that we might have been a bit ambitious in our defence policy as
we drafted it in 1994. I think that it is incumbent on us, as public
representatives, to engage in that defence review. We will lead that.

Mr D H M GIBSON: In another couple of years.

Mr J N MASHIMBYE: Thank you, Mr Gibson.

Today, there will be no trench coats, bicycles and knobkerries. When we
recall the evil deeds of yesterday, it is with the intention of reminding
ourselves and inspiring ourselves not to repeat the tragic past. It is in
that spirit that a few days ago, when we spoke on this very podium and
discussed the recommendations of the racism conference, we agreed not to
repeat the unthinkable and humiliating treatment which was meted out to the
black and coloured soldiers on their return from World War II. I repeat
that, today, there will be no trench coats, bicycles and knobkerries.
[Applause.]
As an appropriate departure from that past we must, today, agree to honour,
in this manner and fashion, members of a unified SA National Defence Force.
We refuse to do what Peter Woodhouse observed in 1605 when he said:


  I see a soldier's service is forgotten.
  In time of peace, the world regards us not.

Our love for, gratitude to and pride in our Defence Force are what we
humbly entrust to them. There will be no trench coats, bicycles and
knobkerries. [Laughter.]

As the fires raged and the floods ravaged, a prayer and a desperate cry, a
prayer and a cry for absolution was all that the hostages of natural
disaster could utter. In the wake of the floods in Mozambique, the esteemed
Graça Machel observed that, during war, hope did not die easily, because
mediators would continuously engage with the belligerents of a conflict.
Madam Machel went on to observe that when natural disasters strike, at
times all one can do is pray, and hope and pray for absolution. As the Rev
Kenneth Meshoe would say, the Almighty works and offers absolution in many
and different ways. [Interjections.] Those, our sons and daughters in
uniform, the sons and daughters of a free, nonracial and democratic South
Africa, rescued a mother clinging to a tree and gave warmth to her child
born on that tree. These are our heroes.

In the troubled world of yesterday, Louis Simpson, a poet born in 1923,
said, and I quote:


  I dreamed of war heroes, of wounded war heroes
  With just enough of their charms shot away
  To make them more handsome. The women moved nearer
  To touch their brave wounds and their hair streaked with gray.
  I saw them in long ranks ascending the gangplanks;
  The girls with the doughnuts were cheerful and gay.
  They ... muttered their thanks;
  The chaplain advised them to watch and to pray.
  They shipped these rapscallions, these seasick battalions,
  To a patriotic and picturesque spot;
  They gave them new Bibles and marksmen's medallions,
  Compasses, maps, and committed the lot.
  A fine dust has settled on all that scrap metal.
  The heroes were packaged and sent home in parts
  To pluck at a poppy and sew on a petal
  And count the long night by the stroke of their hearts.

Today, however, we will happily sing a song and say, about these men in
uniform:


  All this with gallant hearts is done;
  All this with patient hearts is borne

We are proud of them.

Ha va rhandza swinene. [We love them very much.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Chairperson of the NCOP, Deputy President,
hon members, my task in this debate is a small one, which I perform with
pride and honour. I want to thank, first and foremost, the Speaker of the
National Assembly, Dr Frene Ginwala, the Chairperson of the NCOP - you,
Madam, in the Chair - and the members of Parliament for this special honour
given to the SA National Defence Force today. This is probably the first
time in the world that a parliament has bestowed such high honour on a
defence force.

What members have heard and seen today regarding this honour that
Parliament has bestowed on the SA National Defence Force for the peace-time
role it has played in our country and region goes to show beyond doubt that
indeed we do have a dedicated and committed National Defence Force. We have
in our National Defence Force a majority of men and women who are committed
and dedicated to serving this, our nation. They do so under very trying
conditions.

Despite the fact that soldiers are not the best-paid public servants, they
perform extremely difficult and dangerous work with distinction and pride.
The nation and the world saw how, during the floods, our soldiers put their
own lives at risk, while doing everything to save people facing certain
death. We are rightfully proud of the role the SANDF has played and
continues to play in peacetime.

Despite the problems that have come to light regarding racism and the slow
pace of transformation, we must not lose sight of the achievements that
have been made in the short six years of integration of former adversaries.
What we have achieved - and we know we must now accelerate the pace - is
something that has not been achieved elsewhere.

We have integrated seven former defence forces that were on opposite sides
of the liberation war in our country. While we recognise the fact that
there are problems within the SANDF, it would be wrong to paint the whole
of the SANDF with the same brush. The problems in the security forces are
the product of a deeply entrenched patriarchal and racist culture that has
permeated all aspects of social life.

This Government, under the leadership of our President, Thabo Mkeki, has
made great strides, not only in recognising and promoting women's
leadership, but also in ensuring that the Constitution and our laws reflect
a firm commitment to gender and racial equality. As the Commander in Chief
of the armed forces, President Mbeki and the Minister of Defence are
working tirelessly to ensure racial and gender equality within the SANDF.
As a matter of fact, I would like to inform the House that I have been
tasked by the Minister of Defence to meet with women soldiers in order to
identify specific problems that they are experiencing, which may inhibit
their development and promotion within the SANDF. [Applause.]

The Council on Defence, the highest decision-making body in the SANDF, has
tasked the Secretary for Defence to facilitate arrangements for the
directorate responsible for affirmative action and gender equity to report
directly to him. This will enable the secretary and the Ministry to monitor
policy implementation with regard to the promotion of nonracism and
nonsexism in the SANDF.

I am pleased with the general spirit of the debate this afternoon and wish
to reiterate that the responsibility for transforming our country and all
state institutions rests with all of us. May I, in ending, take the
opportunity to thank our Commander in Chief, the President, for the
confidence he has given us to help in the rebirth of our nation and our
continent. We are proud of the role he is playing in leading us into a
peacemaking, peacebuilding and peacekeeping role in our continent, rather
than an oppressive one.

SANDF ke ya rona [The SANDF is ours]. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon members, that concludes our
speakers' list. I am sure the members of the SANDF present here this
afternoon will take back to other members of the force the words that have
been conveyed by members of Parliament today.

Debate concluded.

The Joint sitting rose at 15:08.


