---
title: 'National Assembly - 01 March 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2000-03-01
---

                           WEDNESDAY, 1 MARCH 2000
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

The House met at 15:03.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS, AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

INTERPELLATIONS, QUESTIONS AND REPLIES - see that book.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I give notice
that at the next sitting of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the attempts of the DP to make political capital out of
       proposals to reform questions and interpellations;


  (2) recalls that at a previous meeting of the Chief Whip's Forum, the DP
       had agreed to a trial period for a new system of parliamentary
       questions whereby interpellations would be suspended and an expanded
       system of questions  with the best elements of interpellations
       introduced into the procedure;


  (3) believes that the DP has acted in bad faith by seeking publicity
       while the proposals are under discussion; and
  (4) calls upon the DP to -


       (a)  cease casting aspersions on the efficiency of other parties when
           it itself is plagued by internal conflict; and


       (b)  join the ANC and other parties in working towards the
           transformation of Parliament to better serve the nation.

[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mrs S V KALYAN: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with concern that an invitation has been extended to a group of
       scientists with controversial views on the reality of Aids, to sit on
       a new expert panel on Aids to investigate the science of Aids;


  (2) further notes that by entertaining persons with such controversial
       views, the Government is sending out conflicting and confusing
       messages, detracting from the sterling work being done in the field
       of education about HIV/Aids and encouraging the widespread denial of
       the danger of HIV/Aids; and


  (3) calls upon the Minister of Health and her special adviser Ian Roberts
       immediately to retract the invitation.

[Interjections.]
Dr R RABINOWITZ: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move:


  That the House, in view of the untapped value of indigenous plants, the
  empirical yet unproven value of traditional medicines and the potential
  for South Africa to contribute towards the biotechnology boom, calls on
  the Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism, the Minister of Health
  and the Minister of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology to put in place
  legislation that will protect the intellectual property of South African
  plants and people and regulate independent research into indigenous
  plants, herbs and medicines, as well as human genes, so that we can
  promote the best possible use of our country's vast and unique flora.

Dr B G MBULAWA-HANS: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the tension within the DP continues to occupy the interest
       of the media, with the latest report referring to the Gauteng South
       region objecting to proposed amendments to the party constitution;


  (2) recalls that the issue of rigged membership lists has not been
       resolved;


  (3) believes that this tension is an indication of discontent within the
       DP with the style of the Leader of the Opposition and the ideological
       shift of the DP away from liberal, humanistic values towards right-
       wing conservatism; and


  (4) calls on the DP to cease its petty internal squabbling and instead to
       rise to the challenge of being a constructive opposition in a
       transforming society.

[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Dr S J GOUS: Mevrou die Speaker, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -
  (1) kennis neem daarvan dat 'n Suid-Afrikaanse dokter wat in die
       buiteland praktiseer, prof Christopher Knott-Craig, werk oor 'n
       baanbrekerstegniek in hartchirurgie gepubliseer het;

  (2) erken dat dit weer eens 'n bewys is van die dokters van wêreldgehalte
       wat Suid-Afrika oplewer;

  (3) prof Christopher Knott-Craig gelukwens met sy besondere prestasie; en

  (4) onderneem om alles in sy vermoë te doen om Suid-Afrikaanse akademici,
       veral dokters, vir die land te behou en die sogenaamde ``brain
       drain'' met alles tot sy beskikking te beveg.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Dr S J GOUS: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that a South African doctor practising abroad, Prof Christopher
       Knott-Craig, has published papers on a pioneering technique in heart
       surgery;

  (2) acknowledges that once again this is proof of the world-class doctors
       produced in South Africa;

  (3) congratulates Prof Christopher Knott-Craig on his exceptional
       achievement; and

  (4) undertakes to do everything in its power to retain South African
       academics, especially doctors, for the country and to fight the so-
       called brain drain with everything at its disposal.]

Ms A VAN WYK: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that at the next sitting
of the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) accepts its responsibility to lead by example and demonstrate
       Government's serious commitment to prevent the proliferation of small
       arms in South Africa and the Southern African region;

  (2) calls on the Minister of Safety and Security to provide the House
       with a report on the progress made with the audit of arms and
       ammunition of Government departments and state organs ordered by his
       predecessor in 1998;

  (3) requests the Minister to commit himself to the finalisation of this
       audit and to making available the necessary resources for the
       completion of the audit; and

  (4) ensures that the final audit report is tabled, as a matter of
       urgency, in the House.

Mr S M RASMENI: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the good news about South Africa's economic recovery, with
       strong growth particularly in the manufacturing, finance, real estate
       and business service sectors;
  (2) recognises that the growth rate of 1,2% for last year exceeded the
       forecast of the Department of Finance;


  (3) congratulates Government and the Minister of Finance on their sound
       management of the South African economy; and


  (4) looks forward, with confidence, to increased national prosperity
       under the sound economic management of the ANC Government.

[Applause.]

Dr C P MULDER: Mevrou die Speaker, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek met die
volgende sitting van die Huis namens die VF sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) sy dank en waardering uitspreek teenoor die SA Lugmag vir hul
       onvermoeide ywer en hulp aan vloedgeteisterdes in Suid-Afrika, asook
       in buurstate soos Mosambiek;

  (2) die hoop uitspreek dat die internasionale gemeenskap in 'n baie
       groter mate regstreeks betrokke sal raak om hierdie tragiese
       natuurramp die hoof te bied deur die nodige hulp en ondersteuning te
       verleen aan almal wat daardeur geraak word; en

  (3) 'n beroep op die Regering doen om so gou moontlik met die herstel van
       die infrastruktuur te begin in die gebiede wat geraak is.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Dr C P MULDER: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the FF:


  That the House -


  (1) expresses its thanks and appreciation to the SA Air Force for their
       tireless zeal and assistance to flood victims in South Africa, as
       well as in neighbouring states like Mozambique;

  (2) expresses the hope that the international community will to a far
       greater extent become directly involved in combating the effects of
       this tragic natural disaster by giving the necessary assistance and
       support to everyone affected by it; and

  (3) appeals to the Government to start repairing the infrastructure in
       the affected areas as soon as possible.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that at the next
sitting of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the PAC wishes to congratulate the shareholders of Nail,
       the flagship black economic empowerment company, for the confidence
       they have shown in approving the unbundling measures proposed by the
       board of directors;


  (2) congratulates the board on paying proper respect to fundamental
       economic and financial rules;


  (3) notes that their actions bode well for black empowerment companies on
       the Stock Exchange; and
  (4) calls -


       (a)  for the self-appointed pope of black economic empowerment, Mr
           Jonty Sandler, to stop making pronouncements on behalf of black
           economic empowerment companies, since those people are
           intelligent and responsible enough to make their own
           pronouncements; and


       (b)  on other companies of a similar nature to take a leaf from the
           Nail book when conducting their affairs by taking heed of the
           wishes of the shareholders.

Mrs G M BORMAN: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the widespread destruction caused by the flooding in South
       Africa and in the Southern African region;


  (2) expresses its sincere sympathy with the victims of the recent
       flooding in South Africa and Mozambique;


  (3) further expresses its gratitude to all the people, in particular the
       aid agencies and helicopter crews, who have given assistance to
       victims of the flooding here and in neighbouring countries;


  (4) reiterates its call on the Government to establish a disaster relief
       force, under the auspices of the SANDF, to deal with the effects of
       natural disasters; and


  (5) further calls on the Government to appeal to SADC to establish a
       natural disaster reaction force and relief fund in the region, as
       South Africa cannot be expected to shoulder the moral and financial
       burden for disasters of regional magnitude.

[Applause.]

Chief M W HLENGWA: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I will move:


  That the House -


  (1) believes that the courts of our land should be safe and secure places
       where justice is dispensed without fear or favour;


  (2) recognises that measures have long been implemented to ensure that
       those coming to trial are searched to ensure that neither weapons nor
       dangerous arms are smuggled into court;


  (3) expresses its alarm, annoyance and concern at the fact that a
       prisoner on trial recently shot his way out of court, showing once
       again a slackness in security or collusion on the part of criminals
       and security personnel; and


  (4) calls on the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development and
       the Minister of Safety and Security to investigate this deplorable
       occurrence and lamentable lack of security and further to keep this
       issue on their agenda continuously so that the message finally
       trickles down to the appropriate officers.
Ms N E HANGANA: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the Western Cape government again failed to address the
       most serious concerns of the poorest of the poor people of the
       province when it tabled its budget for this year;


  (2) further notes that the provincial budget failed to match its policy
       objectives with implementation strategies;


  (3) also notes that the province's Finance MEC, Leon Markovitz, admitted
       to having no clue as to how to deal with the questions of poverty
       relief, women, street children, the disabled, SMMEs and even the
       fight against HIV/Aids; and


  (4) calls on the New NP and Mr Van Schalkwyk to form a provincial
       government with the ANC and appoint a Finance MEC committed to
       closing the divide between rich and poor.

[Applause.]

Mnr A S VAN DER MERWE: Mevrou die Speaker, ek gee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) kennis neem van versoeke deur groepe boere in Zimbabwe aan president
       Thabo Mbeki om tussenbeide te tree in die onwettige, onregmatige
       besetting van landbougrond in Zimbabwe deur voormalige
       guerrillavegters wat met president Mugabe se regerende Zanu-party
       verbind word;


  (2) president Mbeki versoek om die negatiewe uitwerking van sodanige
       optrede op potensiële beleggers in Suider-Afrika onder die aandag van
       leiers in die SAOG-lande, en spesifiek president Mugabe, te bring; en


  (3) erken dat Zimbabwe se reeds wankelende ekonomie asook dié van Suider-
       Afrika nie hierdie tipe optrede kan bekostig nie en van mening is dat
       dit onverwyld gestuit moet word.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr A S VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next
sitting day I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes requests from groups of farmers in Zimbabwe to President Thabo
       Mbeki to intervene in the illegal, unlawful occupation of
       agricultural land in Zimbabwe by former guerrilla fighters who have
       been linked to President Mugabe's governing Zanu party;


  (2) requests President Mbeki to bring the negative effect of such actions
       on potential investors in Southern Africa to the attention of leaders
       of the SADC countries, and President Mugabe in particular; and


  (3) acknowledges that Zimbabwe's already shaky economy, as well as that
       of Southern Africa, cannot afford this type of action and is of the
       opinion that it must be stopped immediately.]
Mr S ABRAM: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) welcomes the advent of water boards to facilitate stakeholder
       involvement in water and related matters;


  (2) expresses disappointment that transformation is lacking in the
       representation on many boards;


  (3) calls upon the Government to do whatever is required so that
       representation on such statutory boards reflects the demographic
       composition of South African society, whilst not ignoring the
       professionalism and technical skills required for such boards; and


  (4) further calls upon Government to pursue this matter with the utmost
       urgency.

Dr J BENJAMIN: Madam Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the leader of the New NP, the hon Van Schalkwyk, recently
       called for the protection of minority rights in schools;


  (2) further notes that the New NP is seemingly incapable of moving out of
       the political wilderness of 1948, when education was based on white,
       Afrikaans and so-called Christian principles, denying the existence
       of a rich diversity of other groups, languages and religions;


  (3) recognises that the hon Van Schalkwyk is prone to paying lip-service
       to the existence of a rich diversity of different cultures in South
       Africa; and


  (4) reminds the New NP and its leader that our Constitution protects the
       rights of all South Africans with regard to language, culture and
       religion.

[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mr V C GORE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  no person, and in particular disabled persons, may be unfairly
              discriminated against in terms of the Promotion of Equality
              and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act;


       (b)  one of the mechanisms to ensure that disabled people become
              active and equal members of society is through education;


       (c)  one aspect of this is the concept of mainstreaming disabled
              students;


       (d)  the Department of Education has identified 500 primary schools
              for this purpose; and


       (e)  one of the major obstacles to mainstreaming is the lack of
              resources;


  (2) cautions the Department of Education that, in terms of the Promotion
       of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act, it needs to
       hasten its programme of making schools accessible for all disabled
       learners at primary, secondary and tertiary level; and


  (3) calls on the Government, in particular the Department of Education,
       to outline its policy for the implementation of this programme.

                              NATIONAL LOTTERY

                                 (Statement)

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Madam Speaker, hon members, I am
grateful for this chance afforded me to make this short statement on the
national lottery. It is my hope that all members know by now that the first
Lotto ticket sales will commence tomorrow, 2 March, and that the first draw
of the national lottery is on Saturday, 11 March.

I thought it appropriate that I should make a statement on this in
Parliament, as this is an initiative of Government that has national
significance. It is also important to distinguish the national lottery,
which is a national asset that is overseen by the National Lottery Board,
and the licensed operator, which is Uthingo.

The national lottery is a revenue-generating mechanism developed to finance
specific social needs. Benefiting from the experience of other nations, we
have introduced a national lottery in a well-managed process. I would like
to thank the National Lottery Board for their work, and I have no doubt
that they are now anxiously and vigilantly watching each minute that passes
towards the next milestone in this complex process.

The resources that we hope will be mobilised by the national lottery are
considerable. Over the seven-year licence term, it is projected that
national lottery sales will raise some R50 billion and that the National
Lottery Distribution Trust Fund will receive something in the region of R13
billion. The public will receive something in the region of R24 billion in
prizes and there can be over 500 000 winners in any one week.
The other benefits of the lottery will include R1,9 billion in VAT, and
R500 million from other taxes, such as company tax, duties, etc. I think,
very importantly, it is estimated that some R800 million will be earned by
new SMMEs. Three hundred and twenty-seven new jobs will be created in
Uthingo itself and over 50 000 other new jobs in the lottery industry as a
whole. The representivity of the persons employed and the commitment to
SMMEs is impressive. Suppliers stand to gain over R8 billion in goods and
services, and over 80% of this will accrue to South African businesses.
Retailers stand to gain R2,2 billion in commissions and the annual average
income could be R35 000 per retailer.

In terms of the social responsibility and economic empowerment, we will
establish a central SMME supplier database, and encourage shareholders and
other suppliers to use the suppliers in that database. We will reserve up
to 200 training scholarships for unskilled and unemployed South Africans
from previously disadvantaged backgrounds. We will teach SMME owners and
managers hands-on entrepreneurial skills, and provide 18 SMMEs with
exclusive lottery subcontractors access to funding, mentoring and all the
necessary training and assistance to ensure their sustainability. These are
the commitments that Uthingo has been developing and which will be
monitored by the National Lottery Board.

The national lottery has to be established and run in an exemplary manner.
The National Lottery Board is charged with this oversight. The board was
given the responsibility of advising me on the issuing of a licence to
conduct the national lottery. Three bids were received in response to the
request for proposals which was issued in 1998. For a period of five months
the board was engaged in the evaluation of these bids. Oral presentations,
which included terminal demonstrations, were conducted.

As hon members are aware, the lottery is a money-making scheme. In order to
secure the evaluation process, the NIA and the SA Security Services were
contracted to provide around-the-clock surveillance and protection of the
bid documents and members of the board. These agencies were also contracted
to perform probity checks on applicants, the consultants used and the board
members themselves. The board was assisted in the evaluation process by Mr
Kingsley Jones of the UK National Lottery Commission and a firm of
independent auditors, Grant Kessel and Feinstein, were appointed to review
the entire evaluation process.

The board reached its decision on the preferred bidder on 20 June 1999 and
I was advised accordingly in terms of the Act. I announced the preferred
bidder, Uthingo Management (Pty) Ltd on 9 July 1999. The negotiations for
the licence began. The team that was involved in this process included
members of the board, who were assisted by Adv Werner Krull of Deloitte and
Touche Consulting Group and Dr Jeremy Nurse of the Chief State Law
Adviser's office. I signed the licence on 26 August 1999 and this was
officially handed over to Uthingo on 9 September 1999.

The Lotteries Act, Act 57 of 1997, sets out the objectives of our national
lottery, as well as the distribution of the National Lottery Distribution
Trust Fund which will be administered by the National Lottery Board, and
provides the areas for which the proceeds must be directed. These are for
the RDP, charities, sport and recreation, arts, culture and national
heritage and other miscellaneous purposes. In a few weeks I shall, in
consultation with the Ministers responsible, appoint distribution agencies
to distribute these funds fairly and equitably, taking into consideration
the general development and the financial and social interests of the
country.

I think it is appropriate that I comment on recent media reports involving
Mr Max Maisela, who is the representative of the Post Office on the board
of Uthingo Management (Pty) Ltd, which is the operator of the lottery. It
is necessary to clarify that in terms of the request for proposals, bidders
were required to make provision for a 20% stakeholding for the Government
in the National Lottery. The 20% was split between the Post Office holding
15% and the National Empowerment Fund holding 5%. The Post Office was not
part of the bidding process and, as a result, no conflict of interest could
have arisen in that process. In regard to Mr Maisela's subsequent
appointment to the board of Uthingo as a representative of the Post Office,
I will consult with my colleague, the Minister of Communications, when I
have fully assessed the actual position. No substantive conflict of
interest will be allowed.

I am very confident that the highest standards of security and propriety
are being striven for and that the board will be very vigilant in this.
This is particularly the case in the oversight of the draw and other
operational aspects. May I wish the Speaker and, in fact, all of the House
good luck. Of course, I respect the fact that some members will not
participate as a matter of principle. For the rest of the members, the more
they buy the more we pay out to good causes. It is good that the vagaries
of chance will benefit society in a positive way. Thank you once again for
this opportunity to address the House. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon Minister, was I incorrect in my assumption that you
would be handing out free samples when we gave you this opportunity?
The MINISTER: Madam Speaker, you were absolutely correct. What you have is
what you are going to win. [Laughter.]

Mr N S BRUCE: Madam Speaker, the introduction of a state lottery represents
a far more fundamental change in Government's attitude towards enlightened
legislation than the tax reform of last week's Budget. [Interjections.]

Those who traditionally have opposed a lottery are the puritans and the
Marxists, who have much in common in their desire to take all the fun out
of life and replace it with self-righteous gloom. [Laughter.] I guess that
not many years ago the hon Ministers ranged in front of us this afternoon
would more likely have made common cause with Albert Hertzog on this matter
than with Helen Suzman. This lottery should be an enlightened turning of
avarice to a good cause. Whether it goes far enough in benefiting charities
remains to be seen. My party will watch this very closely.

There is another aspect of this lottery over which we are dismayed. It is
the monopoly it gives Government through the National Lottery Board and its
licensee, not only to run a state lottery, but also to decide to whom the
charitable proceeds are to be dispersed. Monopolies deprive ordinary people
of choice and, in this instance, many worthy charitable organisations will
be deprived of an important means of funding. Instead of boosting
initiative among charities to fund themselves, it places them in a position
of having to go cap in hand to Government or its agent for funding. Even if
the quantum available to charity is larger under the state lottery,
Government or its agent should never be in a position to determine how
charitable assets are distributed.

Remember what Lord Acton said: ``All power corrupts and absolute power
corrupts absolutely.'' Charities, by using their own funding initiatives,
should compete for charitable funds. This lottery and the law that supports
it opens the door to cronyism, preferment and corruption.

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon Mr Bruce, would you please take your seat for a
moment? Hon member, are you rising on a point of order?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Yes, Madam Speaker. On a point of
order: I would like to know how long two minutes is.
The SPEAKER: Order! It is 60 seconds plus another 60 to follow. [Laughter.]
Please continue. [Interjections.] Hon member, you have ten seconds left
which were taken up by Ms Sisulu.

Mr N S BRUCE: Madam Speaker, we assume that the lottery authority will be
scrupulous in applying the equity laws to the fortunate winners of this
lottery. We assume that the winners will also mirror the racial mix of this
country and that at least half of the winners will be women, especially
from the rural areas. If not, my party will make sure that this ... [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Mr H J BEKKER: Madam Speaker, the IFP supports the establishment of a
national lottery. We trust and we hope that this lottery will contribute
substantially to the welfare projects and upliftment programmes that are
envisaged.

We, however, wish to point out that a lottery still remains a game of
chance and that it can only pay out massive amounts of winnings from moneys
received from people who have lost, substantially, even more. Our less
privileged communities, particularly, should be cautious that they do not
lose even the meagre amount of money in their possession.

It may interest members that, already in 1989 and again in 1991, I proposed
in this Parliament that a state lottery should be considered. At that
stage, as a member of the previous governing party, it caused a sensation
and ruffled quite a number of feathers. I refer, in this regard to Hansard
of 13 May 1991, cols 84 to 85. Members should note that this was not the
first time, and we wish now that the lottery is here that we can have the
full support of all members. [Time expired.]

Mnr F BEUKMAN: Mevrou die Speaker, die Nuwe NP is van mening dat die
voorgestelde nasionale lotery op 'n behoorlike sakegrondslag bestuur moet
word aangesien die inkomste bykans R1 miljard gaan wees.

Dit is van kardinale belang dat die sowat 5 500 afsetpunte vir die verkoop
van kaartjies behoorlik sal funksioneer. Verslae wat daarop dui dat die
afsetpunte aan die vooraand van die implementering van die stelsel nog nie
gefinaliseer is nie, is 'n jammerte. Ons vertrou dat die beheerliggaam dit
sal regstel. Die Nuwe NP steun die benadering dat diegene uit voorheen
benadeelde gemeenskappe deur die bedryf van die afsetpunte ekonomies
bemagtig sal word.

Die Nuwe NP is verder van mening dat die kriteria vir die toekenning van
30% van die inkomste aan welsynsorganisasies twee duidelike elemente moet
bevat. Eerstens, die platteland moet voorkeur kry by die toedeling van
fondse aan welsynsorganisasies en, tweedens, gestremdes, weeshuise en oues
van dae moet voorkeur kry by die toewys van geld. Dié wat die kwesbaarste
in die gemeenskap is, moet deur die inkomstestroom van die lotery
bevoordeel word. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr F BEUKMAN: Madam Speaker, the New NP is of the opinion that the
proposed national lottery must be managed on a sound business basis as the
income is going to amount to nearly R1 billion.

It is of cardinal importance that the approximately 5 500 marketing points
for the sale of tickets function properly. Reports which indicate that the
marketing points have not yet been finalised on the eve of the
implementation of the system, are unfortunate. We trust that the
controlling body will rectify this. The New NP supports the approach that
those from previously disadvantaged communities will be economically
empowered through the operation of the marketing points.

The New NP is furthermore of the opinion that the criteria for the
allocation of 30% of the income to welfare organisations must contain two
clear elements. Firstly, rural areas must receive priority with regard to
the allocation of funds to welfare organisations and, secondly, the
handicapped, orphanages and the aged must receive priority with regard to
the allocation of money. The most vulnerable in society must benefit from
the influx of revenue from the lottery.]

Mr C T FROLICK: Madam Speaker and hon members of the House, the UDM wishes
to associate itself with the statement of the hon the Minister. The UDM
further supports the concept of a state lottery and the advantages that it
can bring in improving the lives of South Africans.

As the Minister stated, the biggest beneficiaries of the state lottery will
be the poorest of the poor. With great anticipation and excitement,
potential beneficiaries are bracing themselves to reap the benefits.
Simultaneously, unscrupulous fraudsters are already plying their illegal
trade. Sinister attempts to tarnish the image of the national lottery must
be countered with the strongest possible action from the relevant law
enforcement agencies of the state.

Prophets of doom, corruption and criminals must not be allowed to undermine
the genuine objectives of this venture. The people are hoping and dreaming.
Let us not fail them and leave them in despair.

Ms C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, colleagues, as hon members know, the ACDP is
opposed to a national lottery as we believe gambling is destructive and
cannot contribute to building this nation.

Members know, and I know, that there is no such thing as a free lunch, so
why are we deceiving the youth of this nation? Dreams of a free ride or a
big win only encourage people to be slothful and neglect their
responsibilities, such as housing, feeding and clothing their families. It
is, after all, God who said that it is by the sweat of our brow that we
shall eat. If we defy Almighty God in this way, we will not - definitely
not - be a nation at work.

Warnings against uncontrolled appetite, lust and covetousness permeate both
the Old and the New Testaments of the Bible. Hon members and I both know
people who have been reduced to begging for food for their children after
having spent their entire salary on Lotto. The Government intends using
this money for so-called good causes, but what will Government do for
specific casualties of this evil? Will Government offer shelters?

The Minister says that there will be 500 000 winners per week, but we do
not have a figure for how many losers there will be. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Genl C L VILJOEN: Mevrou die Speaker, die doel heilig nie altyd die middele
nie. Die doel hiermee is goed. Ons het altyd geld nodig vir die armes en om
opheffingswerk te doen, maar dobbel - en dit is wat 'n lotery is - is 'n
verslawende praktyk.

Mense raak só vasgevang daarin dat hulle kos uit hul gesin se mond sal neem
om te kan dobbel. Dobbel moedig ook nie eerlike, harde werk aan om daardeur
geld te verdien om klein en medium-grootte ondernemings aan die gang te kry
nie. Derdens, dobbel moedig ook nie 'n spaarsin by ons mense aan nie.
Entrepreneurs genereer dus nie hul eie kapitaal om klein en medium-grootte
ondernemings te skep nie.

Die VF is van mening dat die besluit van die Regering in hierdie verband
nadelig is in 'n land soos Suid-Afrika waar morele en godsdienswaardes
heropgebou en 'n werksetiek ontwikkel moet word. [Applous.] (Translation of
Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Gen C L VILJOEN: Madam Speaker, the end does not always justify the means.
The intention with this is good. We always need money for the poor and to
do upliftment work, but gambling - and this is what a lottery is - is an
addictive practice.

People become so caught up in it that they will take the food out of the
mouths of their family to enable them to gamble. Gambling also does not
encourage honest, hard work in order to earn money to start up small and
medium-size businesses. Thirdly, gambling also does not encourage
thriftiness among our people. Entrepreneurs therefore do not generate their
own capital to create small and medium-size businesses.

The FF is of the opinion that the Government's decision in this regard is
disadvantageous to a country such as South Africa where moral and religious
values should be rebuilt and a work ethic should be developed. [Applause.]]

Dr R H DAVIES: Madam Speaker, the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry
had an opportunity last month to be briefed by and engage with the
chairperson and CEO of the National Lottery Board. Most of us, I believe,
were generally satisfied that the process of awarding the licence to
conduct the national lottery, as well as the design of the technical and
security aspects of the lottery, are of the highest standard.

What Mr Bruce in his input appears not to recognise is that the experience
of many countries is that national lotteries are a more effective and more
efficient means of raising money from the public for worthy causes than
small fundraising efforts by individual organisations, which are not, in
fact, prohibited by the Lotteries Act.

The Lotteries Act provides for a process of determining a fixed percentage
of the revenue raised that must be distributed to various charitable,
developmental, sports and cultural activities. We were informed by the
board that 50% of the funds raised will be allocated to prizes and that not
less than 30% will go to the National Lottery Distribution Trust Fund. The
Minister said that it is estimated that some R13 billion will be raised
over the next seven years for the trust fund.

Organisations and communities that are involved in developmental and
charitable activities will therefore have the scope for their operations
significantly enlarged and not contracted as a result of the introduction
of the lottery. It is also important that retailers and particularly SMMEs
will have the opportunity to have their incomes boosted by some R35 000 per
annum.

In response to the ACDP, I think it needs to be said that we discovered in
the committee that the board had in fact conducted a social impact study.
The tickets will cost only R2,50 and they were set at a price which is
considered not likely to have a serious impact on family incomes,
particularly of the poor.

We are aware of the intention to introduce and fast-track a Lotteries
Amendment Bill. The Lotteries Act precludes various categories of people
from participating in the process. The board and the department are of the
view that the section in the Act which provides for this is in fact
extremely wide and could be interpreted as excluding all Telkom employees
and others directly or indirectly involved in the provision of services to
Uthingo. The committee, I can say, will do all it can to facilitate the
expeditious consideration of that Bill if and when it is tabled and
referred to us. In the meantime it is my pleasure to wish the lottery well.
[Applause.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, Ministers, hon members, South Africa is
still developing. Our basic needs are greater than the available resources.
One of the resources that is most lacking is money, and therefore the
initiation of the national lottery must be used in its fullest capacity to
target the most vulnerable communities. The modus operandi of the national
lottery must be closely monitored by the Government to avoid exploitation
and to make sure that the profits are used to uplift society socially and
economically. [Applause.]

Mnr C AUCAMP: Mevrou die Speaker, die AEB erken die soewereiniteit van die
drie-enige God oor die hele terrein van die samelewing en nie net binne die
mure van die kerk nie. Ons onderneem om ons maatskaplike bestel in
gehoorsaamheid aan Sy Woord in te rig. Die AEB se ideaal vir Suid-Afrika is
nie dié van 'n sekulêre staat nie. Die praktyk van dobbelary en lotery
deurstaan nie die toets van die Woord nie.

Sake wat in die gedrang kom, is onder andere 'n gesonde werketiek, die
groeiende afhanklikheid van geluk en kans en die grootskaalse verarming aan
die verlieskant van die spel. Die argument dat geld vir 'n goeie doel
hierdeur gegenereer word, geld ook nie. Die beginsel van ``die doel heilig
die middele'' kan nie opgaan nie, anders kan ons net sowel 'n bordeel
oopmaak en die wins aan die armes gee. Die AEB is in die geheel gekant teen
die instelling van 'n lottery. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Mr C AUCAMP: Madam Speaker, the AEB acknowledges the sovereignty of the
Triune God over the entire spectrum of society, and not only within the
walls of the church. We undertake to order our social system in obedience
to His Word. The ideal of the AEB for South Africa is not that of a secular
state. The practice of gambling and lotteries does not withstand the test
of the Word.

Issues that are implicated are, inter alia, a sound work ethic, the growing
dependence on luck and chance and the large-scale impoverishment on the
losing side of the game. The argument that money will be generated for a
good cause, is not valid either. The principle of ``the end justifies the
means'' cannot be accepted, because then we might just as well open a
brothel and give the profits to the poor. The AEB is totally opposed to the
establishment of a lottery.]

In this regard I can tell this House that I am consistent. While I was a
minister in Thabazimbi, a member of the congregation asked me what I would
do if he won a million at Sun City and gave R100 000 as a tithe to the
Church. My answer was: ``No, that is the devil's money. Put it in the bank
and give me a cheque!'' [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

               HRC SUBPOENAS REGARDING ALLEGED RACISM IN MEDIA

                          (Subject for Discussion)

Mr M C J VAN SCHALKWYK: Madam Speaker, the fact that the HRC withdrew the
subpoenas issued - although not unconditionally - and the concession that
editors will no longer be cross-examined or required to defend specific
articles which appeared in their newspapers, is a recognition of fault by
the HRC. This was a positive development and was achieved only through
public pressure and debate.

Unfortunately, the price we had to pay was a dent in the credibility of the
HRC - a vital element in our constitutional framework - and damage to our
hard-earned international credibility. There are three dimensions to the
controversy that we had to observe over the past few weeks.

Firstly, the issue of subpoenas; secondly, the way in which the issue of
racism was approached; and thirdly, the fact that editors had to justify
content. Concerning the subpoenas, when the HRC was launched in 1996, its
chairman, Dr Barney Pityana, said the following, and I quote:


  The Commission has frightening and overwhelming powers at its disposal.

We have seen the operation of those frightening powers over the last few
weeks. The HRC's approach converted what should have been a collective
exercise against racism into a divisive and confrontational debate about
press freedom. The first black woman editor of a major newspaper in the
country, Lakela Kaunda, who is also the chairperson of the SA National
Editors' Forum, said that by invoking these powers, the HRC was guilty of -



  ... a flagrant violation of South Africa's newly-won democratic right of
  a free press. We did not expect anything so draconian.

Former commissioner, Rhoda Kadalie, has described the subpoenas as a gross
violation of freedom of expression and an attempt to prescribe to the press
what they should be thinking and writing.

A dissenting and surprising voice in support of the subpoenas was that of
the Public Protector, Adv Baqwa. It is highly inappropriate for him to rush
into such public disputes and take sides before he is asked to investigate
an issue. If, for some reason, the Public Protector is in future requested
to investigate any element of this process, he would now have compromised
himself. The merit of his argument is also without any basis. He said in a
very aggressive statement that the only aim of the subpoenas was to ensure
that the right people attended the HRC hearings.

It is clear that the Public Protector did not familiarise himself with the
content of the subpoenas. Some of them refer to prima facie violations, and
they list the specific allegations in ordinary language on the basis of the
facts as the HRC sees them. One is guilty of human rights violations unless
one can prove one's innocence. This is a far cry from simply an instruction
to attend a hearing or discussion, as the Public Protector argued. All this
after a very specific warning by the researcher who compiled the report on
which the allegations were based. In the preface of the report the
researcher said, and I quote:


  Drawing legal conclusions would be well beyond the scope of the research
  brief and my own professional competence. The analysis is clearly highly
  selective.

The second dimension is racism. Our country has a history of racism, and we
still have racism. I believe, however, that racism is no longer a
mainstream phenomenon in the white or black communities, but largely a
fringe phenomenon. The huge responsibility of dealing with this issue rests
on the shoulders of the leaders of this country. It is very easy and
clearly tempting to some to abuse this issue, and not solve it.

Some would rather exploit underlying feelings of race to score political
points. But when the issue of racism is raised, some people start to
shudder and try their utmost to avoid a debate. I say, let us have this
debate. A proper, open and thorough debate will achieve two results.
Firstly, it will unmask racist tendencies from black and white, or from
whichever quarter they may come. Secondly, it will expose the high priests
of political and emotional manipulation who hide their own racism with
intellectual sleight of hand, and who rely on intellectual blackmail and
intimidation as the tools of their trade.

I believe that there are still elements of white racism left in our
country. But I also believe that there is a new form of racism rearing its
ugly head, and that is an extremist form of black consciousness, which is
undermining the cornerstone of nonracialism on which our democracy is
built.

In the 1930s, 1940s and the 1950s, we observed the phenomenon of some
Afrikaner ideologues who whipped up white Afrikaner emotions by exploiting
the underlying feelings of nationalism and alienation, instead of
channelling the energy in a positive way. When I look at the way in which
the race card is sometimes so unashamedly played nowadays, I cannot help
remembering those Afrikaner ideologues with their quavering voices and
wagging fingers, who even misused the Bible as supporting evidence for an
extreme narrow nationalism. I also remember all those Afrikaners who kept
silent against their own better judgment because they were afraid of being
labelled as disloyal to the cause.

Mamphela Ramphele made a striking observation in this regard. She recently
warned that our young democracy was threatened by a culture of silence. She
noted:


  Blacks too often avoid criticising their Government for fear of being
  accused of disloyalty, while whites fear the unanswerable charge of
  racism.

I call on those in the ANC who are committed to eradicating all forms of
racism, and who are committed to nonracialism as the cornerstone of our
democracy, to stand up and be counted. It is at moments like these that it
requires guts and conviction to stand up and be counted.

The third dimension is the threat to press freedom manifested in the demand
that editors be required to justify content and to defend specific
articles. The letter to the Human Rights Commission by, inter alia, Cyril
Ramaphosa of Times Media Limited and other leaders of the media, made this
point in a very convincing way. Lakela Kaunda echoed this when she said:


  The problem is that if you have to justify content to Barney Pityana,
  tomorrow you have to justify it to the newspaper owner. It sets a
  precedent. And that is where the threat to editorial independence comes
  in.

There is clearly something wrong at the Human Rights Commission. There have
been resignations - from Helen Suzman, Rhoda Kadalie, Max Coleman, Anne
Routier, Chris de Jager, and only last week, Sheena Duncan. The reasons
given by these people when they resigned are disturbing. Instead of the
Human Rights Commission being a unifying force, and commanding respect in
the fight against racism, its own actions risk becoming a polarising force,
and it is even referred to by people like Rhoda Kadalie as the new thought
police.

There are still men and women of integrity left in the Human Rights
Commission, and we would like to call on them to rescue the HRC from its
own irresponsible inclinations. Being accused of human rights violations is
serious. In such circumstances, the least one can expect is a complaint of
a specific incident so that it can be investigated and a clear, specific
conclusion can be drawn. A broadbrush approach does not meet this
requirement.

It is therefore understandable that fears were expressed that the Human
Rights Commission's approach was emulating a new form of McCarthyism. While
McCarthy was looking for a communist behind every bush, and created
communists out of noncommunists, the HRC's approach was to look for a
racist behind every bush, and to create racists out of nonracists.

In conclusion, independence of the watchdog bodies does not mean that they
are above criticism. It does not mean that they are a law unto themselves
and that they can, in pursuit of their objectives, undermine the very
freedoms that they are responsible for protecting. The Human Rights
Commission's climb-down yesterday is a victory for public opinion and for
open public debate. The HRC's real test still lies ahead.

Mr A C NEL: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: In his speech, Mr Van
Schalkwyk made a statement that there are still men and women with
integrity left in the HRC. Is he implying that there are certain members of
the HRC who are without integrity? If that is the case, I think it is
unparliamentary and in contravention of Rule 66, and he should withdraw it.
[Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, it is a general statement. I do not think
it is an attack on any individual member. [Interjections.]

Dr Z P JORDAN: Madam Speaker, I have, on other occasions, remarked about
the wonders of our democratic Parliament, and the cross fertilisation that
takes place in this debating Chamber. I am very pleased to hear the remarks
of the hon Marthinus van Schalkwyk, and am also very pleased to note that
the NP is now a defender of press freedom. [Interjections.]

However, on 17 August 1982, I had a very narrow escape from death as a
consequence of a bomb addressed to Dr Ruth First which exploded, killing
her and injuring Dr Aquino de Braganza, Dr Bridgette O'Laughlin and me.
That bomb was sent to Dr Ruth First by one Craig Williamson, a notorious
officer of the then NP government's security services.

One year earlier, assassins in the hire of the same NP government had
murdered Joe Gqabi in the driveway of his residence in Zimbabwe. Both Ruth
First and Joe Gqabi were journalists by profession. They had both worked
for the same group of newspapers, which ended up being called New Age,
based in Johannesburg. Both of them had been very mercilessly persecuted
for a number of years for their work as journalists and were in the
forefront of the battle for freedom and for freedom of the media
specifically, in our country.

That persecution culminated in imprisonment. At the time of his murder, Joe
Gqabi had just recently been released from a 12-year prison term on Robben
Island. Ruth First herself had been held for a total of 114 days without
trial in 1963 to 1964. That is how the NP treated democratic journalists
and those who stood up to their brutal, oppressive regime.

To add insult to the injury inflicted on Ruth First's family by Craig
Williamson and his murderous cronies, one of our Johannesburg newspapers
had the temerity to publish the scandalous slander that that murder had
actually been orchestrated and plotted by her late husband, Joe Slovo. That
is the sort of reprehensible track record that the South African press
still has to live down.
This past Sunday, another newspaper reported that in their treatment of
African immigrants of this country, our newspapers tend to treat them as if
they are criminals, refer to them as a problem, refer to them as a source
of friction, refer to them as a source of crime, and this, specifically,
only about African immigrants. I would like to know what the House calls
that. This is not said about Bulgarian immigrants, it is not said about
Chinese immigrants, it is not said about Russian immigrants, it is not said
about immigrants from other parts of the world, but from Africa. What does
the House call that?

An HON MEMBER: Read all the papers.

Dr Z P JORDAN: The issue is not freedom of the press. The issue is the
terms of our Constitution and the powers and obligations of the Human
Rights Commission ... [Interjections.] ... and those obligations and powers
are set out in Chapter 9 of the Constitution. And if my memory serves me
well, all the hecklers to my left here voted for those clauses in the
Constitution. That Constitution states that, amongst other things, and I
quote:


  No person or organ of state may interfere with the functioning of these
  institutions.

I am, consequently, one of those people who were rather disturbed that the
House even entertained this debate today. But in deference to the
procedures and Rules of the House, we are going to continue this debate.

Our Constitution imposes a number of obligations on the HRC and the
elimination of racism is at the heart of the tasks of the Human Rights
Commission, because racism has been the scourge that has denied the
majority of South Africans their human rights. I would make so bold as to
say that the Human Rights Commission would have been remiss in its
constitutional obligations had it not striven to eliminate racism from our
society.

An HON MEMBER: That is not the point!

Dr Z P JORDAN: No institution, nobody, no organisation, no publication, can
claim exemption from this. Everyone knows that the HRC, like the Office of
the Auditor-General, the Public Protector, the Commission on Gender
Equality and the IEC, are not creatures of the Government. All these bodies
have repeatedly demonstrated their independence from the Government by
summoning even Ministers to appear before them. Any attempt to construe the
actions of the Human Rights Commission as somehow mischievous, somehow a
threat to press freedom, is rather laughable.

What the hon Marthinus van Schalkwyk is trying to create is a hierarchy of
rights and obligations. I am not aware that our Constitution recognises
such a hierarchy, and he seems to suggest that, in that hierarchy of rights
and obligations, the right to freedom of expression should be elevated,
amongst others. I do not think that is tenable.

There are, of course, democratic jurisdictions in the world that recognise
such a hierarchy. The constitution of the Federal Republic of Germany, for
example, explicitly outlaws the advocacy of national socialism and by so
doing, in fact, de-emphasises the right to freedom of expression because it
considers the elimination of Nazism as a higher priority than the freedom
of expression in its society. [Applause.]

Our society and our Constitution is not like that. Our Constitution says
all the rights are the same, and the Human Rights Commission has the
obligation to protect and to propagate all those rights. Indeed, if the
actions of the Human Rights Commission pose a clear and direct threat to
freedom of expression, I would suggest that those who think so take the
matter to the Constitutional Court where their claims can be tested - and
it is, indeed, their right to do so.

I want us to debate the matter, but I want to plead - please, let us be
spared the hyperbole and the humbug that our media had recourse to in the
past few weeks, and also spare us the mischievous innuendos about the Human
Rights Commission and its members. [Applause.]

Ms M SMUTS: Madam Speaker, I have been watching the fulminations of the New
NP over the racism inquiry with some wry amusement over the past few weeks
because they really started it all. [Interjections.] And no, I do not mean
they started it in 1948, although Heaven knows they did, nor do I mean in
1982 or any other examples. I mean in 1997 when they asked the Human Rights
Commission to censor all political speech. Yes, they did.

No sooner had we driven that hard section 16 compromise on hate speech in
the final Constitution - largely the hon the Minister of Education, who is
not here, and I - than the New NP threw itself upon the HRC complaining
that certain gory statements by the hon Peter Mokaba and others, including
the hon Ronnie Kasrils, about Mr F W de Klerk were hate speech and also
infringed upon his dignity and that of all persons who had served in his
Cabinet. Apart from deciding the complaints, the New NP wanted the HRC -
the same one, believe it or not - to lay down guidelines for the utterances
of public figures.

I respectfully endeavoured then, as I have again been trying to do over the
past few weeks through correspondence with the HRC, to dissuade that august
body from intervening in free speech issues and the public discourse which
is foundational to democracy. How will the HRC avoid playing censor? That
was my question to them in 1997 and it is the question now.

Quite obviously, Mr De Klerk should have sued for defamation in the courts.
That is how one deals with dignity in the context of the press; it is an
old common law device. In fact, I thought the HRC was infringing on Mr
Mokaba's free speech rights in 1997. Does this House know what they did?
They subpoenaed him for a copy of the relevant speech! Yes, they did so
under the same section 9 of their Act. The HRC dealt with my complaint on
this particular point really quite rudely in their judgment, called a
``report''.

Do hon members think that the HRC should be able to subpoena them to
produce copies of their speeches? No, nooit [never]! If not, how can it be
acceptable for them to demand papers and explanations from editors? It is
not acceptable. It is an infringement of their rights! [Interjections.]

Mr Mokaba is, of course, the chief proponent of the classic illustration of
section 16(2) hate speech. I am not joining argument with you here, but his
old chant is the classic illustration. ``Kill the farmer, kill the Boer!''
is precisely the ``advocacy of hatred'' which ``constitutes incitement to
cause harm'', which our Constitution discourages. [Interjections.]

Now, this not what Mr Mokaba said in the NP case, and in the event - this
is where it gets too interesting - the HRC delivered a report ruling
against the complaint and citing many of the classic foreign and the fresh
South African free speech judgments. As for guidelines, the HRC, very
sensibly, declined to issue them, favouring instead, ``open and robust
debate'' and not wishing to perform ``an invidious invasion of free speech
and political rights''. What does the hon Pallo Jordan say now?

In fact, approving statements from their ruling, such as the following, are
entirely incompatible with the current inquiry into the media. I quote
paragraph 24, a judgment everyone knows:


  In Mandela v Falati, the court found that there is consensus about the
  primacy of freedom of speech, which is the freedom upon which all other
  freedoms depend and without which they could no longer endure.

So, why is the HRC inquiring into the media? Regrettably, the chairperson
declared the media guilty of racism before the inquiry started. This is a
fact, and therein, presumably, must lie an answer, an ominous one.

These excursions into a kind of parallel jurisprudence conducted in a
legislative vacuum should have been nipped in the bud in 1997. That is what
I asked them to do. I asked them not to entertain the complaint. But the
HRC today is still, as it was then, bent on balancing rights, which is a
judicial function. I want to tell Pallo that they are still debating the
ranking of rights. Does he know how? By using the limitations clause. That
is how they rank rights.

However, rights can be limited only by law of general application, and that
is by everyone here - us - and only the courts or duly constituted
tribunals can adjudicate. If we really want them to hear complaints we
should provide for the creation of proper tribunals under the Human Rights
Commission Act. [Interjections.]

There is no guarantee that free speech will be given primacy over dignity
in a complaint brought by the Black Lawyers  Association. The Nats'
complaint should not have been heard and this one should not have been
heard. Media freedom is explicitly protected in our Constitution and that
is quite unusual. [Interjections.] Why? Because we have a long and dreadful
history of the suppression of that freedom. That is why it is protected.

We have passed no law here in this House limiting publication of
discriminatory drafted by the HRC, and then we ensured that their
prohibition were qualified so that public interest discussion would be
excepted and safeguarded.

Race and politics will always intersect in this country. One cannot stifle
comment or reportage on the way we are and on what we say. One cannot do
that without interfering at source with the debate that must determine our
democratic choices. We cannot interfere and the Human Rights Commission
ought not to interfere. We are greatly relieved that an agreement is being
reached between the editors and the commission. We congratulate them all.

Much can unravel, much can go wrong. All of us who slaved through the
Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Bill know
what it takes and how trying it can be. However, we wish them luck. We do
not think that this should have happened at all, but we hope it works out
well. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Rev K M ZONDI: Madam Speaker, hon members, the media coverage of the Human
Rights Commission's inquiry has, in recent days, become entirely self-
obsessive. The grievance of the media over the issue of subpoenas has
dominated the headlines, whilst the grievances of those affected by racism
have gone unheard. [Applause.] In the past week, my party expressed its
concern about the method that the HRC had chosen to adopt in its important
inquiry into racism in the South African media. We expressed the view that
it would have been better for the HRC to have issued invitations to the
media, rather than subpoenas.

However, it is time that we refocus this debate. It is time that we
acknowledge that the central issue is not the procedures adopted by the
HRC, but that it is the scourge of racism which still afflicts our country.
[Applause.] I should make clear the point that, whatever the IFP's
procedural concerns were, we in the IFP are in full support of the HRC
probe into racism in the media. [Applause.] We offer this support, because
we who have just escaped from the affliction of apartheid which
infiltrated almost every institution in South Africa are under no illusions
about the legacy of racism that still pervades our society and which must
be tackled.

We cannot and do not pretend that there are any short cuts or easy roads to
rid our society of racism. In honesty, we must state that, before we can
get to the truly nonracial society that we desire, certain sections of
society will have to swallow an uncomfortable and unpalatable medicine.

Mr G B D McINTOSH: [Inaudible.]

Rev K M ZONDI: That medicine will also have to be swallowed by the press if
South Africa is ever to recover from the pain.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Mr Chairman, I have a point of order. I
object to Mr McIntosh saying that the speaker is a tribalist. I think, in
fact, that that is evidence of this racism that we are talking about.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: May I ask that he withdraw that word? It has
connotations of racism. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Order!

Mr G B D McINTOSH: Mr Chairman, the hon the Minister of Home Affairs should
listen to the interjections. What I said, and unfortunately you were
changing seats, and maybe you were not able to listen ... [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Order, hon member!

Mr G B D McINTOSH: Mr Chairman, who is in charge of the House? These
members or yourself? [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Order, hon members! Can you please
reply to the point of order, Mr McIntosh?

Mr G B D McINTOSH: Mr Chairman, what I pointed out to the hon member Zondi
was that there is tribalism to be attended to in South Africa, as well as
racism. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, I was not in the Chair
when you said those words. Can I inform the hon member, the Minister of
Home Affairs, that we will check the Hansard and that we will rule at a
later stage. [Interjections.] Order! Order! Continue, hon member.

Rev K M ZONDI: Thank you, Chairperson. I was saying that it is an
undeniable truth that even now, reporting, in both the electronic and print
media, continues to be couched in terms which demonstrate racial prejudice.
It is equally undeniable that the people who were at the receiving end, and
even now continue to be at the receiving end of such reporting, are black
communities and organisations operating in and serving those communities.
Those South Africans continue to be insulted by the attitudes that certain
elements of the media have towards their communities.

Look at the way African royalty, for example, continues to be reported by
the press in a dismissive and derisory manner. Quite often references in
the media to, for example, the Zulu king and the kings of Lesotho and
Swaziland, leave one with an impression that in the minds of some
journalists African kings and queens are not quite proper royalty. When
referring to, for example, European royalty, journalists dutifully use all
titles, honours and etiquette which are applicable, while they often appear
oblivious of this practice when referring to our own royalty.

The numerous indignities that institutions derived from African culture
continue to suffer in the hands of racially prejudiced elements of the
media, are a matter of fact which must be investigated. We also know that
there is ample evidence that many journalists working in the media have
found life very hard. When they attempted to counter racist attitudes to
ensure that the media organisations they work for became more reflective of
society, they met with immense difficulties. That is not an acceptable
situation.

While we understand and accept the need for vigilance over press freedom,
the media must equally understand the need for vigilance over their own
reporting - the need to guard against insulting and inaccurate coverage
which damages race relations in this country. Since this country has
changed and is continuing to change, the mass media must change with it
too. They must join the process of transformation and adjust the way they
go about their business. And it is not just over racism that the media need
to take a long hard look at themselves. They must equally reconsider the
bias that they have allowed to enter and pervade coverage in this country.

My party has been on the receiving end of such bias and deliberate
distortions for year after year. We are not asking the media's coverage on
the IFP to be laudatory. All that we are simply proposing is that they
should strive for accuracy and balance in their reporting, and make some
attempts at reflecting this. [Applause.]

Mr J P CRONIN: Chairperson, back in mid 1976 - and without the benefit of a
subpoena - I was grabbed by a dozen security policemen and handed over to
the tender mercies of Warrant Officer Spyker van Wyk and his torture
chamber round the corner here in Cape Town.

Some months later I was charged - along with two others - in the Cape
Supreme Court with the writing, production and/or distribution of 17 ANC
and SACP newsletters. For these 17 acts of journalism - that is not how the
court described them, but that is what they were - the state prosecutor
called for the death penalty.

The DP's predecessor - I think it was called the PFP at that time -
demanded tough measures against me and my co-accused journalists.
[Interjections.] I was lucky! The judge sentenced me to seven years for
journalism.

The first letter that I received in Pretoria Maximum Security Prison was
not from my wife or from my family. It was from that liberal institution
the University of Cape Town, informing me that I had been dismissed from my
job as a lecturer, because I had brought the name of the university into
disrepute. [Interjections.]

I recall all of this now, not because I am sorry for myself. I am not. In
fact, as I say, I am one of the lucky ones. A few years before my arrest,
Ahmed Timol, who had been doing exactly the same kind of journalistic work,
was murdered in police custody. Before Timol and over the years,
progressive newspapers and journals had been systematically persecuted and
banned - The Guardian, New Age, Spark and many more. Printing presses were
seized and generations of outstanding journalists - Edwin Mofutsanyana,
Ruth First, Govan Mbeki and many others - were banned, listed, detained,
forced into exile and imprisoned.

An HON MEMBER: And we do not want it to happen again!

Mr J P CRONIN: Absolutely, we do not want it to happen again. What the HRC
has done - and we can have a debate about the merits and the wisdom of the
particular approach that it has pursued - is perfectly in line with the
Constitution, perfectly in line with its legal rights. It has issued
subpoenas, not for people to appear before Spyker van Wyk, not to come to a
criminal hearing, but simply to come to a process of discussing the
question of persisting racism in the media. That is absolutely important.
[Applause.]

There has been huge amounts of hyperbole and humbug, as the hon Jordan has
just said. I do not want to be cynical now. The more voices that begin to
speak up for press freedom the better. It is good. But, of course, it is
hard not to be a little curious about some of our more zealous, new-found
enthusiasts for press freedom. [Applause.]

For our part in the ANC and the broader liberation movement, we are
extremely proud of the role that we have played in the struggle for the
freedom of expression and for the freedom of the press in our country. We
are proud of the new Constitution that enshrines freedom of expression, and
we, as the ANC, are not about to throw all of that away now.
[Interjections.] Good, I am pleased to hear that I am not alone. I was
alone a long time ago and the hon member's party was not very supportive.
But, of course, rights come with responsibilities. The exercise of one
right cannot undermine other important rights.

Racism in the media, and everywhere else, needs to be exposed and rooted
out. In the ANC, we promise to be relentless in the pursuit of this
strategic objective. The rights enshrined in our Constitution have to be
fostered and defended in the context of the actual South Africa in which we
live. Debates about freedom of expression abstracted from the realities of
mass poverty, gross inequality and unemployment can easily, perhaps
unwittingly, become the ritualised sparring of elite groups staking out
turf and testing one another to see who will blink first.

I want to disagree with the hon Van Schalkwyk when he says that racism in
our society is just a marginal reality. I agree that often overt racism
might well be confined to Eugéne Terre'Blanche and so forth. But when one
disconnects the issues of racism from the historical legacy of apartheid,
from poverty, from unemployment and from huge inequality, and when one
simply has these abstract debates, as we have had in the past week or two,
abstracted from these realities, then they easily become another form of
racism - a kind of colour-blind racism which, in fact, does not do service
to the kind of society that we are trying to build.

Let me take one example. Last Friday the Mail & Guardian devoted, as we all
know, substantial space to the debate around the HRC and the subpoenas. The
front page is dominated by a cartoon, with the HRC chairperson presented as
an inquisition- era torturer. Half of page six is devoted to the HRC. There
is an excellent article by John Matshikiza on this issue. On the same page
Krisjan Lemmer takes a pot shot or two at the same topic. Page 10 is
entirely devoted to the matter - ``Pityana prejudged the media'', etc. The
cartoon on top of the op-ed page repeats the inquisition image. The whole
of page 31 is devoted to the topic. Page 32, page 33 - ditto.
[Interjections.] I am coming to the point.

On page 34 there is an interesting article by Farid Esack on how the Gender
Commission handles gender prejudice and bias with the media. There is an
article by David Beresford, a very weak one which tries to be humorous, and
it is entitled: Barney subpoenas God. The title probably says more than it
intended to about just who some in the media think that they are.
[Laughter.] Two-thirds of page 35 is again devoted to a thoughtful article
by Steven Friedman on the issue. Many of these articles are thoughtful and
some are trying to make a constructive contribution to the debate. Others
are less so, but that is not my point.

On Thursday evening, as this issue of Mail & Guardian went to press, large
parts of our country and the Southern African region were being ravaged by
the worst floods in 50 years. Scores of people had already drowned at that
time. Tens of thousands of people, mostly poor, mostly rural, had lost all
of their belongings. How did the Mail & Guardian reflect on this vast human
tragedy? [Applause.] With a tiny paragraph that was about 2 cm long
reflecting, amongst a list, other events that had happened that week.

Now, I am not suggesting that the Mail & Guardian should get another
subpoena - maybe it should? - to explain what is inexplicable - this huge
blindness which is another form of racism, if I can say so. It is to
completely negate the victims of racial oppression. [Applause.]

As the ANC - and we are addressing ourselves to the HRC as well, to
journalists and editors and to all the rest of us - as we debate the
question of racism and the media, as we must, let us all do so with a sense
of the history that is just behind us - let us not forget that history -
and also the realities in front of us. [Time expired.]

Mr M E MABETA: Mr Chairperson, over the past 10 years, we have taken
remarkable strides towards transforming our country from one under an
inhumane system that debased our humanity and denied our dreams to a modern
democratic state that has taken its rightful place as an esteemed member of
the community of nations.

We now boast a fully legitimate and current democratic Constitution that
commands us to maintain a nonsexist, nonracist and, generally,
nondiscriminatory society. To safeguard our newfound freedom and status,
the Constitution also has established a number of watchdog institutions to
ensure that these rights and values are maintained and, where necessary,
enforced.

It is essential for these institutions themselves not to act in any way
that might derogate from their status as the conscience of the nation in
their respective areas. They are too important in upholding the values that
form the very essence of our Constitution to allow especially their moral
authority to become tainted in any way. The Human Rights Commission is one
of the most important of these institutions. It is therefore unfortunate
that it has now acted in such a counterproductive manner in its approach to
the discussion of the issue of racism in our country. [Interjections.]

The crux of this controversy is that the hearings for which the editors
have been subpoenaed are a direct result of a report which has universally
been discredited as faulty, subjective and misguided. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

Mr M E MABETA: Mr Chairperson, the author of that report has conceded that
drawing legal conclusions would be well beyond the scope of the research.
This, in our view, has distracted us from the analysis of an important and
a serious problem that confronts and threatens to undermine our democracy.
It is not clear to us why, if the HRC considered that it was correct in its
approach to this problem, it has decided to withdraw the subpoenas.
Racism is engraved in the fabric of our society. It touches a raw nerve in
the psyche of the nation. We must be careful not to overreact and lose
perspective in dealing with situations in which we detect it. The HRC is an
important watchdog of human rights. We must protect it from the danger of
being drawn into the fray of racial antagonisms by reports of the nature
that have inspired the suggested hearing.

If we argue that the process does not matter and that what is important is
the subject of the hearings, we run the risk of getting muddled up in our
unpacking of the problem of racism, which touches all of us - white and
black - in many ways and in all aspects of our lives. [Time expired.]

Adv Z L MADASA: Mr Chairman, I support the Dr Pityana and the Human Rights
Commission for the noble task they have undertaken of investigating
allegations of racism in the media. The ACDP appreciates Dr Pityana's
honesty in acknowledging the procedural errors committed by the HRC
concerning the issue of subpoenas. We believe that the media is not above
the law. The cacophonic noise that is made when a powerful institution like
the media is called upon to account is discomforting.
We have gained a worrying impression that some sections of the media want
to enjoy the same rights as everybody else, but without responsibility.
These sections of the media have attempted, in recent newspaper reports, to
trivialise racist complaints by falsely suggesting that any reference to
black-white relationships could be labeled as racism and warrant
investigation by the HRC.

Nothing could be further from the truth. The speed with which some sections
of the media have run to the President of South Africa and to everyone
else, including this Parliament, is probably sufficient evidence that there
is no smoke without fire. We concur with President Mbeki when he told the
Association of Newspapers in his letter that unless the HRC's actions are
ultra vires in terms of their mandate, there is nothing wrong with their
enquiries. The hon the President said that the media must approach the
ordinary courts like everybody else if they have a genuine complaint
against the HRC.

Lastly, the ACDP would like to urge Dr Pityana not only to continue with
his investigations, but also to look at the bias and prejudice of the media
when it reports about speeches of political parties in Parliament and
elsewhere, in the light of the equality laws. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mr P W A MULDER: Mr Chairman ... [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, order!
Please continue, hon member.

Dr P W A MULDER: Mr Chairman, the question is: Exactly what are we
debating?

This is not a debate, as far as I am concerned, about whether the Human
Rights Commission may conduct an enquiry into racism, prisons, torture or
whatever. This is a debate about the way in which the HRC used its powers,
specifically its power to subpoena. What makes the issue more serious is
the involvement of the media. [Interjections.]

Waarom is dit belangrik?

Demokrasie en menseregte het towerwoorde in die internasionale wêreld
geword. Daarom is daar druk op baie lande, veral in Asië en Afrika, om
menseregte te eerbiedig en nader aan 'n demokrasie te beweeg.

Die internasionale wêreld beoordeel 'n land op grond van sy benadering tot
menseregte, demokrasie en vryheid van spraak. Die wêreld het ons buurman,
Zimbabwe, wat op papier 'n demokrasie is, reeds uitgevang vanweë sy houding
jeens sy media en weens die feit dat sy media geen vryheid het nie. Omdat
die uitsaaiowerheid - en die meeste van die koerante - in Zimbabwe deur die
staat beheer word, hang daar vraagtekens oor Zimbabwe se mediavryheid en
daarom sê ek die wêreld het hom uitgevang.

Suid-Afrika het nog nie daardie beeld in die wêreld nie, maar ons moet
hiperversigtig wees om nie dié illusie na buite te skep nie. As die
Menseregtekommissie alle media by voorbaat oor die loop van 'n haelgeweer
dagvaar, stuur hy dieselfde boodskap uit as wat Zimbabwe reeds gedoen het:
``Reg of weg''.

As die kommissie die dagvaardings verder voer met spesifieke klagtes, kan
agb lede maar net na die reaksie van die buiteland kyk. Agb lede kan gerus
die artikel in die New York Times lees oor hoe hy die saak verstaan,
interpreteer en watter gevolgtrekking hy uitstuur, ongeag die argumente wat
agb lede hier gebruik.

Die verstandige wyse om hierdie probleem aan te pak sou wees om die media
se samewerking te kry en hulle na forums uit te nooi. Ek is oortuig die
meerderheid sou saamwerk. Indien daar egter probleme sou wees en sekere
sektore van die media sou weier om saam te werk, sou 'n mens jou troewe
begin gebruik en na ander maniere kyk waarop dié probleem opgelos kan word.


Wat die saak vererger, is die Browde-verslag en die mediamonitorprojek
waarop baie van die aannames gegrond is. As oud-professor in
Kommunikasiekunde wil ek wil vir agb lede sê die werkwyse in hierdie
verslae is onwetenskaplik en die verslae is swak. [Tussenwerpsels.] [Tyd
verstreke.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Why is that important?

Democracy and human rights have become catchwords in the international
community. That is why there is pressure on many countries, especially in
Asia and Africa, to respect human rights and to move closer to a democracy.

The international community judges a country on its approach to human
rights, democracy and freedom of speech. The world has already caught out
our neighbour, Zimbabwe, which is a democracy on paper, because of its
approach to its media and because its media have no freedom. Because the
broadcasting authority - and most of the newspapers - in Zimbabwe are state
controlled by the state, there are doubt about the freedom of its media in
Zimbabwe and that is why I say that the world has caught it out.

South Africa does not yet have that image in the world, but we must be
ultra careful not to create that illusion in the outside world. If the
Human Rights Commission subpoenas all the media beforehand over the barrel
of a shotgun, it is sending out the same message that Zimbabwe has already
sent out: ``Do this, or get out''.

If the commission is going to follow up the subpoenas with specific
charges, hon members would do well to watch the reaction from abroad. Hon
members are welcome to read the article in the New York Times on how it
views and interprets this issue and what conclusion it has reached,
regardless of the arguments that are advanced here by hon members.
The sensible way of tackling this problem would be to get the co-operation
of the media and to invite them to forums. I am convinced that the majority
would co-operate. If there were, however, problems and certain sectors of
the media were to refuse to co-operate, one could start playing one's trump
cards and examine other ways of solving this problem.

What is exacerbating the matter, is the Browde report and the media
monitoring project on which many of the assumptions are based. As a former
professor in Communications I want to tell hon members that the procedure
used in these reports is unscientific and the reports are poor.
[Interjections.] [Time expired.]

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Chairperson, I think the issue here is not the
issue of subpoenas, because they have been withdrawn. The subpoenas were
not the issue in the first place. The issue that we have to debate is
racism. [Interjections.]

The hon member Dene Smuts referred to the fact, or she implied in her
statement, that the Human Rights Commission is trying to stifle freedom of
expression. I do not think that they have the power to do that. They will
never have that kind of power. I do however, think what the Human Rights
Commission is trying to do is to try and make sure that if there is racism
in the country, and people continue to practise it, it has to be debated
and effectively stopped.

I think that is the issue that we are debating. I did not hear the hon
member refer to those issues, but I heard her just talking about other
issues. I do not know what the hon member's intention is, because I think
we are confronted here with an issue. The issue here is that we are in a
society that has to transform. We come from a background where the country
was at war with itself. There was conflict among the different groups in
the country, solely because of the issue of racism. I think we have to take
this debate very seriously.

Since the advent of democratic governance we have seen the media corps
transfixed like a rabbit in the glare of bright lights. While developmental
strides were taken by ordinary people in the various communities, the media
failed to locate their niche in the unfolding democracy. Part of the
problems standing in our way are the issues of racism, sexism, lack of
command of the diversity of languages and racial and gender representivity
at all levels, in the newsroom and in the management echelons.

Over the last five years we have have seen the dearth of investigative
journalism, the ferreting, the unearthing and flagging of critical issues
and telling the South African story as it unfolds. This has been notably
absent. The media is lagging behind and has not caught up with the
transformation that is breezing through the country. While in the past the
roles were sharply defined, the enemy is almost blurred and often rears the
double-headed monster in the form of racism and sexism.

That we have all come this far with this albatross weighing us down is
testimony to the magnanimity of our people. Being spectators rather than to
play a participatory role might be a comfort zone for some. Raymond Louw in
The Citizen of 25 February said: ``The Ombudsman has never had a complaint
about racism in the media.'' He further adds: ``Until the commission raised
the issue, racism was not regarded as the major problem in the media.''
[Interjections.]

The recent flurry of action around the Human Rights Commission's subpoenas
has confirmed to all that racism is alive and well in the media, and that
it needs serious critical analysis and debate. Seeking concessions and
determining the agenda of the proceedings is not only bizarre, but it
raises the question: What is the fourth estate hiding?

The newspapers of yesteryear, which were supposedly at the forefront of
fighting for democracy, are now asking for concessions and closing certain
aspects of their operations to public scrutiny, while on the other hand
proclaiming their abhorrence of things that are racial or racist. Is racism
not one of the malaises threatening our fledgling democracy? I think it is.

Most structures and other organs of civil society understood their roles
and responsibilities in the unfolding democracy. But sadly, the same cannot
be said about the media. We believe that racism has played a part on two
levels - the lack of restructuring in the newsroom to accommodate gender,
language proficiency and representivity; and, on the other level, the
content of reporting.

What stories go into print and who gets prominence is more often than not
explained away under the guise of objective reporting. The gatekeepers of
our news have denied the populace of women's issues written from a woman's
perspective. We have seen developmental stories, more often than not, being
sidelined, simply because good news does not sell copies in the street. We
have seen newspapers keeling over and dying because they are either too
black or not white enough for the advertising moguls.

Gabrielle le Roux, in the December issue of Rhodes Journalism Review,
confirms that there is a link between what is not regarded as newsworthy
and what is not regarded as political. She further adds that crimes against
women, particularly domestic violence, were not, until recently, recognised
as being political. Rather, they were generally cast as belonging to the
private domain.

At the seminar for women journalists organised by the Freedom Forum, which
is a US-linked NGO, women journalists told sad stories of male colleagues
ignoring them or poking fun at  stories on violence against women. This was
to ensure that similar stories do not see the light of day. Until women are
in total control in the media, we will always have such boorish and
unacceptable behaviour like the one we already have here. [Interjections.]
A support group of women who attended the seminar that has been mentioned
and whose aim was to rally women around and support representation of
women's issues in the media and other related aspects, really came up with
issues that were very shocking.

The other critical role facing the media is that of advocacy, informing and
getting people to act on the information, and entrenching democratic
governance. This has most unfortunately been missed in our copy. The
people's right to know has often been ignored. Where any form of reportage
was attempted, it was filled with value judgment and skewed towards
perpetuating racial or gender stereotypes. The issue of rape, for example,
and the sensitivities around the crime, have up until now been treated with
an overload of value judgement.

While the electronic media, specifically radio, has seen women taking the
lead and telling their stories, Moutse, a radio station managed and run by
women, is a case in point. More still needs to be done, otherwise we run
the risk of quietly being erased from the annals of history. Gabrielle le
Roux, quoting Naomi Wolfe, adds that news is the first draft of history. So
the logic follows that ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Chairperson, the UCDP is opposed to the manner in
which the Human Rights Commission sought to engage editors and to the
confusion and accusation of a witch-hunt coming mainly from some editors.
The media owners, rightfully so, are entitled to be consulted on broader
terms of reference,  so as to ensure that the process unfolds in the most
dignified manner, and that at the end of the inquiry real problems are
identified and appropriate steps taken.

The question which ordinary South Africans are asking is: What would have
been the most appropriate mechanism to request the 30 editors and
journalists to appear before the inquiry? The UCDP welcomes the withdrawal
of the subpoenas in favour of a conciliatory approach in addressing the
issues of racism in the media.

There is no doubt that the media wields considerable power and influence in
shaping public opinion about a range of issues, including racism, in our
society. It is an open secret that in the past, the media was used
effectively during the apartheid era to reinforce, amongst other things,
stereotypical depictions and attitudes against the discriminated.

Of course, it would still be unjustified to blame the media alone for
racism. It is also a dangerous presumption to paint a picture that racism
in the media is symmetrically planned, or to deny its existence in any
form. It is hoped that the commission and the editors will be able to find
each other on the issues of process by engaging each other constructively
during the initial phase of inquiry. [Time expired.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Chairman, racism is a cancer in our modern world. It
originates from superstitious concepts of unfounded racial supremacy.
Racism is an erroneous theory in terms of which human abilities are
determined by one's colour, shape of nose and texture of hair. This world
has already experienced, as a consequence of this erroneous and
unscientific theory, the degrading inhumanity of Aryanism, apartheid,
ethnic cleansing and genocide of a large section of humanity, such as the
so-called Red Indians in the USA and Canada, the Aborigines in Australia,
and the Khoisan people and others in this country.

That is why, from its inception, the Pan Africanist Congress of Azania
advocated the establishment of a nonracial society. The Human Rights
Commission has done well to summon the South African media in an effort to
eradicate the cancer of racism. [Interjections.] But this matter must be
dealt with from a broader perspective. Ever since Africa and her people
were underdeveloped through slavery and colonialism, the African view of
the world has been relegated to the dustbin of history. The idolatry of
Eurocentricity emerged and dominated every sphere of African life, and many
Africans themselves accepted this fictitious superiority over them.

Regarding simple daily life in this country, there is very little on SABC
TV that reflects that this country is in Africa. [Interjections.] The
reflection is that of Europe.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

Dr S E M PHEKO: The value of news in this country is determined by
eurocentric interests.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order, hon member!

Dr S E M PHEKO: For example, the death of a European personality is always
reported ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order, hon member! [Interjections.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: ... about more in our media than the death of an African
personality.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Order!

Dr S E M PHEKO: The death of the late Princess Diana received more
attention ...
The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order, hon member!

Dr S E M PHEKO: ... than the death of King Moshoeshoe II ...
[Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, your time has expired.

Dr S E M PHEKO: ... or that of King Dalindyebo. [Interjections.]
[Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! There is too much noise in the House.

Dr A I VAN NIEKERK: Chairperson, Edmund Burke, the 19th century English
political philosopher once said, ``all that is necessary for evil to
triumph is for good men to do nothing''. And, evil will triumph if the
media is subjected to a new form of censorship, either by the Government or
constitutionally controlled bodies such as the Human Rights Commission.
However, evil will also triumph if the media is allowed to abuse the
unalienable freedom of the press. Freedom of the press is very important
for limiting the concentration of political power and for keeping those
with political power in line.

The issue today is racism in the media. But, racism is prevalent in every
sphere of society, of which the media is but one aspect. The South African
society is currently subjected to new racism, and this is what is to be
addressed. White-on-black or black-on-white racism remains racism and can
never be tolerated. The Human Rights Commission, however, has done well to
change the focus of the proposed hearings from racism in the media to a
summit on racism in general. But, the media cannot escape responsibility.
Freedom of the press is an extremely important and powerful tool and the
abuse of this right cannot be tolerated. The media has a responsibility to
society in general, and the fact is that this responsibility is not always
met.

The FA suspects that the individual rights are sometimes negated or ignored
when newspapers can be sold and facts are ignored in favour of unconfirmed
sources to make headlines, which eventually sells more papers. The FA
proposes that the media take responsibility upon themselves by accepting
and applying a code of conduct for journalists and a code of practice for
newspapers in terms of which they can operate. This is a standard practice
all over the world and is a tool which sets ethical and professional
standards for the media. [Time expired.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, ideally editors of the media are blessed with
the duty to report the truth and not to twist the truth. It is a vicious
crime to negatively groom the public's way of thinking. The media must be
used as an instrument to promote, protect, respect, develop, monitor and
make reports on the observance of basic human rights.

If the media capitalises on issues such as hate speech and racism, then it
is the Human Rights Commission's duty to take steps to secure appropriate
redress where human rights have been violated. In order to achieve the
above, the Human Rights Commission must go beyond politics and apply the
correct administrative procedure of law so that justice triumphs beyond
reasonable doubt.

Serving a subpoena to editors or any other individual to appear before the
the Human Rights Commission is a legal mechanism used to access fair
information and facilitate proper investigations. The subpoena is a legal
tool used to enforce accountability and responsibility to ensure that if
any action conflicts with the basic human rights, that action must be
rectified and repetition must be avoided. [Applause.]

Mr C AUCAMP: Mr Chairman, the whole situation around the summons of the
Human Rights Commission to the editors serves as a mirror of an abnormal
society. But where does this abnormality lie? Is the South Africa of the
year 2000 really the racist capital of the world, as is the case with
crime, to the extent that measures had to be taken that damaged the image
of our country and have left the HRC red in the face?

Let someone like Mr Andy Young, a well-known human rights activist, give
members the answer. After a visit to South Africa, he said on the programme
Larry King Live, ``I am surprised to have experienced how the people in
South Africa are getting along with each other.''

Waarom dan hierdie beheptheid met rassisme? Waarom hierdie optrede wat
herinner aan 'n middeleeuse inkwisisie? Is dit nie dalk omdat hierdie
optrede geïnspireer word, nie deur 'n verhoudingsagenda nie, maar deur 'n
politieke agenda? Laat ek 'n paar punte noem.

Die kriminaliserende effek van die WVK op veral die blanke gemeenskap is
besig om te vervaag; nou moet die sondebok lewend gehou word, en daarvoor
kan die MRK gebruik word. 'n Verdere punt is dat die ANC besef dat met hom
gebeur wat wêreldwyd met regerende bevrydingsbewegings gebeur. In die geval
van Suid-Afrika is die wins wat behaal word deur op apartheid te teer, ook
as motivering vir omgekeerde rassediskriminasie, besig om op te raak. Die
Regering wil iets daarvan lewend hou deur rassisme op te blaas om sodoende
die momentum van 'n bevrydingsbeweging te behou.

Rassisme het alles te doen met verhoudings. Het die geagte lede van die MRK
dan die mees basiese van die dinamiek van menseverhoudings vergeet? Met
dwang en gedwonge sosiale manipulasie verbeter 'n mens nié verhoudings nie.
Inteendeel, met die optrede van die kommissie het gesonde rasseverhoudings
in Suid-Afrika eerder myle agteruit geboer. Laastens kan ek nie verstaan
hoe mense 50 jaar teen iets baklei en dit dan as voorbeeld kan voorhou nie.
[Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Why then this obsession with racism? Why this behaviour which reminds us
of the inquisition in the Middle Ages? Could it be because this behaviour
is not inspired by a relations agenda, but by a political agenda? Let me
mention a few points.

The criminalising effect of the TRC on the white community in particular is
fading; now the scapegoat has to be kept alive and to that end the HRC can
be utilised. A further point is that the ANC realises that it is
experiencing what ruling freedom movements worldwide have experienced. In
South Africa's case the advantages to be gained from harping on apartheid,
also as a motivation for reverse racial discrimination, are coming to an
end. The Government wants to keep this alive by placing exaggerated
emphasis on racism in order to retain the momentum of a liberation
movement.

Racism has everything to do with relationships. Have the hon members of the
HRC forgotten the most basic aspects of the dynamism of human relations?
One does not improve those relations by resorting to force and enforced
social manipulation. On the contrary, the commission's actions have rather
caused sound race relations in South Africa to deteriorate markedly.
Lastly, I cannot understand how people can fight against something for 50
years and then hold it up as an example. [Time expired.]]

Mr M A MANGENA: Chair, hon members, our society is still riddled with
racism and racist attitudes at both the overt and subliminal levels. The
media does not operate in a vacuum. On the contrary, it is part and parcel
of this society. It reflects the society but it also influences society in
a very powerful way. It reinforces racial stereotypes and racist attitudes.

For example, Aids is a disease of black people in this country. If one
wants a picture or an image of Aids, it is black. Whenever one runs a
story, the image that one shows is black, whereas we know that Aids is a
neutral disease; it is everybody's disease.

At accident scenes or other violent localities, dying or dead blacks are
often shown. Whites are seldom shown in these scenes. They are treated with
greater sensitivity, dignity and delicacy, because on the whole the media
in this country is owned, managed, controlled and run by white people. It
follows that it will reflect their interests, their values, their
perceptions, their opinions and their orientation. [Interjections.]

For example, reaction to the recent Budget, its soundness or otherwise, was
mainly or predominantly white. The media hearings by the HRC are not only
necessary, but they are essential to help sensitise and perhaps even
sanitise our society of racism in all its forms.

All of us who would like to see a better society emerging in our country
should support these hearings. The subpoenas are no longer an issue. They
have been withdrawn. Let us get on with the job and let nobody hide behind
the subpoenas any longer because until we attend to the fundamental
question of media ownership, we will not be able to resolve this matter
fundamentally. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr N N KEKANA: Mr Chair, the attack by the New NP leader on Chapter 9
institutions is not acceptable. The New NP and its cronies, the DP,
undermine the spirit of our Constitution. To Madam Smuts I say: Let us not
be academic and legalistic about racism in the media. Let us ask all
editors one question: Are they aware of racism in their newsrooms? If so,
can they be open and transparent about it and tell all? Can they print this
in their editorials? Is there racism in their newsrooms?

Ms M SMUTS: And their content? [Interjections.]

Mr N N KEKANA: Racism is alive in many newsrooms. Racial attitudes are
reflected in a lot of news coverage and current affairs programmes. As our
society goes through a process of democratisation, the mass media cannot be
left outside. Journalists and editors cannot be onlookers of change. They
need to participate and contribute to the building of a long-lasting
democratic culture in our country.

Editors and scribes must bring respectability to their profession through
unbiased and quality reporting. Editorial tantrums and momentary responses
might draw the loudest applause from the press galleries around the world,
but will not build a democratic press in our country.

On 14 January, under the heading ``I thought attack was a joke'', the
Sowetan reported that a bus driver, Crain Nyembe and two unidentified
females died when a white man attacked their bus in the Pretoria suburb of
Constantine Park. The Citizen continued the reporting by quoting the hon
Gen Constand Viljoen of the FF saying:
   
  It is terror, but there must be a reason for this type of terror, the
  Government is going to have to address the cause of it.

Die Burger had the headlines ``Regse nie betrokke by skietery, sê kenners''
- Rightwinger not involved in shooting, says expert. Prominence was
subsequently given to reports on complaints lodged by some racists on
whether the media should have stated the racial identity of the perpetrator
and the victims. Very little was reported about the victims, the plight of
their families and the human suffering caused by this killing. Are these
unworthy victims? Are the shocks and stresses caused by this barbaric act
not newsworthy?

Compare this reporting to the tragic and senseless Tempe killing of last
year. The media covered the killings extensively, who the victims were and
who their families were. Why the double standards? Is it because the lives
of the victims of the racial attack in Pretoria are cheap? Is it because
the lives of the Tempe victims are worthy?

There is certainly a difference in the coverage of victims of crime in the
South African media. Race and gender appear to determine what is newsworthy
in many newsrooms. We do not believe that the death of a farmer or a
soldier or a township dweller or a rural woman is less shocking or
stressful than any other death.

Many of our journalists and editors should take the current debate on
racism seriously. Trivialising the attempt of the HRC to understand racism
in the media is irresponsible and adventurous. The debate on media and
democracy is always tense. If one adds racism, we have warfare on our
hands. The stale and musty attitudes of the New NP and the DP on this
important debate will not provide any guidance in this complex relationship
between the press and democratic institutions.

Racism in the newsroom does exist and will continue to be reflected in
media products, unless it is extracted in its embryonic form and nipped in
the bud. Many newsrooms are commercial centres of the media owners. What
matters to media owners are the AMPS, not transformation. This has led to a
commercially driven newsroom that pays little attention to issues such as
racism, the state and working conditions of journalists.

Many experienced journalists are being spawned into newsroom managers.
Experienced journalists are removed from their stories and doing their
beat, and this contributes to a poor coverage of news. Experienced
correspondents must be paid more and must continue to report, instead of
being promoted into oblivion. [Interjections.]

Are the owners of the newspapers giving enough support to the recently
promoted editors and editorial staff in their newsrooms? I do not think so.
There is not enough diversity in the newsrooms and the transformation of
many media groups is low. Not enough is contributed towards the training of
journalists and very little money is spent on supporting institutions that
add value to existing journalists or universities that offer journalism as
a course. The poor reporting that we experience because of old attitudes
and junior reporters must be addressed if we are going to have a free and
responsible press in our country.

Racism is unnatural. When children are born, they have no concept of race
and racial supremacy. It is their mothers and fathers and other adults who
spread this poisonous thought. We call on the media to help to eradicate
racism and not perpetuate it. The ANC supports and will continue to promote
a free and democratic press in the country.

Apartheid's `own affairs' doctrine lingers on. Our past history calls on
all of us to be responsible and sober in our approach to this debate about
the media in South Africa. We therefore call upon all editors please not to
put conditions to the HRC. We plead with them to take racism seriously.
They must go to the HRC and tell all. We want to know what is going on in
their newsrooms. We want to know about those racial punch-ups that are
happening in newsrooms on a daily basis.

Ms M SMUTS: [Inaudible.]

Mr N N KEKANA: Of course! There are squabbles that are taking place in
newsrooms. [Interjections.] We want to know that, because the newsrooms
must reflect what is in our society. [Interjections.] We still have racism
in our society and the same goes for the newsrooms. [Interjections.] We
have racists in this Parliament and the same goes for the newsrooms, so let
us tell all. [Interjections.] Let us ensure that we expose racism and nip
it in the bud. [Interjections.] [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mrs S M CAMERER: Chairperson, in the few minutes at my disposal at the end
of this debate, I would like to deal, firstly, with the allegations raised
by some commentators in the media and this House today that the response to
the HRC's subpoenas is a black-white thing, ie that black editors and
newspaper owners were co-operative vis-à-vis the subpoenas whereas white
editors and owners were not.

Now the ANC has clearly jumped on this bandwagon, as the previous speaker
has demonstrated. In The Citizen of yesterday, one Nat Scrache of the ANC's
information department claimed ... [Interjections.]

Dr Z P JORDAN: Serache!

Mrs S M CAMERER: Whatever! Thank you to the hon Dr Jordan. This gentleman
claimed that the media community was divided along racial lines over the
subpoenas and that while black editors, as he said, ``know the pain of
racism and will welcome any move to address traces thereof'', white
editors, ``who benefited from the previous regime's racist policies do not
understand the fuss about investigating allegations of racism''. This is
pure ANC disinformation, as I am sure the hon Dr Jordan knows very well.

Mike Robertson, the editor of the Sunday Times, who is black, said of the
HRC-commissioned Media Monitoring Project's report into racism in the media
...

Adv J H DE LANGE: He's a white in drag!
Mrs S M CAMERER: ... which led to the subpoenas:


  The document is a staggeringly inept hodgepodge of confused thinking,
  pseudoscience, half-truths, distortions of facts and, in some cases,
  wholesale departures from reality.

The chairman of Times Media Ltd, which owns the Sunday Times, Cyril
Ramaphosa, joined other newspaper barons in calling on the Human Rights
Commission to withdraw the subpoenas. Jon Qwelane of Radio 702 has been
scathing about them. The fact that black and white editors have stood
together, with the co-operation and wide degree of consensus of the SA
National Editors' Forum, regardless of colour ... [Interjections] ...
regardless of colour and in the interests of the freedom of the press,
appears to have persuaded the Human Rights Commission to back down. Black
editors like Moegsien Williams and Joe Thloloe were among the SA National
Editors' Forum members who yesterday fortunately persuaded the Human Rights
Commission to change their proposed adversarial inquisition-like format of
the inquiry into racism in the media to a consultative process, and we
certainly welcome that.

The New NP fully supports the development of a human rights culture in our
country. We also acknowledge that the most severe discrimination which took
place in our country was based on race, gender and disability. And it is
for this reason that these three prohibited grounds for unfair
discrimination are lifted out from the others listed in our Constitution
and given special attention in the recently passed Promotion of Equality
and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act.

We supported that legislation, which includes a provision requiring the
Human Rights Commission to report to Parliament annually on the achievement
of equality and the rooting out of unfair discrimination based on these
prohibited grounds. Accordingly, we have no objection to the Human Rights
Commission fulfilling its task and, in tackling unfair discrimination and
the promotion of equality, to focus, firstly, on race and gender, whether
by reacting to a complaint or otherwise. However, the way they have gone
about it, slapping subpoenas on newspaper editors, ordering them to appear
to answer charges of being implicated in racism or face imprisonment was
ham-handed and ill considered - a hiccup on the way to achieving a human
rights culture. [Time expired.]
The MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS: Chairperson, on a point of order: Is it
parliamentary for the leader of the New NP to ask for this debate, when
millions of our people have been affected by floods and are in misery, and
we are wasting our time on this? [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! That is not a point of order, hon
Minister.

Mr R S SCHOEMAN: Mr Chairman, on a point of order - and this is a serious
point of order, not a frivolous one from a fatigued Minister: The hon De
Lange referred to the editor of The Sunday Times as ``a white in drag''. I
would like to ask for your ruling. Is that not in fact a racist and,
therefore, offensive and unparliamentary term, sir? [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! I did not hear Mr De Lange saying
that. [Interjections.] Order! Mr De Lange did not participate in the
debate. When did he say that?

Mr R S SCHOEMAN: Mr Chairperson, with all due respect, it is possible for
you to ascertain that. We clearly heard him say that from here.
[Interjections.]
Adv J H DE LANGE: Mr Chairperson, I did not say what he is saying. I said
he is a black in drag. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! What did you say, Mr De Lange? Could
you repeat what you said?

Adv J H DE LANGE: Mr Chairperson, I said he is a black in drag, not a white
in drag.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Is that what you said? Hon members, I
cannot, unfortunately, rule on matters referring to people outside this
Parliament. He is not referring to a person in this Parliament. I cannot
rule on that.

Mr R S SCHOEMAN: Mr Chairman, on a further point of order: Could we ask the
next speaker on behalf of the ANC to indicate whether they are in agreement
with the statement that Mr Robertson is a white in drag? [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! I do not think it is necessary to do
that, hon member.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Mr
Chairperson, colleagues and comrades, I remember distinctly our euphoria on
that day in May 1996 when the Constitutional Assembly adopted the new
Constitution. As I look around me now, I see many faces on both sides of
this House that celebrated that moment with me. And if I let my mind wander
back a further two years to 1994, I remember the day that Parliament
adopted the Human Rights Commission Bill.

We crafted the law that established the HRC and we ascribed to it the
necessary powers to perform its functions as envisaged by the interim
Constitution and defined in the final Constitution. It was us, acting for
and on behalf of the people who had mandated us in the 1994 elections, that
also ascribed to the HRC the power to subpoena witnesses while conducting
investigations into human rights related matters. While drafting that
legislation, did any of us ever consider exempting any individual, group of
individuals or sector from this provision? I think not. We would have
articulated those exceptions very clearly in the legislation.

It is also important to note from the minutes of the National Assembly on
the day that the HRC Bill was introduced that all parties voted in favour
of the Bill; that the New NP was satisfied that the provisions of the Bill
fell within the ambit of the Constitution; and that the DP was satisfied
that sufficient safeguards, standards and norms were built into the Act
that makes it possible for the HRC to do its work. One wonders what the
agendas are. Suddenly they are so shocked by their behaviour when they are
actually affected by it.

When our constitutional drafters sat together to draft the interim and
final Constitutions, they were conscious of the challenges that lay before
us. We knew we had to create structures that would strengthen our fledgling
constitutional democracy. As constitutional architects, we all agreed that
we needed a human-rights watchdog with teeth. Why are the hon members to my
left reacting with surprise when the HRC exercises the powers that have
been conferred on it by this House? It would be a grave insult to the
majority of the people ... [Interjections.] Hon members should take their
blinkers off.

It would be a grave insult to the majority of the people in this country to
suggest that racism has been exorcised from our national psyche. In his
state of the nation address to Parliament last month the President put the
issue of racism high on the national agenda. In his address the President
announced that the Human Rights Commission was to convene a national
congress against racism later this year.

We are not the only ones seized with the spectre of racism and its impact
on individual communities. Indeed racism in all its many invidious
manifestations has become a matter of extreme concern within the
international community as well. It is in this vein that the UN High
Commissioner Mary Robinson approached South Africa to host an international
conference on racism in 2001. We need to recognise that South Africa is
ideally placed to endorse a consciousness-raising drive against the
atrocities of racism. Is it not appropriate then that we examine the
society in which we live and answer questions about the quality of our
democracy, even if they are questions that make us squirm? Is this not the
time to assess what we have achieved in the fight against racism and to
take stock of our failures?

What is it that makes us flinch when we hear the word ``racism''? It is the
knowledge that no matter where we stand on the political spectrum, we as
South Africans are defined by the dichotomies that racism has perpetuated
and come to represent. Just listen to our vocabulary: Privilege and
deprivation; advantage and disadvantage; power and powerlessness;
enfranchisement and disenfranchisement; landowner and labour tenant; suburb
and township; haves and have-nots. For years these disparities have
described life on either side of the racial divide.

Is it the stark reality that makes us shy away from the debate surrounding
racism? Is it the knowledge that if we come to terms with racism we must
recognise that privilege invariably comes at the expense of others? Is it
the sneaking suspicion that we will have to relinquish the comforts and
benefits of privilege that deter us from looking racism squarely in the
eye? Is it that we would rather ignore the past and get on with the new
because the past is too difficult and too uncomfortable to explore? What
will we do to eradicate this legacy? How will we become the society aspired
to in the preamble of our Constitution? How will we become a nation united
in its diversity?

We have first to acknowledge the existence of racism, because as we all
know, it remains a daily reality. We have to acknowledge and understand the
residual effect of racism on a society that has only recently emerged from
years of institutionalised racial oppression. We have to acknowledge that
the mere existence of a Constitution, even a progressive human rights based
constitution like ours, does not suddenly and miraculously eradicate
racism, neither does it automatically restore dignity to the untold
millions of black South Africans that sagged under the grinding burden of
apartheid.

We have to understand the dynamics around giving substantive real effect to
our Constitution and the Bill of Rights. We have to understand what it is
about our society that perpetuates the very thing we are trying to fight
and eliminate. We have to understand and promote those behaviours and
actions that contribute to a society free from racism and bigotry. In
achieving this understanding, no one, no individual person, no group, no
institution should be excluded from scrutiny for its contribution to or
perpetuation of racism in our society.

The antidote to the scourge of racism is exposure or, to put it in clinical
terms, probing, diagnosis and treatment. We all have to engage in that
debate about racism and we have to do so honestly and proactively. We have
to talk about it, but talking is not enough. We must unpack and understand
every aspect of racism, the numerous obstacles based on race, language,
culture that must be removed before we can talk about achieving equality.
The debate must bring us as a nation a new awareness and understanding of
racism and how it affects our society, but, most of all, the debate must
provide us with remedies and ways to combat racism.

This is certainly not the last debate which we will have on this very
sensitive issue. Our whole history is dominated by agendas driven on the
basis of race. Our quest for democracy remains informed by a bloody history
in which skin colour was the sole measure of human dignity. We should
continue to revisit the issue of racism for as long as it is necessary. We
would be failing the citizens of this country if we chose to close our eyes
and ears to the evil that still pervades our society.

Race-based discrimination and harassment are as prevalent as the many
racial stereotypes that still abound in our everyday life. Without a deeper
understanding of the economic, social, political and cultural factors that
impact on our lives, our analysis of racism and racial discrimination would
be incomplete. All this calls for committed social enquiry. In the process,
we can expect that there will be disagreements about the proposed
approaches, methods and methodologies used in the investigation. There will
also be differences of opinion about the level of scrutiny that should be
applied.

These are issues with which social commentators are struggling. Historians,
sociologists, educators, legal scholars, philosophers and management gurus
all continue to grapple with the process of understanding our behaviour
within this particular social context. We will not arrive at any scientific
conclusion, but we will be in a better position to come to terms with our
past and the impact that it has had - and continues to have - on the
present.

We are only in the early stages of understanding how we can emerge from the
dark past of domination. In our voyage of discovery, we will come to
understand that racism is not the only ghost that hovers on the horizon. We
will see that racism thrives in an environment of patriarchy, classism and
inequality, and that they feed off one another. We have yet to exorcise
many ghosts on our path on the road to healing and recovery.
As to the particular point of this debate, one has to ask the question why
there has been such a knee-jerk reaction to putting the media under public
scrutiny. As the fourth estate, they are influential and powerful
stakeholders in the social compact. Where lies their accountability? Surely
not only in the number of newspapers that are being sold or the number of
listeners that they attract? We live in a robust society. Media
representatives are keen participants in the cut and thrust of comment and
critique. Why then is the media balking at being called to the centre of
this debate? Or is it simply safer to render judgment from the sidelines?
Surely they are central to this wide-ranging investigation which is putting
all our institutions under the same rigorous scrutiny?

No single right in our Constitution eclipses any other. There is no Holy
Grail that protects the media - a fact clearly supported by leading media
personalities in this country. The right to freedom of expression is not
absolute. It must coexist with other rights described in the Bill of Rights
and in the Constitution. It has to live in harmony alongside, and not
dominate over any other right. Let us get the facts straight: there is no
witch-hunt and no clampdown on the media. Nobody is limiting anybody's
freedom of expression.

The HRC is not the bully in a school yard. Indeed, I am quiet sure that
hundreds of media workers in the country welcome this inquiry. The role of
the Human Rights Commission is central to the process of addressing and
internalising the issues surrounding racism. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

Ms M SMUTS: Chairperson, would the Deputy Minister take a question?

HON MEMBERS: No!

The DEPUTY MINISTER: No!

Ms M SMUTS: Does she speak for the Government or the HRC? I thought the
Government did not control the HRC. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER: Take your blinkers off!

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! She is not going to take your
question.

The DEPUTY MINISTER: I need to reiterate that the functions of the HRC are
clearly stated in the Constitution. Of special importance to this
afternoon's debate is the constitutional imperative that the HRC must
monitor and assess the observance of human rights in the Republic.

The HRC was also given the power to investigate and report on the
observance of human rights, and to take steps to secure appropriate redress
where human rights have been violated. National legislation went further
and gave the HRC the necessary tools to excavate the social terrain, and
they are now using those tools.

A range of persons and institutions, including a Minister in this
Government, have been subpoenaed by the Human Rights Commission. They have
responded to these subpoenas in the spirit of co-operation which underpins
the entire process.

We operate under very clearly defined parameters when it comes to our
Chapter 9 institutions, which include the Human Rights Commission. Neither
as Government nor as Parliament are we allowed to interfere in the
decisions of the Human Rights Commission. Where we can exercise our power
of scrutiny is when the HRC, like every other public body, is called to
account to Parliament. That is the time and the place for that critical
discourse.

The Human Rights Commission, like any other Chapter 9 institution, is not a
law unto itself. They must perform their functions without fear, favour or
prejudice. But at all times they must do so subject to the Constitution and
the law. This is the measure by which they should be judged. We can
disagree with the Human Rights Commission about their chosen methods, but
we can only condemn a process if it exceeds its legal authority - which
they clearly have not done.

The debate introduced by the Opposition here today smacks of hypocrisy. We
should not be satisfied simply to look fine on the outside. Our African
renaissance is not a fashion statement; it is a process of renewal that
will only come about if we grapple with those issues that continue to
divide us and keep us apart.

I would like to conclude with the wise words of Archbishop Desmond Tutu:


  South Africa has most of the world's serious problems writ small. How do
  First World and Third World co-existing cheek by jowl relate to one
  another? How does affluence relate to stark poverty? How do black and
  white get to cohere in one community? How do those who are economically
  developed interact with the undeveloped or the developing? When we solve
  our problems, the world is going to celebrate because we will have
  provided others with a paradigm. It is exciting. From having been the
  world's pariah, we could end up being the model.

[Applause.]

Mr R S SCHOEMAN: Mr Chairperson, may I address you on a point of order?

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! The point of order is granted.

Mr R S SCHOEMAN: Chairperson, further to the earlier points of order
relating to the hon De Lange, I would like to draw your attention to the
fact that there is now a serious dispute as to what was said or not said,
we having clearly heard him say that Mr Robertson is a white in drag, and
Mr De Lange saying something else.

I would like to appeal to you, Chairperson, to give the hon member an
opportunity to refresh his memory, and to be honest with this House,
failing which we will be obliged to request that the tapes be listened to
in the presence of a presiding officer tomorrow morning to determine what
the exact facts are.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Thank you, hon member. Could you give
the Chair and the Table an opportunity to study the Hansard, and then we
will reply to that point of order.

Adv J H DE LANGE: When you ask someone something, you sit down and be quiet
and listen to what is said!

Mr R S SCHOEMAN: Chairperson ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Is that agreed? We will study the Hansard
and reply to that point.
Mr R S SCHOEMAN: Mr Chairperson, we need the tapes of Hansard because we
are suggesting that it is important that this matter be resolved timeously.
Could those tapes be available as early as tomorrow? That is our request.
[Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Well, all I am saying is that we will
look into all possible means and we will come back to you.

Debate concluded.

 CONSIDERATION OF INTERIM REPORT OF AD HOC COMMITTEE ON REPORT 13 OF PUBLIC
                                  PROTECTOR

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND
                      TOURISM ON TOURISM AMENDMENT BILL

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted.

Mr A C NEL: Chair, before we proceed, I understood the previous point of
order to insinuate that Mr De Lange had deliberately misled this House, and
I think that that should be withdrawn.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, we said that the Chair
would look at that and resolve the matter.

                           TOURISM AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Mr Chairperson, the Bill
before the House seeks to amend the Tourism Act, Act 72 of 1993. It is a
rather short and simple Bill, but its implications are very, very far-
reaching indeed. In some ways, what this Bill does is that it sets a
precedent which has not been established in this House since 1994.

It seeks to do two things. The first is to reduce the size of the board of
SA Tourism. The second thing it does is that it seeks to remove provincial
representation from the board. Presently, the board has one representative
appointed by each province, and if this Bill is passed by this House and
the NCOP, it will mean that the board of SA Tourism will be appointed by
national Government and not by national Government in concurrence with
provinces. This is a very interesting thing.

It arose as a result of lengthy discussions that I have been conducting
with my counterparts in the provinces about what we should do in order to
become a global player in tourism. What is it that we need to change and
how should we position ourselves?  One of the things that we found was that
right now we have a whole range of tourism promotion institutions. People
in a number of the big cities in every province all go around the world
promoting tourism in their country, telling people to visit Cape Town, to
visit Durban, to visit the North West, etc, as a result of which we have a
multiplicity of voices in what is already a very cluttered international
market.

What we have decided to do is to move towards a situation in which we would
be a single voice, in which we would have a single international marketing
strategy, and that strategy would be driven by SA Tourism. In order to do
that we need to understand that we are competing against, not other
products in South Africa, but against some of the best and most cutting-
edge marketing strategies to be found in the world. Therefore, if we are to
succeed, we ourselves have to be cutting-edge. We have to have the best
marketing strategies and we have to make maximum use of the worldwide web,
because there are more tourism websites in the worldwide web than any other
single topic to be found.

Therefore, we are transforming SA Tourism. SA Tourism, as an organisation,
eventually will be a lean and mean institution that will have a single
purpose, that is the generic international marketing of South Africa as a
tourism destination. In order for us to do that, we need to have an
appropriate board. We need a board which will be selected in a manner which
will represent both the private sector and Government, so that we move SA
Tourism out of being simply like any other parastatal which is viewed as
being part of the Government sector or the public sector.

We need to move it in that arena or that space which is between the private
and the public sectors, so that we even bring the private sector, the big
hotel groups, into our single marketing strategy. I must say that we have
wide-ranging consensus on that and all nine MECs, certainly in my
consultation, supported this Bill, the private sector supports this Bill
and we ask the House for its support so that we can position ourselves as
truly global players in tourism - something we deserve and something which
is achievable, not in the long term but in the short term. [Applause.]

Ms C M P RAMOTSAMAI: Mr Chairperson, this Bill proposes to amend the
Tourism Act, Act 72 of 1993, in order to change the composition of the SA
Tourism Board.
It is proposed that the maximum members be reduced from 20 to 15 and the
minimum number from 15 to nine. The reason for the reduction is that
current structures do not allow for the appointment of appropriate members,
strategically, to drive the organisation to achieve its objectives of
marketing the potential of the country.

This Bill is actually going to assist us because it will consider other
matters that we will be introducing as a committee. In future we will be
coming up with the registration of tour guides. This Bill is actually
giving the board the power to look specifically at marketing, which is very
important for the SA Tourism Board.

The provisions requiring representation by business, community and labour
sectors, and provinces are removed. It is proposed that alternative
arrangements be made to liaise with provincial governments. The provinces
actually support this proposal, including even the Western Cape. I am not
sure whether the reason we are debating this Bill today is that the MEC for
tourism in the Western Cape is a member of the DP, and I think perhaps this
is something that the New NP and the DP should have discussed before
pushing us to discuss this Bill today.

In view of the proposed reduced membership of the board, it is also
proposed that section 8(2) of the Act be amended to reduce the number of
members required to request an extraordinary meeting of the board from
eight to five.

Tourism can promote the wellbeing of societies and of communities at local
level, as well as expand employment and business opportunities by keeping
abreast of scientific and technological progress which has the capacity to
make  significant contributions to the future development of tourism. At
the second international tourism forum held in Indonesia in September 1996
South Africa joined tourism policy-makers in resolving this.

Tourism development is aimed at raising the wellbeing of local communities,
promoting mutual understanding in order to achieve peace, conserving nature
and the environment, and preserving traditions, as well as social, cultural
and religious values.

We further commit ourselves to tourism development in tourist destination
areas that are able to maintain a balance between the interests of local
people and those of tourists by promoting tolerance between tourists and
local communities, which is based on the principle of equality, so that
mutual understanding and respect for differences are enhanced, and so that
a safe and peaceful atmosphere prevails.

Whilst this happens, it is important to balance economic, social, cultural
and religious values with environmental conservation, so that sustainable
development is achieved. We thank the Minister for introducing the Bill, as
it stands, in order to improve the lives of many South Africans.
[Applause.]
Ms J A SEMPLE: Chairperson, tourism has now been recognised as a major
economic growth point for South Africa. Not only can it provide jobs,
particularly for women, school-leavers and relatively unskilled people, but
it can also contribute to the GNP and provide foreign exchange. However,
this can only happen if big-spending foreign tourists come to South Africa.

Many other countries have realised the economic potential of tourism, and
we face stiff competition in our efforts to attract visitors. It is the
core function of Satour to market South Africa as a world-class tourist
destination, and the Bill we will pass today mainly addresses the
composition of the board.

In order for the best marketing expertise available to be housed on the
board, the DP supports the reduction in the size of the board and the
consequent cut in expenditure. While our party is extremely averse to
centralisation, and some of our provinces might feel affronted at having
their representation removed from the board, it must be pointed out that in
order to choose the best soccer team, one has to select the most talented
players. The same applies to marketing.
The Minister has been given a free hand in selecting the members of the
board. Obviously it is in his interest, and in the interest of promoting
tourism in South Africa as a whole, to make the best use of the talent
available, and we trust that he will do so.

An issue that particularly concerns me is informing people or asking them
to make nominations via the medium of the Gazette. How many of my
colleagues here actually read the Gazette on a regular basis, that is,
apart from the hon Douglas Gibson and, I presume, the hon Johnnie de Lange
and a few other learned friends? Do members here know any of their
constituents who read the Gazette on a regular basis? Our democratic
Parliament prides itself on being open and accessible to the people of
South Africa. We, as parliamentarians, have to find ways to make
announcements, calls for nominations, etc, in a more general way so that
everyone knows about them.

There are only two national newspapers, one English and one Afrikaans.
[Interjections.] Yes, really, does that member not think people on the
ground deserve to know? The medium of radio would be a popular choice, but
which stations would we choose? I appeal to my colleagues to come up with
suggestions on how we could disseminate information on this Parliament to
people on the ground in the most accessible manner.

One can have the best team of marketing experts in the world, but without
money their ideas cannot be implemented. Glossy colour pictures and
brochures, breathtaking videos and billboards with life-size zebras so
realistic that someone even tried to take them home, never mind tourism
offices manned by Satour officials around the world, are all very
expensive.

Never was the old adage truer: To make money you have to spend money. We
are pleased that the Minister of Finance, Trevor Manuel, recognised its
need in last week's Budget by allocating an increase of R100 million to
international tourism marketing for the next financial year. However, we
would also like to see the tax of R100 on international air travel tickets
per departure ploughed back into the tourism industry.

The DP supports the Bill. [Applause.]

Mr M F CASSIM: Mr Chairman, we in the IFP also support the growth of
tourism. We recognise that if jobs have to be created, then the route that
we have to take is indeed going to be tourism. But the question arises:
Why, for example, is Australia, which is far further from Europe than we
are, so much more successful in attracting tourists than we in South Africa
with a better climate, with a great deal more variety in our scenery and
with so many aspects to sell?

Now, the other question that would be very important is that the President
of our country has indicated that South Africa is really two South Africas.
There is a white South Africa and there is a black South Africa. When we
take tourism we find that the concentration of the tourism business is in a
segment that denies a very large number of the people in this country the
opportunity to market and sell that which is important in their areas.
Perhaps we have not had the people on Satour, or those who are marketing
our country, make a very comprehensive map of every single aspect and
attribute that we could utilise to make tourism vital in our country. Too
often the picture that they have presented is of a small part or a small
segment of South Africa, rather than South Africa in all its multiplicity
and in all its variety.
We would like to know what happens after this board has been put into
place. We have put many boards into place in the past six years, but how
have these boards functioned? Who is going to audit and indicate to us
that, having now taken the steps that this Parliament is taking, the
results are beginning to show? Over what period of time will these results
be analysed to indicate that finally, when South Africa and the Government
put tourism on the top of their agenda or give it priority, we now have the
mechanism to ensure that tourism is generating the kinds of jobs that we
want to see generated and contributing to the economy in the way in which
we want to see it contributing?

What segment of the GDP will this new system allow to become part of the
economy? If it begins to succeed in the way in which the Minister
envisages, then suddenly we will have growth, and growth in its wake will
ensure that poverty, suffering, crying and all of the other attendant evils
would also be swept away.  So we in the IFP have great hopes that tourism
is the route to go. We were once the great flavour of the world when we
transformed in 1994. Some of that magic is lost and we hope, maybe, that
some of that magic can be regained.

Mrs M E OLCKERS: Chairman, on behalf of the New NP we would like to support
the draft Bill before us today.

The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism needs to be congratulated
on the streamlining of the Satour board and also on re-emphasising to them
the brief that they have, which is marketing South Africa abroad. A
provincial tourism marketing board would do the rest of the marketing in
the provinces and in the country. Because provinces differ environmentally,
in infrastructure and capability, in how and what they can offer the
tourist, it is a positive step in acknowledging the fact that the provinces
can do their own thing. With this Bill the central Government and the
provinces will form a streamlined and focused strategy with regard to
marketing our country internationally and nationally.

We want to agree with the DP, for once. [Interjections.] We, like them,
would also prefer that the advertisements for nominations be put in more
widely circulating newspapers, for example two national newspapers, and not
just in the Gazette, because we agree that not enough people read or can
even get hold of the Gazette. We may run into the problem of people saying
that this process was not transparent enough, especially seeing that the
Minister alone has the power to appoint the board. I think it leaves him
open to too much criticism unnecessarily. However, we trust the Minister
and we trust his sincerity. We trust that this board, because it is so
important for the country, will have the best marketeers appointed to it,
and that there will be no tokenism. We want to wish the new board success
... [Time expired.]

Mr S N SWART: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister, tourism is undoubtedly one of
the world's largest industries and is one of South Africa's fastest growing
industries. The ACDP accordingly supports this Bill, and welcomes the
reduction of the number of board members and the exclusion of the specific
representation of the business, community and labour sectors with the
concomitant cost savings.

The marketing of South Africa as a tourist destination cannot be hamstrung
by an unwieldy, ineffective and costly board. It is therefore imperative
that the very best expertise available be employed to competitively market
South Africa internationally as the preferred destination for the
sustainable economic and social empowerment of all South Africans, and to
make tourism the leading economic sector in South Africa, this being the
stated vision of the board.

We are further pleased that the Bill seeks to promote a sound working
relationship between the board and the provinces, particularly in the light
of the fact that tourism is a concurrent competence. [Time expired.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Mr Chairperson and colleagues, the democratic dispensation
in this country has called for change in society and, inevitably,
amendments to legislation. Such amendments are being made to ensure that
legislation ties in with the Constitution. South Africans are yearning for
change. There are, however, some statutes that may not be thrown out of the
window in their entirety. The country's laws, like any institution, are
dynamic and not static, and take into account the pace of development;
hence amendments to such pieces of legislation.

The Bill under review will assist in making the SA Tourism Board manageable
and more representative. The reduction in the number of board members will
ensure that the upkeep of the board is cost-effective. The amendment of the
Act will regulate the convening of extraordinary board meetings, and it
will also make the board representative, as those with interests in the
sector will participate, although it has been indicated that the question
of circulation is restricted to the Gazette. However, efforts are being
made to make sure that all people with interests do join hands.

A sound relationship will be maintained between the board and the provinces
engaged in tourism, as minutes of the board meetings will be forwarded to
the members of the executive councils responsible for tourism. There is no
way that the national department, under whose ambit the SA Tourism Board
falls, may engage in issues without the knowledge of the provinces. This
will ensure that there is co-operative governance as envisaged by our
Constitution.

On these grounds, the UCDP fully supports the Bill.

Dr M S MOGOBA: Chairperson, the PAC supports this Tourism Amendment Bill.
We believe that the amendments will actually improve tourism in this
country and make it more manageable and efficient.

Tourism has vast potential for the development of our country's and needs
careful handling and administration. Initiatives of promoting tourism
nationally as well as provincially should address the acute national
problem of unemployment. For this to happen, we should open the door wide
so that all our people, irrespective of political persuasion, should have a
sense of ownership and appreciation of the fact that tourism is a national
asset that should be developed for the benefit of the entire nation.

As a nation, we need to change our orientation and attitudinal behaviour
towards tourists. We need to be more friendly and helpful towards them.
Criminals and unfriendly people can harm our national asset, tourism, and
reduce the benefits we can derive from it.

In the past tourism was a luxury reserved for white South Africans and
foreign tourists, who were mostly white. This perception was unfortunate
and should be transformed immediately. [Time expired.]

Dr A I VAN NIEKERK: Chair, the FA and the UDM support the Bill. Could I say
that tourism is the one product which can bring enormous benefits to South
Africa and to all South Africans?
The Bill, through the new Satour board, must not consider tourism an export
product only. Some areas - for instance the Kruger National Park, which is
a prime tourist attraction in South Africa - are totally out of reach for
most South Africans. The prices are not attractive for South Africans and
in some instances the exorbitance of the prices for admission and
accommodation is clearly aimed at tourists from abroad.

The irony of the matter is that the Kruger National Park is now asking
South Africans to contribute towards their flood relief fund. Most of the
South Africans will not be able to experience the Kruger National Park in
all its beauty and splendour once their contributions have repaired the
damage.

Is it not time that the authorities of these prime tourist attractions
considered a dual system, such as the one followed in Zimbabwe, where
Zimbabweans are subjected to a more reasonable price when a Zimbabwean ID
is shown, and a price payable in US dollars is charged to tourists? South
Africans cannot be excluded from enjoying the benefits and beauty of their
own country.

A second consideration, I think, that the Satour board can do is to market
and promote the lesser known areas of our beautiful country. Attractions
such as the Garden Route, Golden Gate, Pilgrim's Rest and the Kruger
National Park are overexposed with promotion, and lesser known areas such
as the Karoo are excellent examples of what more South Africa has to offer.


A person who has not experienced the thrill of the Karoo in winter and all
its facets has not yet experienced South Africa. To experience the view on
the roof of the world by viewing the glamour and splendour of the bright
stars, to explore the semidesert areas on the back of a bakkie and to taste
the water as pure as nowhere in this world, is an encounter that will
remain with a tourist as long as he or she lives.

The tourism potential in South Africa is enormous and we have to promote
it, but it is under threat. The growth of tourism will, however, remain a
mere pipe dream if the South African Government does not address crime.
Already the Department of Home Affairs of the United Kingdom, through their
own market research, has made public a finding over the weekend which rates
South Africa as the most murderous country in the world. This is not
something that will lure tourists, and we will actually have to address
this together.

We support the Bill.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Mr Chairperson, tourism is one of the key sectors in the
economy which has the potential to generate job-creation and contribute
significantly to the GDP on a dynamic continuum.

The SA Tourism Board is charged with the parental duty to promote and
manage tourism on the local, provincial and national level. Therefore the
amendments made to the Tourism Act of 1993, readdress obstacles that
affected further development in the tourism industry.

The reduction of the members on the tourism board and the decision to
appoint the best talent from whatever walk of life to the board obligates
the members to function with competence and efficiency and to utilise
resources in the economy to enforce development in the tourism industry.

The MF supports the Tourism Amendment Bill.
Ms G L MAHLANGU: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister, the report we have just
passed before we got into this debate was about broadening consultation.
[Interjections.] I am looking for your law. I do not know why we are
talking about a lot of consultation when we have actually deliberated upon
that.

Our problem was that when one puts notices in a newspaper, which newspaper
does one choose? Will one put it in Ilanga laseNatali; or will one put it
in Wamba, Motswalle wa Bana; or will one put it in the Sunday Independent?
That is why we decided that to make sure that there is broadened
consultation we should have the report that we have just passed. So, all
the concerns that have been raised this afternoon were actually dealt with
at portfolio committee level.

Not only have the people of South Africa spoken, but they have confirmed
that we are on course. Indeed, the dark clouds of despair are fading away
in front of our eyes. President Mbeki, on the occasion of his inauguration,
said:


  Because we are one another's keepers, we surely must be haunted by the
  humiliating suffering which continues to afflict millions of our people.
  Our nights cannot be but nights of nightmares while millions of our
  people live in conditions of degrading poverty. Sleep cannot come easily
  when children get permanently disabled, both physically and mentally,
  because of lack of food. No night can be restful when millions have no
  jobs, and some are forced to beg, rob, and murder to ensure that they and
  their own do not perish from hunger. Our minds will continue the restless
  inquiry to find out how it is possible for us to have a surfeit of
  productive wealth in one part of our common globe and intolerable poverty
  elsewhere in that common globe.

The Bill we are discussing this afternoon aims, amongst other things, to
address the shortage of jobs and to put tourism at its rightful place as a
lead sector of the South African economy.

In 1998, South Africa hosted over 5,7 million visitors. The projected
growth rate for the subsequent year was 9,1%, matching the actual growth
rate and pushing the number of tourists to approximately 6,3 million. It is
expected that the year 2000 growth rate will be around 11%.

In order to meet this objective, a number of issues need to be addressed.
Amongst these are the need for training our labour force servicing the
industry, the product development within the industry, the profile of the
industry, and most importantly, the marketing of South Africa as a choice
tourism destination. Satour is charged with the responsibility of this
function. To compete with the world's other major tourism destinations, it
is necessary for our country to be globally competitive.

We can only do this if we set up an organisation with the correct resources
and direction. Government has demonstrated confidence in the potential of
this industry by pledging an increased budget for marketing. In addition,
the private sector has demonstrated its confidence by its contribution to
the Business Trust. This contribution from the Business Trust has resulted
in the substantial increase in the marketing seen in the recently launched
international marketing campaign. Never before has South Africa's tourism
been profiled at this level internationally, and we thank the Minister for
that.

To carry this momentum through and effectively use the resources being
committed to the marketing of South Africa, it is now necessary to address
the organisation that drives this effort. The net effect of the
restructuring will be a saving in board costs and a focus on deliberations
and decisions that support a winning country's marketing approach. This
confirms that we are indeed a nation at work for a better life for all.

The MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Mr Chairperson, if there
was any doubt about this House's commitment to growing tourism, then people
should see how many members are still here at a quarter past seven on a
Wednesday afternoon. It is Wednesday night, in fact. [Laughter.] We truly
are a nation at work.

The hon Farouk Cassim raises a very interesting question. He says that we
plan to do all these things, but asks how we will measure whether we are
making any progress or not. When I got this portfolio, the first thing I
wanted to know was how many tourists visit the country, what tourism's
contribution is to the GDP, and those sorts of things. This country really
does not have that information. This morning when I bumped into Mark Orkin,
the head of Statistics SA, we spoke about discussions which he is having at
present with my director-general about how Statistics SA can begin to
measure the contribution of tourism to the GDP, because right now we do not
really know.

In 1998 my predecessor, Mr Pallo Jordan, contracted the World Travel and
Tourism Council to do a study for us. The only real numbers we have are
based on that study, which showed that, in 1998, tourism contributed about
6% to the GDP, and the tourism economy contributed between 8% and 9% of the
GDP. So already those figures show quite an important contribution to the
GDP.  The average contribution of travel and tourism to the world GDP is
around 11%. So, at a minimum, that is the kind of target that we should be
aiming for. I want to tell the hon Cassim that Statistics SA is now in the
process of setting up the system so that we can measure accurately the
contribution of tourism, and we would therefore be able to report to
Parliament what progress, or lack of progress, we are making.

I enjoyed the hon Van Niekerk's lyrical poetry about the Karoo. It speaks
to me. I spent many a memorable night in the Karoo myself, and I wish we
could spend more time talking about those sorts of things. It is very
important for me, and for all of us who are involved in trying to do
something about tourism, that we get the kind of support that we need,
particularly from the provinces, for this approach that we are taking now,
because it gives us a sense of confidence that we should and can move ahead
boldly, and that is what we would like to do.

I would like to thank the chairperson of the portfolio committee, the hon
Mahlangu, and all the members who have worked very hard in order to bring
us to this point, and to build the kind of consensus that we have. It is a
committee which I am quite certain will keep me on my toes. I must say
this, because I have not had the opportunity to say it before.

The hon the Minister of Home Affairs will be interested to know that we
spent all of Monday with the committee, working very hard at the
Kirstenbosch Gardens. The entire committee has accepted my invitation to
walk up Table Mountain on Friday. We will be very hard at work on
environmental matters, and we will be talking about tourism as we amble up
the mountain. [Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Mr Chairperson, is there any age limit to
those who will be going up the mountain? [Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: No, Mr Chairperson, in
fact there is no age limit at all, so the hon the Minister is invited, and
may I invite all members in the House. If members are prepared to be a
nation at work, and to do what it takes, they should join us on Friday on
the mountain, and they too will be bitten by the bug. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

The House adjourned at 19:21.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                         THURSDAY, 24 FEBRUARY 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:
1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The following papers were tabled on 22 February 2000 and referred to
     the Standing Committee on Public Accounts. They are now referred for
     information to the relevant committees as mentioned below.


     (i)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
              Communications and the Select Committee on Labour and Public
              Enterprises:


              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
              Vote 29 - Government Communications and Information System
              [RP 139-99].


    (ii)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
              Labour and the Select Committee on Labour and Public
              Enterprises:


              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
              Vote 22 - Labour for 1998-99 [RP 146-99].
TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry:


     (1)    Report and Financial Statements of Khula Enterprise Finance,
         Limited for 1997-98.

     (2)    Report and Financial Statements of Khula Enterprise Finance,
         Limited for 1998-99.

     (3)    Report of the Board on Tariffs and Trade on withdrawal of
         provisions under rebate item 311.24, 311.26 and 311.28.


     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry and the
     Select Committee on Economic Affairs.

2.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism:


     Report of the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism for 1998-
     99 [RP 192-99].

     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and
     Tourism and the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs.

3.    The Minister of Communications:


     Report and Financial Statements of Sentech for 1997-98.

     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Communications and the Select
     Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises.

4.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry:


     (1)    Government Notice No 2419 published in the Government Gazette No
         20584 dated 5 November 1999, Extension of time in terms of the
         National Forests Act, 1998 (Act No 84 of 1998).

     (2)    Government Notice No 2450 published in the Government Gazette No
         20603 dated 12 November 1999, Exemption in terms of section 24(6)
         of the National Forests Act, 1998 (Act No 84 of 1998).

     (3)    Regulation No R.1352 published in the Government Gazette No
         20606 dated 12 November 1999, Regulation requiring that a water
         use be registered made in terms of the National Water Act, 1998
         (Act No 36 of 1998).


     (4)    Government Notice No 1353 published in the Government Gazette No
         20615 dated 12 November 1999, Establishment of a pricing strategy
         for water use charges in terms of section 56(1) of the National
         Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

     (5)    Government Notice No 1358 published in the Government Gazette No
         20619 dated 19 November 1999, Release of part of Tweefontein State
         Forest which is no longer required for forestry made in terms of
         section 50(4) of the National Forests Act, 1998 (Act No 84 of
         1998).

     (6)    Government Notice No 1359 published in the Government Gazette No
         20619 dated 19 November 1999, Release of parts of State Forests
         which are no longer required for forestry made in terms of section
         50(4) of the National Forests Act, 1998 (Act No 84 of 1998).

     (7)    Government Notice No 1513 published in the Government Gazette No
         20733 dated 24 December 1999, Release of parts of Grabouw State
         Forests which are no longer required for forestry made in terms of
         section 50(4) of the National Forests Act, 1998 (Act No 84 of
         1998).

     (8)    Government Notice No 1514 published in the Government Gazette No
         20733 dated 24 December 1999, Release of a part of Hangklip State
         Forests which is no longer required for forestry made in terms of
         section 50(4) of the National Forests Act, 1998 (Act No 84 of
         1998).


     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry and
     the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs.

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     Resolutions of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for 1999 and
     replies thereto obtained by the Department of State Expenditure -
     First, Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth and Seventh Report, 1999.

     Referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Labour on the Elimination of
     Child Labour Convention, dated 22 February 2000, as follows:


         The Portfolio Committee on Labour, having considered the request
         for approval by Parliament of the International Labour Conference
         Convention concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the
         Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour, adopted by the
         conference at its eighty-seventh Session, Geneva, 17 June 1999,
         referred to it, recommends that the House, in terms of section
         231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said Convention.


     Report to be considered.

                          FRIDAY, 25 FEBRUARY 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

The Speaker and the Chairperson:
 
1.    The following changes have been made to the membership of Committees,
     viz:


     Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Children, Youth and
     Disabled Persons:

     Discharged: Goniwe, T M.

National Assembly:

The Speaker:

1.    The following changes have been made to the membership of Committees,
     viz:


     Agriculture and Land Affairs:

     Appointed: Mtirara, N Z.
     Discharged: Abram, S.

     Arts, Culture, Science and Technology:

     Appointed: Van Wyk, A (Alt).
     Discharged: Ramodike, M N.

     Communications:

     Appointed: Abram, S; Mndende, N (Alt).
     Discharged: Mtirara, N Z.

     orrectional Services:
 
     Discharged: Goniwe, T M.

     Environmental Affairs and Tourism:

     Appointed: Goniwe, T M (Alt); Mbadi, L M.
     Discharged: Frolick, C T.

     Finance:

     Appointed: Frolick, C T (Alt); Van der Merwe, S C (Alt).

     Health:

     Appointed: Mabeta, M E (Alt); Naidoo, S.
     Discharged: De Beer, S J; Mzimela, S E.

     Home Affairs:

     Appointed: Kalako, M U; Ngcingwana, N D (Alt).

     Housing:

     Appointed: Mtirara, N Z.


     Discharged: Ramodike, M N.
     Justice and Constitutional Development:

     Appointed: Mabeta, M E; Ramodike, M N (Alt).

     Labour:
 
     Appointed: Holomisa, B H (Alt); Ramodike, M N.

     Minerals and Energy:

     Appointed: De Beer, S J (Alt); Ramodike, M N.

     Private Members' Legislative Proposals and Special Petitions:

     Appointed: Abrahams, T.


     Discharged: Ramodike, M N.

     Provincial and Local Government:

     Appointed: Mzimela, S E (Alt).


     Discharged: Ramodike, M N.

     Public Accounts:

     Appointed: Naidoo, S (Alt).

     Public Enterprises:

     Appointed: Mndende, O N (Alt).


     Discharge: Ramodike, M N.

     Public Service and Administration:

     Appointed: Frolick, C T (Alt); Modisenyane, L J (Alt).


     Discharged: Holomisa, B H.

     Public Works:

     Appointed:   Moonsamy, K; Ramodike, M N (Alt).


     Discharged: Kalako, M U; Mtirara, N Z.

     Rules:


     Appointed: Chauke, H P; Goniwe, T M; Maine, M S; Makunyane, T L (Alt);
     Mngomezulu, G P; Modisenyane, L J; Nel, A C; Njobe, M A A; Thabethe, E.


     Discharged: Arendse, J E; Govender, P; Landers, L T; Lekgoro, M K;
     Ngwane, L B; Sonjica, B P; Van den Heever, R P Z; Zuma, J G.

     Safety and Security:

     Appointed: Naidoo, S (Alt).
     Discharged: Frolick, C T.

     Trade and Industry:

     Appointed: De Beer, S J (Alt); Frolick, C T.
     Discharged: Koornhof, G W.

     Water Affairs and Forestry:

     Appointed: Naidoo, S; Ntirara, N Z.

     Welfare and Population Development:

     Appointed: Mabeta, M E (Alt).
     Discharged: Mndende, O N.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Welfare and Population
     Development on Central Drug Authority, dated 25 February 2000, as
     follows:


         The Portfolio Committee on Welfare and Population Development,
         having considered the request of the House to make recommendations
         for the appointment of additional members to the Central Drug
         Authority, referred to it, recommends that the Minister for
         Welfare and Population Development, in terms of section 2(3)(b) of
         the Prevention and Treatment of Drug Dependency Act, 1992 (Act No.
         20 of 1992), be advised to appoint the following persons:


              Bayever, D N; Da Rocha-Silva, L; Fredericks, T J; Hoekstra, M
              C; Jardine, G F; Malaka, D W; Mathe, S V; Moleko, A S;
              Moodliar, D C; Mynhardt, D C; Parry, C D H; Rataemane, S.


     Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Ad hoc Committee on Report 13 of Public Protector,
     dated 25 February 2000, as follows:


     1.     The Ad hoc Committee on Report 13 of Public Protector was
         established in terms of Rule 214 of the National Assembly, by
         decision of the Speaker, on 19 January 2000, which decision was
         ratified by the National Assembly on 21 January 2000. The
         Committee was established to consider Report 13 and to report to
         the National Assembly. The Committee was formally constituted on
         20 January.

     2.     The Committee, mindful of the fact that its terms of reference
         is to consider the report as a whole, proposes to deal with the
         report, its findings and recommendations in a comprehensive and
         holistic manner.
     3.     The Committee notes that the report deals with matters and makes
         recommendations which go beyond the terms of reference derived
         from the Resolution dated 21 August 1997, adopted by the National
         Assembly, requesting the Public Protector to investigate and
         report on the alleged irregularities with respect to the affairs
         and financial statements of the SFF Association, including, having
         due regard to the Report of the Minister of Minerals and Energy
         and to the applicable law, whether the reports of the Auditor-
         General to Parliament thereon were correct and proper. This adds
         to the complexity of the Committee's task.

     4.     In pursuance of its approach, the Committee will consider, when
         necessary, calling evidence on the findings and matters contained
         in the report and on the extent to which the recommendations
         contained in the Report have been implemented.

     5.     The Committee may further consider referring matters arising
         from the report to structures best suited to deal with them.
     6.     Mindful of the need to deal with these matters as expeditiously
         as possible, but also mindful of the scope, range and complexity
         of the matters dealt with in the Public Protector's report, the
         Committee is of the opinion that it will require a period of at
         least three calendar months, from the date of adoption of this
         Report, to complete its work, provided that the Committee may need
         to approach the House with a view to extending this period, if
         necessary.


     Report to be considered.

                          MONDAY, 28 FEBRUARY 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 28 February 2000 in terms
         of Joint Rule 160(4), classified the following Bill as a section
         76 Bill:
         (i)     Division of Revenue Bill [B 8 - 2000] (National Assembly -
              sec 76(1)) - (Portfolio Committee on Finance - National
              Assembly).


     (2)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 28 February 2000 in terms
         of Joint Rule 160(6), classified the following Bill as a money
         Bill:


         (i)     Appropriation Bill [B 7 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec
              77) - (Portfolio Committee on Finance - National Assembly).

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     The following changes have been made to the membership of the Rules
     Committee and its Subcommittees, viz:

     Rules Committee
     Appointed: Bakker, D M; Gaum A; Greyling C H F.
     Discharged: Schutte D P A.

     Subcommittee on Internal Arrangements
     Appointed: Kota, Z A; Maine M S; Mngomezulu G P; Ntuli, M B (Alt).
     Discharged: Goosen, A D; Moss, M I.

     Subcommittee on International Relations
     Appointed: Geldenhuys, B L; Goniwe, T M; Greyling C H F (Alt).
     Discharged: Bakker, D M; Martins, B A D.

     Subcommittee on National Assembly Budget
     Appointed: Thabethe, E; Van der Merwe, S C (Alt).
     Discharged: Moonsamy, K; Oliphant, G G; Smith, V.

     Subcommittee on Parliamentary Oversight and Accountability
     Appointed: Blaas A (Alt); Rabie, P J.
     Discharged: Schutte D P A.

     Subcommittee on Powers and Privileges of Parliament
     Appointed: Bakker, D M; Gaum A (Alt); Goniwe, T M (Alt).
     Discharged: Masutha, M T; Schutte, D P A.

     Subcommittee on Review of Assembly Rules
     Appointed: Bakker, D M; Gaum, A (Alt); Nel, A C (Alt).
     Discharged: Mokaba, P R.

     Subcommittee on Support for Assembly Members
     Appointed: Chauke, P H; Njobe M A A (Alt); Sosibo J E (Alt).
     Discharged: Gigaba, K M N; Mbulawa, B G.

                          TUESDAY, 29 FEBRUARY 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     Correspondence has been received from the President regarding
     communication between his Office and the World Association of
     Newspapers concerning the South African Human Rights Commission's
     hearing on racism in the media.

     The correspondence has been made available to Members.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker:


     (1)    The President of the Republic submitted the following letter,
         dated 24 February 2000, to the Speaker of the National Assembly,
         informing Parliament, in terms of section 201(2) of the
         Constitution, 1996, of the employment of the South African
         National Defence Force in terms of section 201(2)(c) of the
         Constitution, 1996.


         REPORT IN TERMS OF SECTION 201(2) OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE
         REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA, 1996 (ACT 108 OF 1996) ON THE EMPLOYMENT
         OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE FOR SERVICES RELATED
         TO FLOODS IN THE GAZA, MAPUTO AND SOFALA PROVINCES.


         1. This serves to inform the National Assembly that I authorised
              the employment of the South African National Defence Force
              (SANDF) personnel and equipment in the Republic of Mozambique,
              in the Gaza, Maputo and Sofala Provinces. This employment
              commenced on 12 February 2000 and ends on 25 February 2000.


              This employment was authorised in accordance with the
              provisions of section 82(4)(b)(ii) read with section
              2227(1)(d) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
              Africa, 1993 (Act No 200 of 1993), [which sections continue to
              be in force in terms of Item 24(1) of Schedule 6 to the
              Constitution of the Republic of South, 1996 (Act No 108 of
              1996)], read further with section 3(2)(a)(v) of the Defence
              Act, 1957 (Act No 44 of 1957).


         2. A request was received by the Department of Foreign Affairs
              from the Government of the Republic of Mozambique to render
              humanitarian assistance in the location and relocation of
              people trapped by the flooding, and to assist in distributing
              and delivering emergency supplies to the affected areas. In
              line with our international obligations to render such
              assistance, the deployment was authorised.

         3. The deployment consisted of 55 personnel, 3 X Oryx helicopters,
              2 X BK117 helicopters and 2 X Cessna 208 light aircraft. The
              personnel and equipment were deployed to Beira and Maputo for
              the duration of the effort. Other support aircraft which were
              used for the deployment of equipment and support personnel to
              the two locations were 2 X C130 transport aircraft.

         4. Financial implications


              4.1 Personnel allowances for a 10 day deployment for 55
                  members amounts to R297 091-00.

              4.2 The total cost of 2 X BK117 helicopters, 3 X Oryx
                  helicopters and 2 X Cessna 208 aircraft for 30 flying
                  hours over 10 days and the C130 aircraft amounts to R2
                  535 459-00. The Government of the Republic of Mozambique
                  has undertaken to pay for the costs of the fuel.


         5. The Department of Foreign Affairs is responsible for such
              costs.

         6. I will also communicate this report to the Members of the
              National Council of Provinces, and wish to request that you
              bring the contents of this report to the notice of the
              National Assembly.

         Regards

         T M Mbeki


     (2)    Draft declaration for the Conference of Presiding Officers of
         National Parliaments at UN Headquarters from 30 August to 1
         September 2000, prepared by the Conference Preparatory Committee
         at its meeting in Geneva on 31 January and 1 February 2000


         The parliamentary vision for international cooperation at the dawn
         of the third millennium


         (1)     We, Speakers and Presiding Officers of Parliaments, are
              meeting at the United Nations in New York on the eve of the
              Millennium Assembly to pledge our commitment to international
              cooperation, with a stronger United Nations at its core. We
              resolve to ensure that our parliaments contribute more
              substantively to this cooperation by making the voice of the
              peoples heard, thereby introducing a more manifestly
              democratic dimension into international decision-making and
              cooperation. To help impart fresh momentum to the United
              Nations, parliaments must be more closely associated with its
              work so as to give real meaning to the opening words of the
              United Nations Charter: "We, the peoples of the United
              Nations".

         Main challenges at the dawn of the third millennium

         (2)     As we enter the new millennium, we must pursue together
              the ideals enshrined in the Charter and work to address the
              main challenges facing the world community: the achievement of
              international peace and security, democracy, respect for human
              rights, sustainable development and the ensuing social
              progress.

         (3)     We reaffirm the principles of the Universal Declaration on
              Democracy adopted by the Inter-Parliamentary Union and pledge
              to work towards the establishment of a culture of democracy.
              An elected parliament that represents all components of
              society and has the requisite powers and means to express the
              will of the people by adopting legislation and by continuously
              overseeing the action of the government is indispensable for
              guaranteeing the people's rights and liberties and securing
              civil peace and harmonious development.

         (4)     Democracy is founded on the rule of law and on respect for
              human rights, which are themselves based on the precept that
              nothing must infringe upon human dignity. We reaffirm the need
              to ensure the equal rights and opportunities of men and women,
              thus promoting a genuine partnership between them in all
              spheres. We also reaffirm the need to promote a climate of
              tolerance and to safeguard diversity, pluralism and the right
              to be different, which implies protecting the rights of
              persons belonging to minorities.

         (5)     The principle according to which no one is above the law
              and all are equal before it must also hold true for relations
              between sovereign states, which are equal in terms of rights
              and whose peoples have the right to self-determination and to
              choose their political system freely and democratically.


         (6)     We reaffirm our determination to see to it that our states
              honour their commitments under the United Nations Charter.
              States must ensure that their conduct conforms to
              international law, especially human rights and international
              humanitarian law. Respect for the instruments of international
              humanitarian law is essential and we will continue to work for
              the establishment of an International Criminal Court that is
              non-discriminatory and universal.
         (7)     We reiterate our commitment to general and complete
              disarmament under effective international control, in
              particular nuclear disarmament and the elimination of weapons
              of mass destruction, including chemical and biological
              weapons, and of "smart" weapons and anti-personnel mines. We
              remain equally committed to cooperation in the fight against
              terrorism, drug trafficking and organised crime.

         (8)     Peace based on solid and sincere foundations requires a
              more just world, as we firmly believe that all future action
              must seek to ensure sustainable economic and social
              development that is people-centred. We must work to create
              national and international conditions conducive to social
              development, social integration, the eradication of poverty
              and the reduction of unemployment.

         (9)     Preserving and making the best use of the environment are
              essential prerequisites for sustainable development.
              Accordingly, we must not meet our own needs at the expense of
              future generations. In conformity with the conclusions of the
              Earth Summit, the world must pay particular attention to
              water, energy and transport issues, to ways of integrating
              environmental costs and benefits into business, and to the
              impact of the state of the environment on the overall economy.

         (10) Globalisation is creating a new situation. Increased trade,
              new technology, growing foreign investment and expanding
              information-sharing are fuelling economic growth and human
              progress. However, these developments have benefited the
              developed nations more than developing countries and the
              latter are experiencing serious problems in implementing
              international trade agreements. There is a need to ensure that
              the opportunities and benefits of globalisation are shared
              more widely and that the right to development is respected.
              Here, the World Trade Organization must seek to ensure both
              free and fair trade producing long-term sustainable benefits.
         (11) In the poorest countries of the world, debt is a major
              constraint and a very real impediment to development. We urge
              the international community to seize the momentum generated by
              the transition to a new millennium to reduce substantially the
              debt of these countries and to cancel the public debt of the
              heavily indebted poor countries. These measures should be
              carried out in such a way as to avoid shifting the burden to
              other developing countries. Debtor countries must, for their
              part, introduce transparent mechanisms of control in order to
              ensure that the benefits of debt relief result in the socio-
              economic development of their peoples. We also call for
              greater efforts to reverse the decline in official development
              assistance.

         The United Nations in the twenty-first century

         (12) We reaffirm our adherence to the purposes and principles set
              out in the UN Charter and in the international instruments
              adopted since the founding of the world body. We are convinced
              that the UN is needed more than ever before and must remain
              the cornerstone of strong and effective global cooperation. We
              rededicate ourselves to strengthening the world organisation
              and urge members to provide it with the necessary human and
              financial resources.

         (13) There is a need to continue and complete the United Nations
              reform process. The reforms must be based on strict adherence
              to the principles of democracy and respect for the sovereign
              equality of all UN member States. We commit ourselves to work
              towards that end. We must also work to ensure that the United
              Nations is the primary forum for the debate on development
              assistance.

         The evolution of international relations

         (14) There has been a momentous evolution in international
              relations, which are no longer limited to traditional
              diplomacy. The development of multilateral cooperation, whose
              field of action continues to grow, has added new features to
              international relations. International cooperation henceforth
              requires different working methods and the participation of
              new actors. In particular, action to honour the commitments
              assumed in international and regional forums, which are now
              more important than ever, demands the involvement of
              parliaments, and many issues addressed by parliaments at the
              national level have an international dimension.

         (15) These new approaches are all the more necessary in the light
              of the far-reaching global changes that have occurred in
              recent years. We are witnessing a technological revolution of
              unprecedented dimensions. Extraordinary progress in
              communications makes it possible today to follow events
              instantaneously around the globe. Today's world is
              increasingly described as a global village to signify a
              smaller world and one that is dramatically more interdependent
              than ever before. Economic activities of all sorts, at home
              and abroad, by national and transnational companies,
              investment, trade and cross-border flows of capital tie the
              world's nations closer together, as does the growing
              realisation that the world's resources are finite.

         (16) The increasing complexity and globalisation of developments
              in the political, economic, social, environmental and cultural
              fields require parliaments and their members, more than ever
              before, to play their role in enabling citizens and society as
              a whole to understand and cope with the interconnections
              between globalisation and their daily lives and to translate
              their concerns into national and international policy.
              Otherwise, international cooperation and decision-making might
              eventually be seen as posing a threat to national or local
              interests and even democracy.

         (17) Globalisation and the pre-eminence of economic factors in the
              development of nations make it imperative to strengthen
              political processes and the link between citizens and their
              representatives. Under these circumstances, it is also crucial
              to reinforce the role of parliament and its members as
              intermediaries between a complex international decision-making
              process and citizens.


         The parliamentary dimension of international cooperation


         (18) We call upon all parliaments and their world organisation -
              the Inter-Parliamentary Union - to provide a parliamentary
              dimension to international cooperation. Parliament is made up
              of men and women elected by the people to represent them and
              express their aspirations. It is the organ of State that
              allows society in all its diversity to participate in the
              political process. Parliaments embody the sovereignty of the
              people and can, in all legitimacy, contribute to expressing
              the will of the State internationally.

         (19) To provide the parliamentary dimension, parliaments and their
              members must assume increased responsibility in international
              relations, play a more active role at the national, regional
              and global levels, and generally reinforce parliamentary
              diplomacy.

         (20) The parliamentary dimension must be provided by parliaments
              themselves first of all at the national level in four distinct
              but interconnected ways:


              (i) Influencing their respective countries' policy on matters
                     dealt with in the United Nations and other
                     international negotiating forums;
              (ii)     Keeping themselves informed of the progress and
                     outcome of these negotiations;
              (iii)    Deciding on ratification, where the Constitution so
                     foresees, of texts and treaties signed by governments;
                     and
              (iv)     Contributing actively to the subsequent
                     implementation process.


         (21) To achieve this objective, we undertake to review within our
              respective parliaments how best to make use of current
              parliamentary procedures so that parliament, with an active
              input by all parties and members, can make an appropriate
              contribution to governmental negotiations at the international
              level. Information-gathering should be reinforced to enable
              parliament to keep abreast of developments on international
              issues. Parliaments should also play a more proactive role in
              processes relating to the ratification of and compliance with
              international agreements. Throughout, parliament has a
              particular responsibility to engage the public in a continuous
              dialogue and facilitate its input into the decision-making
              process.

         (22) At the regional level, parliaments should make the best
              possible use of regional inter-parliamentary organisations and
              through them seek to influence the corresponding
              intergovernmental bodies. Parliaments should examine closely
              the work of such organisations in order to increase their
              efficiency and avoid duplication. They should also exchange
              experiences with a view to improving and simplifying national
              legislation.

         (23) At the international level, concurrently with the
              reinforcement of the political input of national parliaments
              into the process of inter-State cooperation, the Inter-
              Parliamentary Union should be consolidated as a world
              organisation for inter-parliamentary cooperation and for
              relaying the vision and will of its members to
              intergovernmental organisations.

         (24) Thus, we hereby solemnly confirm our support for the Inter-
              Parliamentary Union and our determination to participate in
              its work with renewed vigour, thus giving the IPU the means to
              discharge to the full the mission entrusted to it. In this
              process we also call upon the IPU to undertake such statutory
              and structural reforms as may be required to strengthen the
              organisation and its institutional links with parliaments.
         (25) By implementing this declaration, we propose to contribute
              substantively to international cooperation and to make the
              voice of the peoples heard within the United Nations, thereby
              pursuing the lofty ideals enshrined in the Charter and meeting
              the challenges facing the world community in terms of
              achieving peace, democracy, sustainable development and social
              progress.

         (26) We decide to convey this document to our parliaments, as
              appropriate, and to urge them to do everything possible to
              ensure that it is followed up in a practical and effective
              manner. We also request our governments to bring this
              declaration to the attention of the United Nations General
              Assembly for debate. Finally, we call upon the United Nations
              and the Inter-Parliamentary Union to seek ways of
              strengthening their institutional links and practical
              cooperation.

2.    The Minister of Finance:


     The Treasury Memorandum on changes in the form of the Estimate of
     Expenditure for 2000-2001.

     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance and the Standing
     Committee on Public Accounts, and


     (a)    the committee must confer in terms of Rule 303(3)(a), and

     (b)    the Portfolio Committee on Finance to report.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    First Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts, dated 9
     February 2000:


     The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
     General Report of the Auditor-General on the Accounts of the National
     Government for the financial year 1997-98 [RP 96-99], reports as
     follows:


     A.     On 1 December 1999, the Committee heard evidence from the
         outgoing Auditor-General, Mr H E Kluever, as well as from the
         recently appointed Acting Director-General of State Expenditure,
         Ms M Ramos, on a number of aspects relating to financial
         management in the public sector.


         1. The Committee noted Mr Kluever's concerns regarding the
              following:


              (1) Inadequate cash-flow, invoice and debtor management at a
                  large number of departments.

              (2) Lack of appropriate measurable objectives and performance
                  indicators in most departments, resulting in inadequate
                  evaluation of the efficiency and effectiveness of service
                  and product delivery.

              (3) Inadequate use of management information systems and/or
                  unavailability of proper management information.

              (4) The limited effectiveness of internal control systems, in
                  particular internal audit functions, at most departments.

              (5) The poor standard of financial statements of several
                  departments, at provincial and local level.

              (6) The daunting challenge facing individual departments, and
                  the Departments of Finance and of State Expenditure as
                  project managers, with regard to the implementation of
                  the Public Finance Management Act on 1 April 2000.


         2. However, the Committee also noted Ms Ramos's evidence that -


              (1) a number of recent changes have created the foundations
                  for long-term financial management budgeting and fiscal
                  management planning;

              (2) budget process reforms have been significant, and that
                  improvements in intergovernmental budgeting have been
                  effected;

              (3) attempts are continuing to match policy priorities with
                  expenditure priorities;

              (4) interventions in terms of section 100 of the Constitution
                  have resulted in improved financial management in the
                  provinces concerned;

              (5) fiscal discipline has improved, and that it forms the
                  cornerstone of the strategy of the Finance Ministry; and

              (6) revenue and debt management have also improved.


     B.     Previous recommendations of Public Accounts Committee


         1. Having heard evidence from both witnesses, the Committee set
              out to determine to what extent recommendations contained in
              the Third Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts,
              dated 3 March 1999, needed to be followed up. In that Third
              Report, that Committee recommended, inter alia, that -


              (1) target dates for the completion of each stage with
                  measurable outputs and outcomes in respect of each of the
                  programmes initiated by the Departments of State
                  Expenditure and of Finance to improve financial
                  management be provided to the Committee;

              (2) thereafter, the Departments of State Expenditure and of
                  Finance report to the Committee on a quarterly basis on
                  the progress made with the successful implementation of
                  the various programmes;

              (3) legislation relating to local government financial
                  management be revised urgently with a view to improving
                  deficient control and accountability measures;
              (4) the Cabinet initiate an awareness programme at all levels
                  of government that would ensure financial management
                  becoming a priority in all public sector bodies, and that
                  sufficient capacity will be developed in these bodies to
                  carry out their functions;

              (5) an oversight committee be established, at the highest
                  level of the Department of State Expenditure, to monitor
                  and promote the efficient operation of all audit
                  committees in national and provincial government
                  departments;

              (6) the maintenance of financial control systems be made a key
                  performance indicator of all line-function managers in
                  the public sector; and

              (7) a Public Finance Management Act implementation plan, which
                  includes the drafting of the norms and standards required
                  by the Constitution, be sufficiently comprehensive and
                  structured to ensure success.


         2. Observations


              (1) The Committee noted that quarterly reports required by it
                  regarding progress made with the various programmes
                  referred to in paragraph B.1.(1) above have not been
                  provided, nor information on target dates and other
                  detail in respect of each of the initiatives.

              (2) The Committee noted that no legislation relating to local
                  government financial management has been tabled in
                  Parliament since the adoption of the Third Report.

              (3) The Committee noted that a monitoring function for
                  internal audit within the wider public sector had been
                  established at the Office of the Accountant-General. It
                  is accepted that the Committee would be informed of the
                  findings of this monitoring unit.

              (4) The Committee noted that the Director-General of the
                  Department of Public Service and Administration had
                  issued a directive to all accounting officers at national
                  and provincial government level on 16 August 1999,
                  requiring "all heads of department [to] ensure that the
                  maintenance of financial control systems, where
                  applicable, is included as a key performance area in job
                  descriptions, performance management systems ... and
                  performance agreements ..." in respect of senior
                  management and staff responsible for the administration
                  or management of financial resources. The Committee has
                  not been informed of any other Cabinet initiatives, as
                  envisaged by the recommendation in paragraph B.1.(4)
                  above.

              (5) The Committee noted with concern that the Department of
                  State Expenditure had not yet provided the implementation
                  plan required in paragraph B.1.(7) above, especially
                  since the implementation of the Public Finance Management
                  Act is to take place with effect from 1 April 2000.
                  However, the Committee was provided with a plan on 20
                  January 2000, which outlined the Department's
                  prioritisation of the Act's provisions and the various
                  stages of implementation. The Acting Director-General of
                  State Expenditure undertook to follow this up with a
                  detailed implementation plan, reportedly addressing
                  immediate as well as medium- and long-term implementation
                  plans, including various training and capacity-building
                  initiatives.


         3. Closing remarks


              The Committee welcomes the assurance by the Acting Director-
              General of State Expenditure that in future the Treasury will
              be playing a more proactive role in assisting departments with
              regard to financial management problems, and that it will be
              ensuring that there is compliance with the norms and standards
              set by the Public Finance Management Act. The Committee is
              also looking forward to a closer working relationship between
              itself and the Treasury.

              Given the changes that public sector management will be faced
              with in the context of not only the impact of the Public
              Finance Management Act, but also the impact of the new Public
              Service Management Framework that came into operation on 1
              July 1999, the Committee has resolved to closely monitor
              progress made and the impact of the implementation on
              financial management in all spheres of the public sector.


     The Committee recommends accordingly.

     Report to be considered.

2.    Second Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts, dated 10
     February 2000:


     The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Report
     of the Auditor-General on the Accounts of Vote 32 - South African
     Revenue Service for the period 1 April 1997 to 30 September 1997 [RP203-
     98], referred to it, reports as follows:


         Unauthorised expenditure: Listed - R6 423 288

         1. Non-compliance with virement - R6 357 710


              During the audit it was determined that certain payments in
              Program 2 - Collections, had been misallocated in the
              financial system. When these errors were corrected, it became
              clear that the budget for a subdivision in the program was
              exceeded by R6 357 710. This over-expenditure is regarded as
              unauthorised, as the Accounting Officer did not grant prior
              virement approval for savings in other subdivisions to be
              utilised.

              The failure by the Accounting Officer to take remedial action
              can be attributed to incorrect management information due to
              the misallocations.
              The Committee wishes to express its serious concern about the
              poor quality of the management information on which the
              Accounting Officer based his decision, as well as the lack of
              proper internal control procedures to detect errors.

              As the contravention was of a technical nature and the budget
              for the total programme was not exceeded, the Committee
              recommends that the transgression be validated by Parliament.


         2. Live Video Conference - R65 578


              The former Deputy Minister of Finance instructed the
              Department, on 31 July 1997, to arrange a live video
              conference for 5 August 1997. The purpose of the conference
              was to inform staff in the Department of the implications of
              the pending administrative autonomy and the impact thereof on
              their careers in the Department. Draft legislation relating to
              the autonomy of the Department was to be discussed in
              Parliament during the afternoon of 5 August 1997.

              The Department did not invite tenders according to the normal
              procurement procedures due to the limited time available,
              although telephonic quotations were requested from seven
              companies. According to the Department, the company appointed
              was the only organisation that could host the live video
              conference at five different venues throughout the country.

              The Department did contact the Office of the State Tender
              Board prior to the appointment, but reportedly was not
              prepared to forward a submission for consideration.

              The Committee is dismayed at the disregard for tender
              regulations. The Tender Board has structures in place to
              consider properly motivated cases, to an unlimited amount, at
              short notice.

              The fact that senior members of the Executive in the
              Department knowingly and deliberately bypassed proper channels
              is unacceptable and sets a bad example to junior officials.
              The fact that the Department has thereby elected to place the
              onus on Parliament to validate this transaction is further
              cause for grave concern.

              As the services were rendered and the State suffered no loss,
              the Committee nevertheless recommends that the amount be
              authorised by Parliament.


     The Committee recommends accordingly.

     Report to be considered.

3.    Third Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts, dated 10
     February 2000:


     The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Report
     of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 24 - Public
     Enterprises for the year ended 31 March 1998 [RP 195-98], referred to
     it, reports as follows:


         Unauthorised expenditure: R350 000

         A consultant had been engaged since 1994 to advise Aventura
         Limited on its restructuring. Although the Minister for Public
         Enterprises was informed about the tender process for the
         appointment of these advisers, no written agreement between the
         consultant and the Ministry for Public Enterprises had been
         entered into.


         According to an affirmation by the former Minister for Public
         Enterprises, the agreement with the said advisor was purely on a
         verbal basis, and the amount of R350 000 had been agreed upon as
         the final payment to the consultant for services rendered, after
         which the verbal agreement was terminated.

         The Committee wishes to express its dissatisfaction at the
         Department's and the Minister's disregard for State Tender Board
         directives. It is unacceptable that rules and regulations are
         contravened. Due to the gravity of the transgression, the
         Committee is unable to recommend authorisation of this amount,
         unless the Department or the former Minister provides, within one
         month, compelling reasons as to why it should be authorised.


     The Committee recommends accordingly.

     Report to be considered.

4.    Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts, dated 10
     February 2000:


     The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the Report
     of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 16 - Home
     Affairs and the Financial Statements of the Government Printing Works
     for the year ended 31 March 1998 [RP 187-98], referred to it, reports
     as follows:


         Unauthorised expenditure: R1 600 000

         Unauthorised expenditure of R1,6 million was incurred for three
         months, from January to March 1998, before the relevant contract,
         for providing accommodation to illegal immigrants, was renewed.
         The Office of the State Tender Board only granted approval for the
         extension of the contract for the period 1 April 1998 to 30 June
         1998, and expenditure incurred for the three months mentioned
         remained unauthorised, even after appeal by the Department.

         The Committee took note of the various efforts by the Department
         to obtain timely approval, but wishes to express its
         dissatisfaction at the Department's disregard for State Tender
         Board directives. It is unacceptable that rules and regulations
         are contravened, even in cases where the projects achieve a
         desirable objective.

         The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer take the
         necessary steps to limit the occurrence of transactions where
         approval is required and to prevent the incidence of unauthorised
         expenditure.

         Notwithstanding the above, the Committee recommends that the
         amount of R1 600 000 be authorised by Parliament, as no
         misappropriations have been revealed.


     The Committee recommends accordingly.

     Report to be considered.

                           WEDNESDAY, 1 MARCH 2000

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Reports of the Auditor-General on the -

     (1)    Financial Statements of Vote 25 - Public Enterprises for 1998-99
         [RP 149-99];

     (2)    Financial Statements of Vote 10 - Correctional Services for 1998-
         99 [RP 133-99];

     (3)    Financial Statements of Vote 2 - Deputy President and the
         National Youth Commission for 1998-99 [RP 127-99];

     (4)    Financial Statements of Vote 27 - Public Service Commission for
         1998-99 [RP 151-99];

     (5)    Financial Statements of Vote 7 - Central Statistical Service for
         1998-99 [RP 157-99];

     (6)    Financial Statements of Vote 8 - Communications for 1998-99 [RP
         131-99];

     (7)    Financial Statements of Vote 13 - Environmental Affairs and
         Tourism for 1998-99 [RP 136-99];

     (8)    Financial Statements of Vote 18 - Housing for 1998-99 [RP 142-
         99];

     (9)    Financial Statements of Vote 20 - Independent Complaints
         Directorate for 1998-99 [RP 144-99];

     (10)Financial Statements of Vote 32 - Sport and Recreation for 1998-99
         [RP 155-99].
     To be referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts.

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development:


     (1)    Reports of the South African Law Commission on the -


         (a)     Recognition of Class Actions and Public Interest Actions
              in South African Law, Project 88 [RP 181-99];

         (b)     Euthanasia and Artificial Preservation of Life, Project 86
              [RP 186-99].


     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
     Development and the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
     Affairs.


     (2)    Report of the South African Law Commission on the Interception
         and Monitoring Prohibition Act, 1992 (Act No 127 of 1992), Project
         105 [RP 203-99].


     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
     Development, the Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security and the
     Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs.

