---
title: 'National Assembly - 27 September 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2000-09-27
---

WEDNESDAY, 27 SEPTEMBER 2000
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 15:04.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

QUESTIONS AND REPLIES - see that book.

                          UNPARLIAMENTARY LANGUAGE

                                  (Ruling)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Before proceeding with notices of motion, I wish
to give a ruling concerning a notice of motion given on Tuesday, 19
September. In that notice the hon Mr Gibson used the quotation:
``Patriotism is the last refuge of a scoundrel'', to cast a reflection on
another member by linking the quotation directly to a statement made by
Deputy Minister Pahad.

Mr Gibson sought to justify his statement on the basis that he was merely
quoting a recognised English saying. I wish to point out to him that it has
often been ruled in this House that accusations are equally offensive and
damaging if they are made indirectly or by using quotations. This is true
even if, as was pointed out to us by Deputy Minister Matthews, the
quotation is from a notable English author of the eighteenth century.
[Interjections.]

In the normal course of events an unparliamentary expression in a notice of
motion is edited out, and the member informed accordingly. In this
instance, however, a point of order was raised at the first opportunity,
and in those circumstances I regard it as appropriate that the words be
withdrawn. Accordingly, I call upon the Chief Whip of the official
opposition to withdraw his reflection on the Deputy Minister of Foreign
Affairs.

Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Speaker, the hon Deputy Minister is not a scoundrel
and I have no problem with withdrawing my remark.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr K A MOLOTO: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the annual meeting of the World Bank and the International
       Monetary Fund was met with antiglobalisation protesters in Prague and
       in South Africa;

  (2) believes that these institutions could effectively oversee the
       process of globalisation if there are mechanisms for meaningful
       participation by developing countries and greater transparency in
       decision-making;

  (3) urges world leaders to move speedily in ensuring that the World Bank
       and the International Monetary Fund are transformed; and
  (4) calls on the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund to cancel
       the debt of the poor countries.

[Applause.]

Mr R JANKIELSOHN: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with disapproval the abuse of power by the ANC-led Vrede
       Transitional Local Council in its decision to allow political parties
       and individual members to use vehicles and other municipal facilities
       free of charge;

  (2) regrets that the ANC is more and more fusing the roles of the party
       and the role of the Government in all its spheres thereby undermining
       the sound principles of democracy; and

  (3) urges the Vrede TLC to withdraw this decision immediately, as this
       decision could be a criminal offence with dire consequences for the
       city council and the ratepayers of Vrede, and could lead to
       councillors having to reimburse the ratepayers for the corrupt and
       illegal misuse of the ratepayers' property.

Mr M A MZIZI: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I will move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  hungry people need to eat, the homeless need to be sheltered and
           the jobless need to be employed;

       (b)  the present efforts to deal with these problems have not made an
           appreciable impact in resolving the crisis; and

       (c)  the crisis is, in fact, deepening and worsening with over 30 000
           jobs having been lost in the formal sector this year; and


  (2) calls on this Government not to delay addressing this problem
       aggressively and with the utmost determination  encouraging the
       resolution of differences in Nedlac thereby averting further
       destabilising strike action.

Mr D J SITHOLE: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  with concern the ruling by the Pretoria High Court not to allow
           hundreds of Alexandra flood victims to move into houses built
           for temporary shelter on the grounds of Leeukop Prison; and

       (b)  that this ruling was made in favour of the Kyalami Ridge
           Environmental Association and residents citing lack of
           consultation, crime and environmental concern;


  (2) believes that the poor have a constitutional right to shelter;

  (3) commends the Government for affording temporary shelter to victims of
       the floods in Alexandra; and

  (4) calls on the stakeholders to engage in a meaningful dialogue and
       reach a compromise that is in the interest of all.

[Applause.]

Dr P J RABIE: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with alarm the lack of investor confidence in South Africa in
       the light of the following: According to the latest figures from the
       South African Reserve Bank, foreign direct investment has decreased
       from R4,5 billion in the first quarter to R300 million in the second
       quarter of this year;

  (2) is of the opinion that this is a shocking fact, because foreign
       direct investment is crucial to spur sustained growth in the South
       African economy and concomitant job creation; and

  (3) urges the Government to reprimand Cosatu for its extremely uncalled-
       for and hostile verbal attacks on business at its seventh national
       congress, as it will only contribute towards further harming investor
       confidence and the creation of job opportunities, for which it
       obviously has no regard, and believes it is high time that Cosatu
       realises that foreign investors owe South Africa nothing.

Mr S J DE BEER: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I will move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -
       (a)  with dismay the reported use of the phrase ``one oppressor, one
           bullet'' by a provincial office-bearer of the PAC; and

       (b)  the reported statements of the said office-bearer that the PAC
           condones the Tempe murders and, by implication, racially
           inspired violence;


  (2) reaffirms its collective commitment to the peaceful resolution of all
       disputes by all political parties represented in the House;

  (3) strongly condemns these deplorable statements as nothing other than
       hate-speech; and

  (4) calls on the PAC to immediately and unambiguously discipline the
       office-bearer involved, in order to prove its commitment to peaceful
       race relations, especially in the run-up to the local government
       elections.

Mr J H NASH: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:
  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the nationwide strike which will take place in Swaziland
           tomorrow in protest against the country's proposed amendment to
           the labour relations Act; and

       (b)  that the New National Party and the Democratic Party have been
           making noises about the occupation of white farms in Zimbabwe,
           and are silent on the issue of the onslaught on workers' rights
           in Swaziland; and


  (2) calls on the government of Swaziland and the unions to engage in
       meaningful discussions and reach a compromise that is in the interest
       of all Swazi people and the region as a whole.

[Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I will move on behalf of the ACDP:


  That the House -


  (1) recognises the beauty and uniqueness of the Cape floral kingdom;

  (2) consequently welcomes the long-term strategic conservation plan for
       this area announced by Cape Action Plan for the Environment (Cape),
       which has been hailed as the most exciting development in the
       conservation of the region for the past 100 years;

  (3) notes that this is the first time in the world that a conservation
       plan has been developed, which is aimed at protecting an entire
       floral kingdom by integrating social, economic and biodiversity
       concerns in the 90 000 square kilometers of the Cape floral kingdom;
       and

  (4) commends Cape Action Plan for the Environment (Cape) for its
       outstanding study completed over the past two years.

Mrs M A A NJOBE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the death toll in the cholera outbreak in Empangeni, KwaZulu-
           Natal, has risen to 13; and

       (b)  more than a thousand people have been treated for the disease
           since it was first identified in the rural communities in
           northern KwaZulu-Natal;


  (2) expresses its condolences to the families of the deceased; and

  (3) calls on all communities to follow safety regulations, and to work
       with the local authorities to ensure that the outbreak of cholera is
       brought under control.

Mr V C GORE: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the Japanese government intends passing legislation to provide
           vouchers for IT training, where those over the age of 20 would
           be eligible for vouchers of about $56 to help defray the cost of
           courses on how to use PCs and the Internet; and

       (b)  the Democratic Alliance has long advocated the use of voucher
           system training and education; and


  (2) calls on -


       (a)  the Minister of Education to investigate such an excellent
           scheme to ensure that South Africa does not fall on the wrong
           side of the digital divide; and

       (b)  the Government to seriously address the problem of South
           Africa's worsening position in the global race to become
           `connected', primarily caused by Telkom's reluctance to provide
           bandwidth to other players in the telecommunications sector.

[Applause.]

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) congratulates Globe and the Committee on Environmental Affairs and
       Tourism for its excellent conference on energy security;

  (2) takes note of the warning that if current water usage on the
       continent and globe continue, we will have no usable water on the
       African continent by 2050; and

  (3) requests the Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism, the
       Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs and the Minister of Water
       Affairs and Forestry to take bold initiatives to highlight and avert
       this threat, to prevent us from repeating the Y2K panic, and to
       prevent the outbreak of even further violence, particularly in
       Africa, over water usage.

Mr C J MALULEKE-HLANEKI: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the
next sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  on Tuesday, the Minister of Public Works, Stella Sigcau,
           launched a community-based public works project worth R2,7
           million to upgrade schools in northern KwaZulu-Natal; and

       (b)  the Public Works department has invested over R1,1 billion in
           community-based poverty alleviation projects in rural areas
           since 1996;


  (2) acknowledges initiatives by the ANC-led Government to embark on
       projects that improve the living conditions of the poorest of the
       poor; and

  (3) congratulates the Minister on this great mission.

[Applause.]

Mnr A S VAN DER MERWE: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op
die volgende sittingsdag namens die Nuwe NP sal voorstel:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) kennis neem van die skokkende feit dat die graad van wreedheid van
       plaasaanvalle in Suid-Afrika ernstig toeneem as die volgende in ag
       geneem word:


       (a)  sedert 1994 is meer as 900 mense in plaasaanvalle vermoor;

       (b)  ondanks die moratorium op misdaadstatistiek dui verslae van
           assessore in die versekeringsbedryf daarop dat die geweld wat
           met plaasaanvalle gepaard gaan, aan die toeneem is;

       (c)  dit is nie net boere wat deurloop onder die geweld nie, maar
           plaaswerkers is toenemend die teiken van plaasaanvalle; en

       (d)  die geweld plaas toenemend sielkundige druk op mense op die
           platteland en lei tot 'n weerstand daarteen om die beroep van
           landbou te beoefen en dit hou gevolglik ernstige gevolge in vir
           die ekonomie en indiensneming op die platteland; en


  (2) 'n beroep op die Regering doen om erns te maak met die saak aangesien
       nie net menselewens op die spel is nie, maar ook die verarming van
       mense op die platteland weens die ekonomiese impak van die geweld.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr A S van der Merwe: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the
next sitting day I shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the shocking fact that the degree of brutality of farm attacks
       in South Africa is increasing significantly if the following is taken
       into account:


       (a)  more than 900 people have been murdered in farm attacks since
           1994;

       (b)  despite the moratorium on crime statistics, reports by assessors
           in the insurance industry indicate that the violence associated
           with farm attacks is on the increase;

       (c)  not only farmers are suffering as a result of the attacks, as
           farmworkers are increasingly becoming the target of farm
           attacks; and

       (d)  the violence is placing increasing psychological pressure on
           people in rural areas and is leading to a resistance to
           practising the profession of farming, which has serious
           consequences for the economy and employment in the rural areas;
           and


  (2) appeals to the Government to treat this issue seriously, since not
       only human lives are at stake, but also the impoverishment of people
       in the rural areas as a result of the economic impact of the
       violence.]

Miss O N MNDENDE: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) urges the Government, in dealing with local government in rural
       areas, to incorporate the good intentions of section 185 of our
       Constitution which deals with the promotion and protection of
       cultural, religious and linguistic communities;

  (2) warns against the implication that the Government is deliberately
       replacing the indigenous knowledge system under traditional leaders
       without their consent, as we all hear from the media, by imposing
       western systems under the guise of democracy and transformation;

  (3) urges the Government to try and seek common ground between these
       schools of thought at an equal level, and create a healthy dialogue
       with no preconceived solutions from an assumed superior structure, so
       that there are no matters arising after the elections; and

  (4) acknowledges the truth that proper dialogue will be effective only if
       the roots of all involved are respected and promoted.

Prof I J MOHAMED: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with sadness the death of four miners following a rockfall at
       the Kloof gold mine;

  (2) expresses its sympathy and condolences to the family and colleagues
       of the miners killed in the rockfall;

  (3) commends the Minister of Minerals and Energy, Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka,
       for setting up an annual review process to inspect safety at mines;
       and
  (4) calls on the Ministry to meet with all stakeholders in an attempt to
       find a speedy resolution to reducing mining accidents throughout
       South Africa.

[Applause.]

                      DEATH OF MR WILLEM VAN SCHALKWYK

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr D H M GIBSON: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek stel sonder kennisgewing voor:


  Dat die Huis -


  (1) simpatie en meegevoel betuig met die familie van mnr Willem van
       Schalkwyk, die veldwagter wat die naweek gesterf het in die
       brandbestrydingsoperasie in die Montagu-pas in die Suid-Kaap;

  (2) dank betuig aan alle individue wat in lewensgevaarlike omstandighede
       help om brand te bestry;

  (3) hulde bring aan diegene wat met hul lewe boet in die uitvoering van
       hul belangrike taak;

  (4) kennis neem van die wegholbrande in die Suid-Kaap; en

  (5) 'n beroep op die Regering doen om alles in sy vermoë te doen om
       sodanige brande te voorkom en te bestry.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Mr D H M GIBSON: Mr Chairperson, I move without notive:


  That the House -


  (1) expresses sympathy and condolences with the family of Mr Willem van
       Schalkwyk, the game ranger who died over the weekend during the fire-
       fighting exercise in the Montagu Pass in the Southern Cape;

  (2) expresses gratitude to all those individuals who help to fight fires
       in life-threatening circumstances;

  (3) honours those who lose their lives in the execution of their
       important task;

  (4) notes the runaway fires in the Southern Cape; and

  (5) requests the Government to do everything within its means to prevent
       and fight such fires.]

Agreed to.

                                 NEW MEMBER

                               (Announcement)

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! That the vacancy caused by the
termination of membership of Dr E A Schoeman has been filled by the
nomination of Mr J W le Roux with effect from 13 September 2000. The member
has made and subscribed the oath in the Speaker's office.

Perhaps hon members would like to see the hon Mr Le Roux. Would the hon
member please stand up. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Mr Chairperson, can I request the hon member Johnny
de Lange to prepare his punch for that new hon member? [Laughter.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! You can arrange that outside the
House. [Laughter.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: Mr Chairperson, may I address you on that point of order
and say that Mr Johnny de Lange is obviously needed again because Mr Manie
Schoeman said yesterday that he has not joined the ANC. [Laughter.]

                               POINTS OF ORDER

                                  (Ruling)

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Before we proceed to the first Order
of the Day, I would like to deal with two points of order raised on
Tuesday, 19 September 2000, by the hon L T Landers and the hon A C Nel,
respectively, during a speech by the hon Mr N S Bruce. I think they are all
present in the House.

The two hon members objected to the hon Mr Bruce saying: ``Yet the
Minister's friends just keep on getting richer,'' and then continuing his
speech by referring to, among others, the chairperson of the National
Lotteries Board.
 
Mr Landers objected on the grounds that Mr Bruce's statement reflected on
the integrity of the chairperson of the National Lotteries Board, and Mr
Nel on the grounds that it cast a serious reflection on the integrity of
the Minister of Trade and Industry.

Section 58 of the Constitution affords members of the National Assembly
freedom of speech, and this freedom of speech is qualified only by the
rules of order which the National Assembly imposes on itself. Remarks by
members can only be regarded as unparliamentary if they are made about
another member, or if they are made against an office bearer whose removal
from office is dependent upon a decision of this House. It should be noted
that the chairperson of the National Lotteries Board does not fall within
that category of office bearers.

Concerning the point of order raised by the hon Mr Landers, I have to
concede that the reference to the chairperson of the National Lotteries
Board is not unparliamentary. Nevertheless, I agree with the hon member
that the remark was perhaps unfair in that no substantiation was offered,
and the public office bearer concerned is unable to defend himself.
I should like to repeat an appeal made previously in this House that the
right of members to freedom of speech should not be lightly used to make
disparaging remarks about specific members of the public or public office
bearers.

Concerning the hon Mr Nel's point of order, I have studied the Hansard, and
I am satisfied that the remark by the hon Bruce was not directed at the hon
the Minister of Trade and Industry, and does not directly or indirectly
reflect upon the Minister's integrity.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF JOINT MONITORING COMMITTEE ON IMPROVEMENT OF
    QUALITY OF LIFE AND STATUS OF CHILDREN, YOUTH AND DISABLED PERSONS -
                          NATIONAL YOUTH COMMISSION

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted.

              DELAY IN PAYING OUT PROCEEDS OF NATIONAL LOTTERY

                          (Subject for Discussion)

Mr M C J VAN SCHALKWYK: Mr Chairman, on 25 June last year, President Mbeki,
referring to the National Lottery in his first speech as President in this
Parliament (Hansard, Joint Sittings, 1999, col 12) said:


  In a few months, it will be possible to allocate even more resources to
  the promotion of the good causes to which the Government and institutions
  ... are committed.

Now, more than a year later, nothing has come of that promise. What has
happened since that undertaking by President Mbeki to this Parliament? It
has been more than a year of contradictions and broken promises. Here are
the other contradictions. Firstly, the Minister of Trade and Industry,
normally one of the more able Ministers, claimed that the distribution of
the proceeds of the national lottery had been delayed because the amount in
the National Lottery Distribution Trust Fund was below projections. Yet,
Uthingo's commercial director argued: ``We budgeted for R50 million per
week, and that is what we are selling.'' With such contradictory
statements, who are we to believe?

Secondly, a senior member of the National Lotteries Board, in answering
criticism that the National Lotteries Board should have created a workable
distribution plan before starting the national lottery, said: ``Nobody knew
how it would turn out because it is our first national lottery.'' Yet
Uthingo toured Britain to study the lottery operations in that country, and
returned to South Africa confident that preparations were well on track for
the South African lottery. The British lottery only began payouts two years
after the start of its operations, so Uthingo should have expected these
problems and made appropriate provisions. When statements about lack of
knowledge are made, and are clearly contradicted by the facts, the question
of credibility again arises.

Thirdly, the Minister of Trade and Industry, as quoted by Sapa on 18 July,
denied ever having forced a charity to close down its fundraising schemes,
saying all that had been done was ``to require schemes to register with the
National Lotteries Board''. Yet, according to Sapa on 14 September,
Minister Erwin announced this month that charities could expect to receive
interim payments from the national lottery to assist them in their
financial difficulties ``due to the closure of their fundraising
lotteries''. In addition, the GCIS, when briefing a Cabinet meeting on 20
September, stated that ``Cabinet approved the implementation of interim
measures to assist charities experiencing financial difficulties due to the
closure of fundraising institutions''. Which statement is true?

Fourthly, the Lotteries Act stipulates that private society lotteries,
whose revenue is less than R1 million may spend no more than 50% on lottery
expenses and, for revenue exceeding R1 million, they may spend 10%. Yet,
the national lottery, according to the Financial Mail, spends more than 17%
of its revenue on costs. Why does this Government insist on holding
organisations and individuals to standards it does not require of itself?

Fifthly, following the Uthingo study tour to the United Kingdom, Uthingo's
communications director said that Camelot, the UK lottery operator, had
shown, since 1994, that it could run an efficient and profitable lottery.
Yet Camelot recently lost the right to run the UK lottery because of public
outrage about Camelot's directors unduly enriching themselves. It has been
argued repeatedly by this Government that the delay in payouts in South
Africa can be justified by the two-year delay in the UK payouts. But just
because the British lottery took two years is no excuse, especially when
Uthingo was supposed to have studied the British model.
All that Uthingo and the Department of Trade and Industry seem to have done
is to copy British mistakes. Additionally, it is reported that in Britain
charities continue their normal fundraising activities. It was not allowed
here. This excuse suddenly surfaced when Government was unable to meet its
own payout deadline - set by itself and nobody else - initially set for
July, then extended to October, and now pushed forward to early next year.

The position of the Government on the lottery seems about as clear as its
stance on the link between HIV and Aids. [Interjections.] These
contradictions and hollow promises must now stop. It is incumbent upon the
hon the Minister as the responsible Minister to clarify these issues for
the public.

Instead of doublespeak, the Minister must confirm the following facts.
Firstly, there is currently estimated to be more than R300 million waiting
to be disbursed from the lottery trust to so-called good causes. What is
the exact amount? Secondly, it is reported that when a member of the public
spends R2,50 buying a Lotto ticket, 31 cents goes to VAT, 43 cents to
costs, 109 cents to prize payouts, and only 65 cents to good causes. When
it is accepted that the pool of disposable income is strictly limited, it
can be convincingly argued that millionaires are being created at the
expense of the poor when payouts remain unpaid.

The SA National Council for Child Welfare, a well-known organisation, lost
R1 million in income from the Viva Trust in the first two months after the
lottery started. In a statement they argued, and I quote:


  It is unacceptable that no distribution agency has been appointed to
  allocate funding from the National Lottery to charities, and that
  charities now find themselves in a situation where services to children
  who are in dire need have to be threatened and curtailed. Whilst
  fundraising from various sources is diminishing, children are being
  abused, abandoned, orphaned by the HIV/Aids epidemic and living in
  shocking conditions of poverty throughout the country.

The community chest in the Western Cape alone has over the past nine years
raised an average of R2,8 million per annum through scratch cards, which
amount has been distributed to some 450 other welfare organisations in the
Western Cape. While poor and sick people and many children are suffering,
the Government is once again intellectualising inefficiency.

Nie-regeringsorganisasies, en organisasies wat doelwitte het met
lofwaardige oogmerke, bestaan merendeels uit vrywillige werkers wat dit
doen omdat hulle sterk voel oor 'n bepaalde saak. Ons indruk is dat baie
vrywilligers in hierdie sektor nou gedemotiveerd raak omdat hulle
inisiatief nou beperk word en hulle 'n administratiewe las opgelê word wat
tydsgewys dikwels bo hulle vermoë is.

Dit sal 'n jammerlike dag wees as ware medemenslikheid en die wil om
vrywillig tot diens te wees van jou medemens doodgemaak word deur die
Nasionale Lotery en die burokratiese rompslomp daarvan. Dit is immers wat
'n gemeenskap en 'n nasie saambind en sterk maak. Die Regering moet nie die
spreekwoordelike Groot Broer word wat naderhand die wil en die vermoë van
mense om deur hulle eie aksies goed te doen vernietig nie. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Nongovernmental organisations, and organisations with praiseworthy
objectives, consist for the most part of voluntary workers who are involved
because they feel strongly about a particular issue. Our impression is that
many volunteers in this sector are now becoming demotivated because their
initiative is being limited and an administrative burden is being imposed
on them, something which is often, in terms of time, impossible for them to
cope with.

It will be a sad day when true fellow-feeling and the desire to serve one's
fellow human beings voluntarily are killed by the National Lottery and its
bureaucratic red tape. After all, this is what unites and strengthens a
community and a nation. Government should not become the proverbial Big
Brother who eventually destroys the will and the ability of people to do
good by their own actions.]

Curiously enough, we now hear that emergency or interim payments will begin
shortly. With the local government elections scheduled for November this
year, the timing of this recent announcement about interim or emergency
payments starting in October must be questioned. [Interjections.] It
strains the bounds of credibility to expect the public to believe that this
very convenient timing was not the calculated result of narrow ANC
political considerations, and I will now argue why. [Interjections.]

We are all familiar with the tired Government argument that payouts were
delayed by the need to accumulate sufficient capital in the lottery trust
to ensure sustainable levels of distribution. This argument is particularly
feeble when one recalls that President Mbeki, in his opening address to
Parliament in June 1999, announced that payouts were due to begin in early
2000, a statement later contradicted by Mr Randal Williams, the Deputy
Director of Gambling and Lotteries, who announced that payments should
begin at the end of October, a date he later revised to early 2001.

Now, the Minister himself was quoted as saying the following: ``It is
regrettable that a junior official was quoted and his reference to March
2001 refers to an optimistic projection.''  Assuming that the need to build
sufficient capital reserves was known in advance, I want to know from the
Minister why such misleading announcements were made and why charities were
prevented from fundraising during this building period.

One of the fundamental concerns about the national lottery is the fact that
the distribution agency has yet to be established. If Government and
Uthingo studied lottery models and international examples prior to the
formation of the National Lottery, why then, I want to ask the Minister,
were the details of the formation of the distribution agency and
distribution criteria not established long in advance of the awarding of
the operating licence?

I want to tell the Minister that this concern is mirrored in the concerns
of the hundreds of NGOs and charities hoping to benefit from the eventual
lottery payout. These organisations are extremely suspicious about the
delay in announcing the distribution criteria. Could the Minister give this
House and the public of South Africa the unequivocal assurance that the
distribution of lottery revenues will not be dictated by narrow political
agendas?

Amongst those organisations to whom we have spoken, there is this constant
refrain: The belief that it is mostly those charities and organisations
with political links to the ANC that will benefit from these moneys.
[Interjections.] Members must wait for the example. The Minister must rest
assured that the public and opposition parties will scrutinise the list of
beneficiaries, when it is finally announced, to ensure that equity and
fairness rather than favour and patronage are the principles upon which
distribution is decided. The fact that the Nelson Mandela Children's Fund
was one of the first organisations to be granted permission by the National
Lotteries Board to conduct its own lottery does not augur well for these
principles. [Interjections.]

I want to say to the Minister that the national lottery could and should
have provided an injection of funding to NGOs, assisted in major poverty
alleviation and made a significantly positive impact on the living
conditions of millions of South Africans. Instead, through political and
administrative bungling and mismanagement, the lottery has simply become a
major disappointment and an embarrassment to both this Government and the
Minister.

The lottery debacle leaves the public wondering whether a better slogan for
the national lottery might not be ``Tata ma chance, tata ma mess''.
[Laughter.] It is up to Minister Erwin to convince this House today that
the lottery will not continue to be part of this litany of failures, and
that efficiency, fairness and good management will eventually be the
hallmarks of the national lottery. If the Minister fails in this task, the
public of South Africa might well be excused for believing that the South
African lottery has much in common with the state lottery of Zimbabwe in
which - surprise, surprise - one of the biggest winners was Zimbabwean
President Mr Robert Mugabe.

We would like to call on the Minister to make the people of South Africa
the winners of the South African lottery, and he must do it now, today.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mr L T LANDERS: Chairperson, the mess is not in the national lottery,
rather I would think, it is in the New NP. [Interjections.] The questions
before this House should be whether South Africa has a lottery that is
supported by the greater majority of its people, whether our national
lottery is sustainable and able to fund good causes which establish
projects which themselves are sustainable and meet the demands of our new
democracy, and whether the National Lotteries Board has built up sufficient
reserves in the National Lottery Distribution Trust Fund to fund good
causes in a satisfactory manner.

An HON MEMBER: What is a good cause?

Mr L T LANDERS: If the hon member wants to know what a good cause is, he
should go to our library here in Parliament and read the legislation that
we are talking about. Maybe the hon member will then learn something about
what a good cause is. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, no dialogue in the
House, please. Continue, hon member.

Mr L T LANDERS: When Parliament considered the Lotteries Bill in 1997, the
distribution of net proceeds of the National Lottery was one of the most
important aspects of that Bill. Of late, certain pressure groups have
complained that they have not received the funding that is due to them from
the National Lottery Distribution Trust Fund.

Allow me to place a few facts before this House so that we can debate this
matter from an informed basis. It was never the intention that the National
Lottery Distribution Trust Fund would be the sole source of support for
NGOs and charitable organisations.

These organisations were given sufficient notice of Government's intention
to establish a single National Lottery and such organisations ought to have
taken the necessary steps to ensure their own sustainability. The
implication is that, were the National Lottery to collapse tomorrow, these
organisations would also collapse. [Interjections.] In as much as we were
warned ... [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

Mr L T LANDERS: In as much as we were warned by Richard Branson not to let
our National Lottery be a honey pot for only a few, we should be just as
wary of funding unsustainable projects or allowing the funds from our
lottery to be used primarily for the administrative costs of NGOs and
charitable organisations.

To this end, checks and balances must be put in place to ensure that even
the disbursement of funds for good causes receives the support of those
millions of people who participate in the National Lottery every week, but
also those whom the good causes are meant to help. [Interjections.]

It would seem to make sense to me to have different categories of
institutions or good causes to whom the funds could be disbursed. There
could be a category of organisations to whom funds could be disbursed
annually, a second category of organisations to whom funds could be
disbursed quarterly and a third category to whom funds could be disbursed
as a result of natural disasters, as in the case of the Manenberg and Mount
Ayliff tornado disasters. [Interjections.] This approach would make for
proper planning, both by the proposed distribution agencies and the NGOs
and charitable organisations to whom the funds are disbursed for good
causes.

It is now about nine months ... [Interjections.] The hon member should
listen carefully ... [Interjections.] Not the hon member Mr Lee, his
colleague next to him. [Interjections.] I want the hon member to listen
carefully.

I want to say to the hon member Mr Van Schalkwyk that it is now about nine
months since our National Lottery was launched. At about this time the hon
the Minister of Trade and Industry should be conferring with other relevant
Ministers, that is the Minister of Finance, the Minister for Welfare and
Population Development, the Minister of Sport and Recreation, the Minister
of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology and the premiers of all the
provinces in order to appoint or establish distribution agencies which will
disburse the funds in the National Lottery Distribution Trust Fund.

These Ministers and premiers, together with the National Lotteries Board,
should agree on the criteria and conditions upon which applicants for funds
are granted such funds, as well as the competence of applicants to handle
the funds they may receive. Finally, when all the provisions of Chapter 3
of the Lotteries Act are met, or are able to be met, only then can we
consider the disbursement of the proceeds of our National Lottery.

Clearly, therefore, there may well be those organisations which deserve
consideration because they may be in dire financial straits. Section 31 of
the Lotteries Act makes provision for the allocation of lotteries' funds
for miscellaneous purposes. It would seem to me that in such cases the hon
the Minister could make provision for the funding of such organisations.

However, we want to sound a warning here. Such an allocation should only be
made after the necessary probity check, audits and other investigations, so
as to ensure that no Tom, Dick, Trevor Lee or Mary can simply apply for a
grant in terms of section 31 without fulfilling the necessary requirements.
It is also important to place on record that NGOs and charitable
organisations should not operate on a shoestring budget basis in the hope
that they will be bailed out by an allocation of funds from the lottery.

Chairperson, you gave a ruling with regard to the comments by the hon Nigel
Bruce. [Interjections.] I agree. It is not my intention to question your
ruling, but I do want to address the hon Nigel Bruce. [Interjections.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: Are you happy about the lottery?

Mr L T LANDERS: The hon Gibson must listen very carefully to what I have to
say.

The hon Nigel Bruce made some very disparaging remarks about the
chairperson of the lotteries board from this podium. In my view, he abused
the power of this podium. I want to say to him ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, I have ruled on that
matter. Can you please address the House on the subject before the House.

Mr L T LANDERS: I am addressing the subject at hand, Chairperson. The name
of the hon chairperson of the National Lotteries Board was brought into
this debate. We challenge the hon Nigel Bruce to say what he said about the
chairperson outside the precincts of this Parliament, if he has the guts to
do so. [Interjections.]

Our National Lottery is a national asset. When we consider motions such as
the one before us, it should be done in a manner that is responsible and
that does not detract from or negate the importance of our National Lottery
as a national asset. Millions of South Africans wait with bated breath
every Saturday evening for the result, except Doug Gibson. [Interjections.]
He is off doing something else on a Saturday evening. And the excitement
with which South Africans wait for the results of the National Lottery
every Saturday is commendable and we want to thank the members of the
National Lotteries Board. We also want to thank Uthingo for bringing that
excitement into the homes of our people. [Applause.]

Mr N S BRUCE: Mr Chairperson, what a callous way to refer to our charities,
as pressure groups. We need to be clear what is happening economically when
a government awards itself a lottery monopoly and then fails to keep the
conditions and the privilege which it itself has bestowed, especially when
this impacts on the poor, the sick and the suffering. [Interjections.]

A government gambling monopoly is a disguised means of taxing the poor man
who is out of work, the pensioner who is hoping to secure some small
comforts and the indigent who is mesmerised by the vagaries of fortune. Go
and look at those who frequent the Disneyworld of our plastic casinos or
are standing in the queues for lottery tickets. They are not rich, they are
not the white middle-aged male capitalist who gets things done in this
economy, nor are they the easily exploitable junkie from the Far East, with
a suspect Yen and an eye for a chance and a thumb in his karaoke. Those who
buy lottery tickets are ordinary folk on whom most governments would
hesitate to impose a special tax intended to help the less fortunate, who
have no choice but to depend upon charity.

Of course, Government seeks justification for this disguised tax by
perpetuating the myth that a state lottery soaks the rich to help the poor.
[Interjections.] But it does not. It soaks the poor instead, and enables
those who enjoy the patronage of running the lottery to get rich in the
process. [Interjections.]

Regardless of having soaked the poor and enriched the elite, the hon the
Minister should be keeping his promise. That promise was to pass on the
gains to those whom this Government caused to need them most: the charities
that were precluded from their own fundraising by a government which
claimed it knew better how to raise money. [Interjections.]

So it is all very well now for the Minister to explain, six months after
some charities were forced by National Lotteries Board regulations to stop
fundraising, that lottery revenues first have to build up and stabilise
before the charities will receive any disbursements. This suggests that
lottery revenues have been substantially below expectation, despite the
monopoly. After six months of paying out substantial prize moneys, the
lottery is still unsure of its revenues.

Previously, the hon the Minister urged charities to continue their
fundraising activities in the meantime. That was never practical. To run
other smaller charities, limited by the regulations of the National
Lotteries Board, in the face of enormous prizes exciting the avarice of
every prospective participant, would be futile.

It is, of course, difficult for charities to protest, because what they
will eventually get, if they are admitted into this magic circle, is in the
gift of a distributive authority under Government patronage. There are
those who have benefited from the lottery, in addition to those who have
won prizes. I have nothing against Mr Joe Foster, the National Lotteries
Board chairman. I do not intend to say that he has, in any way, acted in an
untoward manner. However, the fact remains that his union has a direct
interest in the lottery operating company, Uthingo. [Interjections.] He
must be benefiting from it.

Another beneficiary is Humphrey Khoza, the unfailingly unctuous CEO of
Uthingo, which is 30%-owned by G-Tech, the supplier of lottery equipment,
and Camelot, amongst others, which recently lost gambling concessions in
Britain after their directors were accused of enriching themselves.
[Interjections.] Uthingo's margins are modest, but its cash flows are
enormous. Would it not be equitable, while charities are being starved, for
Uthingo to be subject to a special lottery tax like the two large assurance
companies which were hit by a special demutualisation tax? [Interjections.]

The DTI's ineptitude does not end with the lottery. It has licensed four
limited payout operators who spent R400 million on equipment, but the hon
the Minister would not allow them to trade. Eleven deadlines have passed
since the establishment of the National Gambling Board. The next one is in
March. [Interjections.]

The Minister says he is not there to protect licensees from commercial
risk, but that is disingenuous. It is not a commercial risk. It is
bureaucratic failure. The consequence is that the hon the Minister has lost
R500 million in levies to the provinces, not to mention depriving the
fiscus of VAT revenues and company tax. [Interjections.]

Regulation is applied by the DTI at times with such arrogance, absence of
vision and lack of consultation that it is hardly surprising that investors
are wary of engaging in this country. [Interjections.] The lottery debacle
is symptomatic of a deeper malaise in the Department of Trade and Industry,
which should be of equal concern to Government. [Applause.]

Mr H J BEKKER: Mr Chairman, I have no intention of embroiling myself in the
quarrel between the hon Bruce and the hon Landers. I will leave that to the
hon Johnny de Lange and Manie Schoeman, and see if they can sort it out.
[Laughter.] I think that this time we would rather sit on the sidelines.

The IFP is very concerned about the delays regarding the payout of the
welfare portion of the Lotto proceeds. With this in mind, the IFP put a
question to the hon the Minister about three weeks ago, which was tabled
last week. I think that this question, together with other pressures put on
the Minister and Uthingo, resulted in his more favourable response last
week about interim or emergency payments.

This we welcome, although it is a most belated statement. Welfare and other
organisations that could benefit from Lotto payouts were practically forced
to cease raffles and other forms of competition in favour of the more
practical Lotto with its possible windfalls for the welfare organisations.

Few hon members would know that prior to my involvement in politics in 1981
I was actively involved in the welfare sector. As administrative manager of
the National Council for Child and Family Welfare, I became the secretary
of the combined national welfare organisations. One of our greatest
achievements at that time was to change the format of the subsidisation
formula of welfare organisations, resulting in an almost 100% improvement
in the government payout to these national welfare organisations.

At that time public utilities and the private sector also ran competitions
on behalf of national welfare organisations. The most well-known of these
were the Springbok Radio welfare fund, and the Sunday Times charity
crossword competition, as well as other toys-for-joy competitions.

Together with the late Tertius Myburgh of the Sunday Times, we established
the formula of distribution. In general terms, the main beneficiaries were
the national welfare organisations, which then, in turn, had to distribute
and prove their distribution to their affiliated societies across the
country. I can remember that our escape from the maze of demands was to
resort to the approved welfare posts subsidised by the government. At least
with regard to the National Council for Child and Family Welfare, the aged,
the blind, the deaf and cripple care, we found that they were all
supportive of the formula thus being created. Amongst several members in
this honourable House that assisted with this process, I can remember the
hon Dr Jassat, the hon Cas Saloojee, the hon Farouk Cassim and the hon
Premier Winkie Direko of the Free State.

We do not underestimate the task of the Minister and, from experience, we
do not envy him the formidable task of trying to keep the welfare
organisations happy, as well as being a sober judge when the moneys have to
be distributed. We are looking forward to receiving the distribution
formula from the hon the Minister and we accept that it will have to be
adjusted continuously even after it has been announced.

In conclusion, I must ask, on behalf of one of my colleagues: How is it
possible for an hon member to spend R1 000 on Lotto tickets and then win
nothing worthwhile out of his or her 400 tickets? I would take it that the
response of the hon the Minister would be that my colleague is a great
donor to the welfare organisations. And for reasons beyond my control, I
will not disclose the hon colleague's name, but just sympathise with his
misfortune at this stage. [Interjections.]

I trust that the Lotto will go a long way in alleviating the plight of the
welfare organisations.

Mr C T FROLICK: Mr Chairman, hon members, the National Lottery, under the
auspices of the Department of Trade and Industry, was launched with a great
deal of excitement and expectation. The Saturday evening game show on
television attracts millions of viewers hoping to win the big jackpot. Such
was the interest in the long-awaited and long-overdue launch that even in
this House a debate was held on the institution of the lottery.

However, the public interest also lies in the distribution of lottery
proceeds, as to who will benefit, by how much and who makes these
decisions. Justifiably, individual participants want the reassurance that
they are truly contributing to deserving causes. It appears that the
National Lottery has not generated the amount of funds that the Government
initially expected it would.

High expectations were created amongst charities and NGOs regarding the
expected outcome. In effect, the message went out to all charities that
they would be funded from this new super-fund flowing from the National
Lottery and, by implication, that no other form of funding for charities
would be required in future. Whether intentional or not, this message has
done a great deal of harm to charities and other sources of funding have
dried up, whilst all involved expected huge funds from the lottery.

At the same time, it is politically irresponsible to try and score points
on the plight of the poor and the needy. Such rhetoric will lead to a
mindset of entitlement and the expectations amongst the needy that South
Africa is a super-welfare state. Those who aim to score these political
points would do well to recognise the difference between empowerment,
entitlement and addressing imbalances of the past.

The proceeds of the National Lottery must not be confused with Government's
responsibility to deliver certain constitutionally mandated basic services.
Proceeds from the National Lottery should be a bonus, not a replacement,
for existing social welfare initiatives. These proceeds should be targeted
through specific projects and should not simply amount to handouts.
Projects must be launched by the Government to ensure that potential
beneficiaries are empowered in order to improve their lives permanently,
instead of creating a class of perpetually dependent citizens.

The UDM urges that the following three measures feature strongly in the
management of these funds. Firstly, measurable and quantifiable fund
distribution must be implemented. Secondly, the process of distribution
must be completely transparent in order to allow for continuous scrutiny as
to who receives what. Lastly, exact timeframes for payouts should be set
and kept. These measures should go a long way to allay the concerns of all
involved. [Applause.]

Ms C DUDLEY: Chairperson, the ACDP notes with disappointment, but not with
surprise, that no lottery funds have yet been distributed to charities and
organisations urgently needing the funds. Donations from the public to
charities have dropped dramatically as South Africans have been misled into
thinking that buying lottery tickets is donating to charity.

The ACDP appeals to the public to give directly to charities that are
contributing visibly to the uplifment of their communities, as the large
majority of money spent on the lottery goes to costs incurred by glittering
TV programmes and large boards of trustees and administrators. The ACDP has
always contended that on issues of chance and speculation, as promoted by
the gambling industry, trouble never lurks far behind. Direct Government
involvement in the distribution process is another major concern. Lottery
money is after-tax discretionary money, and Government cannot possibly have
a say in the distribution of these funds.

South Africa has well organised charities in almost every field, with a
proud record of cost-effective distribution of resources. Many are
concerned that Government's involvement could result in the selection of
politically correct causes most beneficial to itself. Government has also
proved its inability to direct money to the poor and this is clearly
illustrated by the Department of Welfare not even distributing the money
allocated to poverty relief in its last budget. Government's only
involvement should be to ensure financial accountability and control. The
National Lottery exploits the poor and young, robbing them of their natural
ambition. That this is being done in the name of charity in order to salve
the conscience is deplorable.

Lastly, we find the comments by the DP and other parties which, as far as I
know, voted for the National Lottery, rather strange. The ACDP is opposed
to the Lotteries and Gambling Board Act. [Interjections.] We believe
gambling is destructive and cannot contribute to building this nation. The
lottery does not create wealth, but rather consumes it. [Applause.]

Mr V C GORE: Chairperson, how society has been able to break free from its
inhumanity to mankind, is in the manner in which it treats its most
vulnerable members - persons with disabilities, the elderly and children.

In South Africa, the disabled community constitutes approximately 6,5% of
our population. A 1986 Human Sciences Research Council survey showed that
only 0,26% of our disabled population in South Africa were economically
active. The question is: How do 2,5 million people survive if they have no
formal income? The answer is simple. They rely on the generosity of their
fellow countrymen and women.

The National Lottery, when it was proposed, appeared to be an excellent
idea to the disabled sector. It meant that these organisations could spend
less time on fundraising and concentrate on their core businesses - helping
out the more marginalised members of our society. What has happened in fact
is the exact opposite. With the delay in paying out proceeds from the
National Lottery, these organisations are now facing financial ruin and the
people that they are meant to help are the ones that are suffering. One
only has to look at the Association for Persons with Physical Disabilities
in KwaZulu-Natal, a previously highly successful organisation which ran 20
protected work environments and projects, and directly serviced 4 000
disabled people. It now faces imminent closure due to financial
constraints. Their simple crime was to focus on service provision, their
core business, hoping the National Lottery would fund them.

I would now like to turn my attention to another important aspect in South
African life - sport. In just over a month's time 64 of our disabled
athletes will leave our shores to participate in the Para-Olympic Games.
Only through the sterling efforts of organisations such as Napcosa funding
was found to foot the bill of approximately R10 million over four years. In
direct contrast to this, the British Para-Olympics team is sending 300
athletes to Sydney, funded almost exclusively through the British national
lottery scheme. We as a country cannot expect our athletes to bring back
the medals if we do not want to invest in their future. Have we as a
country been able to break free from our own inhumanity? It is difficult to
believe so when we consider the inability of Government to provide a
helping hand to one of the most deserving sectors of our community -
disabled persons. [Applause.]

Mr D LOCKEY: Chairperson, as one of the most loyal supporters of the
National Lottery I think I am very well qualified to speak in this debate.
I want to differ with the hon Van Schalkwyk. My experience, judging from
the long queues every Saturday night when I go and purchase my Lotto
ticket, is that the Lotto is a runaway success and anything but a failure.

I also want to take issue with the hon Bruce. The hon Bruce made this
pathetic racist observation that it is only white males that are creating
wealth in this society. [Interjections.] This remark is typical of that old
English, colonial, loyal superiority complex and that explains exactly
where the hon Bruce comes from. We reject that remark with the contempt it
deserves.

Secondly, the hon Bruce also made an impassioned plea here that the lottery
is an additional tax on the poor, but in the same breath he is arguing for
limited payout machine operators to be allowed to start operating. So it is
not clear from this ambivalence in his argument what exactly his position
on the issue of gaming is.

The reason there could not be an immediate payment of the lottery proceeds
has been given over and over again, in this House and in the Portfolio
Committee on Trade and Industry. The Minister has given his assurance that
the distribution agencies for the National Lottery Distribution Trust Fund
should be fully operational by early next year. These agencies are vital
for identifying the charities that will qualify for the proceeds. These
agencies are also entrusted with the task of ensuring that there are proper
systems in place for these charities to account for the money that is
allocated to them.

We all know that the New NP has a history of spending money like a drunk,
so it is not surprising that any insistence on checks and balances is
something they do not see the need for or, quite frankly, do not
understand. We all know that the NP government built thousands of toilets
in the veld under the pretext of doing something good for the people. We
all know that they squandered R15 billion on Mossgas in a feeble attempt to
circumvent the oil embargo.

We, in this Government, have insisted on ensuring that there is fiscal
discipline. In 1994, when the ANC took over, it inherited a budget deficit
of 10,4% of GDP. Today that budget deficit has been reduced to less than
3%. This is a remarkable achievement if one takes into consideration that
over the past six years we have embarked on the biggest reconstruction and
development programme that this country has ever seen. We have built more
than a million homes.
Coming back to the National Lottery, it has also been explained that the
reason why funds could not be allocated immediately is that we want to
raise a sufficient amount of money to build up the reserve so that we can
ensure that the distribution system is stable and that the disbursements to
charities are not greater than the collection of funds through the lottery
process.

It took the United Kingdom government two years before they could disburse
funds. The Minister has just announced this week that six months after the
inception of the Lotto, we will be in a position to disburse funds to
charities on an interim basis. This is a remarkable achievement. It took
the United Kingdom government two years to disburse the funds, but it took
us only six months.

The lottery process is not the only means for charities to raise funds. It
should not be seen as a substitute for fundraising activities by charities.
One can quite rightly ask what these charities that are now reported to be
in such dire straits would have done if there were no Lotto.

The timing of this debate is also very significant. The local government
elections must at least explain some of the new-found love the New NP and
its partners have for charities. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, I will not allow
interjections that keep disrupting the business of this House.
Interjections are allowed, but please make them in an orderly manner. We
have the business of the House to continue with and finish in time.
Proceed, hon member.

Mr D LOCKEY: The ANC as an organisation has an impeccable record when it
comes to supporting charities. Apart from the fact that this Government has
committed more than 60% of the national budget to social services, former
President Mandela has committed a large portion of his time during
retirement to raising funds for various causes. Former President Mandela
has already raised funds for 35 schools in disadvantaged communities.
[Applause.] The Nelson Mandela Children's Fund is one of the most
successful charities that this country has ever seen. President Mbeki has
the Crossroads Education Fund, which contributes bursaries to assist needy
children to pursue tertiary education, particularly in the areas of science
and technology.
The key question to ask the Democratic Alliance, and the New NP in
particular, is: Which of their former Presidents or Cabinet Ministers have
been involved, in the past or the present, in charitable causes? The only
person I know who ever ventured into the business of charity in the past
was the hon Abe Williams, and we all know what happened with the funds he
raised. [Interjections.] We all know that in his case it was a case of
``Tata Mawilliams''.

As far as I know, the New NP has only contributed to the misery and poverty
of our people. Given their history, what moral ground do they stand on when
they criticise this Government? The New NP, while in government, never
wanted a lottery because it militated against their so-called religious
principles. Yet it allowed the Defence Bonus Bonds, a system that allowed
them to fund an illegitimate war against the people of this country -
people who were fighting for a just system of fundamental human rights for
everyone.

Today the former oppressor is portraying itself as the champion of
democracy and freedom. Today the same party whose policies created gutter
education, undevelopment and pervasive poverty, is offering itself as the
only hope for the poor. None of these stunts will work. [Applause.]

The electorate already gave notice during last year's election that the
demise of the NP was imminent. The Democratic Alliance is doomed because it
carries the baggage of the NP. No amount of posturing, of so-called help to
the poor, will save them from this absolute demise. [Applause.]

Mr G E BALOI: Mr Chairman, it has taken a long time for the payouts to be
made to the needy institutions. However, we accept what the Minister of
Trade and Industry had to say - that the funds were not enough to cater for
the needy.

It is understandable that the plight of charities will elicit strong views.
However, it is unfortunate that, by publicising inaccurate information,
uncertainty and anxiety have been caused amongst these important
institutions.

The process of finalising the distribution is now virtually complete, and
Cabinet will consider it in its next cycle. We all hope for the best.

It is imperative that the lottery funds are handled in a manner that meets
the highest standards of accountability. No compromise on this must be
entertained. The people of South Africa are waiting to see their
contributions being put where their mouths are - at the right time, the
right shares and to the right institutions.

God bless the people of South Africa. The UCDP accepts it.

Mrs P DE LILLE: Chairperson and hon Deputy President, first let me say how
much I welcome the Minister's announcement that a start is to be made next
month in making payments to deserving organisations engaged in poverty
relief from the accumulated Lotto funds. May I say to the hon the Minister:
Better late than never.

I assume that the Minister is aware that the Government's own chosen
instrument for support for NGOs - the National Development Agency - has
only recently got its act together to begin its work. The NDA faces a
massive backlog of applications from the old Transitional National
Development Trust, not to mention the applications that will stream in.
This is a pitiful underfunding, in any case.

I assume also that the Minister knows that international donors now realise
the horrible mistake they made after the 1994 elections in switching the
main focus of their efforts from civil society to government aid. They have
now realised that our civil society organisations can spend money to better
effect on our poorer compatriots than our grossly misnamed Department of
Social Welfare.

Why does the Government not come to the same insight? Why does it not fast-
track the distribution of the large amounts of money in the state coffers,
in the Umsobomvu Fund and in the Department of Welfare to our experienced
funding agencies in civil society, even if it is just an interim measure?
Finally, I also wonder how the Minister feels about being the head of a
department that has taken so long to agree to disburse funds that were
heralded as a major contribution to the impoverished citizens?

In conclusion, as a trustee of the Nelson Mandela Children's Fund, I want
to say that the statement made by the hon Van Schalkwyk is incorrect. The
Nelson Mandela Children's Fund will not benefit from the lottery.
[Interjections.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, the establishment of the national lottery
gives every single South African citizen the opportunity to work in
partnership with the Government to develop the poorest of the poor and the
disadvantaged. Therefore, unnecessary delays in allocating the profits from
the national lottery to targeted charitable organisations kills our
citzens' enthusiasm to appreciate our new-found democracy and integrated
efforts in capacity-building.

The National Lottery is a huge and prominent strategy to redress the uneven
economic hubs that exist in South Africa which, of course, were inherited
from the apartheid regime. Therefore, based on the principle of
transparency and accountability, the role-players of the National Lottery
are legitimately duty-bound to disburse the funds through distributing
agencies as soon as possible.

The lottery system is very complex, and it requires strict administrative
processes in distributing the funds. That should have received priority in
the first place to avoid delays in human development. [Applause.]

Mnr C AUCAMP: Mnr die Voorsitter, die AEB het hom om morele redes duidelik
uitgespreek teen die lotery en ook daarteen gestem. Eintlik wil ons nie
betrokke raak by 'n proses wat iets wat verkeerd is, wil probeer stroomlyn
nie. Die versoeking is eintlik groot vandag om my te verlekker en te sê, ek
het julle mos gesê, maar nou is die effek van wat gebeur op die oomblik so
negatief dat ons ook hier ons stem moet laat hoor.

Die Lotto het so 'n gees van verslawing by ons mense meegebring. Hoe
tragies is dit nie om te sien hoe mense Saterdae toue en toue staan om 'n
kans te waag, en dit terwyl daar rugby op TV is! Hulle is verslaaf aan die
geluksgodin.

In verband met die uitdeel van die geld, wil ek die volgende sê. Watter
sein stuur dit uit as daar al talle en talle kitsmiljoenêrs in Suid-Afrika
uit hierdie skema gebore is, maar die armes en behoeftiges het nog steeds
niks gekry nie? Die liefdadigheidsinstellings is nou slegter af as voorheen
deurdat eie projekte nou benadeel is. Ander sprekers het dit duidelik
uitgewys, en dan blyk dit boonop dat 'n minimum van 70 sent uit 'n rand nie
die ware bestemming gaan bereik van behoeftiges vir wie dit bedoel is nie.

Die morele besware teen hierdie stelsel is afgemaak met die argument dat
die doel die middele heilig. Hierdie doel word nie eens bereik nie.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr C AUCAMP: Mr Chairperson, the AEB clearly expressed its opposition to
the lottery for moral reasons and also voted against it. Actually, we would
not like to become involved in a process which seeks to streamline
something which is wrong. In fact, the temptation is great for me to take
delight in saying, I told you so, but the effect of what is happening is so
negative at the moment that we also have to make ourselves heard here.

The Lotto has brought about such a spirit of enslavement among our people.
How tragic it is to see people standing in long queues on Saturdays to take
a chance, and that while there is rugby on TV! They are addicted to lady
luck.

With regard to the distribution of the money, I would like to say the
following. What signal does it send out when numerous instant millionaires
have already been made in South Africa as a result of this scheme, but the
poor and the needy have still not received anything? The charity
organisations are now worse off than before due to the fact that their own
projects are now being disadvantaged. Other speakers have clearly pointed
this out, and then it also appears that a minimum amount of 70 cents in the
rand will not reach the true destination of the needy for whom it was
intended.

The moral objections to this system were brushed aside with the argument
that the end justifies the means. This end is not even being achieved.]

The hon Landers called the lottery a national asset. I agree with him, but
I spell that A-C-I-D. It is a burning acid, eating into the pockets of our
people, eating into the morals of our community, without achieving the end
which was supposed to justify the means. [Interjections.]

Die AEB doen 'n beroep op alle verantwoordelike burgers van Suid-Afrika om
barmhartigheid te bewys vanuit 'n hart wat uitgaan na die behoeftiges soos
die Skrif dit vra, sonder die verslawende bymotief om 'n kitsmiljoenêr te
word. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The AEB appeals to all responsible citizens of South Africa to show
compassion from a heart which goes out to the needy as the Scriptures ask,
without the addictive additional motive of becoming an instant
millionaire.]

Dr R H DAVIES: Chairperson, one of the risks that people run when they
cobble together in an alliance which is based on nothing more than
opportunism, is that they can never be sure that the messages will not get
so hopelessly mixed up that they become unintelligible. [Interjections.]
That, I would argue, is exactly what we have seen this afternoon.

We heard Mr Van Schalkwyk, in his introduction of this motion, criticising
what he appears to see as inefficiencies in the administration of the
lottery. Mr Bruce, on the other hand, has expressed scepticism about the
concept of the lottery itself. Today he spoke about the state awarding
itself what he called a lottery monopoly, and he complained on a completely
uninformed basis about what he said were small charities being precluded
from raising their own funds.

Mr Bruce has often spoken on this topic. In fact, he speaks more on it than
he does on industrial policy or SMMEs, and some of us wonder whether he
really is the spokesperson on trade and industry. What he has put forward
in his various interventions is a laissez-faire approach in which he
clearly has a preference for small institutions doing their own fundraising
and for there not being a National Lottery.

The point that Mr Bruce appears to have ignored in all of this, is that the
National Lottery offers us an opportunity to raise considerably more funds
for good causes than the alternative. [Interjections.] The National
Lotteries Board has projected that over the course of the seven-year
contract period of Uthingo, something like R13,3 billion would be raised by
the lottery.

Let me just correct Mr Van Schalkwyk: The Minister told the portfolio
committee a week or so ago that currently R179 million has been put in the
trust fund. That is considerably more money than would be raised by small
charities which are, by the way, not actually prevented from engaging in
their own fundraising operations. What is happening is that they are
regulated.

The fact is that if we move in the direction of a national lottery we run a
couple of risks. The first one, which no one has mentioned today, is that
of problem gambling. The fact is that we can encourage more and more people
to spend money on gambling at the expense of basic needs. The ANC has
raised this matter in discussions with the National Lotteries Board. It
seems as though this was something which they bore in mind when setting the
ticket price. The department is also engaged in working on problem gambling
in order to ensure that it does not become an abuse of the kind that Mr
Aucamp and the ACDP appear to think it will be. [Interjections.]

The second risk is that one is dealing with large sums of money, and one
can potentially compromise the integrity of the lottery by not following
proper procedures and by acting imprudently. I think it is a great
misrepresentation in the debate this afternoon to suggest that those of us
on this side of the House do not want to see the lottery funds distributed
as quickly as possible. I would argue that we do, as much if not more than
people on that side of the House. [Interjections.] The point is that we
realise that this needs to be done on a sustainable basis that does not
compromise the integrity of the lottery. That is what we want to see.

The Minister has said that he will not compromise prudent management of the
lottery funds. He will draw on the best international experience and will
make sure that we have a sustainable lottery system. I think we should
support him in that, and we should support his not being pressurised by
political opportunism into abandoning sound management of the lottery
system. [Interjections.]

Mr Van Schalkwyk accused the Minister of political opportunism in the
timing of the announcement that there will be interim payments to certain
charities. I want to ask Mr Van Schalkwyk a couple of questions. Is he
seriously suggesting that what the Minister should do is to delay those
interim payments until after the local government elections? Is that what
he is suggesting? [Interjections.]

What about the timing of the debate this afternoon? Does Mr Van Schalkwyk
really want us to believe that the Demogogic Alliance tabled this debate
this afternoon while being completely indifferent to the fact that we are
in the run-up to the local government elections? Anybody who believes that
will believe anything, including that the DA is a viable political
organisation. But I have news for them. The fact of the matter is that the
people of this country have not lost confidence in the National Lottery.
There was a record turnout last week and there will be an even bigger
turnout this week. We need to realise that this lottery is an asset and it
needs to be managed effectively.

Having said that, I just want to say to the Minister that he has our
support, from this side of the House, in not being pressurised into acting
in a way which is imprudent. But I want to ask the Minister if he could,
today or at some stage in the future, offer us in Parliament and the public
at large some kind of clear, broad guideline on the steps that will be
followed and, if possible, some indication of the kind of timeframes. I
think that would help in terms of creating greater certainty around this
matter and avoiding some of the mindless manoeuvres which we have been
subjected to this afternoon. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Chairperson, I am very pleased to get
this chance this afternoon to set the record straight. It is with some
regret that I have listened to a whole range of misrepresentations and
distortions, and these cannot do service to the many people that we believe
and know the lottery will benefit. I can understand that we all try to do a
bit of political point-scoring, but we should not distort facts on a matter
such as this.
Let me also welcome to the House Mr Joe Foster, Prof Ram and Mr Khoza, the
chairperson of the National Lotteries Board, the chief executive of the
board and the chief executive of Uthingo. [Applause.] Those of us who
fought for good causes in this country and those of us who fought for the
wellbeing of our people, know these three persons and respect them as
people of great integrity and commitment to this country. [Interjections.]
[Applause.] I therefore have no problem with someone like the hon member
Bruce abusing me. I am used to it. But I find it immensely distasteful that
the undeserved protection of this House is used to discredit people of
great honour.

Let me now address what is going to happen and what has happened. I will
not attempt to respond to the numerous inaccuracies and distortions. In
June this year, when I made my first statement in this House after the
launch of the National Lottery, I stated unequivocally and very clearly
that we would separate the setting up of the National Lottery from the
setting up of the distribution agency. If hon members were to go back and
check the Hansard, they would see that I said that I exercised my judgment,
which I believed to be profoundly correct, based on the experience and
advice received from other areas.
I realised that this could cause certain difficulties and I stated very
clearly and precisely that, if it was the case that, as a result of the
termination of lotteries such as Ithuba and Viva, there were real cases of
hardship in certain agencies, I would take steps to see if I could expedite
support for those particular cases. I have done that.

Cabinet has approved the process within a very short time. Depending on
whether the printers get it out this week or next week, we will gazette the
regulations for that. Applications will have to be made in the standard
format, following the standard mechanisms for credential requirements. How
long that will take, I cannot say. It will depend on how easily we can co-
operate with those who make the applications. Obviously we will try to
expedite that but, as I have said time and time again, I will not be forced
into short cuts that might go wrong.

Why this talk of delay, delay, delay? I have made statements on many
occasions. If those organisations waiting to receive funds from the
National Lottery and any sensible observer of this process were to read my
statements, if they were to read Hansard, they would not be confused. The
confusion comes from the politicking of two parties.

I have stated quite clearly that the National Lottery is governed by a
licence. In that licence the conditions are set out and certain projections
are made regarding funding, roll-out, different games coming in, etc. This
is a massive enterprise. I have stated very clearly that we need to be very
confident that everything will go well. I am pleased to say that it has not
only gone well, it has gone very well. We are managing a lottery on a very
high standard and it is doing very well.

This notion that there is R300 million available is just ignorance about
the licence conditions. That is a public document. The researchers of the
different parties that had all sorts of other facts wrong could have gotten
this right. What happens is that the funds that go into the National
Lottery Distribution Trust Fund are based on a formula. This is common
practice. The formula escalates from a low figure, which is currently 13%,
to a high figure of 40%, based on the income received from the National
Lottery. Therefore there cannot currently be R300 million in the National
Lottery. Hon members have to apply 13% to the turn-over figures and not
30%. The latest figure that I have received from the chief executive is
R190 million.

It is important that we understand that this can make a significant
contribution to charities. Our records show that Ithuba and Viva combined,
at their height, paid out about R25 million. That was somewhere between 6%
and 16% of the total revenue of those organisations. Already, with this
R190 million, we are in a position to make a significant and lasting
contribution to welfare, charities and other structures, as envisaged in
the Act. If we are going to do that, it is really a pointless and stupid
exercise, as I have said in this House during my last statement on this
matter, to start paying out large amounts before one is absolutely certain
that one has a cushion that allows one to pay out more than one receives in
many months.

That makes sense. As I said in this House before: Why start paying out a
few good causes here and there? Why not start with a reasonable system? I
also stated it in a statement to the press in which, if hon members had
read it carefully, they would have seen what I said. I said that there is a
difference between commencing the distribution payments and the final fully
articulated system of distribution. It will take time.I think the figure
for March given by one of my junior officials is a reasonable estimate for
when the full system will be in place, not when we would make certain
disbursements.

If one reads the Act - I would really urge the institutions that will be
making an application to read the Act, and I am sure all the sensible ones
have done that - one will see that the Act is very, very clear. In fact, I
think it is almost exemplary in terms of grant-making. It sets out,
firstly, which principles should govern the distribution system, and these
principles are very clear. The lottery cannot be the sole source of income
for any one cause. It is not designed to replace all revenue-raising for
good causes. It is very clear, too, the lottery must make distributions
across the country. It cannot just focus on certain areas. It is very clear
about a range of matters. These matters will be set out in the regulations
that I am obliged in terms of the Act to publish.

Those regulations will set out the distribution agencies, the categories
and the percentages by category, the requirements for applications, the
format of the application form, the selection, appointment and
administrative procedures of the distribution agencies and so forth. These
would be set out. They exist, they are elaborate and they are clear. There
will be no confusion or lack of clarity for any applying agency. We have
prepared detailed packs to support and assist the agencies in making
application, explaining the Act to them, explaining how they should draw up
their business plans, etc. We very deliberately went about that. We are
going to make the distribution system of the lottery exemplary.

We took advice from many quarters, we took advice from other lotteries, we
took advice from the World Bank and many others. This has not been a delay.
If we had done it faster, I think we would have been imprudent. The advice
I still get from experts is that we are going to distribute too early. That
is the advice that I still get. I have elected to say, all right, we will
have to take a bit of a chance, and we will make the payments a bit
earlier. I am particularly concerned, as I indicated before, that if there
are clear and deserving cases of people who did get money from lotteries we
stopped, we will treat them first. But they will have to comply with all
the requirements of the Act, all the requirements of our formats, etc.
I would like to tell colleagues in this House that this lottery can be made
to do many things for many people, such as the disabled, sportspersons and
every one. But we are going to run this lottery, as a lottery, in an
exemplary fashion, and we are going to run the distribution system in an
exemplary fashion. I will not be bulldozed or cajoled or heckled into doing
something which I know is wrong. I trust my judgment. I trust the judgment
of the board. Our judgment has been good in the past and it is going to be
good again. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 18:44.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                          FRIDAY, 22 SEPTEMBER 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    On 22 September 2000 the following Bill, at the request of the
         Minister of Health, was introduced in the National Council of
         Provinces by the Select Committee on Social Services. It has been
         referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification
         in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Chiropractors, Homeopaths and Allied Health Service
              Professions Second Amendment Bill [B 66 - 2000] (National
              Council of Provinces - sec 76) - (Select Committee on Social
              Services - National Council of Provinces) [Explanatory
              summary of Bill and prior notice of its introduction
              published in Government Gazette No 21483 of 25 August 2000.]

National Assembly:

The Speaker:

1.    The following members have been appointed to serve on the Committee
     mentioned, viz:
     Ad hoc Committee on General Intelligence Law Amendment Bill:

     ANC

     Benjamin, J (Alt); Bloem, D V; Cwele, S C; Ebrahim, E I; Gigaba, K M N
     (Alt); George, M E (Alt); Goniwe, T M; Kota, Z A; Landers, L T;
     Lekgoro, M K (Alt); Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Mashimbye, J N; Modise, T R;
     Ngculu, L V; Scott, M I; Van der Merwe, S C.

     DP

     Pillay, R; Schalkwyk, P.

     IFP

     Ndlovu, V B.


     New NP

     Olckers, M E.

     UDM
     Abram, S.

     ACDP

     Green, L M.

     FF

     Mulder, C P.

     AZAPO

     Mangena, M.

                         TUESDAY, 26 SEPTEMBER 2000

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Labour:


     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Broadcasting
     Corporation for 1999-2000.

2.    The Minister of Health:


     (a)    Government Notice No R.650 published in the Government Gazette
         No 21313 dated 30 June 2000, Amendment of Regulations made in
         terms of the Medical Schemes Act, 1998.

     (b)    Government Notice No R.755 published in the Government Gazette
         No 21399 dated 28 July 2000, Amendment of Regulations relating to
         milk and diary products made in terms of the Foodstuffs, Cosmetics
         and Disinfectants Act, 1972.

     (c)    Government Notice No R.837 published in the Government Gazette
         No 21486 dated 25 August 2000, Amendment of Regulations relating
         to milk and diary products made in terms of the Foodstuffs,
         Cosmetics and Disinfectants Act, 1972.

     (d)    Government Notice No 757 published in the Government Gazette No
         21409 dated 28 July 2000, Notice of ratification of Protocol on
         Health in Southern African Development Community (SADC).

     (e)    Government Notice No R.836 published in the Government Gazette
         No 21486 dated 25 August 2000, Amendment of regulations regarding
         maximum limits for pesticide residues made in terms of the
         Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and Disinfectants Act, 1972.

     (f)    Government Notice No 838 published in the Government Gazette No
         21483 dated 25 August 2000, Explanatory summary on Chiropractors,
         Homeopaths and Allied Health Service Professions Amendment Bill,
         2000 published for comment.

     (g)    Government Notice No R.872 published in the Government Gazette
         No 21533 dated 8 September 2000, Regulations regarding the use of
         names which may not be used made in terms of the Medical, Dental
         and Supplementary Health Service Professions Act, 1974.

     (h)    Government Notice No R.872 published in the Government Gazette
         No 21533 dated 8 September 2000, Regulations on flouridating water
         supplies made in terms of the Health Laws Amendment Act, 1977.

     (i)    Government Notice No R.921 published in the Government Gazette
         No 21552 dated 15 September 2000, Regulations regarding fees to be
         paid to the South African Nursing Council made in terms of the
         Nursing Act, 1978.

     (j)    Government Notice No R.925 published in the Government Gazette
         No 21552 dated 15 September 2000, Regulations defining scope of
         profession of emergency care made in terms of the Medical, Dental
         and Supplementary Health Service Professions Act, 1974.

     (k)    Government Notice No R.943 published in the Government Gazette
         No 21569 dated 22 September 2000, Regulations made in terms of the
         Medical Schemes Act, 1998.

     (l)    Government Notice No 942 published in the Government Gazette No
         21569 dated 22 September 2000, Explanatory summary of the Mental
         Health Care Bill, 2001 published for comment.

     (m)    Government Notice No 876 published in the Government Gazette No
         21535 dated 4 September 2000, Publication of the Chiropractors,
         Homeopaths and Allied Health Service professions Amendment Act,
         2000 (Act No 6 of 2000).

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
     Development on the Limitation of Legal Proceedings against Government
     Institutions Bill [B 65 - 99] (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 20
     September 2000:


     The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development,
     having considered the subject of the Limitation of Legal Proceedings
     against Government Institutions Bill [B 65 - 99] (National Assembly -
     sec 75), referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism
     as a section 75 Bill, presents the Institution of Legal Proceedings
     against Organs of State Bill [B 65B - 99] (National Assembly -sec 75),
     and endorses the classification of the Bill as a section 75 Bill.

     The Committee wishes to report further, as follows:


     1.     During its deliberations on the Bill, the Committee's attention
         was drawn to the fact that certain provisions of existing laws
         provide for different -


         (1)     notice periods; and


         (2)     prescription periods,


         for the institution of legal proceedings in respect of certain
         debts arising from delictual or contractual liability.

         The Committee expressed the view that some of those provisions
         could possibly be unconstitutional, particularly in the light of -


         (a)     the reasoning in Mohlomi v Minister of Defence 1997 (1) SA
              124 (CC), where the Constitutional Court declared the
              provisions of section 113(1) of the Defence Act, 1957 (Act No.
              44 of 1957), which provided for limitations of actions against
              the Defence Force, to be constitutionally invalid; and


         (b)     the South African Law Commission's supplementary report on
              the investigation into time limits for the institution of
              legal proceedings against the State (Project 42).


         In order to create uniformity, the Committee deemed it appropriate
         to repeal existing provisions providing for different notice
         periods, whether they are possibly unconstitutional or not, and to
         substitute them with a uniform notice period which will apply in
         respect of the institution of all legal proceedings against
         certain organs of state, as defined in the Bill, arising out of
         certain debts. The Committee, however, further deemed it
         appropriate to retain certain existing provisions which, for
         specific reasons, provide for notice periods that differ from the
         uniform period envisaged by the Bill.  It is important to note
         that the Bill empowers a court, upon application by a creditor and
         if certain requirements are met, to condone such creditor's
         failure to comply with the notice requirements provided for in the
         Bill.

         By defining debt as "any debt arising from any unlawful act or
         omission for which an organ of state is liable for payment of
         damages, including any delict or liability without fault in terms
         of a statutory provision, but does not include a debt arising from
         a breach of contract", the provisions providing for a notice
         period will not apply in respect of debts arising from contractual
         liability.

         In order to create further uniformity, the Committee deemed it
         appropriate to repeal certain existing provisions, whether they
         are possibly unconstitutional or not, which provide for specific
         notice or prescription periods in respect of certain debts arising
         from delictual or contract liability. The Committee, however,
         further deemed it appropriate to retain certain existing
         provisions which, for specific reasons, provide for prescription
         periods that differ from the period provided for in Chapter III of
         the Prescription Act, 1969 (Act No. 68 of 1969). The effect of the
         repeal of the above-mentioned provisions is that the prescription
         of all debts arising from delictual or contractual liability will,
         after the commencement of this Bill and unless otherwise provided
         for by an existing provision, be regulated by Chapter III of the
         Prescription Act, 1969.

         Due to the fact that no comprehensive review of all the provisions
         providing for different prescription periods, whether of a
         delictual or contractual nature, has been done, the Committee was
         not in a position to deal with the harmonisation of such different
         prescription periods on the strength of comprehensive research.
         Furthermore, because the main object of the Bill is to harmonise,
         and create uniformity in respect of, the provisions of existing
         laws providing for different notice periods, the Committee is of
         the view that the Bill is not the appropriate mechanism to deal
         with the harmonisation of provisions providing for different
         prescription periods.

         Clause 2 of the Bill, however, provides for a limited
         harmonisation of such laws and also contains specific transitional
         arrangements to ensure a smooth transition.

         The Committee therefore recommends that the Minister for Justice
         and Constitutional Development be requested to request the
         Chairperson of the South African Law Commission to include an
         investigation into the harmonisation of the provisions of existing
         laws providing for different prescription periods in the Law
         Commission's programme.


     2.     The Bill, as introduced into Parliament, provided for the repeal
         of section 44 of the Compensation for Occupational Injuries and
         Diseases Act, 1993 (Act No. 130 of 1993), which provides, inter
         alia, that "a right to benefits in terms of this Act shall lapse
         if the accident in question is not brought to the attention of the
         commissioner or of the employer or mutual association concerned,
         as the case may be, within 12 months after the date of such
         accident". Although the Committee considered the repeal or
         amendment of the said section 44, it expressed the view that it
         had insufficient information available to it to consider the
         repeal or amendment of that section properly and any possible
         consequential amendments to the said Act which might emanate from
         such repeal or amendment. In the light thereof, the Committee
         recommends that the Department of Labour be requested -


         (1)     to investigate the repeal or amendment of section 44 with
              a view to bringing the provisions thereof into line with the
              provisions of the Bill and, if necessary, the Constitution,
              and to identifying possible consequential amendments to the
              above-mentioned Act emanating from such repeal or amendment;
              and


         (2)     where necessary, to submit legislative proposals regarding
              the matter in question to Parliament for its consideration.
     3.     The Committee's attention was also drawn to section 23 of the
         Road Accident Fund Act, 1996 (Act No. 56 of 1996), which provides
         for the prescription of the right to claim compensation from,
         among others, the Road Accident Fund, established under section
         2(1) of that Act, in respect of "loss or damage arising from the
         driving of a motor vehicle in the case where the identity of
         either the driver or the owner thereof has been established". The
         Committee considered the possibility of repealing the said section
         23 and including the Road Accident Fund in the definition of
         "organ of state" so as to make the provisions of the Bill
         applicable to that Fund. The Committee is aware of the Road
         Accident Fund Commission, which has been established to "inquire
         into and to make recommendations regarding a reasonable,
         equitable, affordable and sustainable system for the payment by
         the Road Accident Fund of compensation or benefits, or a
         combination of compensation and benefits, in the event of the
         injury or death of persons in road accidents in the Republic". It
         has been brought to the Committee's attention that the Road
         Accident Fund Commission is required to submit its Report to the
         President during the course of 2001. In the light of the above,
         the Committee decided against the repeal of section 23 and the
         inclusion of the Road Accident Fund in the definition of "organ of
         state". The Committee recommends that the Department of Transport
         be requested -


         (1)     to consider and evaluate any recommendations regarding the
              matter in question as contained in the Report by the Road
              Accident Fund Commission;


         (2)     in any case, to investigate the repeal or amendment of
              section 23 with the view to bringing the provisions thereof
              into line with the provisions of the Bill and, if necessary,
              the Constitution, and to identifying possible consequential
              amendments to the above-mentioned Act emanating from such
              repeal or amendment; and


         (3)     where necessary, to submit legislative proposals regarding
              the matter in question to Parliament for its consideration.
     4.     The Committee's attention was also drawn to the fact that the
         Legal Succession to the South African Transport Services Act, 1989
         (Act No. 9 of 1989), contains certain provisions providing for
         specific notice periods in respect of claims for compensation for
         livestock killed or injured by a train or for property destroyed
         or damaged by a fire caused by a burning object coming from a
         locomotive or train. Due to a lack of information, the Committee
         was not in a position to consider the repeal or amendment of those
         provisions properly for purposes of uniformity. The Committee
         therefore recommends that the Department of Transport be requested
         -


         (1)     to investigate the repeal or amendment of the above-
              mentioned provisions with a view to bringing them into line
              with the provisions of the Bill and, if necessary, the
              Constitution, and to identifying possible consequential
              amendments to the above-mentioned Act emanating from such
              repeal or amendment; and


         (2)     where necessary, to submit legislative proposals regarding
              the matter in question to Parliament for its consideration.


     5.     The Committee's attention was drawn to section 59 of The South
         African National Roads Agency Limited and National Roads Act, 1998
         (Act No. 7 of 1998), which provides for notice periods for the
         institution of legal proceedings against, among others, The South
         African National Roads Agency Limited (the Agency) or an employee
         of the Agency for any damage or loss allegedly suffered by a
         person as a result of any act with regard to a national road which
         allegedly was performed or omitted by, among others, the Chief
         Executive Officer or any of the other employees of the Agency
         acting in the performance of their duties.  Although the Bill, as
         introduced into Parliament, provided for the amendment of section
         25 of the National Roads Act, 1971 (Act No. 54 of 1971), it did
         not provide for the amendment or repeal of the said section 59. It
         was brought to the Committee's attention that the whole of the
         National Roads Act, 1971, except section 2(1A) thereof, has been
         repealed by The South African National Roads Agency Limited and
         National Roads Act, 1998. In the light thereof, the Committee
         deemed it appropriate to include an amendment to section 59 of The
         South African National Roads Agency Limited and National Roads
         Act, 1998, in the Bill so as to make the uniform notice period
         envisaged by the Bill applicable to legal proceedings emanating
         from the provisions of that Act as well. The Committee also noted
         that section 59(3) provides that "[n]either the Agency nor ... any
         person who operates or has constructed a national road, will be
         liable for any damage or loss suffered by any person through the
         use of any part of the national road other than the roadway or as
         a result of the closure or deviation of a national road under this
         Act". Although, as a result of the repeal of section 59(1) and (2)
         of the latter Act, the Committee effected consequential amendments
         to section 59(3), it does not express any views on the
         constitutionality of that section.


     6.     The Committee expresses its concern that it had to amend the
         Black Administration Act, 1927 (Act No. 38 of 1927), once again,
         on a piecemeal basis. The Committee is aware that the said Act was
         one of the cornerstones of the previous dispensation and reflects
         many of the injustices of the past. The Committee also expresses
         the view that it is unacceptable that six years after the new
         constitutional dispensation came into being, the above-mentioned
         Act has still not been reviewed in its entirety with a view to
         bringing it into line with the Constitution. In this regard, it
         was further brought to the Committee's attention that on 5
         September 2000 the High Court of Pretoria, in the case of D E
         Moseneke and Others v The Master of the High Court (Case No.
         20006/2000), declared the provisions of clause 3(1) of the
         Regulations promulgated in terms of the above-mentioned Act to be
         invalid, unconstitutional and of no force and effect. In the light
         of the above, the Committee recommends that each Member of the
         Executive who is responsible for a Department that administers
         specific sections of the above-mentioned Act, and especially those
         Members who are responsible for the Departments of Home Affairs,
         Justice and Constitutional Development and Land Affairs, be
         requested to review the sections which their respective
         Departments administer, with a view to bringing those sections
         into line with the Constitution. As it appears that the above-
         mentioned Act is administered by various different government
         structures, which may explain why no Department is taking
         responsibility for the review of the whole Act, the Committee
         recommends that this matter also be brought to the attention of
         the President. The Committee urges the Minister for Justice and
         Constitutional Development to consider referring the review of the
         whole of the above-mentioned Act to the South African Law
         Commission as a project of the highest priority.


     7.     The Committee requests that the Department of Justice and
         Constitutional Development and all the other Departments to which
         specific tasks have been assigned in terms of this Report, must
         each submit a report to the Committee on progress regarding the
         task or tasks assigned to them, with the Department of Justice and
         Constitutional Development co-ordinating the submission of such
         reports, within six months after the adoption of this Report.


     Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Public Works on the Council for
     the Built Environment Bill [B 16 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75),
     dated 21 September 2000:


         The Portfolio Committee on Public Works, having considered the
         subject of the Council for the Built Environment Bill [B 16 -
         2000] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified
         by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the
         Bill with amendments [B 16A - 2000].

3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Public Works on the
     Architectural Profession Bill [B 17 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec
     75), dated 21 September 2000:


         The Portfolio Committee on Public Works, having considered the
         subject of the Architectural Profession Bill [B 17 - 2000]
         (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified by the
         Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill
         with amendments [B 17A - 2000].
4.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Public Works on the Landscape
     Architectural Profession Bill [B 18 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec
     75), dated 21 September 2000:


         The Portfolio Committee on Public Works, having considered the
         subject of the Landscape Architectural Profession Bill [B 18 -
         2000] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified
         by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the
         Bill with amendments [B 18A - 2000].

5.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Public Works on the Engineering
     Profession Bill [B 19 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 21
     September 2000:


         The Portfolio Committee on Public Works, having considered the
         subject of the Engineering Profession Bill [B 19 - 2000] (National
         Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified by the Joint
         Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with
         amendments [B 19A - 2000].

6.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Public Works on the Property
     Valuers Profession Bill [B 20 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75),
     dated 21 September 2000:


         The Portfolio Committee on Public Works, having considered the
         subject of the Property Valuers Profession Bill [B 20 - 2000]
         (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified by the
         Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill
         with amendments [B 20A - 2000].

7.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Public Works on the Project and
     Construction Management Professions Bill [B 21 - 2000] (National
     Assembly - sec 75), dated 21 September 2000:


         The Portfolio Committee on Public Works, having considered the
         subject of the Project and Construction Management Professions
         Bill [B 21 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it
         and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75
         Bill, reports the Bill with amendments [B 21A - 2000].

8.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Public Works on the Quantity
     Surveying Profession Bill [B 22 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75),
     dated 21 September 2000:


         The Portfolio Committee on Public Works, having considered the
         subject of the Quantity Surveying Profession Bill [B 22 - 2000]
         (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified by the
         Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill
         with amendments [B 22A - 2000].

9.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs on the Abuja
     Treaty, dated 20 September 2000:


         The Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs, having considered the
         request for approval by Parliament of the Treaty establishing the
         African Economic Community (Abuja Treaty), referred to it,
         recommends that the House, in terms of section 231(2) of the
         Constitution, approve the said Treaty.


     Report to be considered.

                        WEDNESDAY, 27 SEPTEMBER 2000

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:


     1.     The Minister of Finance:


         Government Notice No R.896 published in the Government Gazette No
         21545 dated 8 September 2000, Amendment of Prescribed Fees made in
         terms of section 36 of the Pension Funds Act, 1956 (Act No 24 of
         1956).


     2.     The Minister of Trade and Industry:


         Report and Financial Statements of the Support Programme for
         Industrial Innovation for 1999-2000.

National Assembly:

Bills:
     1.     The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development:


         (1)     Wetsontwerp op die Direktoraat vir Spesiale Operasies [W
              39 - 2000].


              The Directorate of Special Operations Bill [B 39 - 2000]
              (National Assembly - sec 75) was introduced by the Minister
              for Justice and Constitutional Development on 11 August 2000
              and referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and
              Constitutional Development.


