---
title: 'National Assembly - 09 June 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2000-06-09
---

FRIDAY, 9 JUNE 2000
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 09:06.

The Chairperson of Committees took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr S J MOHAI: Chair, I give notice that on the next sitting day of the
House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the people of South Africa will celebrate the 24th anniversary
           of the Soweto uprisings on 16 June;


       (b)  this marks an important day in our history, one on which young
           people resisted apartheid gutter education; and


       (c)  the ANC-led Government has declared this day national Youth Day;


  (2) believes that this generation of our youth made an important
       contribution towards the dismantling of the evil system of apartheid;


  (3) commemorates the gallant fighters, the young men and women of 1976,
       for their courageous efforts to fight apartheid; and


  (4) calls on the new generation of young people to pick up the spear and
       play an important role in building a new nonracial, nonsexist and
       democratic society.

[Applause.]
Mr D H M GIBSON: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:
  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  with shock and disgust the armed invasion of a DP meeting in
           Phiri, Soweto, last night;


       (b)  that the meeting had been widely advertised in the area; and


       (c)  that only the two DP public representatives, Richard Pillay, MP,
           and Manny de Freitas, MPL, amongst all those in attendance, were
           robbed of their vehicles and personal belongings;


  (2) expresses concern that this incident does not bode well for free and
       fair local elections when political party representatives are
       targeted by criminals;


  (3) recognises that violent crime is a feature of the daily lives of many
       South Africans; and
  (4) calls on the Minister of Safety and Security to honour his
       responsibility to the South African public by providing effective
       policing to combat the debilitating tidal wave of crime which is
       destroying our country and which threatens our democracy.

[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Prince N E ZULU: Chair, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes, supports and gives credit to the Minister of Home Affairs for
       his concerted effort to search for a world-class immigration policy,
       one which is now on the cards; and


  (2) is of the opinion that such a policy is intended not only to control
       the movement of people more amicably, but also to attract investment
       of foreign skills and capital into the country and combat the present
       scourge of unemployment.

Mr N J GOGOTYA: Chairperson, I give notice that at the next sitting of the
House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  with appreciation the increased participation of ordinary
           citizens in exposing and fighting crime; and


       (b)  that there are new structures for police reservists,
           neighbourhood watch groups, voluntary emergency centres and
           community police officers in the South Peninsula, Cape Town;


  (2) acknowledges that the SA Police Service has ultimate authority in
       safety and security matters and needs to be strengthened; and


  (3) calls for the co-ordination and co-operation of all those involved in
       combating crime.

[Applause.]
Mrs S M CAMERER: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  with great concern that two more escapes from court buildings
           involving 16 dangerous awaiting-trial prisoners took place this
           week and that many of these prisoners are armed and are still at
           large;


       (b)  the briefing of the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
           Development to Parliament that there are only 595 security
           personnel working in the department and that an additional 3 000
           security officers are required to secure the courts properly;
           and


       (c)  that funds have been made available to outsource these security
           requirements; and


  (2) urges the Minister to proceed without delay to do everything
       necessary to make our courts safe and secure.

Mr M E MABETA: Mr Chairman, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the timely announcement by the Ministry of Justice of a pilot
       project for supporting the victims of rape and crime;


  (2) calls on all relevant structures in the Western Cape to give full and
       necessary support to this centre;


  (3) commends the commitment by the Directorate of Public Prosecutions
       that the centre will be functional by August; and


  (4) notes that this initiative will go a long way towards making justice
       more available and accessible to women and children who mostly are
       the victims of crime.

Mr S P GROVÉ: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that 5 March 2000 was World Environment Day;


  (2) recognises the suffering experienced by those who worked for the
       asbestos mining company Cape PLC, resulting in severe damage to the
       health of those workers;


  (3) recognises the sterling work done by the South African legal team and
       British public representatives, most notably the hon Kevin McNamara,
       MP of the British Labour Party, in support of approximately 2 300
       South African claimants who are seeking compensation through the
       British courts; and


  (4) wishes the claimants every success after their long battle to have
       their case heard.

Mr M A MANGENA: Chair, I give notice that at the next sitting of the House
I shall move on behalf of the Azapo:
  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the call made every now and then by some citizens that all
           children in our country be afforded an opportunity to learn at
           least one African language at school; and


       (b)  a similar call made recently by some officials in the Ministry
           of Justice that judges, magistrates and prosecutors be
           encouraged to learn at least one African language to enable them
           to dispense justice better;


  (2) observes that despite the fact that whites have been in this country
       for several centuries, they still understand few of the languages and
       little of the culture of the African people;


  (3) is of the opinion that it is, in fact, the African majority who has
       been compelled by colonial conquest and loveless religious conversion
       to assume white names, learn European languages and assimilate white
       culture;


  (4) believes that the learning of African languages by all will
       contribute enormously towards better group relations, mutual
       understanding and a more suitable society within which democracy can
       be built ...

[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M WATERS: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the chairperson of the Edenvale-Lethabong council, ANC
           councillor Virginia Mlobeli, failed to disclose her council
           allowance of R4 023 when applying for a housing subsidy; and


       (b)  Councillor Mlobeli is presently earning an additional R4 198 as
           chairperson of the Edenvale-Lethabong council, giving her a
           total income from the council of R8 221; and


  (2) calls for the -


       (a)  immediate resignation of Councillor Mlobeli;


       (b)  Provincial Housing Board to take legal action against Mlobeli;
           and


       (c)  ANC to explain to their public representatives that housing
           subsidies are meant for the poorest of the poor and not for the
           ANC elite.

[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mr G P MNGOMEZULU: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the continued and unseemly squabbling between the DP and the New
           NP; and


       (b)  the comments of the leader of the New NP, the hon Marthinus van
           Schalkwyk, that ``the DP's actions have removed any basis of
           good faith between us'' and that the DP's actions ``can at best
           be described as calculated deception'';


  (2) urges the New NP to explain to the voters of the Western Cape how its
       party can effectively govern jointly with a party whose actions are
       continuously characterised by deception and opportunism; and


  (3) calls on the hon Mr Van Schalkwyk to prove that his party has moved
       away from the blindness of its apartheid past by listening to the
       wishes of the voters of the Western Cape who supported the ANC in
       greater numbers than any other party.

[Interjections. [Applause.]

Mr J H MOMBERG: Wat sê jy nou, bobbejaanspanner? [Tussenwerpsels.] [What do
you say now, monkey wrench? [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Mr Lee and Mr Doidge, we have the
business of the House to consider!

    AMENDMENT OF RESOLUTION ADOPTING 19TH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
                               PUBLIC ACCOUNTS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr G Q M DOIDGE: Chairperson, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the Majority
Party, I move the draft resolution printed in his name on the Order Paper,
as follows:


  That the Report be adopted, except that with reference to paragraph 2 of
  the Report, it be amended to read as follows:


  2.  The remaining amount of R1 199 022,16, reported as unauthorised by
       the Auditor-General, refers to expenditure incurred from voted funds
       to host the Second National Conference on Small Business, in excess
       of the R2 million donation received. Further information had been
       requested from the department, but the Committee is concerned at the
       non-compliance with the relevant Treasury Instructions. The Committee
       has noted the corrective measures reportedly implemented by the
       Department. However, the Committee recommends that the unauthorised
       expenditure in question not be authorised, and that the legal process
       set out in sections 33 and 34 of the Exchequer Act take its course.

Agreed to.

  RATIFICATION OF DECISION OF JOINT PROGRAMME SUBCOMMITTEE ON FAST-TRACKING
           OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT: CROSS-BOUNDARY MUNICIPALITIES BILL

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr G Q M DOIDGE: Mr Chairperson, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the
Majority Party, I move the draft resolution printed in his name on the
Order Paper, as follows:


  That the House ratifies the decision the Joint Programme Subcommittee
  took on 8 June 2000 in accordance with Joint Rule 216(2), namely that the
  Local Government: Cross-boundary Municipalities Bill, 2000, be fast-
  tracked by, where necessary, shortening any period within which any step
  in the legislative process relating to the Bill must be completed, in
  order to make it possible for the Bill to be passed by both Houses of
  Parliament by 23 June 2000 (see Announcements, Tablings and Committee
  Reports, p 500).

Agreed to.

     CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF AD HOC COMMITTEE ON REPORT 13 OF PUBLIC
                                  PROTECTOR

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Resumption of debate on Vote No 12 - Government Communication and
Information System:

Mr T L MAKUNYANE: Mr Chairperson, information is power, and we want it for
our people. As the South African public becomes more involved in the
process of governance, it will demand more information about specific
areas, including those critical to their basic survival.

This need defines the task of Government to provide development,
communication and information. It also raises the need for Government to
encourage and promote the development of community media that will reflect
the full diversity of views that make up our society. The mandate of the
Government Communication and Information System is to ensure that the
public is informed about the Government's policies and activities.

Government communication is a powerful instrument that can help to deepen
our democracy and change the lives of our people. But, in the wrong hands,
it can also wreak havoc. In the past the NP used government communication
to wage psychological warfare against our people. The apartheid regime used
its communication capacity to promote the ideology of separate development
and entrench white supremacy. Who can forget the apartheid propaganda
products of the time: velaphanda, Nhluvuko, Intuthuko, Tswelopele,
Tswelopele, Tšwelelopele, Panorama, and even Wamba, Motswalle wa Bana?
These were the products of the SA Communication Service. Through them, the
apartheid regime hoped to legitimise itself through misinformation and
lies. The aim was to disempower and subjugate our people through the
suppression of information and distortion of reality.

The so-called mainstream press - white-owned and bankrolled by big business
- also played along. Through the Newspaper Press Union, this section of the
media allowed itself to be manipulated by the apartheid state. Through its
participation in the defence and police liaison committees, the Newspaper
Press Union colluded with the apartheid government and allowed it to
dictate the levels of press freedom.

The Afrikaans press, especially the Naspers stable, publicly supported
apartheid and openly espoused white supremacy. The English press, on the
other hand, only appeared to be against the excesses of apartheid, but it
defined its anti-apartheid stance within the racist framework of white
sectarian politics. When it reported on the anti-apartheid struggle, it
readily and uncritically adopted concepts that were churned out by the
apartheid propaganda machine. Apartheid-sponsored violence against our
people was called black-on-black violence. Anti-apartheid activity was
termed anti-South Africa. To them freedom fighters were terrorists. It was
this press that also subscribed to the notion that white South Africans
were actually Europeans. This so-called mainstream media was so grossly
crippled and distorted by its association with apartheid that it is today
still unable to recognise, acknowledge and root out racist influences
within its own ranks.

Information is power, and we want it for our people. The poor and
marginalised need accurate, relevant and timely information about
Government policies, bursary facilities, services, job opportunities,
skills training and so forth. We cannot entrust this task to this
unreconstructed, white-controlled, profit-driven media. We cannot rely on
the media that still echoes the ideological tenets of a minority that has
nothing to gain from the transformation of our society. People need a media
that will inform, educate and empower them to better the quality of their
lives.

However, the mainstream media has a right to exist. It can continue to
provide its own minority audience with accurate, timely and relevant
information about share prices and stock market analysis - well and good.
But being informed is not the prerogative of this privileged minority, nor
should the provision of information be taken to be the monopoly of this
mainstream media.

The forces of our struggle for transformation also need accurate, relevant
and timely information that will empower them. The workers who bore the
brunt of apartheid's super exploitation need information. The army of the
unemployed which was created by apartheid as a pool of cheap labour need
information. The rural masses who cry out for land and services need
information. The women who have been marginalised and turned into beasts of
burden by the migrant labour system, need information. The black middle-
class, the managers, the black intelligentsia and other professionals who
have caught a distant glimpse of a better life but were kept out by
apartheid's job reservation, also need information.

The Government Communication and Information System strives to meet these
needs. It seeks to utilise, not only the traditional methods to target this
neglected audience, but also to find new and creative ways to disseminate
information that will be useful and relevant to these sectors of our
population.

Through the establishment of a network of multipurpose community centres,
the GCIS will provide an accessible local network that will bring
integrated service delivery through one-stock Government service and
information centres. These will use the latest technology to afford
ordinary people access to Government services.

There will be many spin-offs that will benefit local communities. Through
the media development agency, GCIS will also promote and encourage
community media that will reflect the full diversity of opinion in our
society.

Also important is the mandate of the GCIS to promote the good image of
South Africa here and abroad. This will have a direct impact on business
confidence and our country's ability to attract foreign direct investment.
But most of all, it is GCIS's overarching task of providing development,
communication and information that will empower our people to change their
own lives. We, therefore, request this House to support this Vote as the
GCIS is a powerful vehicle of change whose mission is to empower our
people.
Mr S J MONGWAKETSE: Chairperson, the Minister, Comrade Essop Pahad,
Ministers, comrades, ladies and gentlemen, I think that Comrade Makunyane
has emphasised exactly what is needed by our people. Democracy in our
country cannot be fully realised if some of the people are left out, if
some do not know what the Government is doing in terms of service delivery.

When the President, during the state of the nation address, spoke about a
nation at work for a better life and the dawn of the African century, he
was announcing the Government programme focusing on a strategy of
mobilising people to work with the Government to improve their condition.
It is of paramount importance to have an informed society.
 
Information is empowerment, as Comrade Makunyane has said. There is a sense
developing amongst the people of our land that Government can only succeed
if it is partnered by an active population. Information builds an
independent, self-reliant and confident society.

Maabane leloko la lekoko la kganetso, Mme Dene Smuts, o ne a maketse thata,
a batla go itse gore go tla jang gore go nne le ditšhaba tse pedi mo nageng
e le esi ya rona. Ke solofela gore go gontle gore leloko le le tlotlegang
le makale ka tsela e ntseng jalo, ka gonne se monate se ingwaelwa. Ke rona
re itseng gore mo nageng e ya rona go na le ditšhaba tse pedi, tseo tse di
nang le bokgoni le tseo di senang bokgoni.

Kwa gaetsho kwa Ganyesa, batho ba teng ga ba kgone go bona telebišene. Ga
ba kgone go utlwa gore mmuso o dira eng. Le gale ka gonne makoko a kganetso
a batla gore tshedimosetso e goroge mo bathong bangwe, mme ba bangwe ba
seke ba e bona, ba re nnyaya, Motlotlegi Mopresidente ga a tshwanela gore
re ditšhaba tse pedi mo nageng ele esi. [Legofi.]

Nna ke a itse gore Mopresidente Thabo Mbeki, fa e ne e le Motlatsa
Mopresidente o kile a kopa gore a fiwe nako mo telebišeneng mo go
tlhalosiwang dintlha tsotlhe tsa puso. Makoko a kganetso a ne a ema ka
dinao, a re Motlatsa Mopresidente o batla go dirisa tšhono eo go tsweletsa
diphitlhelelo tsa lekoko la gagwe. Ke ipotsa potso gore setshosa se
sekanakana se ke eng? A makoko a a kganetso a tsaya gore puso e ya gompieno
e tshwana le puso ele ya maloba?

Ga go kgonege go tshwantsha puso eno le ele ya maloba. Puso ya maloba e ne
e le ya kgatelelo, mme ke bona ba itseng seno. Puso eno ya gompieno ke puso
e e nang le Mosireletsi wa Setšhaba. Fa o sa itumelele sengwe, o kgona go
lebisa ngongorego kwa go ene. Ke solofela sentle gore fa re eletsa gore
batho botlhe mo Aforika Borwa ba lekane - ka gonne rona mo ANC, re bua ka
tekatekanyo; batho botlhe ba tshwanetse go lekana - le ka tshedimosetso ba
tshwanetse go lekana. (Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[Yesterday a member from the opposition party, Ms Dene Smuts, was very
surprised to hear that there are two nations in this country. I expected
the member to be surprised because if the shoe fits she should wear it. We
know that there are two nations in our country, those who have and those
who do not have.

Where I come from in Ganyesa the people do not have television. They are
unable to hear the programmes the Government has in place. Opposition
parties want information to reach some people and not others and they state
that the hon President should not say that we have two nations in one
country. [Applause.]

I know that when Thabo Mbeki was still the Deputy President he asked to be
given time on television to explain the Government's programmes. Opposition
parties were up in arms, claiming that he wanted to further the aims of his
party. I ask myself what these parties are afraid of. Do these parties
think that this Government is similar to previous governments?

It is not possible to compare this Government with governments of the past.
Previous governments were oppressive and these parties know this. Today's
Government has a Public Protector. If one has a complaint one can direct
this complaint to the Public Protector. We in the ANC want people in South
Africa to be equal and we also want them to have equal access to
information.]

The Government Communication and Information System is indispensable for
achieving this end. It is responsible for the communication environment
within which the selected representatives of the people operate. The rural
communities, which form a large part of society, must know what the
Government is doing. They must understand the programme of the Government.
Information for this community is a democratic right - it is not a
privilege. One of the critical elements in the mandate of the Government
Communication and Information System, GCIS, is to lead Government
communication, ensuring that all sectors of Government operate within the
framework of an integrated communication strategy.

Radio is an essential tool through which the Government communicates with
the people. There are many that have no access to information, except
through this medium. In the past few months we have seen a significant
improvement in GCIS's radio production services for community radio
stations. The unit recently put in place a new facility that enables
community radio stations to pick up key speeches in Parliament and in the
Union Buildings. This feedback can be broadcast live to community radio
stations around the country.

This process of bringing Parliament and Government to the people has
elected a tremendous response from the community radio stations. The
President's state of the nation address, for example, was broadcast live to
20 community radio stations. Many other stations have expressed interest
for the future. Radio is the most important messenger, not only because it
is affordable and available, but also because it is accessible. Information
is communicated in the language of the listener. Radio delivers information
directly to the listerner. It is not dependent on literacy, on education
and on sight, but on language.

Se ke se itseng ke gore ka 1994 re ne re na le Tirelo ya Tlhaeletsano ya
Aforika Borwa, kgotsa SA Communication Services. Tirelo eo, e ne e tshwerwe
ke dipuo di le dintsi. Rotlhe re a itse gore tirelo eo tota e ne e se
tirelo ya nnete, ka gonne go ne go na le mapodisi mo gare ga yona. Re
fitlhetse sentlhaga sa mapodisi mo gare ga tirelo e. Re ne ra botsa gore
batho ba sedimosetswa jang fa e le gore ke mapodisi a a boitshegang mo gare
ga sentlha seo.

Ke sone se eleng gore, go bua nnete, re raya makoko a kganetso re re tirelo
ya tshedimosetso e re nang le yona gompieno fa ke e e botlhokwa, gonne
sengwe le sengwe se tlile go bonagala mo pepeneneng, eseng jaaka maloba. Go
bua nnete, ANC e kgonne go fenya ditlhopo SA Communication Services e ntse
e le teng. Ga re itse gore e ne e tsietsa batho e re eng, le gale re kgonne
go fenya ditlhopo.

[Ke ka lobaka leo ke reng a ... [Nako e fedile.] [Legofi.] (Translation of
Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[In 1994 we had the SA Communication Service. This service was governed by
many languages. We know that this service had police in its ranks. When we
came to power we found many police in this Service. We asked how people
could get information when there were police in this service.

In truth I want to tell opposition parties that the service we have now is
important because everything will be out in the open unlike in the past.
The ANC was able to win the elections despite the presence of the SA
Communication Service. We do not know how it deceived people, but we were
able to win the elections.

That is why I say that ... expired.][Applause.]]

Mrs A VAN WYK: Mr Chairperson, a government is nearly always voted in by an
electorate in the hope that their expectations will be met by those to whom
they have given their support in return for enticing pre-election promises.
It follows that such a new government coming to grips with the challenges
of actual rule soon realises that the successes it does manage to achieve
should be communicated if it wishes to retain power and deliver service. A
success achieved or, at the very least, an honest effort in, say the
eastern or northern part of the country, holds out the promise to people
elsewhere that their turn, too, might come. This is part of the political
process in any democracy.

A balance needs to be found, though, between the legitimate
responsibilities of a government and the political objectives of the
rulers. Without it the distinction between state and party becomes blurred,
the integrity of the public service is compromised, misuse of taxpayers'
money occurs and corruption sets in.

It is difficult to govern a country effectively and justly, and the
electorate soon notices shortcomings. How great the temptation to follow
the tried and tested method of perpetuating your hold on power by means of
spin doctoring, positive imaging, etc - all the tricks in the book of the
propaganda industry, variously identified as public relations, media
liaison or communications.

Mr Joel Netshitenzhe said in his overview to the Portfolio Committee on
Communications: ``For the first time in about five years, a majority among
South Africans is confident of the Government's will and capacity to deal
with crime.'' What is true is that strategies and tactics to increase and
hold on to power are nearly always rendered transparent by the actions of
Government.

The New NP wants to see the discrepancies in our country between rich and
poor, urban and rural, the developed and the underdeveloped, the serviced
and the underserviced, significantly reduced within a reasonable timeframe.
To the extent that it is possible within the demands of such an enormous
primary responsibility, the New NP also wants to see, concurrently, our
country laying the foundations and setting the example for the true
awakening of Africa.

The New NP supports this budget. Power objectives overriding the interests
of a country, though, usually result in the appointment of party loyalists
to high positions. One wonders whether the advice will be given to the
President in the Government communication forum that appointing political
activists throughout the organs of state undermines accountability and
ultimately democracy itself. If they were honest, they would also tell him
that it gives South Africa a bad press and that it does nothing for his
image.

I would like the Minister to explain to this Parliament what measures he
will institute to ensure that GCIS improves its record as an objective
communication and information service. A sure sign of growth towards a
culture of democracy in our young country would be nonpartisan appointments
to top jobs, and a decorous distance between public servants and
politicians. That would inspire confidence in our Government and our
country as the regional leader.

The New NP approves of sound renewal. Modernisation of symbols is essential
in a country which is trying to improve itself and redefine its identity.
This must be done in a way which is universally acceptable. In October last
year Minister Ben Ngubane said Parliament would participate, but the coat
of arms was decided on by GCIS alone.

Ms N E PHANTSI: Hon Chairperson and hon members, it was Martin Luther King
who coined the phrase ``knowledge is power''. What better way to develop
and maintain that knowledge than through the power of the print media?
Reading certainly does strengthen the mind.

As we move into the new millennium, we still cannot say with confidence
that we have achieved freedom if the majority of our people are still
excluded from receiving information. The media in our country is still
controlled by people who do not really have, as their priority, the desire
and commitment to educate and inform the majority of our people on issues
that concern them.

'n Mens kry nie juis daagliks dekking van nuusgebeure in die klein dorpies
in die platteland nie, tensy die President of van die Ministers daar besoek
aflê. Heelwat suksesverhale gaan dus verlore omdat daar nie plaaslike
mediadekking is nie.

In die gemeenskap van Paballelo in Upington is 'n gemeenskapskoerant in die
middel van 1999 op die been gebring, maar in hierdie stadium verskyn
Comnews glad nie meer nie, omdat daar nie fondse is om voort te gaan met
die publikasie daarvan nie. Die gemeenskap moet dus nou staatmaak op Die
Gemsbok, wat weekliks verskyn en nie alle gebiede en gebeure dek nie.

Ons as die ANC wil graag meer gemeenskapskoerante in hierdie gebiede sien
waar daar nie toegang tot die media is nie, sodat hierdie gemeenskappe kan
weet van die plaaslike inisiatiewe en mense. Van dié inisiatiewe word deur
die mense self bestuur. Ons glo ook dat 'n verskeidenheid mediavorms 'n
beter diens sal verseker en aan al die verbruikers 'n wyer keuse sal bied.

'n AGB LID: Dis reg, gooi kole!

Me N E PHANTSI: Met 'n verskeidenheid koerante sal die gemeenskappe hul
kulturele verskeidenheid kan uitleef. Daardie agb lid se party het ons
mense teruggehou, so hy moet nou stilbly! [Gelag.]

Baie van die koerante word steeds beheer deur groot maatskappye, en dié
maatskappye se direkteure is meestal wit mans. [Tussenwerpsels.] Ons het
dus meer swart vroueredakteurs nodig om 'n verskeidenheid menings te kan
weerspieël. [Tussenwerpsels.] Die spoedige instelling van die agentskap vir
media-ontwikkeling en -verskeidenheid sal help om te verseker dat koerante
soos Die Gemsbok die gehalte van hulle dekking verbeter. [Tussenwerpsels.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[One does not really receive daily coverage of news events in the small
towns in the rural areas, unless the President or one of the Ministers
visits there. A number of success stories are therefore lost because there
is no local media coverage.

In the community of Paballelo in Upington a community newspaper was
established in the middle of 1999, but at this stage Comnews is no longer
being published, because there is no funding to continue publishing it. The
community must therefore now rely on Die Gemsbok, which appears weekly and
does not cover all areas and events.

We as the ANC would like to see more community newspapers in these areas
where there is no access to the media, so that these communities can know
about the local initiatives and people. Some of these initiatives are
managed by the people themselves. We also believe that a variety of media
will ensure a better service and offer all the consumers a wider choice.

An HON MEMBER: That's right, turn up the heat!

Ms N E PHANTSI: With a variety of newspapers the communities will be able
to express their cultural diversity. That hon member's party held our
people back, so he must keep quiet now! [Laughter.]

Many of the newspapers are still controlled by large companies, and the
directors of these companies are mostly white men. [Interjections.] We
therefore need more black women editors to reflect a variety of opinions.
[Interjections.] The swift introduction of the media development and
diversity agency will help ensure that newspapers such as Die Gemsbok
improve the quality of their coverage. [Interjections.]]

Newspapers and radio stations rely on advertisements. However, the
advertising industry is still conservative and male-dominated. The MDDA
should also, once established, strongly engage the advertising industry and
big business to support community-based initiatives. [Interjections.]

Die Gemsbok is 'n wit koerant en hy dek net sekere gebiede.
[Tussenwerpsels.] [Die Gemsbok is a white newspaper and it only covers
certain areas. [Interjections.]]

It is easy to produce media, especially newspapers, but the distribution of
that product is the most challenging. Government must look into resourcing
these initiatives and introducing a common carrier for distribution.

Dit is algemene kennis dat die groot maatskappye sorg dat hul koerante
eerste Sondagmôre afgelewer word, wat beteken dat hul koerante voorkeur
kry. Die klein koerante moet in dieselfde gemeenskap meeding en dan het die
mense klaar van die groot mediagroepe se koerante gekoop. Ons moet die
speelveld gelyk maak. [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[It is general knowledge that the large companies see to it that their
newspapers are delivered first on a Sunday morning, which means that their
newspapers receive preference. Small newspapers have to compete in the same
community and by then people have already bought one of the large media
groups' newspapers. We must level the playing field. [Interjections.]]

In conclusion, the future is in our hands. We must carry forward the work
necessary finally to liberate ourselves from the evils of apartheid.

Ons is nog besig om skoon te maak waar die NP half gewerk het.
[Tussenwerpsels.] [Applous.] [We are still in the process of cleaning up
where the NP did half a job. [Interjections.] [Applause.]]

It is a long road, but our steps remain sure and our destination is
certain. [Applause.]

Muf I MUTSILA: Mutshimbidzamushumo, tshivhangalelwa tshihulwane tsha
Tshumelo ya Muvhuso ya Mafhungo na Vhudavhidzano (GCIS) ndi u ḓisa
tshanduko kha muvhuso washu muswa siani ḽa u anḓadza mafhungo kha
vhadzulapo nga nyambo dzine vha dzi pfesesa.

Kha Phalamennde dzoṱhe dze dza vhuya dza vha hone fhano Afurika Tshipembe,
ndi lwa u thoma kha ḓivhakale ya fhano, u wana na riṋe-vho tshaka dza
vharema dza fhano kha ḽino dze dza vha dzi sa vhoniwi sa vhathu, dza vho
kona u ima fhano phanḓa dza ḓiphina nga lwa ḓamuni, dza ḓiṱongisa nga
nyambo dzadzo.

Tshiphugaṱhalu tshashu tshiswa tshi dovha tsha sumbedza vhuḓiimiseli ha uyu
muvhuso washu muswa une wa khou dzhiela nṱha tshaka dzoṱhe dza Afurika
Tshipembe hu si na tshiṱalula. (Translation of Tshivenḓa paragraphs
follows.)

[Ms I MUTSILA: Mr Chairperson, the objective of the Government
Communication and Information System (GCIS) is to bring about changes in
our new Government as regards giving information to all citizens in the
languages they can understand.

This is the first time in the history of the Parliament of South Africa
that we blacks can also stand here and proudly express ourselves in our own
mother tongue.

Our new coat of arms is also an indication that this Government is
committed to recognising the diversity of cultures in South Africa without
discrimination.]

The new coat of arms also reflects language issues in South Africa. The
apartheid system in South Africa was based on separate development. It is
this notorious system that entrenched racial inequality and, by extension,
resulted in what is known as ``identity crisis'' across the South African
landscape. The past policy of bilingualism, which officially declared
English and Afrikaans as the only official languages, was also a brainchild
of the apartheid system. This policy did not in any way contribute to a
shared national identity, but instead created conflicts between the
speakers of different languages.

This background serves to explain the rationale behind the adoption of the
new coat of arms of South Africa and its motto, namely !ke e: /xarra //ke.
[Applause.] It is a way of saying that South Africa is a diverse nation -
culturally, racially, linguistically, religiously and ethnically. However,
diverse as it is, South Africa should strive to be united. With the coat of
arms inscribed with Khoi and San words, the dignity of the very people
eroded since the arrival of the colonial system of governance is steadily
being regained.

South Africa has to cement its diverse cultural practices. It has to
embrace the unity in diversity and form an identity. Other formerly
marginalised communities must be roped in to participate in the journey of
self-discovery, self-renewal and renewal of other people's identity. The
coat of arms has symbolically given the Khoi and San languages a new role
to play in shaping the country's national identity. The idea supports such
concepts as ``a rainbow nation'' and ``a new patriotism''.

Throughout its policies, the new South African Government has embraced
diversity as one of the cornerstones of a national identity. Therefore, the
coat of arms is, in itself, a confirmation of the fact that views from
below are equally listened to by the South African Government. This is a
manisfestation of the fact that South Africa is democratically growing in
stature.

From a language point of view, it shows that all languages are equally
respected in South Africa. The coat of arms is a symbol of unity in
diversity, inclusiveness in decision-making by formally marginalised
communities, and the beginning of the rediscovery of the ordinary.

Tshiga tsha u ṱavha ha ḓuvha tshi sumbedza lushaka luswa lwo faranaho, lu
sa ḓivhi tshiṱalula nga lukanda, hune vhana vhashu vha ḓo ḓiphina nga
mutoli wa pfunzo nthihi i fanaho. Izwo zwi nkhumbudza phindulo ya muḓuhulu
wanga musi a tshi vhudziswa nga mme awe nga ha khonani yawe tshikoloni. Vho
mu vhudzisa uri iyo khonani ndi murema kana ndi mukhuwa naa? Ene a tshi
fhindula o ri ha ngo vhudzisa, u ḓo i vhudzisa nga ḓuvha ḽi tevhelaho.
Zwine zwa amba uri ha ngo vhona muvhala wa muthu, o vhona muthu ngae.
(Translation of Tshivenḓa paragraph follows.)

[The rising sun indicates a united nation without discrimination according
to the colour of one's skin, where our children will enjoy one, equal
system of education. This reminds me of my niece who was asked by her
mother whether her school friend was black or white. Her reply was that she
had not asked her friend about this and would do so the following day. That
means that my niece did not see the colour of her friend, but only the
person.]

In conclusion, the 1993 Constitution of the Republic of South Africa ends
with an epilogue entitled National Unity and Reconciliation. Among other
things it says, and I quote:


  This Constitution provides a historic bridge between the past of a deeply
  divided society characterised by strife, conflict, untold suffering and
  injustice, and a future founded on the recognition of human rights,
  democracy and peaceful co-existence and development opportunities for all
  South Africans, irrespective of colour, race, class, belief or sex.

South Africa belongs to all who live in it. United in our diversity, we
shall build this country together, fighting for change and a better life
for all. [Applause.]

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: Chairperson, I would like to start by
thanking all speakers who participated in this debate yesterday and today.
Particularly, I want to say to the speakers from the ANC that I would like
to thank them for bringing very clearly to our notice the fact that
democracy and communications have to be measured by the degree to which one
is able to speak to the poorest of the poor, and the degree to which one
enables those people to communicate with us.

It would seem to me that for a political party to survive, never mind
thrive, it has to be based on some fundamental principles which people can
look at and agree or disagree with. What has, unfortunately, happened to
the DP is that in the last few years, it seems to have shed any principles
it may have had in the past. [Interjections.] It is a process determined by
a head-long rush to get as many votes as is possible, never mind on what
basis. [Interjections.]

It would then seem to me that even their international allies in the
liberal countries would be embarrassed to sit with people who are, surely,
even to the right of the British Conservative Party. [Interjections.] One
only hopes that, for the sake of proper political debate, discourse,
discussion, interchange of views and disagreements, that the DP would soon
see sense and at least try to operate on the basis of sound principles.

Yesterday, hon member Dene Smuts of the DP had a four-minute diatribe. It
took up a typical position of a tradition that they have inherited from
their new constituency, essentially the supporters of apartheid. It took an
approach of a policy of divide and rule. Having found nothing to criticise
in the GCIS's report - and may I say, excellent efforts - they seek to
divide GCIS from the principals they serve.

I want to tell the hon member Dene Smuts that the problem, it seems to me,
is that her party is driven by a compulsion to pander to the basic
instincts of her constituency, instead of rising to the challenge of
bringing people into democracy and nonracialism. [Applause.] One of the
powers of research is that it confronts us with realities that challenge
the comfortable attitudes that are nurtured by restricted interaction in
society. Ms Smuts nurtures the hope that the world shares her negative
attitude to South Africa's standing in the world and the extent to which it
continues to grow as a result of the efforts of President Mbeki.

Those members who were here yesterday would have noticed that there was
only one mention of President Mbeki in my speech because we are going to
have a debate on the Presidency next week. However, I feel compelled to
respond to some of the comments made by Ms Smuts yesterday. She claims that
the research that I have spoken about is three months old. So, I do not
know what that means and how people have changed their minds in three
months. But I want to quote to her from the actual research


  First of all, people said that they were very happy with the transition
  from Madiba magic to Mbeki management. Those responding scored the new
  President positively, over 85%, as a visionary, a doer, as focused,
  consistent, honourable, conciliatory and so on.

Now, there is an old English saying - I know Ms Smuts is Afrikaans speaking
... [Laughter] ... which says: ``Facts are stubborn things.'' So she should
try to get hold of some facts.

She also spoke, yesterday, in a rather disparaging and nasty manner about
this philosopher king who is now writing letters about HIV/Aids and so on.
A newspaper that she likes reading, but selectively, the Business Day of
Wednesday, 7 June, carried an article by Simon Barber - who can by no
stretch of the imagination be called anything close to a supporter of the
ANC - which said, and I hope it will be listened to:


  HIV co-discoverer, Lue Montaigne, a member of the panel and the very
  antithesis of a dissident, writes in his recent book, Virus, and I quote:
  ``If we are to compare the transmission of the disease and produce
  effective treatments, it is very important to know whether the virus acts
  alone or with accomplices.''

In other words, whether there are any co-factors that heighten its effects.
The quotation continues as follows:


  In tropical regions, the number of germs in circulation is considerable.
  Cases of chronic latent infection are common - malaria, parasites, fungi
  and bacteria. The number of cells in a state of alert is high, and this
  is probably one reason why HIV has spread more rapidly in the southern
  than in the northern hemisphere.

That is precisely what President Mbeki said in the letter, viz that in
order to deal with this crisis, we need to understand it. Here is Luc
Montaigne agreeing with his point of view. In a paper submitted to the
panel, and it is from the same article, Robert Rubenstein, professor of
physiology at Michigan State University, says:


  Clearly, it will be easier and less expensive to stop the spread of Aids
  than to cure everyone who develops it. Indeed, preventive measures such
  as better nutrition, cleaner water, better public health and less disease
  benefit every individual as well as the economy. Given the fact that
  there are limited resources, I do not see that there is any question as
  to whether prevention or treatment is the better option.

I am not going into the details because the Minister of Health dealt with
this in her Vote.

However, I would like to ask Ms Smuts again to stop playing party-political
games which compel her to be very economical with the truth. [Laughter.]
[Interjections.]
Ms M SMUTS: [Inaudible.]

The MINISTER: Yesterday we were also told by Ms Smuts that the image of the
President is now bad because of his approach in trying to find solutions to
the problems in Zimbabwe. The truth of the matter is ... [Interjections.]
... I want to tell hon members about a chap by the name of ... What is his
name? I do not know what his name is. [Laughter.] He is a darker shade of
pale. Do members know what he does every time he speaks? He looks to those
who are a bit paler than he is for support. [Laughter.] Some people will
never learn. [Interjections.] Los jou base uit, man! [Leave your bosses
alone, man!] He must speak for himself. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Prime Minister Blair, President Clinton and 13 heads of state that
President Mbeki met in Germany recently ... [Interjections.]

Mr D A A OLIFANT: Jy's 'n aap! [You are an ape!] [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! I will not allow something like this
in the House. If we heckle, can we please heckle up to a point and then
keep quiet and allow the debate to continue.

Mr E K MOORCROFT: Chairperson, on a point of order: Is it in order for a
member on that side to call a member on this side an ape?

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Can you please withdraw that remark,
hon member. [Laughter.]

Mr D A A OLIFANT: Chairperson, I withdraw. [Interjections.]
The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! You may proceed, hon Minister.
[Interjections.] Can you please give the hon Minister a chance to reply.
You may proceed, hon Minister.

The MINISTER: Chairperson, I want to say that all of them agreed with the
position and approach of President Mbeki, which is motivated by the
determination to find a solution to a very difficult and complex problem.
But, of course, as far as the DP is concerned, the President has hurt his
image. If she also watched television, she would have heard the Danish
Prime Minister only three days ago, affirm that having supported the
struggle against apartheid, Denmark was not going to walk away now that the
challenge is to defeat the legacy of apartheid. He said that in the press
conference that he was holding together with President Mbeki. Now, what
about this image?

When he was in Germany, the Prime Minister of Portugal - which will host
the next EU summit that takes place within the next 10 days - extended an
invitation to President Mbeki. He said Mr Mbeki should please go to the EU
summit, because they wanted him to go and meet with them. The President of
Argentina, President De La Rua, told President Mbeki about the summit of
Mercosur which was to take place sometime later that year, and said that
they wanted him to go and join them. What kind of image is the member
talking about? Seriously! [Interjections.] No, Mr Chairperson, I am not
taking any questions.

What we need to talk about is the fact that the leader of the DP will not
get invited to any sensible conferences. What he has to do is to go and
scrounge around, begging for invitations. [Interjections.]

The legacy of what the ANC and its allies, as well as the President, refer
to as two nations is to put the reality of our situation on the table.
[Interjections.]

Ms M SMUTS: It is to polarise us!

The MINISTER: Of course, we are polarised. What does the hon member think
we are? What does the hon member think apartheid did to South Africa?
[Interjections.] What does she think the apartheid legacy has done to us?
What does she think hundreds and hundreds of years of the super-
exploitation of black labour power, of the systematic racism, of the worst
forms of institutionalised racism since Hitler's Germany has done to our
society, if it has not polarised it? [Interjections.]

The object of our exercise must be to see how we bring our nation together.
[Interjections.]

Ms M SMUTS: But we were doing all right!

The MINISTER: But we cannot pretend that we do not have two nations in
South Africa. We cannot pretend that on an international scale, we have a
few countries who are the haves and the rest of the countries are the have-
nots. We have to deal with those issues.

Ms M SMUTS: What happened to the ``rainbow nation''?

The MINISTER: The rainbow nation is a mirage. When the member was a little
child they told her there was a pot of gold at the end of it. This DP has a
mirage of its support: it will never find that pot of gold. [Applause.]

What we have to do as a country is to work together with the rest of the
developing world, to deal with the issues of poverty and underdevelopment.
We have to work together to compel those who have to understand that they
also have to change; we have to get international institutions such as the
IMF and the World Bank, not only to democratise their own structures, but
to be more sensitive to the needs of the developing countries. This is what
we need to do.

May I just comment on the issues raised by Ms Vos - I do not know where she
has gone to. She was a bit balanced yesterday, but let me say this to her:
When GCIS produced this annual report and the pictures and statements from
Government - I do not know why she did not note this - every single IFP
Minister was also mentioned therein. Now if the ANC benefited from that, I
suppose the IFP also benefited from it. So if I were the hon member, I
would not be too opposed to it.

The truth of the matter is that GCIS is not about to publish an account of
Government's progress, since it does that each year when the President
reports to the nation during the opening of the parliamentary year in
February. It has been done each year, and GCIS can take pride in what it
produces for that purposes.

GCIS itself worked out a framework within which it would operate just
before elections take place. It was guided by the precepts of the Public
Service Act. Section 36 stipulates that an officer or employee may not draw
up or publish any writing or deliver a public speech to promote the
interests of any political party, and GCIS stuck to that.

The ANC does not need GCIS to engage in propaganda for it. We are quite
capable of doing that ourselves. [Interjections.] What do we need GCIS for?
I did appreciate Ms Van Wyk's attempt at being positive. But, again, the
coat of arms was not decided on by GCIS. There was a process: Public inputs
were received, common elements were identified, heritage people and others
were involved, design people were involved. From all of that, 10 proposals
were made. Out of those, three were selected. Cabinet, as far as I can
remember, took at least two meetings to study the proposals in front of
them. Suggestions were made to the designers and, eventually, Cabinet
approved the present coat of arms unanimously. So it has nothing to do with
the GCIS. What GCIS did do was to facilitate the work for which they were
thanked by Cabinet. [Interjections.]

Now regarding appointments of activists, what does one do? The ANC got just
over 66% of the vote. I suppose most intelligent and skilled people have,
in one way or another, some connection with the ANC. If one wants an
efficient, professional, highly skilled Public Service, one is going to
recruit people who certainly would have sympathies with the ANC. Otherwise,
what are we going to get? Do they want us to go to Ventersdorp and recruit
the director-general. [Laughter.] Obviously, the question is: Can one
demonstrate that people who have been appointed to senior positions have
not been able to do their jobs? If so, then one must look at that. If
people fail to do their jobs then they should go. But let us not come here
and wage this propaganda because one feels that the New NP must be seen to
be critical of the Government, in spite of itself. Otherwise, more people
are going to join the DP. [Laughter.] That cannot be correct.

Let me say, at the end, that it is critical, I think, for members of
Parliament who, during constituency week and outside of that, do their
constituency work, also to monitor the extent to which GCIS is succeeding
in communicating with the poorest of the poor, because obviously there are
serious limitations on the capacity of GCIS to monitor itself. We therefore
invite MPs from all parties - of course, I suppose, it is mainly the ANC
that has constituencies in the rural areas and who care about the poorest
of the poor, although even the white suburbs will be interested in what
they say - to come back to us.

They should say to us that we said we would set up multipurpose community
centres, we said we would communicate with the poorest of the poor, we said
we were going to want to get views and comments of the poorest of the poor,
and, where they come from, we are not succeeding. Then GCIS would have to
take the necessary steps to respond to those criticisms.

However, we will do that together with the MPs, because, in the end, it is
in all our interests that the people whom we wish to serve, must, at times,
be served in a way which cuts across party-political interests. Fundamental
for South Africa is to what extent we have the capacity to rise above
narrow, party-political interests and put the interests of the nation
first; and, on this, I invite all members of Parliament please to engage
with us to ensure that GCIS becomes an even better, an even more skilled,
an even more professional, and an even more competent communicator.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 34 - Water Affairs and Forestry:

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Mr Chairperson ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Could we please take our seats? The
Minister wants to start with his speech, please. Those who are going out,
let us do it peacefully and quietly.

The MINISTER: Chairperson, pula, nala, kgotso [rain, greenery, peace]
[Applause.] From rain comes the greenery of development and progress, which
creates peace. Amanzi ayimpilo [water is life].

In France, in 1968, Jeremy Cronin, who was at the Sorbonne, will remember
that a slogan went up on a wall, which said: Forests precede civilisation
and deserts follow them. We must make sure, in our care for our water and
our environment, that this can never happen in our country.
My department's work rests on three main functions: the conservation of
water resources, water service delivery, and forests. Let me first address
our core business - water resource development and conservation. Why is it
the core business? Because, unless we are able to secure and look after the
sources of our water, protect them and ensure that the rivers run, that the
ecosystem is healthy, along with the environment, we will find a time when
the deserts follow, when the taps run dry.

So this particular area of our work, the core business, is all about the
sustainable management of this precious resource, a resource which
underpins everything now - our lives, our wellbeing, our economy, our
industry, our agriculture, our tourism, anything and everything - and must
be sustainably managed well into the future.

Over the decades in this country, we have had engineering developments of
great dams, big and small; of massive pipelines serving bulk water; of
tunnels transferring water from one river system and basin to another; of
reservoirs where water is stored; and of reticulation to where people are.
In the past, pre-1994, as we know, this was, unfortunately, simply to the
privileged.
The business of water resource development and care does not end there,
because when we are finished with that water and it is discharged back into
the rivers, the streams and the ecosystem, it must be treated and cleaned
first as it must be purified before it comes to us. This is a massive
undertaking, and this is ongoing work of this department.

In relation to this, let me just briefly refer to a terrible action of
pollution in Vanderbijlpark, Gauteng, which has been dragging on for too
long. Iscor, established there since the '40s, has been polluting the land,
and the people who live there have suffered greatly. Their properties are
now worthless. The land there is poisoned, and the landowners have been
selling out to Iscor in order to move on with as much as they can take,
leaving on their smallholdings the unfortunate people who worked and
laboured for them. These people, who are living there with no jobs now, are
simply being taken by those landowners who have sold out and dumped near
the nearest township.

Iscor is saying that it does accept that it is the pollutant and that it
will put things right. I want to see Iscor spend millions on putting that
land right, and they have assured me that they will. I can understand their
case. In order to correct what they have done, they have to have that land
and they have to rehabilitate it, and that is why they have been paying
out. However, there has been a vexed issue on whether there is real
compensation and who is behind the evictions, etc.

We had a forum that was established in 1997. I saw that it had become a
talk shop and a delaying tactic. Together with Gauteng MEC, Comrade Mary
Metcalfe, we have had a number of meetings. Last week we met with Iscor and
with all the role-players, the tenants, the landowners, the occupiers, etc.
I appointed a representative, on my behalf, to deal with this issue, and I
have told Iscor that this has to be concluded by the end of this month. I
expect that Iscor must, and will comply now, otherwise I will have to go as
far my powers provide in an expropriation of that land. I have told Iscor
that it is going to get us into a long court battle and litigation, which
will only make the lawyers rich. I have pleaded with them to uphold their
moral responsibilities. We will see what happens at the end of this month.

Let me come to the issue of water delivery, the issue that really affects
us all. The immediate objective of this Government and our department is to
bring water to the 12 million people, mainly in the rural areas, who in
1994 were not serviced at all, because previous governments, colonial to
apartheid, did not care a damn.

My department, under my illustrious predecessor Kader Asmal, has done a
magnificent job and has delivered to over 4 million people who did not have
before. However, I have had an audit done. It has taken a long time and
what we can say is that although it looked as though we would reach the
mountain top, the 12 million delivery point, in 2007, this was far too
optimistic. I must be honest about such figures and estimates. We are far,
far short if we continue along present lines and with present funding. This
is because this could take us an extra 20 years, to 2027. I have been to
Cabinet, and I have reported this to Cabinet. Cabinet has instructed me to
form a committee with the Ministers of Finance, of Provincial and Local
Government, and of Housing to see what we can do about speeding up this
delivery.

I want to tell hon members that in addressing this challenge, I have a
concept of four pillars. The hon Hanekom knows about the four pillars of
struggle. We will call this the four pillars to address the issue of, on
the one hand, delivery and, on the other hand, affordability,
sustainability and flexibility, and partnership. Those are the four
pillars.

Let me come to the question of affordability. Soon after I took office, I
visited a small village near Mount Ayliff which had a very nice water
project into a village, pumping from a dry river bed, and along RDP
standards, there were taps every 200 metres. I was very impressed.

We walked down to the dry river bed. I wanted to have a look at the pump
station. I was astonished to find a young woman. She had a three-week-old
baby in a blanket on her back, and she was digging a hole next to the river
and scooping out muddy water into a bucket. I could not believe this.
People 200 metres away were in queues filling their buckets. I asked her
why she was doing this. She said to me she could not afford to pay the R10
a month that everybody had to contribute to the village scheme. A jolly
good village scheme it was too - very well run.

This really disturbed me. It is not an occurrence that one does not find
elsewhere. Women in the Northern Province have reported the same thing to
an NGO. They say they cannot afford the R10 a month that they would have to
pay to meter schemes or whatever, because it would mean that they would not
have R10 worth of food for their children. We know how low the income is in
the rural areas. It has really made me think and urged me to look at the
price factor. There are many members here who know very well what the
prices are in the rural areas.

To put this in a nutshell, for our glass of water, for our 20 litres of
this life-giving water which we do not think about when we turn on the
taps, we here, urban dwellers, pay 1 cent.  With my best projects in the
rural areas, we cannot charge less than 2 cents. Already the rural villages
pay double what we pay. The reasons are because of economies of scale in
the urban centres and because of the huge problems, capital expenditure, to
get the pipes and the taps into these remote rural areas.

However, there is a question of social justice and social equity. I have
had to look no further than our country. I have not had to look at Cuba or
Vietnam or China. I looked at metro in Durban. The Durban model, and little
Hermanus down the road, have a subsidy for the lowest rung of their tariff,
the poorest people who are consuming the least.
The Durban model is very interesting. They provide free 6 000 litres, 6
kilolitres, that is 25 litres per person per day. That is the first step of
the tariff, whether you are Harry Oppenheimer or the poorest of the poor.
If Harry Oppenheimer decides to take only 6 kilolitres for that month, he
will not have to pay. It is equal.

As one goes up the steps, so the price increases. If one fills one's
swimming pool with 50 000 litres of water, or sleeps on a water bed, as I
believe some rich people do these days, or washes one's car and one's body
six times a day, and does all the things that I do not think hon members
do, then one will pay, and pay a lot. That helps to subsidise, in Durban,
those unfortunates at the bottom of that tariff system. It seems to me that
this is an eminently remarkable model for us to follow.

I have spoken to many people in the water business in the urban centres.
After humming and hawing and scratching their heads they did, in the end,
tend to agree. The problem is going to be the rural areas where we do not
have the economies of scale. That is where Government is going to have to
decide: Do we subsidise the poorest of the poor - as Comrade Mandela calls
them ``paupers'' - of the rural areas? When we consider social justice and
social equity, I would say then that we have to. I have received
considerable sympathy and interest in Cabinet.

The second area and pillar of this strategy is that of sustainability.
Those from the rural areas, particularly my colleagues on this side, know
very well how we put in the systems, because it is easy to put in the pipes
and the taps if one has the money to do so. However, if one does not at the
village level, at the small local government level, have the skills, the
personnel, the capacity for operation and maintenance, then the taps run
dry, the system breaks down, and then there is anger and frustration.

So we have to address the question of sustainability. I have not invented
these things. I am putting them together as four pillars to empower people
to set up the water committees, to capacitate the local government to whom
these functions are soon going to be transferred because, in fact,
servicing communities is not the role of my department constitutionally.
They are doing this as a bridging issue until local governments are solidly
in place and have the capacity.
The third pillar is that of partnership. We have very many different types
of partnerships. There are interdepartmental partnerships, there are
partnerships with NGOs, there are public to public partnerships, and then
there is the vexed question of private partnerships. I will come back to
that. Let me give hon members a few examples. We have visitors in the
public gallery today in the famous yellow shirts of the Working for Water
programme. This is an outstanding programme working with Government
departments.

We all know about the efforts to clear alien vegetation from our riverine
areas in order that water can flow at maximum potential. This is because
those greedy alien trees - and please let us not mix them up with people
from abroad - suck up approximately 1 000 litres of water a day, whereas,
as our rural people well know, our lovely, beautiful indigenous trees get
by on far less.

The Minister of Finance has referred to the Working for Water programme as
the best poverty relief programme in our country. I would like to
congratulate Dr Guy Preston, who unfortunately is not here, and the whole
Working for Water team and its management, who are with us today, on the
outstanding job they do. [Applause.]

I want to share with hon members an example of a wonderful public-public
partnership. Just the other day, near Rustenburg, I opened a water
purification plant and supply system at the Vaalkop Dam, set up by Rand
Water and Magalies Water. They raised the capital of R270 million. The
system there in a few years' time will be servicing 300 000 people. The
stakeholders and their customers who can pay; the Rustenburg city council,
which will service that burgeoning city and outlying townships; the
Baphokeng royal administration, with all the villages under its
jurisdiction; Impala Platinum mines; and others will have repaid their
loans within seven years. I therefore very much favour public-public
partnerships.

But let us come to the private sector. We cannot as Government provide the
type of investment capital we require to speed up this programme. It seems
to me that the private sector can provide tremendous amounts of investment,
as is happening everywhere in the world today. I believe even in Cuba they
are considering bringing in a Spanish company to run Havana's water system.
Of course, the private sector wants to ensure that there are profits. They
need to know the name of the game, namely security and clarity. For this
reason I issued regulations yesterday for all forms of partnership in terms
of the water sector. These have been released for public comment.

I do believe that the private sector has a very important role to play. The
point is that regulations will govern and control in the public interest.
It is not as we might have thought in another millennium, when to me the
idea of engaging the private sector on something like that would have been
sacrilege, supping with the devil. We have a reality in our world today. I
look practically at what I am meant to do, and that is to deliver water, to
give it to our people. I do not want them to wait for decades or never get
it at all. If it means that the private sector can provide the capital and
gain profits, but under our control and regulations, then I do not see any
reason why we should not do so.

Let me come to the fourth pillar. It is a question of flexibility. It is a
question of big not always being best or beautiful. Two weekends ago I went
to a little place called Zinguthu in the Glen Garry area. There I saw a
small system capturing the waters of a stream up in the hills, reticulating
water down to six villages by gravity. We opened it. That scheme cost us
less than R1 million.

Last weekend I went to Etembeni, near Keate's Drift, the place in respect
of which Tony Leon, on his whistlestop tour earlier in the year, said that
ANC delivery was breaking down. He was on one side of the river at a
brokendown borehole, set up by the previous Bantustan or homeland
administration, which was not working. He turned the tap, it was dry and he
concluded that the ANC was not delivering. I asked him, when I heard about
it: ``Dear hon member, why did you not cross the river?'' It is situated at
the Mooi River near the confluence of the Umgeni. He would have seen our
project, a stone's throw away. [Applause.] Keate's Drift is a little CBD of
Etembeni. He should just have a little patience.

I was there last Saturday, with the Zulu monarch, a number of MECs and a
wonderful amabuthu who I danced with, shaking my shield and knobkierie
which they gave me. We opened a project which is immediately servicing 3
000 people. Within a short time the second and third phases will reach 7
000, and within three to four years we will be serving 30 000 people in the
Msinga valley. That is the ANC delivery. [Applause.] We do not hide our
problems.

Ma' Lydia Ngwenya met me up at Arabie in the Northern Province. There is a
big dam, with huge pipelines and wonderful reservoirs. She said to me that
the project was a white elephant. There were no pipes from those reservoirs
into the villages. There are 56 villages. Only 10 or 11 of them are getting
the water. I told her that I would not be a Minister of white elephants. My
department will be an African elephant of delivery - indlovu yase-Afrika
yokuphakela. [Applause.] I want to give Ma' Lydia my director-general's
assurance that we now have the money. Within a month or two, we will start
laying down the pipelines to those villages. Within two years all 56 will
be serviced. [Applause.]

That is the strategy of the four pillars, and for the department it is the
question of ``bereka thata'' - we will work hard to achieve. We have got to
do a lot with sanitation. It is a Cinderella - nothing much has been done.
There are 20 million people in the rural areas without it, and a Government
task team has not done the work. Education, Environmental Affairs, Health,
Public Works, Housing and my department are kickstarting it again, to come
up with a strategy.

I now want to turn to the third main function of the department - forestry.
We are selling off the forests; we are leasing them off. In the 19th
century, government developed forests in this country, because they needed
the wood. That was strategic. Government does not have to be in the
business of growing pineapples, pumpkins or pine trees. We are losing R200
million a year as the department. So, we have put the forests on the
market. There are three categories: the large-scale for big investment, the
medium for local business in the provinces and the third, woodlots, for the
communities. The rural communities need the wood for fuel. It is not for
nothing that the forests have been called ``the poor person's overcoat'',
and we will ensure that those woodlots become part and parcel of
agricultural development for those communities.

I want to say briefly that there are areas of forest in our country - the
indigenous Nkandla forest of Shaka Zulu, the Amatola of Sandile and Maqoma,
and the Fundudzi in the Northern Province of King Makhado - which were
sites of resistance against the colonialists. These can be developed, not
only for educational and tourism purposes, but for the wholly sacred
respect that they deserve linked into those rural communities. And they
must become part of the African renaissance.

I want to state briefly that we are dealing with the issue of Dukuduku. It
is a question of ensuring that there is no intimidation of those who are
registering with my department, in order to be relocated to the two farms
that we bought in the nearby area. I have been there, and I have talked to
the committee that represents the foresters. We are setting up a trust and
we will give them all the help they need. We have to finish the
registration first. My colleague, the Minister of Safety and Security, and
I have been addressing this matter. We will see that the registration takes
place, that there will be no intimidation and that people can move. I am
afraid that those - with their automatic weapons and dagga fields within
that forest - who are refusing to budge, will have to be shifted. But we
are trying to do this peacefully.

I want to turn quickly to the issue of transformation in this department.
It is becoming more representative, and is improving. There is a long way
to go with the middle management level and improvements are required with
gender representivity. The department needs to be speedier in terms of its
responses to the public. In terms of culture and attitude, there is a
strong educational campaign. We have changed the names of our buildings.
They no longer have the names of the past. Our head building is called
Sedibeng; our second, eManzini; our third, Waterbron; and our fourth, where
the forestry people work, is called Ha madaka, which is Tshivenda for ``the
forests''.

The issue of corruption in our society must be rooted out, whether in
business, in Government or in sport. And we are doing that in the
department. In the past year, as a result of the campaign, half a dozen
people have been uncovered involved in fraud, and they have been charged
and dismissed. To take a bribe, someone must offer one a bribe - Hansie
Cronjé could tell us that. [Laughter.]

With regard to the Lesotho Highlands Development Authority, there has been
an unfortunate development, as we know, over the past number of years,
where the chief executive officer of that development authority has been
found guilty of taking bribes. A criminal court case is underway and others
are under investigation. As far as this is concerned, we have been giving
our fullest support to the Lesotho government and we are working on this
whole issue together. But when they say that there is corruption in Africa,
they do not say that the people and the companies that are offering the
bribes do not come from Africa. They come from Europe, North America and
other continents. [Applause.] What we are saying is that there needs to be
a thorough international review of methods to control this type of
corruption, and the main contractors - who are these big guys from abroad -
must be held responsible for the subcontractors.

I want to say of the exchequer budget account of my department that 28%
goes to resource management, 60% to water services and 12% to forestry.
Looked at another way - this is very revealing, and I am very proud of this
department's management - 16% of that exchequer budget is spent on
personnel expenditure, 5% on administration expenditure and 69% on capital
expenditure. This is an extremely good division indeed. It demonstrates
sound financial management and I congratulate my director-general and his
team. [Applause.]

I will end by asking all hon members, whom I know to be supporters of
water, this colourless fluid, to support this budget. In conclusion, I wish
to extend my appreciation to my director-general, Mike Muller, and to his
entire department for their outstanding work and effort in a difficult
period of transformation. I want to extend my very deep appreciation to the
chairperson and all members of the portfolio committee from all parties,
for their vigilance, their support and their positive criticism, which I no
doubt will hear today. I will be listening with both ears and noting what
they are saying, and so will the team here, so that we can learn from them.

I want to say a special thank you to my advisers, Dr Eugene Mokeyane and
Janet Love, for their lovely support. I also want to extend my appreciation
to my charming ministerial staff for being prepared to work with somebody
like myself at such irregular hours. I want to thank them all for helping
me keep my head above the water, and for helping me to see the wood and not
just the trees. I can tell hon members that there have been many occasions
when they prevented me from barking up the wrong tree. I want to say to the
hon members that they have known me as a red, but I think they can see that
the green has emerged from the closet.

Siyabonga [Thank you], and I shall conclude with the slogan of the
department:

Viva water, pure and clean!

HON MEMBERS: Viva!

The MINISTER: Viva forests, rich and green!

HON MEMBERS: Viva! [Applause.]

Ms B P SONJICA: Chairperson, it is definitely very difficult for me to
follow on such a vibrant Minister. I think he was a firebrand this morning.

I just want to make a comment that there is a party in this House called
the DP which always claims to speak on behalf of and for the poor, and yet
the evidence shows that they are hypocrites. I think we need to change
their name and call them the ``Hypocritical Party.'' [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, withdraw the words
``Hypocritical Party''. [Interjections.]

Ms B P SONJICA: Chairperson, I will withdraw. Water has been politicised,
therefore I think I have every right to speak politics around it.

I wish to extend a word of thanks to the following people: the ANC study
group on Water Affairs and Forestry for their support, discipline and
political guidance; members of the Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and
Forestry for their co-operation; and the Department of Water Affairs and
Forestry for being available whenever we need them. I think it is only now
that I understand what is meant by being accessible. I would also like to
thank the Minister's advisors, Ms Janet Love and Dr Mokeyane, for their
preparedness to share information with us and, of course, the staff.

I rise on behalf of the ANC to support this Vote. We would obviously have
preferred an increase of 7,7% rather than a decrease of the same
percentage. However, we realise that the national Budget has competing
priorities which it needs and has to satisfy. We welcome the projections
reflected in the medium-term expenditure estimates of Vote No 34, which
reflect an increase in the department's budget allocation for the 2001-2003
financial years, which we think will go a long way in addressing the
backlog. We also welcome the efforts of the Minister who seems to have been
trying to ensure that delivery of basic water services is speeded up.

The core function of the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry is to
provide water services in an equitable and just manner. Water service
provision is a matter of moral and economic imperative. It is a matter of
life and death to the majority, namely the poor South Africans. To them,
basic water delivery is about survival. It is therefore important that the
department ensures that this budget will go far, insofar as reaching the
target that it has set for itself.

URhulumente okhokelwa yi-ANC usebenzise iSebe leMicimbi yaManzi naMahlathi,
wenza imitsi ukutshintsha impilo yabantu beendawo ngeendawo, ebe imaxongo
meko leyo esiyishiyelwe nguRhulumente wangaphambili. Amanani abantu
esibanike ezi nkonzo zibaluleke kangaka ayazixela. UMphathiswa
ulichaphazele eli nani kwintetho yakhe wathi abo bantu bangaphezulu
kwezigidi ezihlanu ezinamawaka amathandathu.

Andiqondi ukuba likhona ilizwana kulo lonke eli limiweyo ... (Translation
of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[The ANC-led Government engaged the Department of Water Affairs and
Forestry to make strides in transforming the precarious lives of
communities in various areas which the former regime left for us. The
numbers of people to whom we have delivered these important services speak
for themselves. The Minister referred to that number in his speech and said
that they were in excess of 5,6 million.

I do not think that there is a country in the entire world that has ...]

... delivered so much within a period of five years. The lives of those
people who have benefited were improved to a great extent as social
conditions in those areas changed for the better. For example, the delivery
of basic water services to over 5,6 million people has meant a reduction in
the mortality rate which has always been a consequence of water-borne
diseases. In monetary terms, it means that the Government saved some of the
R4 billion that it spends every year on the treatment of water-borne
diseases. Most importantly, women's priorities, which include access to
water and sanitation, were taken care of. However, I must hasten to say
that there are still huge inequalities and imbalances of supply, quality
and consumption, and that about 8 million people in the rural areas are
still subjected to such bad conditions.

The provinces that are mainly affected are the Eastern Cape, the Northern
Cape and the Northern Province because of their history of being former
homelands. Unfortunately, these very areas are where one experiences gross
unemployment, a high rate of poverty and underdevelopment. Giving a water
supply to these people means giving them a lifeline. The department will
have to ensure that these provinces are prioritised when it comes to the
allocation of funds.

Water provision cannot be seen in isolation. It should be linked to
economic development. Government and the department need to find a way of
giving a daily allowance to help the poor to kick-start local economic
activities. This would be in line with international arrangements where
there is a basic minimum of about 50 litres of water that is given to
citizens in other countries. This should be done in our country within the
context of an integrated rural development approach, which means therefore
that there should be co-operation between related departments to ensure
that this is realised.

With regard to sanitation, this is, unfortunately, a programme that has
been treated as a Cinderella in the department. Perhaps a review of the
present demand-responsive approach needs to be done by the department.
About the implementation of policies, there has been a significant shift in
delivery service policy and legislation in line with the new Constitution.
The department has been successful in implementing this new policy,
especially, the Water Services Act of 1998.

However, a lot more attention should be given to the National Water Act of
1998, where there are still distortions or a deliberate undermining of the
provisions of the Act by some individuals or groups, especially the
farmers. We have evidence that landowners still link their water rights to
property or land rights. There are also those who still live in the past,
and who think that clean and potable water is an exclusive privilege of the
few rich whites.

Education of the rural communities about their water rights is crucial,
especially the education of the water committees, so that they can demand
their water rights wherever they are. The biggest question though is how
enforceable these Acts are that we have put in place. What happens when a
person violates those rights? Do the victims have any recourse?

Regarding the cost recovery, the portfolio committee has made an
observation that cost recovery for basic services is very low.
Consequently, the trading account has suffered a deficit of about R294
million. There are various factors that could be contributing to this.
Firstly, it could be poverty, and, secondly, it could be the lack of
capacity of local government in handling this responsibility. The portfolio
committee is busy conducting an investigation for all the reasons behind
this problem.

Concerning the public-private partnerships, the committee will support them
as long as they do not add a financial burden to the poor. There are also
concerns around corruption. It is said to be perpetrated by regional
officials in a very sophisticated way, especially with regard to tendering
procedures.

There is more to be done with regard to transformation. We believe that the
department is very slow in driving this process. The light has flickered,
that is why I am stammering. With regard to forestry, we have to
concentrate on restructuring. There are various problems there, and
communities are not participating in the process of restructuring.
[Applause.]

Mr E K MOORCROFT: Mr Chairperson, in February this year, the hon the
Minister addressed an important gathering of people in Durban. This was the
Tenth Congress of the Union of African Water Suppliers. In his address, he
sketched his vision of the way ahead for the supply of water in South
Africa. This morning he expanded on this vision, and we were interested to
hear what he had to say about it.

While we, in the DP, cannot agree with every sentiment expressed by the hon
the Minister, there was a great deal in his address and in his approach
with which we can associate ourselves, and this, together with the manner
in which the hon the Minister has conducted his stewardship of this
important portfolio during the past year, has enabled us to give our
support to his Vote. The contribution that I would like to make on behalf
of my party this morning is to pick up some of the important themes
introduced by the Minister, and to scrutinise them with a view to
suggesting constructive improvements.

With regard to the way forward, the hon the Minister claimed that the
critical challenge facing us is to find ways of stepping up the pace at
which the poor can gain access to sustainable water and sanitation
services. We agree. The Minister then went on to express his belief that
the way to do this was by way of creating effective partnerships, both
cross-border and domestic partnerships, between Government and the private
sector; and between Government and nongovernmental and community
organisations. Again, we agree. The question is: What will these
partnerships involve, how will they be structured, and what sorts of
benefits are likely to flow from them?

It has always struck us that, whereas service providers of other basic
commodities, such as electricity, have sought new and innovative ways of
either providing or saving that commodity, water providers have often
lagged behind. The obvious constraint is a financial one, and supplying
water is an expensive business - reservoirs, pumps, pipes, etc, all cost
huge amounts of money. But can we honestly claim to have exhausted all the
possibilities as far as stretching our present resources is concerned? We
believe not.

Let me begin with the most insatiable water user of all, agriculture.
Agriculture, I believe, uses some 60% of all water resources. Yes, water is
essential for agriculture and agriculture is essential for our wellbeing,
but can we honestly claim to have exhausted all possible ways of cutting
down wasteful use of water in agriculture? Since agriculture is almost
entirely in private ownership, is this not the first place in which to
start seeking some kind of beneficial partnership between the state and an
important beneficiary of the water supply? For example, we all know that
modern systems of irrigation can cut down enormously on water use, but they
are expensive, and given the narrow profit margins in agriculture, farmers
are naturally reluctant to overcapitalise. But let us suppose again, for
example, that where farmers are obliged to pay for their water, usually on
the basis of how many hectares they are irrigating, tariff adjustments
could be introduced for those who invest in water-saving irrigation
equipment, thereby encouraging the sustainable use of water in that regard.
The next area which suggests itself for a partnership is industry, also a
massive user of water. Here the prevention of pollution is a major problem.
The hon the Minister dealt with this matter extensively in his address this
morning, and we are pleased to hear that he is taking a tough line on
pollution. And perhaps this is where this idea of partnership with industry
could come into play. So I shall set that particular aspect aside and move
on to another source of enormous wastage of our precious water resources,
and that is in the disposal of household sewerage.

There has been a great deal of research work done in other parts of the
world on the use of water-saving chemical toilets, particularly in water-
scarce areas. Now, are we exploring this technology as an alternative to
the wasteful flushing of toilets, particularly where this water has already
been purified and is potable? This is surely another area in which the
private sector could make a contribution, either by way of research into
improving the technology, or in the practicalities of applying it.

A further source of significant wastage is cracked or leaking supply pipes.
A pipe on a village green not far from where I live has been leaking
unattended for at least the past two years. How many thousands of litres of
purified water have leaked away here I shudder to think, and there are many
thousands of such leaks, I am sure, all over the country. Is it not time
that, in terms of some sort of partnership, perhaps, between the state and
municipalities, which are responsible for these services, the state could
assist with the repair of such leaks? Of course, there will be a cost
involved, but is the cost of not fixing the pipe not greater in the long
run?

One last example of a partnership, this time directly between the private
sector and the poorer communities, could be that of providing communities
with the good old-fashioned water tank which is filled by rainfall run-off
from the roofs. Many of us here will still remember, I am sure, a time when
certain suburbs were not supplied with reticulated municipal water and
residents had to make do with tank water. It was not a convenient system,
but it did serve a good purpose.

The old-fashioned tin tank was heavy and rusted, but there is now a modern,
fibre-glass tank which is virtually indestructible and can hold 2 000
litres of water. Perhaps, one day, some enterprising company will see the
value of having its name or its logo emblazoned on a thousand water tanks
in our townships, and this form of advertising might even be a more
effective way of advertising than expensive TV or radio adverts. I am just
putting these forward as suggestions which could be thought about.

What I have tried to do by using this simple illustration, is to indicate
that the idea of a partnership being put forward by the Minister, which we
endorse, could be carried forward cheaply and effectively and be a benefit
to all parties. All that is required is the will to do this, and we hope
that the hon the Minister will demonstrate this will. [Applause.]

Mrs L R MBUYAZI: Chair, the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry has
embarked on a policy shift to stop establishing and maintaining commercial
forests operations. This is a desirable policy shift. The questions which
nevertheless have to be raised and answered are: Who are the successful
bidders and which of the forests will be allocated to each bidder? What
access to recreational areas within the forest will be obtained for the
public? What guarantees can be given to this House that our forests will
not fall into the hands of foreign companies which then export the logs to
their own sawmills for their own benefit? What guarantees do we have that
sufficient timber for our construction and furniture industries will be
available at affordable and competitive prices? Who in future will
undertake research and ensure that new forests are being and will be
established to meet our future needs? In this respect, the promotion of the
preservation of our indigenous forests must be clarified.

In so far as forests are concerned, the IFP supports the leasing of
industrial plantations to new bidders and investors. This will remove the
maintenance burden from the state. But we still hope that much is going to
be done in the case of indigenous forests. The IFP applauds the fact that
these forests will not be transferred to new owners. Our concern is that
some of these indigenous forests are not being utilised in a manner that
will help the local communities.

Umhlonishwa uNgqongqoshe ukhulumile, njengoba kade ekhuluma lapha, waphatha
indaba yamahlathi emvelo akhona le kithi KwaZulu njengakoNkandla, koShaka
Zulu nakoDukuduku mayelana nabantu abayizivakashi. Kunelinye ihlathi
engifuna ukwenaba ngalo lapha, okuyihlathi laseNkandla, eliyihlathi lemvelo
elinomlando omkhulu. AbaseNdlunkulu baye baze bafunge bathi: Ngifunga
uCetshwayo eseNkandla, ngoba yilapho iNkosi uCetshwayo yalala khona.

Eduze naleli hlathi futhi kunomuzi wePhini likaMongameli. Yindawo le
enomlando omkhulu. Ngaphesheya kwakhona kukhona amanzi ashisayo aqhuma
phansi, angumthombo, eduzane kwaleli hlathi. Ngakho-ke, kumhlonishwa
uNgqongqoshe sithi sifisa ukuthi kule ndawo kube khona intuthuko ethile
engenziwa ukuze izivakashi eziya kule ndawo zikwazi ukusizakala, futhi
balekelelwe laba bantu bakhona ngokuthi mhlawumbe bakhe izindlu zokuhlala
izivakashi uma zizobona lezi zindawo, ngoba kunezindawo eziningi ezakhelene
esibona ukuthi mhlawumbe kungaba usizo uma abantu bakhona beba yingxenye
yehlathi, bazi ukuthi kwenzekani.

Okunye futhi esikucelayo kumhlonishwa uNgqongqoshe ngukuba kwenziwe
ubudlelwano nabantu laba abasebenzisa amakhambi abathatha ihlathi
njengendawo yabo yokuthola imithi. Siyazi ukuthi abantu bakithi
bayasizakala bakhe laphayana amahlamvu athile, baxebule ehlathini. Ngakho-
ke kuyindawo ethile okufunakala ukuthi uma beyisebenzisa bazi ukuthi
mhlawumbe umuntu kufuneka akhe kangakanani, kube khona ukuxhumana komnyango
nalaba bantu abasebenzisa amakhambi. Kodwa-ke kuhle balekelelwe uma bewakha
phela, futhi kufuneka kube khona nokongiwa kwemvelo. Kokubili kufanele
kubuyiswe, kube khona. UNgqongqoshe ukhulume ngezinsika ezine, enye yazo
okungukwenza izinto ngendlela eqhubekayo. Ngakho-ke kulokho esikubonayo
ngukuthi laba bantu mabangalahlwa nje, kodwa futhi kufanele bakwazi
ukuwakha ngoba siyaphila ngawo la makhambi abawathatha laphayana kuleli
hlathi.

Okokugcina-ke, maqondana nezemvelo, kumhlonishwa ngithi siyazi ukuthi
njengoba kuvele le mililo emikhulu ebikade ikhona, amahlathi ashileyo kube
ngatshaliwe, bekungewona awemvelo. Amahlathi emvelo kukancane kabi lapho
umuntu ezwa khona ukuthi ihlathi lishile labhebhetheka ngoba anamanzi awo
avikela ukuthi ihlathi lingashi nje libhebhetheke liye phambili. Ngakho-ke
thina, njengeqembu le-IFP, sithi akuqhutshekwe. Lolu hlelo lukamhlonishwa
esiluncomayo, lokuba kutshalwe izihlahla zemvelo ziqhutshezelwe futhi
zongiwe lezo ezivele sezikhona, siyalweseka. (Translation of Zulu
paragraphs follows.)

[The hon the Minister has spoken about tourists. He has referred to the
historic forests of KwaZulu-Natal like Nkandla, Shaka Zulu and Dukuduku.
Now, I want to talk about a certain forest which is known as the Nkandla
forest. It is a big forest and is well-known in history. Members of the
royal family when they swear, say they swear by Cetshwayo as he is in
Nkandla, because that is where King Cetshwayo was buried.

Very close to this forest, lies the homestead of the Deputy President. The
Nkandla forest has a great historic record. Opposite this forest, hot water
comes naturally from the ground. Therefore, we appeal to the hon the
Minister to improve these forests so that visitors who come to these places
will be helped, and people who reside near these places will benefit as
they will be employed to build houses in which visitors will stay. There
are many people who live near these forests. They should be informed about
what is taking place regarding these forests. In other words, they should
be considered as part of these forests.

We also appeal to the hon the Minister to establish a relationship with
traditional healers who obtain their medicinal herbs from these forests. We
know that our people benefit a lot from these forests because that is where
they get their medicinal herbs. Therefore, people should be informed about
what the Government thinks of these forests. They should be given an idea
of the amount of medicinal herbs they are allowed to dig out and cut in
these forests. The Government must consult with traditional healers.
Traditional healers should be assisted in obtaining medicinal herbs. Nature
must also be taken care of. The hon the Minister talked about four pillars,
one of which is to move things in a continuous manner. Therefore, from what
we see, we feel that traditional healers should not be neglected. They
should be allowed to obtain medicinal herbs from these forests because it
is through their medicinal herbs that our illnesses are healed.

In my conclusion on the environment, I would like the hon the Minister to
know that since we have recently experienced big fires, the forests that
were burnt did not have natural trees, they had trees that were planted by
people. There are few occasions when one hears about the burning of natural
forests. The reason for this is that natural forests have water in them
which protect the forests from burning easily. We in the IFP say that we
should proceed. We applaud this project of the hon the Minister. Natural
trees should be increased by planting new ones. The old ones should be
protected. We support this project.]
Let me turn my attention to water affairs. In the past year parts of our
country were heavily flooded. Meanwhile, Kenya is experiencing such an
acute water shortage that it is unable to generate adequate electricity.
The human impact on weather and climate has resulted in altered rain
patterns. What measures has the Government put in place to deal with these
wild swings between too much rain and too little rain?

Let me now look at water aquifers. In many parts of the world these have
been depleted by the overpumping of water from the ground. In Australia
this has led to the salt level rising, with damaging effects on plants and
trees. How is our Government dealing with this situation?

Finally, Government has made remarkable progress in bringing water to those
who were previously marginalised and discriminated against. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Mme P K MOTHOAGAE: Modulasetulo, Tona ya Merero ya Metsi le Dikgwa, maloko
a atlotlegang, borra le bomma, ke tlotla mo go nna go nna le seabe mo
tshekatshekong ya tekanyetsokabo ya Lefapha la Merero ya Metsi le Dikgwa.
Ke lebisa tlotla go bomme botlhe ba Aforika Borwa, segolo ba ba kwa metseng
le kwa madirelong a temo a basweu, mo seabong sa bona go kgaratlela
kagose[s]a ya Aforika Borwa le Aforika ka bo phara.

Metsi ke botshelo. Rotlhe re a itse gore dipuso tsa tlhaolele di dirisitse
metsi jaaka sebetsa sa tlhaolele. Mo kgweding e e fetileng re bone
matlhotlhapelo kwa Wolvekrans kwa Randfontein, Gauteng. Rrapolasa Dirk
Pelser o ne a tsaya malapa a le matlhano, go akaretsa masea, a ba
tlhatlhaganya le dikolobe mme a ba kgaolela metsi - fela dikolobe tsona di
ne di na le metsi. Ke rata go buisa mafoko aga Mme Nothembisa Vumbane mo
lokwalodikgannygeng, mo a reng:


  We were treated worse than the pigs. While we had our water supply cut
  off by the owner of the farm, his pigs had plenty of water to drink.

Dilo tsena di diragala godimo ga Molaotheo o ofetisitsweng ke Ntlo e.
Matlakala a re a bonang ano, a diragala mo godimo ga Molao wa Ditirelo tsa
Metsi wa 1997, le Molao wa Metsi wa 1998. Tiro e e re emetseng e ntsi, go
samagana le ba ba kgatlhanong le diphetogo. Matlakala a a diriwang ke
borrapolasa ba tshwana le Dirk Pelser, a tshwanetse go fela. (Translation
of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[Mrs P K MOTHOAGAE: Chairperson, the hon Minister of Water Affairs and
Forestry, hon members, it is an honour to participate in the debate on the
Vote of this Department. I want to honour all women in South Africa,
especially those in the homes and on the agricultural farms of whites, for
their role in promoting the rebuilding of South Africa and the rest of
Africa.
 
Water is life. We all know that governments of the past sed water as a
weapon of oppression. Last month we saw a heartbreaking incident at
Wolvekrans in Randfontein, Gauteng, where a farmer, Dirk Pelser, took five
families, including children, and forced them to live with pigs. He cut off
their water supply, but the pigs had water. I want to quote the words of
Mrs Nothembisa Vumbane, who stated in a newspaper, and I quote:


  We were treated worse that the pigs. While we had our water supply cut
  off by the owner of the farm, his pigs had plenty of water to drink.

These things happen despite our new Constitution that was drawn by up this
House. These dreadful things happen despite the Water Services Act of 1997
and the National Water Act of 1998. A huge job awaits us, including those
who oppose change. Things that are done by farmers such as Dirk Pelser
should come to an end.]

I mean, these people are ruthless. Why must we be lenient with them?

Before 1994 no national institution was responsible for ensuring equitable
and sustainable access to water and sanitation services. All these years
the DP sat in this House, doing nothing. This morning, the hon Moorcroft
told us about the pace of delivery, I am surprised ...

Ke makaditswe ke se a se buang ka gonne ga nke aya kwa di kopanong tsa
komiti e. [I am amazed by what he has said, because he never attends
committee meetings.]

Rural water supply and sanitation was left to former homeland governments.
We inherited more than 600 water projects and many of them were
dilapidated. So, the DP, in trying to score political points, visited
Keate's Drift. Mr McIntosch, in a bow tie and bellbottoms, went to turn on
a tap, when he knew there was no water.

In drawing up the Water Amendment Act of 1997, a long involved process of
consultation was undertaken by the Department of Water Affairs.
[Interjections.]

La ntlhodia! [You are irritating!]

Communities, trade unions, farmers, industrialists, scientists and
environmentalists were contacted. This was done in order to give force to
the constitutional mandate which guarantees a right to water access and a
healthy environment that is not harmful. One is concerned, however, about
how some of our industries are conducting themselves or whether they are
undermining legislation. The Minister referred to the Iscor case and we
hope that we are going to get results soon. Iscor might not be the only one
in industry that is undermining us.

Water resources are a public commodity which are regulated to meet the
interest of all users, whether they get their water from rivers, the sky or
underground. No part of the water resources of our country will be regarded
as private property. However, I want to tell the hon the Minister that it
seems as if we are still having some problems. I am not sure how far the
process of licensing of water has gone, but a certain farmer in our area in
Lehurutshe has approached the Zeerust Town Council, saying that he has
enough water on his farm and can assist the town council. The council
raised this with me, and I referred them to Mr Narache at the regional
office in Mafikeng. It seems there is some information lacking and some
people are undermining what we have put in place with regard to this.

I want to raise the issue of hon chihuahua Tony Leon going to the Kaya
Sands waste disposal site where he was accompanied by armed youths who were
toyi-toying in front of him. I am not sure what message he was sending. He
raised the issue of the Jukskei River being polluted. The Minister has been
there before and he can share with this House information on what is
happening in Midrand. They concentrate on the suburban areas and forget
about the rural areas.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: You are talking nonsense!

Ms P K MOTHOAGAE: O bua matlakala. Mphe tshono ke go bolele di kgang tsa
gago! [You are talking nonsense. Give me a chance and I will tell you what
you are about!]

They are happy that we concentrate on their areas. We are not going to do
that. They must change ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, please do not
refer to the Leader of the Opposition as a chihuahua. [Laughter.] Do not
allow your speech to go to the dogs! Deliver a good speech. Please
continue, hon member.

Mrs P K MOTHOAGAE: Mr Chairperson, I would not be just if I did not address
sanitation in this debate. In 1996, a draft White Paper on National
Sanitation Policy was circulated. Consultation started in 1995 and
provinces were consulted through workshops. Six departments were involved:
Water Affairs and Forestry, Health, Education, Environmental Affairs and
Tourism and Provincial Affairs as well as Housing. We saw that as a very
comprehensive, co-ordinated and integrated approach. I would like to ask
the hon Minister, what happened to that White Paper?

The Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry visited nine
provinces. The Portfolio Committee on Education visited the Eastern Cape
and KwaZulu-Natal. So, water supply and sanitation remain a serious
problem.

I wish to take this opportunity to workshop the UCDP on its oversight role
as parliamentarians. I want to say to hon Baloyi that if he is in his
township and sees a blocked pipe or water that is not well managed, he
needs to sit down with the council and resolve the matter instead of going
to Radio Motswedeng FM.

This party should thank the ANC. They were given a chance to come back to
this House and resolve the mess that they created with their bosses.

The ANC supports this Vote. [Applause.]

Mr S SIMMONS: Chairperson, hon Minister and members of the House, the New
NP will be supporting this Vote. Owing to time constraints, I will only
focus on my concerns on the budget and services rendered by the department
in the past.

The hon Minister will observe from the budget that out of the eight
programmes, six programmes make provision for, inter alia, mainly new
salary improvements and improvements in conditions of service. Besides the
fact that Programmes 7 and 8 do not include any salary improvements, the
interpretation of the budget as to what amounts have specifically been
budgeted for the various programmes, excluding the salary improvements,
cannot be determined. Enquiries into that have to date not been responded
to. Perhaps the hon Minister could assist and provide me with the relevant
figures.

On a recent provincial visit by the portfolio committee, we noted many
successful projects and how grateful the affected communities were, many of
which he has mentioned here today. I also noted the many not-so-successful
projects and the reasons for this as expressed by the various communities.
A further concern was the many white elephants, such as dams that are not
fully utilised or utilised to their optimum. One such dam is the Taung Dam
in the Northern Province, which is situated in the former Bophuthatswana
homeland which is a water-scarce area. When the portfolio committee visited
this dam, it was more than full; in fact, it was overflowing. Crystal clear
water was running over the dam's wall.

It was also pointed out to us that two other dams not far from where we
were were also not being utilised to their maximum. Lack of funds was the
reason no infrastructure could be installed so that the water could be
taken to where it was needed most. The Minister's comments in this regard
would be appreciated.

Two independent studies by nongovernmental organisations evaluated the
Department of Water Affairs and Forestry's community water and sanitation
projects which have been in place since 1994 and found that between 50% and
90% of the projects were in total disarray.

Research done by the Rural Development Services Network found, inter alia,
that about 40% to 60% of the rural people do not have adequate drinking
water, and that only 26% of the projects were fully operational. Moreover,
by 1999, the Government had cut the water provision in its budget by a
massive 21,6% and a further 3,6% in the current financial year, which to me
seems to be a shortcoming in the department. This state of affairs is
totally unacceptable. Based on these findings, it seems that the success
claimed by him and his department has been overexaggerated and that more
people than estimated by him are still without potable water and sanitation
services.
I want to refer to the concerns of the commercial forestry industry. The
National Water Act classifies commercial forests as the one and only stream
flow reduction activity under the use of water category. Owners of timber
plantations are required to register their plantation areas as water users
and will require licences to continue with these activities. The licences
are not permanent and their duration is restricted to a maximum of 40
years, subject to regular review at intervals of not more than five years.
These reviews could result in the termination of licences with little
certainty that adequate compensation would be paid.

Furthermore, the Act provides for charges to be levied on all forms of
water use. In the case of forestry, which relies entirely on rainfall, the
charges would inevitably have to be based on estimates of the extent to
which the plantations reduce runoffs. The charges would be based on an area
planted and average rainfall for the subcatchment concerned. No account
would be taken of drier years or other variations.

The forestry industry will also be required to pay for water in respect of
which no services are provided, which can therefore be regarded as a tax on
rainfall. I appeal to the Minister that caution be exercised in this
regard. This is a controversial and contentious issue, and we request that
fairness prevail in order to placate all the role-players. [Time expired.]

Mna P M MATHEBE: Morena Modulasetulo, Tona ya tša Meetse le Paballo ya
Dithokgwa, le bang-ka-nna, seo se ke kego se nkgahle ke gore motho a tle mo
pele gomme a tle a bolele ka bošaedi le bošula bjo bo dirilwego ke phathi
ya gagwe.

Mna Simmons o re boditše ka ga ``di-white elephant'' tša matamo, tšeo re
tšwago go di bona kua Northern Province. Potšišo ke gore na e ka ba tšona
``di-white elephant'' tšeo di agilwe ke bomang? [O tsenwaganong.]

MALOKO A HLOMPHEGAGO: Ke Ramodike!

Mna P M MATHEBE: Bjale ga ke tsebe ge e ba ``bonnete'' bjo bo boletšwego ke
Mna Simmons bo tlo kgahla Mna Van Schalkwyk gobane ke phathi ya gagwe yeo e
dirilego mašula ao.

Naga ye ya rena ya Afrika-Borwa e šegofaditšwe ka meedi le meetšana, maope
le dinoka tšeo, tše dingwe tša tšona, di elelago motšhaotšhele.
Matlhakoring ohle e potapotilwe ke mawatle. Go agilwe matamo a go duta
meetse a go tšwa dinokeng tšeo. Efela, se bošula ke gobane kabo ya meetse
ao e be e sa fiwe batho ka go lekana. Mmušo wola wa malobanyana, wa majela-
thoko, o be o hlokometše fela bagwebi ba balemi ba maburu. Dikanale tšeo di
išago meetse ao baleming, di be di phatša ka gare ga metse ya gaborena,
eupša bomme le dikgaetšedi ba gapeletšega go ya didibeng tšeo go nwelago
ditonki le diphoofolo tše dingwe, go yo ga meetse a go apeya le go nwewa.

Meetse ao a tšwago letamong la Loskop ka Moutse, go la Mpumalanga, a feta
diketekete tša batho ba Moutse a eya go fiwa balemi le badudi, bao ba ka
tlalago fela seatla, ba Groblersdal le Marble Hall, ka baka la gore ke
maburu. Se, ke seo se ke kego se seleke bathobaso. Batho ba gaborena, ge ba
fetwa ke meetse ao, ba gapeletšega gore ba dumele gore a a ba rona. Gape re
gapeletšega gore re dumele gore ke nnete gore morula o a hlaba, re ntše re
tseba gore nnete-gona ga o na meetlwa. Tšeo ka moka e be e le ka baka la
wona mmušwana wola wa majelathoko. [Legofsi.]

Le moo batho ba bego ba fiwa meetse, ba be ba sa kgathe tema lenaneong la
go a aba. Gape ba be ba sa dumelelwe le go ka fa ditšhišinyo go abjweng ga
wona. Le taba ya go ka nyakišiša gore ke batho ba bakae, mo nageng, bao ba
bego ba se na meetse e be e se bohlokwa mmušong wola wa diganka, wa
majelathoko. Ba be ba dira fela seo se kgahlago bona, e lego seo se bego se
šulafatša magagaborena.

Ba hlomile dinagamagae tšeo di bitšwago ``homelands'', tšeo re sa di
ratego; gomme ba tšere maburu ao go bona ba rego ga a tsebe selo, ba sa a
ratego, ba a romela gona dinagamagaeng tšeo go yo ba ditlhogo tša dikgoro
tšeo ba bego ba re ke tšona di tlago direla bathobaso mešomo. Seo ba be ba
se dira ka go tseba gabotse gore batho bao, ka ge e le bao ba sa kgonego,
sa bona e tla fo ba go senya mo dinageng tša gaborena.

Mna Ramodike o be a le fa. Ke a tshepa o tla nhlatsela mo tabeng ye, gobane
ge a be a le tonakgolo ya mmušo wa Lebowa, go be go na le monna yo a
rometšwego ke maburu fao, e le hlogo ya lefapha la tša temo, meetse le
dithokgwa. Dithutwana tša monna wa ntshe e be le ge a na le setifikeiti sa
go rua dinôse. [Disego.] Go le bjalo, e be e le yena hlogo ya Lefapha la
tša Temo le Meetse ka nagalegaeng ya Lebowa. Naa ka setifikeiti sa go rua
dinôse, motho a ka kaonefatša maphelo a batho ge go e tla kae? Ke potšišo
yeo re tlago e botšiša bona banna ba ba majelathoko.

Efela go tloga ka ngwaga wa 1994, Mmušo wa rena wa ANC o dirile dinyakišišo
go ka hwetša gore e ka ba ke batho ba bakae bao ba se nago meetse. Re
hweditše gore bontši bja batho ba ke badudi ba Mpumalanga, Eastern Cape,
KwaZulu-Natal le Northern Province, elego mafelo ao a tletšego ka bahlaki
ba dinagamagaeng. Go leka go fetola seo, Mmušo wo wa rena o file batho ba e
ka bago dimilione tše senyane le makgolo a mabedi meetse. (Translation of
Sepedi paragraphs follows).

[Mr P M MATHEBE: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry
and hon members, I find it interesting when people have the audacity to
rise in this House and start talking about the evil acts that were
committed by their party in the past.

The hon Mr Simmons has just referred to what he termed the ``white
elephant'' dams that we have in the Northern Province. The question is, who
actually built those white elephants? [Interjections.]
HON MEMBERS: Ramodike!

Mr P M MATHEBE: Well, I do not know whether the ``truth'' that the hon Mr
Simmons has just revealed will be appreciated by his boss, the hon Mr Van
Schalkwyk, because it was his party that was involved in building those
white elephants.

Our country is endowed with valleys and watercourses, streams and rivers.
Some of these rivers flow throughout the year. South Africa is also
surrounded by oceans. Some of the rivers and streams have been dammed up.
However, it is strange to note that water from those dams was not supplied
to the local communities in an equitable manner. The former apartheid
regime was particularly committed to serving only the Boer commercial
farmers. The waterpipes that carried water to those farming communities
went through our villages, but our mothers and sisters had to share impure
water with donkeys and other wild animals.

Water from the Loskop Dam in Moutse, Mpumalanga, was carried in pipes to
small white farming communities in Groblersdal and Marble Hall, whilst
thousands of local black people of Moutse were deprived of water. This
annoyed the black communities. When our people are deprived of water they
feel that they are being forced to accept that they are not fit to get
water at all. We are also being forced to believe in the fallacy that a
morula tree is prickly whereas we know full well that a morula tree has  no
thorns at all. This heavy burden was thrust upon us by the previous
apartheid regime. [Applause.]

Even in places where water was provided, local people were not consulted in
allocating it. They were not even allowed to voice their opinions in the
allocation of water. The apartheid regime did not even bother to find out
exactly how many people were without water. They did all this because they
particularly enjoyed seeing our people suffer.

The apartheid regime established the hated ``homelands'', and seconded
useless Boer rejects to these governments as heads of departments whom they
claimed would create job opportunities for blacks. They did all that to
ensure that those rejects would retard our people's development.

The hon Mr Ramodike was here. I am sure he would agree with me on this
matter, because during his tenure as the Chief Minister of the former
Lebowa homeland government, there was a man who was seconded by the
apartheid regime to head his homeland's Department of Agriculture, Water
Affairs and Forestry. The academic qualifications of that man consisted of
a certificate in beekeeping. Yet he was appointed as a high-ranking
official in the Lebowa government. How on earth can a person with nothing
but a certificate in beekeeping improve the quality of life of the people?
That is what we should ask these rightwingers.

However, since 1994 our ANC-led Government has embarked upon a research
mission to establish just how many people are still without water. We found
that most of these people are in rural areas of Mpumalanga, the Eastern
Cape, KwaZulu-Natal and the Northern Province, which are mostly inhabited
by the poorest of the poor. In its endeavours to bring about change, our
Government has so far delivered water to approximately nine million and two
hundred people countrywide.]

In rural areas, the proportion served by this infrastructure has risen to
50%. About 4 million people received new supplies, and about 6 million
people benefited through the improvement of the reliability and quality of
the water supply.
Since last January, the portfolio committee has visited all the provinces
in South Africa. Our brief was to study how the Department of Water Affairs
dealt with the backlog in the delivery of water services. Our brief was
also to make suggestions to the department, especially on how to improve
efficiency when addressing the backlog in the regions. We want to engage
the department on the institutional arrangements. We are vitally concerned
about the viability of local authorities. We have grave fears about the
sustainability of some of the water boards.

The key finding from our study tour is that, while there has been a record
of some impressive achievements, the backlog remains a source of
frustration for our people. For the first time, as a member of this
committee, I was shown the workings of purification plants, reservoirs and
dams. We visited the Driekoppies Dam in the catchment area that covers our
neighbouring countries, and where there is a standing co-operation between
these countries. Driekoppies has great potential for creating employment
opportunities when zoning plans and agricultural forestry nurseries get
under way. We visited the construction site of the Injaka Dam, the
purification plant and associated works which provide essential water to
the nearby hospital and thousands of people who, up to now, have had a very
unreliable flow of water.

When we deal with the delivery backlogs, we are addressing the result of
our past. Apartheid was a crime against humanity, and that criminality
included a vast waste of money. Resources were squandered in constructing
monuments of stupidity. About R25 million was spent on constructing the
Zoeknog Dam. The committee viewed the remains of this project, built under
the homeland policy. This disaster continues to drain the financial
resources and adds to the erosion of sensitive soil. However, plans are
afoot on the part of the provincial Department of Agriculture to
rehabilitate the scheme, but on a much smaller scale, to sustain a coffee
plantation.

In the Northern Province's working for water lead project, there is visible
progress in reclaiming ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M N RAMODIKE: Mr Chairperson, the aim of the Department of Water Affairs
and Forestry is, as indicated in the explanatory memorandum of this Vote,
to ensure the availability and supply of water on a national level, and to
promote the development of forestry.

There is no doubt that the former Minister of this department made a lot of
strides and achievements in this regard, particularly with regard to water
supply at a national level. We believe the present Minister will continue
to make these strides and achievements.

The UDM supports this Vote.

Go le bjalo, mohlomphegi, ntumelele ke dire ditshwao-tshwao tše di
latelago: Leina le lengwe la Northern Province, go tloga maloba, ke
``Meetse-Baloi''.

Go a hlobaetša, ge Mmušo o laetša bokgoni kua marung - godimo ga dihlogo
tša batho - mola kua tlase, mo batho ba tlogego ba tsoma thušo, Mmušo o
bonala o itšhireletša ka letlhaka - go sa laetšwe bokgoni le go iša
ditirelo bathong - mola re kwešiša gore Mmušo wo wa lehono ke mmušo wa
batho le batho ka batho.

Go kile gwa bolelwa ka phaephe ya meetse go tloga nokeng ya Zambezi go ya
Northern Province. Le lehono setšhaba se sa beile mokganya phatleng.
Go tlatša dimpa, gape go a nyamiša, gore ge go na le matamo a magolo a
dikgoparara, gomme a tletše meetse, gwa no hwetšagala gore batho ba sa
phatša melala ye metelele, ba se `na meetse ditikologong tša bona.

Batho ba bangwe ke bo-seila-kgaka-bo-senwa-moro. Motho o botšiša gore wena
o dirile eng, mola a tseba gabotse gore ka nako yeo o be a bina koša le
rena. Lehono ka gore ANC e tšere marapa a pušo, o akalala kua marung le
bonong, mola maloba re be re mo tseba e se lenong. Go na le ba bangwe bao
ba bego ba šoma le rena, e le badiredi ba mmušo, le ba bangwe gape bao ba
bego ba na le rena gona mebušong yeo go thwego ke ya majelathoko. [Disêgo.]
Lehono ge ba bona ANC e tšere marapa a pušo, ke bo-hee-le-rena-re-tšwa-
tokologong! Ao e tloge e le maaka a go tsebja ke Modimo! [Disêgo.]

Go a hlobaetša ge, ka nako ye ya diphetogo, go sa hwetšwa batho ba bohlale,
bao e rego ge ba bangwe ba bolela, ba ba tseneganong. Ge motho a duletše go
dira mašata, mola ba bangwe ba bolela, o khupetša magole le go hloka tsebo
tša gagwe.

Go a hlobaetša ge, ka yona nako ye ya diphetogo, go sa hwetšwa ba bangwe,
bao ba tsogago mašego ka baka la tšhego ya meetse, ba sepela maeto a
matelele, ba rwele metšega dihlogong, ba e ya go ga meetse. Bao ba rego ge
ba lle pelle, ka meetse a Lepelle, ba se kwešiše 'taba tša bona, ba tlo
fela ba boela morago. [Nako e fedile.] [Legofsi.] (Translation of Sepedi
paragraphs follows.)

[Mr M N RAMODIKE: However, allow me, Mr Chairperson, to make the following
comments: As from yesterday, the Northern Province is also known as "Meetse
Baloi" (Water and Witches - It is perceived as being beset by the problem
of droughts and an abundance of witches).

It is sad to see the Government channelling aid above the people's heads
while at grass-roots level, where the people need aid the most, the
Government is hiding behind the bushes. There is neither skills development
nor service delivery and yet we are led to believe that the present
Government is a government of the people, by the people, for the people.

It was mooted, some time ago, that a pipe would be erected to bring water
from the Zambezi River to the Northern Province. To this day, the people
are still waiting.

Some people hunt with the dogs and run with the hare. A person asks one
what one has done, whereas he or she knows full well that we were both
here, singing together. Now that the ANC is in power, they keep their heads
in the clouds, in the realm of the vultures, whereas we did not use to know
them as vultures. Some of them used to work with us as civil servants.
Others were even working with us in the governments that were regarded as
being to the far right. [Laughter.] Today, when they see that the ANC is in
power, they also claim to have been in exile! The Lord knows that they are
telling lies! [Laughter.]

It is sad, at this time of transformation, to find that there are still
people who are bent on interrupting others when they speak. Someone who
does nothing but howl while others are talking reveals his or her own
stupidity and lack of knowledge.

It is sad, at this time of transformation, to find that there are still
people who wake up when it is still dark, due to lack of water, and walk
long distances, with containers on their heads, to find water. Those who
are full of sour porridge that has been prepared with water from the
Olifants River, do not understand their plight. They end up going back home
without any water. [Time expired.] [Applause.]]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! On what point are you rising,
sir?

Mr J H MOMBERG: Mr Chairperson, on a point of order: I just want to say
that while the hon member was speaking, there was no translation service.
[Interjections.] Unfortunately, the indication was that there would be a
different speaker, so no language preference was indicated. It is not
Parliament's fault. I think that, in future, we must just inform Parliament
about language preferences.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! We will inform the Whips.

Mrs M L NGWENYA: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister and colleagues, ke tlabja ke
sepitikopo se se sa tšwago go tloga mo. [Disêgo.] Ke tlabja ke gore a na
ruri se be se ka kgona go buša e le sepitikopo, ka gore le mmone gore le ka
mokgwa wo a tlogilego ka gona mo, e fo ba ga sepitikopo. [Disêgo.] Rena ga
re na nako ya batho ba bjalo ka yena.

Go e na le gore a bolele ka taba ya meetse le go phethagatša ditirelo, go
be go tlo ba bokaone gore a re botše gore yena o dirile eng mo nywageng ye
lesome, gobane gabotsebotse re tseba yena a na le motšhene wa go neša pula.
Re a o nyaka! A a o tliše mo! O paletšwe. Le mo lenaneong la rena la ditho
tša ANC re mo rakile. [Disêgo.] (Translation of Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[Mrs M L NGWENYA: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister and colleagues, I am greatly
perplexed by the behaviour of the traffic cop who has just left this
podium. [Laughter.] What amazes me further is how a mere traffic cop like
him can have the competency to govern. Hon members will agree with me that
the manner in which he left this podium was typical of a traffic cop.
[Laughter.] We do not have time for people like him here.

Instead of debating issues that relate to water supply and service
delivery, it would have been a good thing for him to tell us exactly what
he has done over the past ten years, because we know, for a fact, that he
has a rain-making machine. We need that machine! Let him bring it here! He
has failed! We have expelled him from the ANC. [Laughter.]]
We all need water to live. We all know that fact. But the notion that all
our citizens have a right to water is something which we fought for, and it
is now enshrined in our Constitution - a right to have access to sufficient
water.

For many, many people, this constitutional right has also become a reality
in their lives. Many people who had to walk long distances to fetch water
which was not fit for human consumption now have clean running water in
their homes, or close to their homes. This is one of the great achievements
of this ANC Government, and not Ramodike's government. [Laughter.]

According to the latest research, 18 000 people in South Africa die every
year from diarrhoea or dysentery. These diseases are caused mainly by the
use of unclean water. The research further states that Government spends R4
billion annually on these two diseases. That is more than six times the
annual allocation for community water supply and sanitation.

Therefore, the hon the Minister will note that the challenge of supplying
clean water to our communities is essential. Surely, it makes a lot of
sense to spend more money on water on which our lives depend. After all,
access to sufficient water is a constitutional right. The returns to
society, by spending more money on water, are high. So, while we clearly
support this budget, we want the Minister to know that we stand behind him
as he tries to persuade Cabinet that a greater share of the budget needs to
go towards supplying the community with water.

I am grateful for the Arabie Dam report, and I will convey the message to
my community. It makes me feel good. It is true that 3 million households
from disadvantaged communities have received water, and that is, indeed, a
great achievement. These communities are represented by us, the ANC, and
not by the DP, the opportunists.

Not many of these projects have proved to be sustainable. A high percentage
of the new connections are not working, and water disconnection has
increased owing to nonpayment. Our challenge is to learn from our mistakes
and to find better models and ways of doing things in a way that would
result not only in increased delivery, but in both sustainable projects and
delivery. We are not a defensive Government. We acknowledge our mistakes,
unlike the previous regimes that were always howling and yet did anything
and nothing.

Community involvement will be encouraged so that communities take greater
responsibility for the maintenance of local water supply. However, in order
to achieve this, there has to be a greater and consistent community
participation in the design and implementation of such projects.

This time around, delivery must become a reality. All rural communities
must enjoy their basic rights, especially the right to clean water. There
must be local government capacity-building and local governments must be
adequately resourced. Community structures must develop sufficient capacity
to undertake the necessary task of managing water systems.

This ANC-led Government is in the process of reversing the damage caused by
300 years of colonialism and apartheid, which established the horrific
homeland structures which became a real threat to us. However, we still
feel that working together, we will bury the past. Working together, we
will live as equals at long last. I just want to appeal to the DP that if
it is part and parcel of this Government, it should be constructive, for
once, and stop moaning and criticising without actually coming forward with
a single piece of advice. [Applause.]

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Chairperson, hon Minister, we are now dealing with the
most essential commodity without which there can be no life. However, its
importance is taken for granted and underestimated.

We applaud the principal aim of the Department of Water Affairs and
Forestry, namely to ensure the availability and supply of water at national
level, and to promote the development of forestry.

We further appreciate the policy-development strategy identified by the
department, which augurs well for the philosophy of empowerment and
privatisation, ie transferring commercial forestry functions to the private
sector and community-owned structures; the leasing out of 330 000 hectares
of state forests in collaboration with the Department of Public
Enterprises; publishing draft norms and standards which prescribe
regulations for water services, thereby representing a shift towards full-
cost recovery from water users.
We live in a competitive world and therefore we cannot ignore governing
trends in the industrial and labour markets. It is imperative that salaries
be adjusted from time to time, working conditions be improved and new
innovations be introduced. Hence, the increment in administration, water
source assessment, water resource planning, etc were justified and
unavoidable.

It is equally important to note that this department is focused on service
delivery by providing the necessary tools such as an efficient and cost-
effective supportive administrative and management service, through the
allocation of 531 new bursaries, the extension of the internal audit
directorate and the strengthening of financial management and
transformation in the department.

The devolution of certain responsibilities to provinces such as the
transfer of water supply schemes to local authorities to ensure their
proper operation and maintenance, support to local authorities in preparing
the implementation of water services, development plans and the provision
of support and advice on water resource management and the water users'
association and other water users is highly commendable, but must be
followed ...
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, your speaking time
has expired.

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: ... up closely in the teething stages to guarantee
success and efficiency.

I support the Vote.

Muf T E ḼISHIVHA: Mudzulatshidulo na miraḓo yoṱhe ya Buthano ḽa Lushaka,
hezwi ri tshi amba nga ha miḓalo, tsha u thoma, ri a livhuha na u
fhululedza mihasho yoṱhe ye ya ḓidina musi vha tshi pfa khombo, vha ḓala-
ḓala na shango uri vha thuse vhathu vhoṱhe vho kwameaho, vha sa sedzi uri
nnyi ndi nnyi. Ri ri, kha vha fare nga u ralo vhunga Tshivenḓa tshi ri
munwe muthihi a u ṱusi mathuthu.

Zwi dovha hafhu zwa vha tsumbo ya uri muvhuso u posa iṱo kha vhathu vha
shango ḽashu. Ri tshi sedza kha mavunḓu maṱanu o kwameaho, hu na vhathu vho
lozwaho vhutshilo musi wa miḓalo. Vhathu vha anganyelwa kha ḓana, mahumi
mararu, na vhaṱanu na vhaṋa. A thi ḓivhi zwine Vho-Ramodike vha khou amba
ngauri tshiṅwe tsho ṱuwisaho vhathu ndi madamu o bwiwaho, ha sa fhedziswe
mushumo. Ndi ngaho vhathu vhahashu vho lovha nga u shaya vhudzulo na
zwiṅwe.

Ra sedza, ri ḓo wana uri vunḓu ḽa Devhula, ḽi na vhathu vha ḓana na vhaṋa
vho lovhaho nga nṱhani ha izwo zwa Vho-Ramodike. Mpumalanga ho vha na vha
mahumi mavhili vho lovhaho. Devhula Vhukovhela ho vha na vhararu. Kapa
Vhubvaḓuvha ho vha vha sumbe na Free Sate ho vha na vhararu. Kha vunḓu ḽa
Devhula, hu na mivhundu i no swika ḓana na mahumi maṱanu yo kwameaho na
vhathu vha zwigidi zwa maḓana a sumbe na mahumi maṱanu. Miḓi ya ḓana na
mahumi mavhili na muthihi yo kwamea.

U wa ha maburoho na u kumbiwa ha dzibada zwi kha ḓi vha kwama ngauri hunzhi
muvhuso wo fhiraho wo vha u si na pulane. Vho vha vha tshi sokou vhea vha
sa ḓivhi uri vha khou ita mini. Ndi ngazwo musi wa mvula idzo, miḓalo a i
ngo konou tikea. Zwikolo a zwo ngo dzheniwa, zwibadela ho vha hu sa swikei,
na vhathu a vho ngo kona u ya mavhengeleni u ṱoḓa zwiḽiwa nga mulandu wa u
tshinyala ha dzibada. Vhoramabindu nga itsho tshifhinga vho wana nḓila ya u
itesa tshelede. Muthu o vha a tshi renga lofo ya vhurotho nga randa ṱhanu.
Musi muthu a tshi ṋamela bisi kana thekisi, mitengo yo vha i tshi vha nga
huvhili. Arali i rannda ṱhanu, dzo vha dzi tshi vha dza fumi.

Tsini na hune nda dzula hone, avho vha tshanda tsha monde vha ḓivheaho, vha
tshi vhona vhathu vho takutshedza vha tshi khou lugisa dzibada, nge muvhuso
wa Phurovintsi ya Devhula wo ṱuṱuwedza vhathu uri vha takutshedze vha
ḓiitele, vho mbo takutshedza u fhura vhathu. Vho vhudza vhathu uri hu itiwe
dzikonṱiraka ṱhukhu dzine vhathu vha nga dzhenela nga maḓana maṱanu uri
musi vhathu vha tshi pfuka vha badele. Vha ri vha funa vhathu, u nga funa
muthu ane wa dovha wa ri u mu pfela vhuṱungu, ngeno wa dovha wa mu
badelisa? Izwo zwi amba mini? Fhedzi, ro zwi thivhela na muvhuso wo
ṱavhanya u zwi pfa wa vha fara zwanḓa.
Dzibada dza zwigidi zwa maḓana mavhili kha muvhuso wa Devhula dzo kumbiwa.
Muvhuso uyo wo ṱahisa ḽa uri musi hu tshi lugiswa dzibada hu lavhelesiwe na
idzo dzi re vhukati ha miḓi. Zwi ḓo ita u tshimbila havhuḓi ngauri na kha
idzo bada hu nga vha na khombo samusi dzo tshinyala-vho.

Ri livhuha muvhuso washu nga nḓila ine wa khou shuma na vhathu. Ndi ngazwo
ro vha na vhatikedzi vhanzhi. Vha maini wa Tshikondeni u re devhula
vhubvaḓuvha, vho ri thusa nga magandakanda avho khathihi na u bvisa R20 000
ye ya ṋewa muvhusowapo uri hu lugiswe bada.

Rine vha ANC, ro zwi ita uri vhathu vha re na zwine vha nga ṋea, sa thuso,
zwi ḓo ṱanganedzwa. Ndi ngazwo ro kona u ṋea vhathu zwiḽiwa na zwiambaro.
Zwa zwino, vha khou ḽa na u ambara. Ri livhuha vhathu vho shumaho ḓuvha
ḽoṱhe vha sa aweli uri bada ya Magoebaskloof na ya Thathe Vonḓo dzi luge
ngauri dzo wa vhusiku na masiari lwe vhathu vha balelwa u fhira.

Ri tshi ḓa kha dzinnḓu, vhathu vhanzhi vho sala vha si na vhudzulo. Vho
shumisa zwikolo na dziholo sa vhudzulo ha tshifhinganyana. Fhedzi, Muhasho
wa Vhupileli na wa Vhulondavhathu, yo lingedza nga nḓila dzoṱhe uri vhathu
vha wane madennde ane vha ḓo dzula lwa tshifhinganyana. Ri dovha hafhu ra
livhuha na miṅwe mihasho ye ya shuma i sa aweli ... [U fhela ha
Tshifhinga.] (Translation of Tshivenḓa speech follows.)

[Miss T E ḼISHIVHA: Mr Chairperson and hon members of the National
Assembly, when we refer to the recent floods, firstly, we thank and
congratulate all the departments that got involved in assisting all people
affected by the disaster without discrimination. We encourage them to
continue doing so as it is said that one swallow does not make a summer.

It is also evident that our Government is always alert to the plight of its
people. Looking at the five provinces affected, 135 people are estimated to
have lost their lives. Hon Mr Ramodike spoke about the cause being the
uncompleted dams and that is how many of our people died and so on.

Considering the death toll of 104 people due to what the hon Ramodike has
just referred to, Mpumalanga had 20 deaths, the North West had three, the
Eastern Cape had seven and the Free State had three. In the Northern
Province 120 areas were affected, impacting on 700 050 people and 121
homesteads.

Fallen bridges and eroded roads have affected people's lives, due to
careless planning by the previous government. Their planning was haphazard
and that is why the floods were so destructive. There was no schooling,
hospitals were inaccessible and people could not go to shopping centres to
buy necessities. Business people got an opportunity to raise the prices of
their goods for a goodly return. One would buy a loaf of bread for R5,00.
The taxi fare was doubled, so that if the normal cost was R5,00 one was
expected to pay R10,00.

In my area, those from the right took the opportunity to cheat people who
tried to help themselves by repairing roads after being encouraged to so do
by the government of the Northern Province. They suggested that people
should contribute R500 to form small contractors for the temporary
construction of roads and bridges so that people had to pay to cross. They
claim to like people and yet they intend to exploit them. How is it
possible that they like them? We and the provincial government heard about
this and put a stop to it.

About 200 000 roads were washed away in the Northern Province. The
Government has appealed for repairs, which should also include community
roads in order to make travelling easy.

We thank our Government for the way they have assisted people. That is why
we had many people giving a helping hand. The Tshikondeni mine in the north
east made their tractors available and contributed R20 000 to the local
government for road repairs.

We in the ANC welcome any form of assistance, and that is why we could
afford to give food parcels and clothes to people. As of now people are fed
and clothed. We also thank the people who worked all day to repair the
Magoebaskloof and Tate Vondo roads to make travelling possible.

When considering housing, many people have been left homeless. They have
been temporarily accommodated in halls and schools. The Departments of
Defence and of Welfare also assisted by providing tents. We also thank all
departments that have worked tirelessly ... [Time expired.]]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, the next speaker
will be making his maiden speech. [Interjections.] Give him the courtesy of
the House. [Applause.]

Mr D S MAIMANE: Mr Chairperson, hon members, let me start by congratulating
the former Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry, the hon Prof Kader
Asmal, on leading a transformation programme that culminated in an
effective and efficient supply of water to the people of our country, both
in urban centres and rural areas.

The transformation process, as envisaged by the ANC, seeks to ensure that
institutions that provide a basic service, such as water, must be
efficient, effective, manageable and representative of the population of
our country. It is in accordance with this vision that the Water Services
Act, No 108 of 1997, was enacted by this Parliament in order to determine
the manner in which the transformation of institutions, such as water
boards, should occur.

This Act provides for a rare opportunity for municipalities to begin a
process of accepting ownership of the water services work, accelerating
cost recovery, and ensuring sustainable delivery of water. In some cases
municipalities have opted for partnerships with water boards. In the
eastern region of the North West province a water services contract has
been entered into between Rand Water, the Eastern District Council,
Mabopane, Ga-Rankuwa and Winterveld TRCs. Such a contract enables a
municipality to provide water efficiently to the people within its area of
jurisdiction.

A challenge that remains is the use of equitable shares by municipalities.
Guidelines should be developed to ensure that a certain percentage of
equitable shares is appropriated to water so as to cover the needs of the
indigent people. It is against this background that I believe that the
transformation agenda of this country is safe in the hands of the ANC.
[Applause.]

Modderspruit - a village in the North West province, next to a town known
as Brits - is enjoying the fruits of a water services provision contract
between a water board and the municipalities mentioned above. Funding has
been secured for the upgrading of the water services work from an RDP
standard to a high level of service. Furthermore, the Minister of Water
Affairs and Forestry, Comrade Ronnie Kasrils, has announced guidelines for
public and public-private partnerships. This will enable municipalities, as
water service authorities, to appoint capable water service providers,
which will increase their capacity to speedy delivery and ensure
sustainability through meaningful cost recovery programmes. It is,
therefore, important to encourage public partnerships. The Minister needs
to be commended for this marvellous work.

While such marvellous plans of delivery continue, we need to remind this
nation that the former Lebowa government, under the leadership of Chief
Minister M Ramodike, constructed a dam which remains a white elephant to
this day. [Interjections.] Such poor planning and inconsiderate decision-
making are characteristic of all bantustan governments which enjoyed the
support of the apartheid NP government.

The Department of Water Affairs and Forestry leads a programme known as
Working for Water. This programme has dealt a serious blow to unemployment
in some rural areas of our country. Again in Brits, there exists a project
known as the Kwena project. This project has created jobs for the people of
Maboloka, Bapong, Mmakau and Letlhabile. The Working for Water programme
has become a real enemy to poverty and unemployment. [Applause.] It is,
therefore, essential to create a pool of resources to ensure its
continuation.

I had an opportunity of meeting people employed in a Working for Water
project in Mpumalanga. They told me that they are not only getting jobs,
but they are also trained in areas of small contractor development. Such
training will enable them to become contractors in future. In this regard
we need to congratulate Dr Guy Preston, who is the leader of this programme
at the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry. I would like to say to him
in Setswana:


  Nko ya kgomo mogala tshwara thata, e sere o utlwa sebodu wa kgaoga.

[Applause.] Operation Ukuruka is also an important programme led by our
Minister. It is important in a sense that it sensitises our people around
the dangers of exotic plants. We need to commend hon Minister Kasrils for
this. [Time expired.][Applause.]

Dr M S MOGOBA: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister, South Africa is basically a
dry country, compared to water-logged countries like Holland, and our
rivers, compared to the large rivers of the world, are like small streams.

It is ironic that this year we had devastating floods that left a trail of
devastation, particularly on the services and infrastructures of poor
communities. Water is a national challenge in terms of supply, distribution
and care of it as a scarce commodity.

Some areas have new dams and potable water, and this has brought some
smiles to many poor communities. However, many large villages, like
Phokwani, are still waiting. A village, such as Matlala Mohlalaotwane is
next to the Arabie Dam, but still has no water. Even the much appreciated
donation from the European Community seems to have been depleted by
consultants, leaving the communities high and dry. Strict measures should
be instituted to ensure that the millions of rands set aside for projects
end up in the communities for which the money was intended.

The hon the Minister has rightly said that white elephants will not be
tolerated under his regime, and that they will become African elephants. I
want to assure him that when the African elephant arrives in those villages
that I have referred to, there will be ululating and celebration because it
will be a long-awaited arrival. [Applause.]

It is observed painfully that the general picture of spending shows that
nearly 50% of the budget is used for professional services, and that the
next considerable slice goes to personnel and transfer payments. Whilst
this slant is inevitable in a highly technical field like water services,
the use of local human resources, properly trained of course, would go a
long way towards ensuring that services are improved and that the
communities who are in dire need of water are the ultimate benefactors.

Water service boards need to be overhauled and transformed so that local
people can be empowered to manage water for their communities. Intensive
campaigns should be launched to train many local black African technicians
and engineers so that they can take part in the construction of dams like
the Komati, Driekoppies, the beautiful dams build in the Lowveld regions,
the Lesotho Highlands Water Scheme, or even the Kariba Dam.

When water flows nearly everywhere South Africa will become the rich and
beautiful garden which God intended it to be. And with that picture and
that hope in front of us, the PAC will be happy to support this Vote.
[Applause.]

Mr M M MASALA: Mr Chairperson, the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry
has made great strides in bringing solid management to the chaos in the
forestry industry that was inherited from the apartheid state. At the
centre of this chaos were the contracts that the former government and
homelands entered into with sawmills. These contracts were everlasting.
They agreed to supply timber in perpetuity. They were conceived as an
incentive to sawmills to invest in processing plants in rural areas.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! On what point are you rising,
sir?

Mr J H MOMBERG: Mr Chairperson, on a point of order: The television monitor
is not working.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! They will be checked by the
technical staff. They are now on. Please carry on, sir.

Mr M M MASALA: Most of the contracts were with white-owned businesses. The
long-term nature of the contracts created a barrier to entry and made it
difficult to bring black participants into the sector. Many of the
contracts were practically impossible to bring to an end. In 1996 there
were 29 of these contracts. To date, 26 of them have been converted into
new contracts, thanks to the negotiating skills of the department. However,
three of the contracts are in the hands of the diehards who are still
resisting transformation. The department has, however, approached the
Minister to decide about these three.

The National Forests Act has fundamentally changed the way timber is
supplied in South Africa. It will lead to much greater representivity,
efficiency and fairness in the sawmilling sector. The sale of state
forests, amounting to 330 000 hectares of forests and five sawmills, is in
full swing. Already the interministerial Cabinet committee has approved
four preferred bidders for the forestry packages.

I am sure the Minister is aware of the growing current of resistance
building up from the disadvantaged sectors of our people regarding the
process of awarding contracts. As we democratise our country, as we strive
towards the empowerment of the disadvantaged and the levelling of the
playing fields so skewed by apartheid, it is critical that the
privatisation of state forests is not ruled by the principle of the
survival of the fittest and the elimination of the disadvantaged. That is
the law of the jungle.

Recently, the committee visited the provinces and we discovered that the
disadvantaged communities closely linked to commercial forests in places
such as Mhlahlane, Weza and a lot of others, were completely left out of
the processes. I appeal to the hon the Minister to find creative ways in
which all South Africans, especially those who are disadvantaged and linked
with these processes either directly or indirectly, could be armed with
resources and information that would enable them to participate effectively
alongside the advantaged.

The National Forests Act has as one of its key aims ``to promote greater
participation in all aspects of forestry and the forest products industry
by persons disadvantaged by unfair discrimination. We must ensure that
legislation passed by this House is always implemented as it was intended.
The restructuring of commercial forests has tended to overshadow the other
good work being done by the directorate of forestry.

Community forestry is designed to meet local, social, household and
economic needs and to stimulate local economic development. About 100
woodlots, mostly in the Eastern Cape, have been set up to supply rural
communities with wood. As we move towards participatory democracy, we are
ever strengthening the power of the people to take control of their own
destinies. We encourage the forestry directorate in its endeavours to move
towards participatory forestry management by the communities themselves.

On that note, I ...
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Your speaking time has
expired, sir, on that note. [Applause.]

Mr D A HANEKOM: Mnr die Voorsitter ... [Mr Chairperson ...]

Mr J H MOMBERG: Gooi kole, Derek, gooi kole! [Tussenwerpsels.] [Turn up the
heat, Derek, turn up the heat! [Interjections.]]

Mr D A HANEKOM: Ek sal water gooi en nie kole nie! [Gelag.] [I shall put a
damper on things rather than turn up the heat! [Laughter.]]

Hon Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, I have been given the job of
acting as a kind of sweeper, and that means picking up the points that have
been made in the course of the debate and responding to some of them.
However, there is another sweeper that will follow, and that is Ronnie
Kasrils, and he comes with a much bigger broom than the one I have. So I
will let the Minister do most of the sweeping in responding to the points
made. In fact, not many controversial points have been raised. There are
some points which one can elaborate and pick up on. I want to highlight a
few things rather than picking up on the points.

The hon Minister spoke about four pillars. Now, in those days of struggle
we, of course, knew the four pillars of our struggle like we know the ABC.
I listened very carefully to what the Minister said, and I picked up the
first three pillars, but I did not really pick up the fourth pillar. I
think it had something to do with ``small is beautiful'', but the Minister
will have to clarify that.

What I like about the Minister's approach, though, is that we have a task
ahead of us - a very important task. In order to do it, this Minister with
a military background is going to approach it with military discipline.
[Laughter.] So we are going to find the most effective ways of doing it.
That is good, because that is where we sometimes fall short. We have good
policies, good programmes, good legislation, but in doing it, we do not
often succeed, because we do not always find the right ingredients. I think
that with the Minister's approach, we are going to really do it. Much has
already been done, but much more needs to be done.

Perhaps we can look at this task of providing clean water to all our
people, which is a constitutional right, and analyse it, and reduce it to
two major objectives. On the one hand, as the Minister said, there is the
question of a water resource. There is limited water available that needs
to be conserved very carefully. Our water resource has to be managed and
conserved very carefully so that water could be available to our people for
ever. That is very important.

On the other hand, we have to make sure that that water which we conserve
gets to our people and to water users, and that means for a range of water
uses: for irrigation and agriculture, for industry, for mining, but
especially for millions of people whose lives depend on it, and that is
drinking water. That has to stand right on top of our policy. [Applause.]
That, I believe, is what we are doing.

I am going to concentrate a little bit on affordability and availability of
water to people who need it to live. Without water, we die. Without air, we
die. The difference between water and air is that we do not pay for air.
Air is abundant. There is enough air. Yes, sometimes it gets polluted, like
water gets polluted. But there is an abundant supply of air and not an
abundant supply of water, and that is the big difference.

So it is quite correct that people should pay for water which they use. It
is a scarce commodity. However, it is not correct that poor people who
cannot afford to pay for water should not get it. We need water as much as
we need air to live, and we cannot watch poor people not get sufficient
water because they cannot afford to pay for it. That is unacceptable, and
that is our big challenge.

We must look at making that notion of a lifeline supply, and that is that
basic requirement for our lives on which our lives depend, free. We cannot
do otherwise. I think there we have to look at all the most effective
models built into the hon Minister's four pillars in making that a reality.
It could be done through crosssubsidisation or differentiation in tariffs.
Those things need to be done.

We have good models and good examples which we can look at now and draw on.
We have models in small towns and in large cities. Take the model of
Hermanus. Let us look at the hon Minister's two objectives once more:
conserving the water resource and getting water to people. Both of that
happens very well in Hermanus. Poor people are getting water at affordable
rates or no rates in both Hermanus and Durban. However, at the same time,
as hon members know, in Hermanus water is being conserved more efficiently
in the process. So both objectives are being met: Poor people are getting
free water and our water resource is being managed more carefully and
efficiently.

In Durban, Durban Metro obviously indicates that it can be done in bigger
cities, so it must be done. Therefore we believe that there is consensus
here in Parliament that this should be a policy which the Minister as
Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry should drive. The first 6 000
litres, or something to that effect, should be free.

Concerning the consequences to big users or the consequences to cost
recovery, I do not think that is so consequential. The fact that people get
their first 6 000 litres free does not really make much difference, because
the wasteful water-use or the additional water will pay for that first 6
000 litres, and that is important to note. So: ``Drive it, Ronnie, drive
it.'' That is something that we want to see implemented countrywide.
[Applause.]

We, in the ANC, are not embarrassed about our policy of putting poor people
first. We put the poor first, and we will do it. We will not be embarrassed
about it. Our task is to eradicate poverty once and for all. So, Comrade
Ronnie should not be worried about the green image that he is getting now,
because green and red are quite compatible. We want him to remain red.
[Laughter.] [Applause.]

Comrade Kader Asmal had an era and he will be remembered for putting in
place good policies, good legislations and good programmes - Working for
Water, community water supply and so forth. Ronnie Kasrils will have to be
remembered as picking up that spear and taking it one step further in
ensuring that poor people in our country will not be discriminated against,
that every person in our country will get an adequate supply of clean
drinking water. I am sure that we will remember Comrade Ronnie Kasrils for
that. [Applause.]

Lastly, just a word or two. As a member of this portfolio committee, I must
say that our chairperson, Comrade Sonjica, has given good leadership to
what we are trying to achieve. [Applause.] When she was first made
chairperson of this portfolio committee, she was so humbled by it and so
frightened of the enormity of the task. She has more than risen to that
task. I am sure that I am speaking for all members of the portfolio
committee. We would like to pay tribute to her for the way she is managing
this process. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Mr Chairperson ...

HON MEMBERS: Metsi! Metsi! [Water! Water!] [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Before you begin hon Minister,
hon member on what point do you rise?

Ms F I CHOHAN-KOTA: Mr Chairperson, I am rising on a point of explanation
on the obsession of the hon Jan Momberg on the issue of the TV. Just by way
of explanation, Chairperson, you do remember that we rescued him from the
media-crazed DP, and there are certain things that one just cannot remove
from some people. [Laughter.] [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! That is not a point of order,
but I will allow it to go. [Laughter.]

The MINISTER: Mr Chairperson, I want to thank all the hon members who have
participated. They certainly showed unanimous support for my approach and
budget. Many thanks for that, and thanks to all members who are here today,
for showing such great attention. I thank both sides of the House, from the
left to the right, geographically, although politically that would be right
to left. I am sure the hon Moorcroft will not mind my saying that.

Let me immediately say of the hon Moorcroft's contributions - he was one of
the first to contribute from the DP - that I sat there, listened to what he
had to say and applauded what he said, and I thank him very much indeed.
What counts is constructive inputs and criticism. I would say that if his
party adopted the approach he has adopted, then perhaps the DP would not
experience what they feel as a kind of bitterness and frustration when
their leader speaks or when some of them speak.

I would say that the hon member Moorcroft has given an example to any
opposition party about how to engage constructively and how to make
criticisms and points. I want to tell him that I am looking forward - I
have met him a few times, as I have met other members of his party in my
office when I was with Defence - to a further meeting on what I consider to
have been excellent points concerning the development of the partnerships.

There are some aspects of the leaks and the harvesting of water that I have
not dealt with, because I did not have time, but I think he put them
creatively and, certainly, the hon member picked up my key theme about
partnerships with industry, agriculture and so on, in a very interesting
way. And that is the way we are going to follow. The hon member Hanekom
said in his rousing finale that all of us must work together, because we
must have consensus on water - this colourless fluid that everybody
requires.

Prior to the hon member Moorcroft's input, the chairperson made an
excellent speech, and I want to thank her for that. She did raise certain
points regarding integrated rural development. I thank her for that,
because I did not quite deal with it myself. She also raised the issue of
sanitation and other points. Obviously here, I am not going to deal with
every single point made by those who spoke. If I did, I would keep members
here way into the weekend, and I think we have better things to do - and
that is constituency work - instead of listening to me here.
What I would like to say to the hon Moorcroft on the issue of partnerships
is that we are working with organised agriculture to improve water use and
efficiency. The hon member from the IFP raised some very important points,
and I thank her very much. I would say that I totally agree with her about
the importance of those indigenous forests, Nkandla, where, as she pointed
out, Deputy President Zuma also comes from, as do many of her party, too,
such as Rev Musa. Of course, it is also the place where Cetshwayo sought
sanctuary. I could not agree with her more, that we are - I strove to make
this point and I hope members listened to what the hon member who comes
from those areas was saying - not doing sufficient to develop the
indigenous forests, which are such centres for culture, medicines, and for
the study of our history.

I know that when I have spoken to both the Deputy President, the young man
from Nkandla, and the Premier of the Eastern Cape, who comes from the
Amatola forest, where Maqoma and Sandile, the great Xhosa generals, fought
the colonialists, they became very excited about how we could develop these
places in the way the hon member described.

There were points that the hon member made on the fires, the issue of the
indigenous trees, etc, and I am glad that another member reminded us about
a campaign I did not refer to, given the time factor, and that was the
Ukuvuka campaign, which is also a partnership between Government, the
private sector and even the media - the Cape Argus group - and Santam. It
must be repeated elsewhere in the country.

The hon member made another interesting point which time did not permit.
She asked me what we were doing about the development of our underground
water, called ``ground water''. Someone new to this area of water such as
me, heard the term ``ground water'' and thought they were referring to the
water in the dams. I then discovered that when civil engineers talk about
ground water, they mean the underground water in those aquifers.

I want to link up with hon Hanekom when he said that he missed my fourth
pillar. I was running out of time. The fourth pillar is flexibility, and I
said that small is beautiful and it is not only the big things that matter.
I will give an example. I had very interesting meetings with the Borehole
Operators Association of South Africa and the Water-Driller Operators of
South Africa and they asked: Minister, why are we not exploiting the
underground aquifers more? And they said that the best water for whisky is
ground water, meaning the underground water. I tried it and I agree.
[Interjections.]

But that is exactly what I mean. I can link the two points together. So,
jumping back to hon Hanekom, the fourth pillar is going in for big schemes
and finishing the white elephant of Arabie, but also looking at the
development of the simple stuff, the boreholes, the aquifers, and the
harvesting of water, as the hon Moorcroft pointed out.

On the issue of harvesting, the Chilean ambassador told me how in Chile in
the water-dry area up on the Andes, they put nets up on the mountains and
the nets catch the mist, and the water runs down and they harvest an
enormous amount of water. I said to him that I did not think that South
Africa lent itself to that. Of course, foolish me, ignorant me!

I go to the Northern Province and I am at Turfloop. We have a water
institute which my department set up there and I hear that the local people
up on the Eastern Drakensberg nearby have been harvesting, for years, water
in the Chilean model. What has happened there now is that they are not
using it to drink. The water from the mist that rises over the Drakensberg
is so pure that they have set up a little business. About half a dozen
people are selling that water to laboratories, and they have managed to get
a SMME going. The water sector is a very interesting one, indeed.

I was asked by the hon Mothoagae about Kaya Sands. This was a case where I
visited a waste site. In the old days, I would have called it a rubbish
disposal site. My director-general has said to me: Please do not use terms
like that. That means one just dumps rubbish there. They might have done it
in the old days. A waste disposal site is where the waste is meant to be
managed. It is put into land fills where one has trenches around and where
one puts down plastic on the base and where one must ensure that any
poisonous matter from the disposal does not run into the water system or
the ground water in the rivers.

Of course, the Jukskei River is a disgrace. It is a river we must try and
save. It is in the state it is in because of the industry and the density
of population in Gauteng. I did say to the hon the Leader of the Opposition
who visited the site - he challenged me to visit it and I am being very
honest with the members of his party that I have been to places that he has
earmarked. I will go to any place that members earmark for me, because I
have to be a servant of Parliament and of the public - about that
particular site that I did not find it to be any worse than any other site
in the major cities of our country and, in fact, it was in the process of
closing down. It was meant to close down at the end of June and, in fact,
no more rubbish is being dumped there. Only construction debris is being
placed there and the rubbish is going elsewhere. I am prepared to go to
places, but I am not prepared to go at the drop of a hat.

The hon Simmons raised a number of interesting points. I want to say to
him, though, that as far as the Taung Dam is concerned - it is very
wonderful that a dam in that dry arid area is more than full now - we are
dealing with the Department of Agriculture about how to use the water in
this dam. Many members have made this point. We find dams all over this
country. Often they are very low, sometimes they are full. The Taung Dam
does not seem to be using water for anything.

In the past, as members pointed out, and as they pointed out to hon
Ramodike, the previous governments wanted to build dams and provide water
for the irrigation farmers, basically, privileged farmers. Irrigation
farming takes 51% of all the water we use in this country, and they still
pay - I would say - far too little for it. I take the point made by Mr
Moorcroft. They put these dams everywhere for that purpose.

One has Arabies, which is a very good case in point. For villagers living
there, as well as near these other dams, no provision was made to put in
the piping to help the local community with their basic domestic water or
to help them become emergent farmers. For us, the question now is - of
course, we are looking at this - how we help to convert those dams into
something for the Arabie villagers, etc. It is a phenomenal expense in
terms of the capital that is required, and that is why it is not being done
that quickly.

Regarding the issue of the Taung Dam, we have to start changing such places
from being the white elephants that they actually are into something that
could be very beneficial. The town is running out very fast.

In response to the contribution made by the hon member Ramodike from the
UDM, firstly, the Zambezi River is not a river on which we can claim any
rights. There are eight countries who live along the Zambezi Basin. They
have the right to lay claim to the Zambezi, not us, not the Northern
Province. In fact, for us to obtain water from the Zambezi River, being at
the end of the queue, before those countries who were able to come in on
this first, would be absolutely prohibitive.

That hon member built a dam called Zoeknog which collapsed. I would like to
ask him what he is ``soeking'' from us now ... [Laughter.] ... because we
are really very ready to take positive input. My earphone was working well,
and I did hear what he had to say. He made some points which made me laugh
a little bit.

Regarding the issue of the failed schemes - someone else made a point about
this matter, and I think it was the hon member Simmons who dealt with the
Taung Dam issue followed by the hon Ramodike - most of them were inherited
from the homeland Bantustan. These dams and schemes had been put up with
absolutely no interest in sustainability, operation and maintenance, and
trying to rehabilitate them is costing us a fortune.

Of course, people are frustrated with us now, and they are saying to the
department and this Minister: Why can we not get anything from these
irrigation schemes, canals and dams? I have been to certain places in
Ciskei, and we are trying to find literally R250 million to rehabilitate
Ciskeian irrigation schemes that were put up for the so-called emerging
farmers, and which are completely silted up, and we require that kind of
money to get them going again.

I have tried to deal with everything that was raised, and I would have been
very ready to continue doing so. I am looking at my clock here and it
indicates that I am left with five seconds. Therefore all I can say is that
I have listened carefully and I have written down hon members' points. I
have my department officials here who have taken notes. Everyone who has
contributed will get a response from us on those issues. The red light is
on.

I would like to thank hon Hanekom. The colour is red. I am proud to be
green. I want to thank all members. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 12:30.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                             FRIDAY, 9 JUNE 2000

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Report on Parliament for 1999.


