---
title: 'National Assembly - 06 June 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2000-06-06
---

TUESDAY, 6 JUNE 2000
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 09:05.

The Chairperson of Committees took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                           (The late Mr T S Khoza)

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Chairperson, I move the draft resolution printed in
my name on the Order Paper, as follows:


  That the House -
  (1) notes the premature death of the Honourable Themba Khoza on Sunday,
       28 May 2000;

  (2) recognises the valuable contribution that he -


       (a)  as a dedicated Member of Parliament, made to our first
           democratic Parliament; and

       (b)  as Leader of the IFP in Gauteng, made to that province;


  (3) believes that he served the people of South Africa with selfless
       dedication;

  (4) expresses its sincerest condolences to the wife, children, family,
       friends and supporters of the deceased; and

  (5) wishes that they be filled with strength and fortitude in their time
       of sadness.

  Hamba kahle, Themba.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, Themba Khoza was born in
the poor rural areas near Eshowe. He was recruited by the IFP when a tribal
meeting was held to tell the villagers of the new organisation. He rose
within the ranks of his party and was deployed to the then Transvaal. His
determination to raise the profile of the party soon led him to rise to
prominence in the political landscape of our country.

Themba Khoza's political life epitomises different phases of political
developments in our country. On the one hand, his life reminds us of our
painful past, the nightmare years of urban massacres, rural assassinations,
train killings, rolling violence between township residents and hostel
dwellers. His life reminds us of the violence unleashed by the apartheid
security establishment and Third Force to derail the process of change. It
was this violence that the NP government dubbed ``black-on-black''
violence, using it in a manner that sought to derail our liberation
struggle and forcing a political settlement that would perpetuate white
domination.

His life also reminds us of the determination of our people to win their
liberation. The death of Mr Themba Khoza, a member of this House, comes at
a time when both the ANC and the IFP, in the true spirit of reconciliation,
have moved closer than ever before in joint programmes to bring peace to
the province of KwaZulu-Natal.

The ANC once again expresses a sense of grief at the death of this IFP
leader. We extend our condolences to the IFP and to the Khoza family.
[Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, the DP fully supports the motion as it appears
on the Order Paper and we also endorse the views and the words expressed by
the Chief Whip of the ANC. It is always a very sad moment when a colleague
and a parliamentarian passes away, and it is a timely reminder to us of our
own vulnerability and our own mortality.

Themba Khoza was well known to many of us in the DP. He was a likeable
person, with a good sense of humour and we certainly got on well with him.
However, apart from this, he was a shrewd politician and a good tactician
and there is no doubt that, while his own party will miss him for these
qualities, we, too, will miss our own discourses with him. They were always
constructive and always entertaining.

The DP offers sincere condolences to his family. Themba will be sorely
missed by them and by his friends, but we also want to extend our
condolences to his party, the IFP, who, through his untimely death, have
lost a very important member and stalwart.

Mr A BLAAS: Chairperson, the New NP also supports this motion and endorses
what has been said so far. It is with sadness that we learnt of the passing
on of our friend and colleague Themba Khoza at the youthful age of 41. He
was but in the prime of his life, and we are sure that there were still a
lot of things he wanted to do, and still could do.

According to two books on politics, Themba traces his interest in politics
to the Zulu wars against British imperialism. His great-grandfather fought
in the Battle of Isandlwana in 1879 when the Zulu warriors defeated the
British army. Themba only became involved in politics in 1975 when he
joined the Inkatha Youth Brigade.

He opened the IFP organisational office in the Transvaal in January 1990.
Themba made rapid progress and was already appointed to the IFP's top
decision-making body, the central committee, in 1991. After the signing of
the National Peace Accord in 1991, he became active as a peacemaker. He
served on the National Peace Committee and the local dispute resolution
Committee in Soweto.

Since 1994 he, of course, served as one of our colleagues in this House.
Themba was a patriot who believed passionately in the principles, policies
and directions of his party. He practised politics with dedication and
commitment. He was a loyal person who cared deeply for those he represented
and respected. The New NP expresses our deepest sympathy to his wife,
children and other family, and to his friends. Our condolences also go to
the leader and members of the IFP.

Lala ngokuthula, Themba. [Rest in peace, Themba.]

Mr T ABRAHAMS: Mr Chairman, the UDM endorses the condolences expressed by
the parties that have spoken. In the very short space of time - that we
have been here, Themba Khoza had quite remarkable relationships with many
of our members. The early death of any South African is an unwelcome
phenomenon. To those who constitute this House of Assembly, the passing on
of a member of this institution is a reminder of our own vulnerability.
Hence, we endorse the sentiments expressed. The UDM extends its condolences
to the family of the late Mr Themba Khoza and also to the IFP.

Adv Z L MADASA: Mr Chairperson, the ACDP supports the motion and wishes to
extend its condolences to the IFP and to Mr Khoza's family, especially his
wife.

Dr C P MULDER: Mr Chairperson, Thembinkosi Samson Khoza was born on 17 May
1959 in Eshowe, Zululand. At the time of his death he was only 41 years
old. Themba Khoza moved to Johannesburg in search of employment in 1983. In
January 1990 he opened the first organisational office of Inkatha in
Johannesburg. At the same time, he established an employment agency under
the auspices of the Inkatha youth project.

As already mentioned, Themba Khoza traced his political awareness to his
childhood, which was filled with stories about the victorious Battle of
Isandlwana in which the Zulu forces defeated the British. His mother was a
descendant of the Zulu royal family. Themba Khoza maintained that the youth
should become the uniting force in Inkatha. In 1989 he was nominated the
Transvaal youth leader, and in 1991 he was voted onto the central committee
of the IFP. In the general election of April 1994 Themba Khoza was elected
to Parliament. According to his curriculum vitae, he was a devout Christian
and an active member of the Rhema Church.

Die VF kan hom derhalwe volkome vereenselwig met die voorstel wat vandag
voor die Huis dien. Ons betuig daarom graag ons opregte meegevoel en
simpatie aan Themba Khoza se familie, sowel as aan die IVP wat 'n kollega
verloor het. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Consequently, the FF can totally identify itself with the motion before
the House today. We would therefore like to express our condolence and
sympathy to Themba Khoza's family, as well as to the IFP who have lost a
colleague.]

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Mr Chairperson, on behalf of the UCDP leadership,
members and supporters, I wish to take this opportunity to express our
deepest sympathy and extend our condolences to the family of Mr Themba
Khoza. We are still shocked by the untimely passing of the IFP Gauteng
leader. His death was never expected at this point in time, but,
nevertheless, we should accept his death as the will of the Father, the
Creator and the Almighty.

To Dr Mangosuthu Buthelezi, and the IFP leadership in general, and to
members and supporters, we share their loss of a man loved and valued most
as a true leader of their party. To us, the UCDP, we do not express this to
score political points, nor to use this parliamentary platform to say
something about this former hon member of Parliament, because we are
expected to do so. Rather, it is a sincere expression of feelings of loss
for a man who is now seen as a peace seeker, who is far from the Themba
Khoza we knew as portrayed in the past during the democratisation process
of South Africa.

Those who hated him chose to call him a warlord, while those who loved him
saw him simply as a committed and loyal leader ready to defend what he
valued most - the IFP and its policies. Themba was a fearless soldier until
God called his name. The IFP Gauteng leader Humphrey Ndlovu said: Themba is
not dead. Uwile. [He has fallen.] His spirit will live amongst us to
continue to fight for peace in building South Africa.

Lala ngoxolo, Themba. Lala kahle, Khoza. [Rest in peace, Themba. Rest in
peace, Khoza.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Mr Chairman, at the height of the violence in this country,
which was dubbed black-on-black violence, I was the representative of the
liberation movement at the United Nations headquarters in New York.

In July 1992 I successfully persuaded the chairman of the special committee
against apartheid to call on the Security Council to debate the then South
African situation with a view to stopping the genocidal violence which,
according to my information, was being carried out by Buffalo Battalion 32,
Koevoet, Selous Scouts, Renamo and by the Askaris in this country. It was
at about this time that I read about Mr Themba Khoza.

Some time after returning from my mission at the UN I met him for the first
time at the high court in Johannesburg. After I was introduced to him, I
said to him: ``I thought you were a monster with a long tail and two horns.
How did a handsome man like you, who is so African, get the image of a
warlord?'' He laughed. I can therefore say without any fear of
contradiction that the Themba Khoza of the media and of his political
enemies was not the same Khoza that I knew.

One wonders if the IFP would still be around if it had not had a cadre like
Themba Khoza who defended his right to be the IFP. It is tragic that Themba
Khoza died surrounded by a controversy that was never proved in a court of
law. The PAC sends its condolences to his wife, children, the entire family
of the hon Themba Khoza, and to the IFP leadership and members.

I-PAC, umbutho wama-Afrika, ithi phumula ngokuthula mfo kaKhoza.
Ubuyinsizwa phakathi kwezinsizwa. Sizokukhumbula njengeqhawe. [As an
organisation of African people, the PAC says rest in peace, you, the son of
Khoza. You were a hero among men. We will remember you as a hero.]

Re a o dumedisa. O re dumedisetse ho Morena Shaka, o mo jwetse hore
lefatshe la rona ha le so kgutle. [We greet you. Convey our greetings to
King Shaka, and tell him that our country is not yet returned to us.]

Tiko ra hina. [Our country.]

Mr C AUCAMP: Mr Chairperson, on behalf of the AEB I honour the memory of
the late Themba Khoza who left us at the young age of 41. We honour him as
a dedicated member of Parliament and as a leader who served his people with
dedication. We express our sincerest condolences to his wife and children.
May the God in whom he believed console them, his leader, Dr Buthelezi, and
his colleagues in the IFP with the comfort of his work and spirit. His
early death reminds us all that this life is but a short and temporary
station on the way to eternity. The AEB supports the motion wholeheartedly.

Mna M A MANGENA: Modulasetulo, re le ba lekgotla la Azapo, tsamaišana le
tšhišinyo ye e lego gona mo. Re lliša ba lapa la ga Khoza le lekgotla la
IFP ge ba lahlegetšwe ka mokgwa woo ba lahlegetšwego ka gona. Ba
lahlegetšwe ke moetapele yoo e bego a sale o mofsa, yoo e lego gore mošomo
o a bego a ka o direla ba lapa la gagwe le ba IFP, o be o sa le montši pele
ga gagwe. Re a tseba gore Themba Khoza o be a hlakahlakane le dilo tšeo e
lego gore ga di bose mo bophelong bja rena, feela seo a lego sona ke seo se
bontšhago gore rena bjale ka setšhaba mo historing ya rena ya go lwela
tokollo re be re le bjang. O re gopotša gore re be re bolayana ka borena,
re le gare re re re lwela tolologo. Re re ge a hlokafetše bjale a na le
mengwa e 41, moo e lego gore bana ba gagwe e sa le ba bannyane, le mošomo
woo a bego a ka o direla IFP o be o sa le o montši, re re lehu ke lehodu
leo e lego gore le ba utsweditše selo sa bona se blohlokwa. Feela re re, le
ge le sa lebale, nke le amogele, le tle le kgone go tšwela pele. Ga a
robale ka kgotso. (Translation of Sepedi speech follows.)

[Mr M A MANGENA: Chairperson, we in Azapo align ourselves with this motion.
We convey our condolences to Mr Khoza's family and the IFP for the loss
they have suffered. They have been robbed of a young leader whose work for
his family and the IFP was not yet finished. We know that Themba Khoza was
alleged to have been involved in activities that embittered us, but that
helped to reveal the nature of our history as a nation at the height of the
political struggle in this country. His death reminds us that we were then
killing one another, and claiming to be fighting for freedom.

Because he died at the age of only 41, his children are still young, and he
still had to perform a great deal of work for the IFP, we would say that
death has robbed them of an asset. However, we would like to tell everyone
that although it is difficult to forget, they should accept what has
happened so that they can start afresh. May his soul rest in peace!]
Rev K M ZONDI: Mr Chairperson, the death of our colleague, friend and
comrade Themba Khoza has, indeed, been a tragic affair to the IFP. It is a
sad loss that will not be easy to overcome. However, the greatest tragedy
and sense of loss is that which is felt by his family, who have described
it as a great blow and one of the darkest hours in their lives.

Themba Khoza was born into a society in which he would enjoy no basic
dignity of being a human being. In life, he rose to a leadership position,
where he was called upon to lead the poorest of the poor, the despised and
the destitute in very undignified circumstances. He knew no dignity. He
exercised his leadership during the darkest hours of the history of our
struggle for liberation, where a black had to die in the hands of another
black, where an African had to die at the hands of another African and
where the oppressed had to die at the hands of another oppressed.

It is true that, at the time of his death, Themba was in the forefront of
the struggle to restore peace, especially in the province of Gauteng, where
he exercised his leadership in efforts which were spearheaded by the ANC-
IFP ten-a-side committee in that province.

We will miss Themba, and we can only wish him to rest in peace; ironically,
because in the world into which he was born, he enjoyed no peace. We hope
that, in the hands of his Maker, he will finally find peace.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon members, I wish to associate myself and
all presiding officers with the motion of condolence. We also wish the
family strength to bear their loss, and we appreciate that this is also a
great loss for both the IFP and Parliament. May the soul of Themba rest in
peace.

Motion agreed to unanimously, all the members standing.

                        ALLOCATION OF SPEAKING TIMES

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Chairperson, I move the draft
resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:


  That, notwithstanding the provisions of Rule 106, the following times be
  allocated to parties for comment on today's statement by the Minister of
  Minerals and Energy:


     African National Congress: 7 minutes; Democratic Party: 5 minutes;
     Inkatha Freedom Party: 4 minutes; New National Party: 4 minutes; United
     Democratic Movement: 3 minutes; all other parties: 2 minutes each.

Agreed to.

                COMPOSITION OF SA PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION TO
                        OBSERVE ZIMBABWEAN ELECTIONS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move the draft
resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:


  That, further to the resolution adopted on 17 May 2000 concerning the
  South African parliamentary delegation being sent to observe the
  Zimbabwean parliamentary elections, the House, subject to the concurrence
  of the National Council of Provinces, resolves that -


  (1) the South African parliamentary delegation will comprise:


       ANC:Benjamin, J; Chikane, M M; Dyani, M M Z; Ebrahim, E I; Lobe, M C;
       Louw, S K; Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Mpehle, M; Nel, A C; Taabe, T B
       (NCOP); Van der Merwe, S C; Yengeni, T S (Leader of delegation);

       DP: Farrow, S B; Maluleke, D K; McIntosh, G B D;

       IFP: Mpontshane, A M; Mzizi, M A;

       New NP: Schoeman, E A; Van Jaarsveld, A Z A; and

       ACDP: Dudley, C;


  (2) the delegation is to observe the election campaign in the run-up to
       the elections, the casting of votes during the elections and
       subsequently the counting of the votes; and

  (3) the delegation must, after the completion of its mission, present a
       full report to Parliament.

Agreed to.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 13 - Health:

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson and hon members, I rise to deliver this
budget speech, mindful of the historical significance of addressing our
nation at the dawn of the new century and a new millennium.

I am particularly conscious of the fact that millions of our citizens
expect us, through our actions, to ensure that, indeed, this becomes an
African century. I wish to thank the President and the Deputy President for
affording me the opportunity to serve my country at this critical period.

My Cabinet colleagues have been a source of enduring strength, as have been
those who died in the struggle for the realisation of an equitable and just
system. There are too many to be counted. The challenge before us, as
public representatives, is to ensure that we not only live up to the
expectations of those who have put their faith in us but, indeed, lay a
solid foundation that will earn us pride of place as worthy successors of
the revolutionary giants who sacrificed to ensure that we stand today, as a
free people, a beacon of hope in a troubled world, a ray of light in a
continent that has seen too many a dark cloud.

Ours is a challenge to grasp every opportunity to shape events to advance
equity and opportunity. We need to do so in the context of a people
characterised by high levels of poverty, a tragic legacy of our recent past
and against the background of a tragedy of enormous proportions brought by
the HIV/Aids epidemic.

We ought to draw strength from the enormous achievements of the past six
years. Our country is certainly a better place today than it was for the
vast majority in the past. That a lot more still needs to be done, is just
a measure of the enormity of the challenges we face. However, succeed, we
will.

Let me, today, place on record our determination to forge ahead to advance
the interests of our citizens, especially the most vulnerable, even if at
times we have to take the consequences of interfering with the comfort zone
of those who would rather have us believe that they were destined to lord
it over us, and that any question of their motives is an act of betrayal.

Over the past year, we have seen health anchored firmly as a critical
ingredient in the development agenda and as an important tool to fight
poverty. Health issues are increasingly determining the economic success,
or otherwise, of states by specifically influencing such initiatives as
foreign direct investment. At the same time, health issues are taking
centre stage as core elements of human security, as evidenced by the
Security Council debate on HIV/Aids in January this year, and the recent
pronouncements by the US administration.

As South Africans, we should take pride in having recognised these changes
earlier than others. We need to intensify actions consistent with this
approach, by investing in the health of our nation, as a necessary element
of building a humane society, well-positioned to succeed in a competitive
and interdependent global village.

As we sharpen our national response to our own specific challenges, let us
also recognise the critical influence that those around us will have on our
success or failure. After all, most of the diseases that account for most
of our mortality and morbidity, have no respect for our geographical
boundaries. In this regard, we continue to place a high premium on our co-
operation with the member states of SADC.

We value the responsibility which we were given to co-ordinate the health
sector in our region. We are proud of the effort we have put to ensure that
there is a coherent framework for our co-operation. Last August, in Maputo,
our President signed the SADC protocol on health. This important document
is now before this House to facilitate the necessary ratification.

I appeal to members to discharge their duty, so that we continue to lead by
force of example. I wish to indicate that, as of April this year, Botswana
has ratified this protocol, whilst Namibia has concluded its internal
consultations and was in the process of depositing the instrument with the
secretariat in Gaberone. I believe that we have a duty to ensure that, when
the heads of governments meet in Namibia in August, we, too, must have
ratified the protocol.

Recently, between 15 and 20 May this year, we attended the 53rd session of
the World Health Assembly. The partnership forged by the SADC Ministers
truly enabled a stronger voice for our continent and the developing world.
We are convinced that the strengthening of this partnership constitutes a
solid platform and a launch pad for our sectoral contribution to the
African renaissance.

Over the past few months, we have also participated in major initiatives on
the African continent. Amongst these were the consultations in tackling
malaria on the continent in Abuja, Nigeria, and the ministerial
consultation in Burkina Faso on HIV/Aids on instruction from the OAU
summit. Both of these meetings were successful and provided us with a
platform for exchange of strategies and a common focus on the two major
challenges facing our continent.

I am also happy to report that, in our last meeting held in Malawi in May
this year, the health Ministers of SADC adopted an intersectoral, regional
strategy on HIV/Aids. I have been charged with ensuring that all the
relevant sectors in SADC adopt this strategy in advance of the summit in
August. At the same meeting, we set in motion a process that should lead to
a co-ordinated response to malaria. This latter process builds on the
initiative we undertook together with Swaziland, Botswana, Mozambique and
Zimbabwe.

As many of the members know, we also chair the sectoral committee of health
Ministers of the Nonaligned Movement - a task that will end when our
President hands over the overall chairmanship to Bangladesh in late 2001.
Before then, we intend to approach Cabinet with a view to hosting the NAM
health Ministers here in our country and to deliberate on strategic issues
for this movement that will guide it well beyond the term of our
chairpersonship. It is our intention to work closely with the parliamentary
committee on health as we prepare for this important event.

Globalisation is a reality of our times, bringing with it fundamental
changes in the landscape for international health. It confronts us with
many challenges and yet, it also presents unparalleled opportunities for
international action to confront the global public health challenges of our
times. In this regard, we continue to strengthen bilateral ties with a
number of countries. Recently, we signed a memorandum of understanding with
Tunisia. Work has been completed to facilitate similar actions with Uganda
and the People's Republic of China during the second half of this year.

We shall continue to strengthen and actively participate in all relevant
international institutions, particularly the World Health Organisation, and
ensure the articulation and implementation of decisions that advance our
developmental perspective and promote solidarity in action amongst the
developing nations of the world. In this regard, I wish to pay tribute to
my predecessor, the hon the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Dr Nkosazana Zuma,
for placing our country in a firm leadership role during the 52nd World
Health Assembly in 1999, in tackling two important global health
challenges. This was through the adoption of a resolution that set in
motion the process towards an international framework convention on tobacco
control and the adoption of a revised drug strategy whose central objective
was to improve access to pharmaceuticals for the vast majority in the
developing world.

During this year's assembly, we continued to ward off many sinister moves
aimed at diluting these major achievements. This Parliament ought to take
pride in the fact that the key underlying principles that inform this
global agenda were nurtured in robust debates here in this House and
finally passed in our laws in the form of the Medicines and Related
Substances Control Amendment Act, Act 90 of 1997, and the Tobacco Products
Control Amendment Act, Act 12 of 1999.

Whilst we continue to have a setback with regard to the implementation of
the former law in our own country owing to the pending court case brought
against us by the pharmaceutical industry, we are, however, proud that our
brave and principled stand has generated such a strong current in the
interest of the poor on our globe. We believe that this movement is now
unstoppable and has to lead to the establishment of an international order
that ensures that all of us do benefit from the advances in science and
technology through ensuring that there is greater access by all to the
drugs that are effective against diseases that continue to cause so much
misery on our planet.

Let me, at this point, reiterate the view of the South African Government
that we do not have the slightest interest in abrogating patent protection
that is in line with our national laws and our international obligations.
Ours is a country that honours its commitments and respects the rule of
law. We also accept and recognise the need for those who put significant
investments in research for newer and more appropriate modalities of
treatment to get reasonable returns on their investment. As we continue to
engage in these matters, we shall be guided by this perspective. Once
again, we commit to stay on course while seeking any reasonable solution to
our own difficulties.

The course that we have taken requires that we forge strong partnerships
across the globe. These partnerships require patience and trust.
Furthermore, we realise that the complex nature of problems that we face,
will rarely require simple solutions to solve them. Consequently, there
will be moments of advance and periods of demoralising setbacks. Equity in
health is a core value that is central to the humane society we have
committed to build.

Since my assumption of the position of Minister of Health, I have spent a
lot of time trying to make a careful assessment of where our health reform
agenda stands. This has entailed looking at the successes and failures thus
far, in order to define the key strategic challenges confronting us during
this second term of democratic government. This has led to the formulation
of our strategic framework, the ten point plan, which will guide our
actions over the next four years. This has been a collaborative effort
between me and the nine MECs. Last November, we also had occasion to
deliberate extensively on this strategy in a meeting attended by members of
health committees across the political divide from the provincial
legislatures, NCOP, National Assembly and representatives of Salga. I wish
to record my sincere appreciation for the constructive manner in which
these discussions were handled.

The message flowing from this assessment has been clear and unambiguous. We
have done a lot over the past six years to improve access to health care
for the previously marginalised majority of South Africans. Barriers to
access have been removed. We were particularly pleased to note, in our
recently released demographic and health survey, that, today, 94% of South
African women attend antenatal care. We have also noted reports in
different studies which show a consistent pattern of increased access to
the services for the termination of pregnancy and the increasing
availability of contraceptive services. But against these successes, we see
the challenge posed by the still unacceptably high levels of maternal
deaths, currently standing at 150 per 100 000 live births, and the
differential access to termination of pregnancy services with rural women
continuing to be disadvantaged.

In September 1999, together with my colleagues, the MECs for health, we
reflected on these findings in the context of reviewing the report on
confidential enquiries into maternal deaths covering the period up to
December 1998. We adopted a series of recommendations which are now being
implemented in the provinces, and amongst those are paying more attention
to improvement of infrastructure, training and supervision of health
personnel, formulation of clear national guidelines for antenatal care and
ensuring consistent monitoring of implementation, finalisation and
popularisation of contraceptive guidelines to tackle the problem of teenage
pregnancies, and expansion of the termination of pregnancy services
specifically to improve access for rural women.

We are also continuing work to address other important areas of women's
health, and amongst these are the following: We have finalised guidelines
for screening of women for cervical cancer; we are working intersectorally
to strengthen initiatives to curb violence against women; and we are taking
steps to significantly extend the programme for training of forensic nurses
to enhance our capacity to deal appropriately with victims of violence and
sexual offences. Just a week ago, my department held an important
consultation with other stakeholders on this subject. Greater attention
will be attached to this area of work this year.

We are also contributing to ensuring that our country meets its obligations
flowing particularly from Cairo and the Beijing platform of action. We
recognise that our intervention will be sustainable if we succeed in
mainstreaming gender in every facet of our activities. In this regard, my
department has commenced to work on the development of a gender policy in
health under the guidance of our newly appointed gender equity director.
From this platform, I wish to stress the value we attach to this area of
work, not only in dealing with issues of representivity - important as they
may be - but in ensuring that the health services overall, and the budget
in particular, are gender-friendly and sensitive.

Another area of success has been immunisation. In July last year we
expanded our programme of immunisation with Hib vaccine. This is an
effective intervention against childhood pneumonia and meningitis. Now this
means that South African children get immunised for eight vaccine-
preventable diseases.

We have also continued the previous trend with no polio cases being
reported last year. We are well on the way to be certified polio-free this
year. We continue to witness a marked reduction in the number of notified
measles cases from 22 798 in 1992, to 1 070 in 1998 and 901 in 1999. This
has been the result of both improved routine coverage and successful catch-
up campaigns, from 76% in 1994 to 82% in 1998.

We are also progressing well with the implementation of integrated
management of childhood illnesses. This is a concrete response to the UN
Convention on the Rights of the Child and aims to holistically address the
problems of children aged between two months and five years. All nine
provinces have adopted this strategy and training is currently taking
place. We envisage that every district will be implementing child care
initiatives through this strategy by the year 2004.

As hon members would know, South Africa is a signatory to the UN Convention
on the Rights of the Child and has established a national programme of
action for children. We presented and defended our first country report in
Geneva earlier this year and Minister Pahad led our delegation. Whilst we
are proud of this landmark event, there are still major areas for concerted
effort. These include child abuse and the care of orphans, especially in
the light of the HIV/Aids epidemic. These areas are being tackled by the
NPA steering committee. My department continues to play an important role
in support of the NPA. Further details on these and other programmatic
achievements and challenges are contained in our annual report and our
strategic framework document.

The second unambiguous message for us is that there are problems with the
quality of the care we are providing which require our firm and consistent
attention. We say so in spite of an article that appeared on page 5 of the
Business Day of Monday, 17 April 2000, entitled ``Government service with a
smile''. This article which begins by saying, ``The perception that dealing
with government departments is usually a frustrating experience, has been
shaken by a survey conducted for Business Day by market research house, AC
Nielsen MRA,'' continues to say that ``of the 5,3 million people who came
into contact with the health department, 4,6 million, that is 88%, claimed
to be satisfied with the service''.

Our Constitution obliges us to work tirelessly to build a caring and humane
society. Central to this challenge is the restoration of humanity of all
South Africans. It is our firm believe that the health sector has a
particular contribution to make in this national project. This is
particularly so when our society is still scarred by the ravages of
apartheid discrimination and racism, and now confronts the difficult
challenges posed by the HIV/Aids epidemic. As a nation, we need to adopt a
policy of zero tolerance of inhuman and discriminatory practices,
particularly against those vulnerable on account of social and economic
status and/or circumstances of illness. I call upon all of us across party-
political affiliation to join in a national effort to rid our health system
and society of this scourge.
Earlier this year I addressed this House on a related matter, namely the
need to scrupulously adhere to the highest ethical standards in the conduct
of clinical research. Let me stress once more that it is unacceptable that
any of us should exploit those in our society who find themselves more
vulnerable. Ours is a caring Government and we will not hesitate in
defending the weak against the strong. This is an area on which there can
be no compromise. I repeat the undertaking I made then that my department
will soon finalise the necessary guidelines for ethical conduct of research
in our country.

Last November we launched the Health and Patients Rights Charter as an
instrument for co-operative interaction between the providers and the users
of health care. Early this year we received encouraging reports of actions
undertaken in provinces to ensure that this charter gets implemented and
becomes a living document. The charge is now for all of us to enter the
fray, mobilise our communities and ensure their ownership of the services
which are, after all, theirs.

Our communities must be encouraged to participate actively in the
governance structures of our institutions such as the health boards. I am
raising this matter also with the representative organisations of health
workers and our statutory councils. We shall ensure that, with these key
stakeholders, we move together in the interest of our country and her
people. We shall further advance our approach to improving quality by
finalising a policy framework on quality in the second part of this year.

We also need to weed our health sector of all forms of mercenary conduct.
The recent media disclosures of perverse behaviour in the form of kickbacks
have left a bitter taste in all of us. Of greater concern for me is
increasingly the realisation that we know that this is just the tip of the
iceberg. I call upon all health professionals to stand up in defence of
what is good in our profession by working with communities and the relevant
bodies to weed out this minority that is bringing such discredit to our
collective and commendable efforts.

There can be no greater cancer of betrayal than those who maliciously
benefit from the intimate knowledge of the pain of those who put them in
their confidence. It is in this context that we work on the initiatives of
the forum of statutory councils to formulate guidelines for wider
discussion on this matter. But let it be clear that this initiative will be
of no meaning unless it is followed by demonstrable actions which
unambiguously convey the seriousness of these transgressions.

The third clear message for us is the need to progress with even greater
speed in building a truly integrated and unitary health system based on the
comprehensive primary health care approach. Commendable success has been
achieved in unifying our previously fragmented system and creating an
integrated and functional national system and nine provincial
administrations. A major challenge now is to build on the advances made in
the demarcation of local government and create and strengthen functional
health districts as a vehicle for the delivery of integrated primary health
care services.

A related challenge is that of implementing a well co-ordinated hospital
development programme. Such a programme incorporates hospital
rehabilitation, decentralisation of hospital management and quality
improvement initiatives. Various elements of these programmes are ongoing,
as reflected both in our annual report and in the budget.

In this year's budget, R400 million is allocated for the hospital
rehabilitation programme. The challenge is to align all these consistent
with the strategic framework. We are encouraged by decisions in some
provinces, notably Gauteng and the Western Cape, towards allowing a degree
of revenue retention within institutions and the health sector. We believe
that this sets the scene for the types of incentives that are crucial in
promoting efficiencies, enhancing responsiveness to clients or users,
giving true meaning to decentralised management authority and promoting
viable sustainable public-private partnerships.

As regards health financing, we need to encourage as many of those who can
afford to make some contribution towards the financing of their health care
needs to do so, so that we can better target our limited fiscal allocation
to more adequately assist the many our country who remain trapped in
poverty and require our assistance. This approach underpins the amendments
to the Medical Schemes Act which was passed into law in 1998 and also
informs our determination to work hard towards the introduction of a social
health insurance as a component of an appropriate social security system in
our country. The Medical Schemes Act, with all relevant regulations in
place, finally came into effect on 1 January this year. The move to enhance
regulatory capacity in the council for medical schemes is proceeding
smoothly.

I have recently been approached by the council for medical schemes with a
request for some amendments to the regulations. I have agreed to these and
they will be published in their final form in the Gazette on Friday, 9
June. These cover the need to extend the amnesty period during which people
can join the schemes without incurring the adverse selection protection
penalties by a further nine months until March 2001. This is to make
provision for the obstacles to joining that have been created amongst
others by the delays in the finalisation of the rules and constitutions of
the schemes. There are regulations to protect individuals from the
application of the pre-existing conditions exclusions in two instances,
that is where a person has been a member of the medical scheme for more
than two years and needs to change to a new scheme, and where persons need
to change to a new scheme because they have changed employment.

Another unambiguous message for us is the need for a coherent human
resource strategy and plan that guides our actions. As we all know, health
care delivery is a labour-intensive business and will remain so for many
years to come. Furthermore, personnel expenditure continues to be the
largest expenditure item in our budget, currently standing at 65% of the
total health budget. We have put in place a team led by Prof William Pick
and supported by the WHO to systematically work on this matter. This coming
Thursday and Friday we shall receive the first report of this team at our
Minmec.

A few points are, however, clear. We need to be more aggressive in ensuring
greater representation of those historically disadvantaged in our student
intakes. This must be linked to a greater focus on the actual output, as
there is a disconcerting revolving-door phenomenon that we are observing.
This should not just be confined to undergraduates, but, indeed, should
begin to tackle the postgraduate profiles. Measures need to be put in place
to avoid the current use of our limited national resources to feed an
insatiable international market in the developed world through the
emigration of skilled and scarce human resources, sometimes without making
any real contribution to this country.

There are some definite areas of overproduction in our systems. This
represents the squander of our limited national resources which we cannot
justify. We simply cannot continue to train people that we know will not
find employment in that particular discipline when there are many glaring
areas of skills shortage which are necessary to correct in order to put our
country on a firm growth trajectory.

We need to learn from the success of the introduction of community services
that it is possible to secure, from our youth, genuine and meaningful
participation in the entrenchment of our democratic dispensation. I salute
the young doctors who were the pioneers of this initiative. I also note
with satisfaction that preparations are advanced to commence community
service for dentists next month and in January 2001 for pharmacists. I
appeal to these young South Africans to have it in their hearts to face
this challenge with commitment, pride and a sense of duty to serve. Theirs
will be a reward no money can buy, namely the silent prayers of those who
shall benefit from their acts of patriotism. [Applause.]

We shall work with other departments to systematically work through these
challenges that we have identified. We shall imbue this area of work with
the necessary urgency we believe it deserves. We shall also be guided by
the work that our Cabinet is busy with in this area.

Needless to say, another key and clear message for us is that every good
that we do will surely be undone if we do not tackle, bodily and
comprehensively, the challenge posed by the dual epidemics of HIV/Aids and
TB. This informs our approach to seek for ways of dealing comprehensively
with this challenge. In the past few months we have demonstrated clear and
unambiguous political commitment to deal decisively with the epidemic of
HIV/Aids; extended the life-skills programmes in schools; established the
SA National Aids Council; developed the HIV/Aids/STD Strategic Plan for
South Africa 2000-2005, with the participation of many stakeholders;
increased capacity-building and support to NGOs; finalised and published an
HIV-test and policy, gazetted in December last year; and increased our
public awareness campaigns.

Important landmarks have included the launching of the SA Business Council
on Aids and the expansion of the civil-military alliance to cover the five
provinces, strengthening partnerships through a concerted drive to meet
many stakeholders. I wish to refer, particularly, to consultations with
religious leaders, traditional leaders and the youth, and the development
of adult treatment guidelines for opportunistic infections.

We shall now be carrying this work forward with particular focus on the
following activities: Expanding HIV counselling and voluntary testing and
finalising, together with the Department of Welfare, a strategy for home-
based care. In this regard let me report that on Friday, 9 June, we shall
be holding a joint Health and Welfare Minmec to finalise this issue as a
follow-up to a successful meeting we held in March this year. Let me place
on record my profound appreciation for the leadership and partnership
exercised by my colleague hon Minister Zola Skweyiya in this regard.

We are also working together with the Departments of Welfare and of
Education on implementing the integrated strategy for dealing with children
infected with and affected by HIV/Aids. This interdepartmental programme
will be funded through the special allocation of R75 million announced by
the Minister of Finance during his Budget Speech. We shall continue to
ensure the escalation of our public awareness programmes as well as
ensuring effective functioning of SANAC.

It should be noted in this regard that HIV/Aids activities constitute the
largest expenditure line item in our departmental budget. In this year
alone, R145 million is allocated in our budget for activities to curb the
spread of HIV/Aids and other STDs. This amount is exclusive of the R75
million already referred to for the implementation of the interdepartmental
projects and budgets allocated by the provinces. We have allocated R20
million of our budget for the activities of SANAC.

As we intensify our response with greater involvement of NGOs, CBOs and the
private sector, we need to enhance our ability to co-ordinate our
activities from the national to the local level. A few general points need
to be made on the impact of the epidemic. It is clear to us that provincial
budgets are coming under very severe strain as a result of the growing
burden of disease caused by Aids. In spite of this, we have committed
ourselves to nondiscriminatory provision of treatment of opportunistic and
intercurrent infections.
I believe that many would agree that, everything else aside, the use of
antiretroviral triple therapy is completely unaffordable in our context.
This would be so even if there was an 80% reduction in the current market
price, as was reported in some of our media.

We, however, believe that it is appropriate for us to continue engaging the
pharmaceutical industry with a view to working towards improving the
affordability of pharmaceuticals. That is why we shall actively participate
in these discussions both as ourselves but also representing SADC member
states that have appointed us to represent the region as part of an African
Ministerial Team.

Needless to say, we welcome any sincere attempts and efforts by the
pharmaceutical companies to increase access to pharmaceuticals. As many
members know, we continue to engage Pfizer in its offer to make available
free of charge Fluconazole for the treatment of cryptococcal meningitis.

We are approaching these discussions with an open mind, but we believe that
any strategy that we follow should be sustainable. We also appeal to Pfizer
to extend its offer to ensure an affordable package for the treatment of
thrush - a debilitating condition that is common in those infected with
HIV/Aids. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Dr A S NKOMO: Mr Chairperson, as we rise to the bait of the challenge of
this Vote, I wish to congratulate the newly appointed Minister of Health,
Dr Manto Tshabalala-Msimang, and all the new MECs for health.

I wish also to acknowledge the fact that the national Health Team,
otherwise known as the Minmec, consisting of ten members, has five women in
its ranks. I am happy to make this remark, because, even as we speak, the
Beijing + 5 Platform of Action is sitting in New York, and one of the
senior members of this portfolio committee, Mrs Bertha Gxowa, is one of the
South African representatives at that conference. [Interjections.]

It was Alfred Tennyson who said: ``... much to do, so little done, such
things to be.'' He could just as well have said: ``So much to do, so little
money, such things to be.'' Having said that, I must express the gratitude
of the health team for the whopping sum of R32 billion that has been set
aside for health care delivery in the current financial year. This
constitutes the largest budgetary allocation to a line function. This is a
loud and proud testimony of Government's seriousness about health, as
evidenced by the fact that the Ministry of Health has a seat on the
MincomBud, which sets priorities on issues such as the allocation of
resources within the social and economic sectors.

We have just emerged from the Health budget hearings which are an important
occasion for the Portfolio Committee on Health as they present the
committee and the NA with the opportunity to review major activities
undertaken by both the national and provincial departments of health. And
may I say that these hearings were attended by not less than 12
directorates and all nine provinces. These proceedings also fulfil the
constitutional mandate that requires the NA to -


  ... ovide for mechanisms -


  (a) to ensure that all executive organs of state in the national sphere
       of government are accountable to it; and
  (b) to maintain oversight of -


       (i)  the exercise of national executive authority, including the
              implementation of legislation; and
       (ii) any organ of state.

The objectives of the hearings are as follows: Critically to review what
major activities were undertaken during the past fiscal year to meet the
established needs of the South African population; to examine how financial
resources were spent on these activities; to learn about departmental
priorities and plans for the coming fiscal year; to highlight any obstacles
and problems for delaying the realisation of the rights established in the
Constitution; and to identify where the portfolio committee can assist in
the process.

The past few years have seen the introduction of new policies and
legislation within the health sector intended to facilitate the
transformation process. While this legislative reform will be an ongoing
process, the coming years will focus primarily on the implementation and
monitoring of enacted legislation and policy to see whether it has made a
difference. Indeed, this afternoon, we begin the hearings on issues around
the implementation of the Choice on Termination of Pregnancy Act.

The portfolio committee realises the need to continuously evaluate and re-
evaluate the impact of this transformation in the health system, and also
on service delivery. Therefore, the report generated from these hearings is
used, along with additional technical analysis, to provide a basis for an
annual evaluation of the budget by the portfolio committee.

Policy developments have to be viewed in the context of the broader
national social policy framework, which is to foster a balanced and viable
society that requires social institutions and services to function
effectively and smoothly. In support of this, the national Department of
Health set out in the 1997 White Paper the strategy and objectives on the
transformation of the health system in South Africa. The key objectives of
this transformation include the promotion of equity and accessibility in
service delivery, and the extension of the availability of appropriate
services.

The implementation of the 1997 White Paper on the transformation of the
health system in South Africa has seen progress in four broad areas, for
instance, of the increased access to primary health care; acceleration of
the initial implementation of the district health system for primary health
care delivery, as will be amplified by Mr Mpehle later on this morning;
development of key inputs such as the national norms and standards;
legislative developments in support of primary health and access to
services.

The year 1999 saw the following legislative and policy advances: The
approval of the three amendments to the Tobacco Products Control Amendment
Act of 1998, to ensure its constitutionality; the publication, in October
1999, of the regulations in terms of the Medical Schemes Act of 1998; the
implementation of compulsory community service for pharmacists through the
Pharmacy Amendment Bill of 1999; the establishment of the SA National Aids
Council; and the establishment of a draft HIV/Aids Strategic Plan for South
Africa 2000-2005.

Concerning health system reform priorities, what has also emerged from the
hearings were the following health reform priorities: The equitable
allocation of health services, including the budget, nationally, in
compliance with the Constitution; the implementation of a primary health
care strategy based on the principles of the primary health care approach
as enunciated at Alma Alta in 1978; and the creation of an integrated
health system, ensuring both public and private sectors best serve the
public interest.

Government has taken a very responsible line with Unaids and WHO, which
have identified public awareness aimed at changing life-styles and
behaviour as the most potent weapon against HIV/Aids. In the context of a
preventative approach, they have looked at the development of a vaccine
which is specific to the variant of the HIV virus that is prevalent in
Southern Africa, and Government has, through the Department of Arts,
Culture, Science and Technology, contributed a sum of R200 million to the
South African vaccine initiative.

The Department of Health continues to lead Government efforts to fight the
HIV/Aids pandemic. HIV/Aids is one of the most serious health challenges
facing this country, if not the world. While Health will remain in the
forefront of the struggle against HIV/Aids, Government, as a whole, has
committed itself to the fight against HIV/Aids. The SA National Aids
Council has established, and Cabinet has approved, a special allocation of
the national Budget of R75 million in the current financial year towards
HIV/Aids. The Departments of Health, of Education and of Welfare will use
these funds to develop an integrated strategy to fight HIV/Aids.

It is crucial to understand that HIV/Aids is not a health problem but a
societal problem. Any strategy to combat the epidemic needs a holistic
approach - a mobilisation of resources from all spheres of society and the
recognition that Government is just one part of this and does not have all
the answers to the problem. It is thus disheartening to see the one-minded
approach and belief that drugs only offer the key to a successful strategy
for combating the disease.

HIV/Aids wears the face of a chronic disease and affects only a small
portion of the population in the Western world. In this country, and indeed
in the Southern African region, HIV/Aids wears the face of a lethal disease
which affects millions of our people with unprecedented cost implications.
Any strategy to combat the disease needs to take this into account and
therefore cannot take the form of an exclusive strategy that serves only
the select few.
It is with this in mind that prevention has already been identified and
authorised as the main weapon to be used in the fight against HIV/Aids. We
are not alone in this strategy, but together with the United Nations and
the World Health Organisation. The Government has already poured money to
finance a campaign to change the lifestyles and behaviour of society. The
campaign involves all sectors of society as is manifested in the SA
National Aids Council which brings together the faith-based sector,
academics, sports personalities, the youth sector, celebrities, people
living with HIV/Aids and a core group of Government Ministers.

As part of this preventative approach, the Government has identified a need
to develop a vaccine, and through the Department of Arts, Culture, Science
and Technology, has allocated R200 million to this project. The campaign
must also entail a close nexus between poverty-alleviation measures, human
rights and developmental considerations as well. As a society, we need to
pause and take stock, to consider whether we have created a climate in
which it is physically safe and incentive driven for people living with
Aids to come out of the closet.

A call needs to be made to the representatives of health workers'
organisations to announce their readiness, their willingness to endorse the
rights of all people, including people living with Aids, to access the
health care delivery system. A pertinent consideration in the matter of
knowledge production relates to the partnership between the performers of
clinical trials and the subjects of such clinical trials. To whom does the
intellectual property deriving from this social production accrue? Why is
it unilaterally appropriated by only the performers of such trials?

These are issues which we need further to interrogate as the portfolio
committee, to determine the rights and responsibilities of pharmaceutical
companies, but also, and more importantly, the rights of the subjects of
these clinical trials. We support this Vote. [Applause.]

Mrs S V KALYAN: Chairperson, hon members, Health was awarded a sum of R32
billion - that is 12% of the total Budget - to achieve its goals for 2000-
2001. Big tasks, limited money, and it is quite understandable why the
Ministry of Health continues to plead financial restraint as a hindering
factor to goal realisation. But then again, this does not excuse why 40% of
the allocated Aids budget rolled over last year.

South Africa is faced with a worsening Aids epidemic which will have a
profound impact on the country's economic outlook. Infection rates are
forecast to peak at almost 17% by 2006 for the population as a whole, with
Aids-related deaths expected to peak five years later with 256 Aids deaths
per 1 000 normal deaths. Around one in five adult South Africans are
thought to be infected with HIV - the virus that leads to Aids.

Closer to home, Prof Coovadia, chair of the Aids 2000 Conference, stated
recently that one in 12 members of Parliament are HIV-positive. In view of
the alarming statistics just quoted, it is both puzzling and disturbing to
note the Government's persistent dragging-of-the-heels attitude in
addressing the pandemic. Is it possible that the Minister of Health's
identity crisis has got something to do with it?

Apparently it took a child - her daughter - to inform her that she is
actually the Minister of Health and not the Minister of Aids. Hon members
should add to this her rather arrogant statement quoted in the Washington
Post: ``People with Aids expect you to drop everything for Aids,'' and one
begins to understand that the Aids pandemic is not really the number-one
priority on her list. If the Minister feels that Aids does not form the
bulk of her portfolio, why does she not then heed the call of both the DP
and several NGOs to move the national HIV/Aids programme out of the
Ministry of Health and allow an independent commission, which falls under
the authority of the President, but is chaired by civil society, to run the
programme. [Interjections.]

When asked in a recent debate on the question: Why is the Government
struggling to make an impact on the Aids crisis, the Minister chastised the
audience for daring to believe that the Government has a vital role to play
in addressing the Aids pandemic. It is her belief that the individual must
take responsibility rather than the Government, thereby inadvertently
casting aspersions about the Government's ability to lead the Aids campaign
effectively.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, are you rising on a point
of order?

Dr B G MBULAWA-HANS: Chairperson, no. I would like to ask a question.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Would you take a question, Mrs
Kalyan?

Mrs S V KALYAN: No.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! She will not take a question.

Mrs S V KALYAN: President Mbeki stated in 1997 that the Government has
committed itself to a partnership against Aids. It is without a doubt the
most important partner because Government has power, Government has
resources, Government has connections, Government has influence. All of
these could be powerfully employed to make an impact on this epidemic. But
what do we have instead?

When challenged recently in the United States on his apparent inaction in
tackling the Aids pandemic in South Africa head-on, the hon Mbeki replied
that his stance was really not one of inaction, but rather that of
meditation. So what do we have in South Africa? We have the case of
punctured condoms, we have the Sarafina 2 saga, we have statements that
western solutions are unsuitable, that Aids drugs are either impossibly
expensive or toxic, we have a belief that the African version of the
disease is unrelated to the HI-virus, we have a Minister with a child
adviser in respect of her job description, and we have a President who
meditates on life-and-death issues.

To date, the Government has struggled to make even a small dent in the Aids
pandemic, primarily because of a determined stubbornness to address the
issue head-on. The Government has failed to publicly acknowledge its
mistakes and this has encouraged denial of the disease in our country. The
Government has to make choices regarding the provision of Aids drugs,
especially to pregnant women in order to reduce the risk of mother-to-child
transmission. The Government needs to break the silence. The words of
Phylicia Oppelt when she says, ``A flutter of red material cannot speak as
loudly as the voice and action of role models,'' best illustrates how this
can be achieved.

South Africa is not only battling with its Aids crisis. While significant
changes have taken place in the planning of district health care,
improvement in service delivery systems at the grass-roots have been
disappointing. A recent survey suggests that improvements in district
health care is being hindered by inappropriate human resource planning and
slow organisational transformation of hospital services. Current staffing
is roughly two-thirds of new recommended levels resulting in poor delivery,
low motivation and reduced capacity to deliver. Further, another report
recently states that only 103 of the 269 hospitals designated to provide
free abortions are functional, thereby causing an escalation in the number
of back-street abortions.

Mental health is a sadly neglected aspect of our health system. Electro-
convulsive therapy and deep-sleep therapy have not been mentioned in the
proposed Mental Health Bill and are practised in many psychiatric
institutions, often without proper and informed consent.

The Minister's predecessor generated a lot of activity in the field of
health care during her five years in office, not necessarily all good. When
this Minister took over as Minister of Health, South Africa breathed a
collective sigh of relief and there was an expectation and hope that she
would make positive moves to ensure that the 1994 ANC election promise of
health care for all would be realised.
Sad to say, in the past year it has been a case of more of the same policy,
which has resulted in an increased sense of frustration by both patients
and health care professionals. It is sincerely hoped that once the Minister
has got over her identity crisis and familiarised herself fully with her
job description, she will give her full and undivided attention to the job
at hand. [Applause.]

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Mr Chairperson, working with the ANC health policy is like
walking in a minefield of paradoxes. It is like being in wonderland, and if
the policy continues in its present vein it will be as much use to the
people of South Africa as the Mad Hatter's tea party was to Alice in
Wonderland, not for lack of commitment on the part of all the players, from
the Minister to the lowliest opposition MP, but because it is based on a
system that is designed to fail. [Interjections.]

One had to sympathise with the officials of the national department who
reported to us during budget hearings. One after the other, with admirable
frankness, they admitted that they were failing to provide health care that
was adequate. No one even spoke of good to large sections of our
population, and their integrity deserves that we support this budget.

When the hon Dr Nkomo arranged for us to briefly interact with Minmec, it
was clear that the health system is knotted with complexities. Intentions
are admirable, but not mechanisms for implementation. Money must be spent,
but, I fear, little will change. I believe that many in the department
understand the root cause of the problem, but they dare not say so.
Therefore I keep calling out: ``Change the Constitution!'' to anyone who
will listen. But the C-word is a sacred cow and anyone who dares mess with
it is likely to hear: ``Off with your head!''

If we genuinely want to deliver services to the people, we need a system
that is simple, clear and, above all, accountable. How else does it become
efficient? Ours is none of the above. Our failure to deal with Aids, which
straddles health, welfare and education, is a barometer of the weakness of
the system. There are knowledgeable people in South Africa who know the
root cause of our problems. They have workable solutions, but they need
more recognition and the Aids plan needs better management and co-
ordination.

The Ugandan model stares us in the face. It includes a major commitment to
community health workers. They speak in a language the people understand.
They have credibility. But here they play the minutest role. Why do we have
such a strong denial about Aids? It is because it is still dealt with
within the realms of mythology and because it is more a matter of political
theatre and populism than a matter of practical concern.

Migrancy and trucking need special solutions, as does the custom of
multiple sex partners, at all levels of society. Rape, the unequal power
relationships between men and women, the absence of testing, and openness
and personal responsibility, are issues that must be tackled one by one. At
its present rate of devastation, Aids will render all our other gains
futile. Compared with these mammoth issues, the problems with drug
companies are as nothing.

One of the issues that deserves that we draw the line between Parliament as
theatre and Parliament as a place of integrity is where we play God over
babies' lives. People will understand that treating HIV-positive mothers to
reduce the chances of their babies getting Aids is not a money issue. It
only costs R25 per treatment with Nevirapine and almost the same price for
the Government using AZT as the cheapest generic. Besides, the cheapest
abortion costs R181 and the Government offers them freely. No, it is not
about money, it is about coping with the orphans.

We are equally ambiguous when it comes to Aids testing. ``Be open,'' we
say, but we hardly offer any tests. We could offer group pretest
counselling, and everyone who attends a clinic or hospital could be offered
an HIV test while allowing them the right to deny it. If they test
positive, they must know the result. Some people will fall into the six-
week window period and others may experience social ostracism. But the
emphasis should be on self-knowledge with confidentiality and on a
patient's obligation to communicate the information to a spouse or sex
partner.

As more people become positive fewer will be ostracised. Tests are
available at R6 each and possibly less if purchased in vast quantities. Can
the Government say to this that they do not have the money? We run about
saying: ``No money, no money,'' like the White Rabbit who kept saying: ``No
time, no time.'' We can stretch our money if we use it efficiently and
effectively, and if we are more courageous with private-public
partnerships. We must also be more creative with international donor
partnerships and use them to give people incentives to be open about Aids.
They can receive food supplements, vitamins, legal support, group support,
exercise or yoga classes, laughter therapy, homeopathic treatment or
treatment with registered traditional healers to boost their immunity.

Yes, corruption is rife in the public and the private sector, but there are
ways around this. One way is to regulate, not so that the Government
controls everyone and everything, as that increases the scope for
corruption, but to ensure that minimum standards are imposed, monitored and
applied, both in public and in private health facilities. Only if the
private and the public sectors are put into open competition, will we
narrow the gap between services for rich and poor. Let us create a database
of state patients and contract our provision of services to private clinics
and hospitals. Bloodsuckers would find no place in such arrangements, as
payment would be per patient and not per service.

All aspects of health delivery require favourable incentives, and there are
ways of offering such incentives while allowing competition and freedom of
choice, and while regulating to ensure minimum standards. By contrast,
nothing could be more wonderlandish than Dr Nkomo pointing his lance at the
provinces and threatening to make them vanish so that the national and
local government can offer an efficient, equitable and national health
service.

Realistically, we should provide an Aids emergency fund to each province,
and let them get on with training pretest counsellors and health workers
and with distributing condoms. As things stand, provinces must deal with
the entire Aids epidemic without any increase in budget. They must fail.

Equally befitting wonderland are genetically modified organisms. There is a
tiny staff component dealing with this immensely important task. They are
knowledgeable and obligingly forthcoming with information. But the problem
they are facing with labelling has not been resolved at the international
level. We cannot hold on until Codex, the world food monitoring body, makes
up its mind. Biotechnology already has its claws into us.

Genetically modified organism technology is growing faster than our control
of it. We are told that labelling of genetically modified organisms all the
way along the food chain will be impossible because grains are mixed in
silos and cannot be separated into GMO-full and GMO-free. It is too
expensive to check products down the line for GMOs, and if we cannot label
at the beginning stages, why bother to label at the last stage of
processing? To pretend that we are looking after the public? We might as
well just say to people: ``Eat me and grow tall, drink me and get
smaller.'' A better option seems to be to label foods free of GMOs, where
the responsibility and cost are borne by companies trading in healthy
natural products.

There is a depressing list of additional problems about which I could
maunder on, like the winding perm in the mouse's tail in wonderland. There
is the bizarre approach to foreign qualified doctors in terms of which only
Cubans are welcomed to our shores. Recently, the department won its appeal
against a judgment that favoured nine excellently qualified doctors. [Time
expired.]

Ms S B NQODI: Hon Chair and members, I will not waste my time by responding
to the shallow-minded and maybe academically and scientifically empty and
uninformed arguments and lamentations on Aids from the people on my left.
[Interjections.] One of my party members has been mandated to debate the
HIV/Aids pandemic facing all of us.

I want to commend the Department of Health on the achievements it has made
under the most difficult circumstances since the inception of our
democratic Government in 1994. It is a fact that the backlog we inherited
from the apartheid era posed a daunting challenge that many thought we
would never overcome. I am sure that most members in this House still
remember the constant TV coverage of the unsightly, dilapidated state of
our health facilities and equipment in the Eastern Cape. It is thus with
great optimism that I stand here today without being naive about the
challenges we have set for our country's health system under the ANC-led
Government.

According to the 1999 South African health review, significant strides have
been made in developing a unified public health sector that is district-
based and underpinned by the principles of a primary health care approach.
However, transformation and the achievements of equity are hampered by
various factors which include difficulty in redistributing resources
together with a shrinking public sector budget. A good example of this is
that while, on the surface, the Health budget has increased by
approximately 6% from last year, which is a welcome increase, when taking
the inflation rate into account, this increase is minimal, indeed.

As the hon the Minister has mentioned, equity is the key to our goals, and
I stand here as the champion of this great cause, which I would like to
address myself to. A distinction needs to be made, however, between equity
and equality. Equity does not mean providing the same resources to
everyone. It means giving more to those who have less, so that the gap
between the rich and the poor decreases. Whether equity is measured by
health status, by province, by race or according to the urban/rural divide,
the fact of the matter is that it is almost exclusively poor black people
whose lives are most affected by inequity in South Africa today.

These, as I have stated in my opening, can be traced from the backlogs we
have inherited, as the people's Government, from the apartheid regime. To
illustrate this, the lives of our families in the rural Eastern Cape or the
Northern Province differ greatly from the lives of people in Cape Town or
Johannesburg, not only in their day-to-day lives, but also with regard to
their health status.

Research by the health system trust indicates that around 30% of children
in rural provinces do not grow to their full potential, due to poverty and
everything that goes along with it, as compared to only 10% in the affluent
or rich provinces. This then supports the fact that rural Africans have, by
and large, the worst health status of all South Africans.

Underlying these differences are the determinants of health. For example,
only 12% of rural Africans have a tap in their dwellings, whereas over 95%
of whites and Indians, and over 70% of coloureds, have taps in their homes.
Water is the source of life. What kind of life do we hope for in our rural
communities?

In 1997, out of every 100 women attending antenatal clinics, 16 were
infected with HIV/Aids, and we know from the statistics and subsequent data
that this epidemic has increased. In KwaZulu-Natal, 27 people out of 100
are infected, whereas less than ten people per 100 are infected in the
Northern Cape, Western Cape and Northern Province. When these figures are
separated by race, the overwhelming majority of those infected are black
Africans.

As a committee charged with the oversight function of this national
department, interprovincial equity is also our concern. The increase of
around 6% does not reveal the reality that the less well-off provinces that
have received the least increases in their budget allocations are the same
provinces that have massive backlogs.

We thus questioned the effectiveness of the formula that determines the
provincial equitable share, especially with the Minister of Finance. While
backlogs and rural populations are taken into consideration in the formula,
their weighting, however, is far too small to result in any tangible
differences within the health sector. Notwithstanding the inequities in
health resource allocation between provinces, the inequities between
provinces are far greater. Case studies undertaken into the budgets of the
Eastern Cape and the North West show that there was, at least, a fourfold
difference in resource allocation between the district with the greatest
budget and the district with the smallest budget.
I want to conclude by supporting the budget and by emphasising the
importance of the need for accelerated change in delivery in the health
system, and the need to improve the quality of the lives of our people,
especially those who are underserviced in the rural areas. [Applause.]

Dr S J GOUS: Mnr die Voorsitter, Gesondheid het sedert 1994 al hoe meer
prominensie geniet en word deesdae as een van die belangrikste maatskaplike
portefeuljes saam met veiligheid en sekuriteit genoem. Die rede hiervoor is
hoofsaaklik die voorkoms van Vigs, wat 'n voelbare negatiewe effek op alle
vlakke van die samelewing uitoefen.

Wanneer 'n begroting beoordeel word, is die belangrikste vraag of die
publiek waarde vir geld ontvang, en daarom is dit nodig om 'n balansstaat
van die Departement van Gesondheid se suksesse en mislukking op te stel.
Sedert 1994 het grootskaalse transformasie plaasgevind om 'n hoogs
gefragmenteerde gesondheidsdiens onder een departement te vestig. Dit is
tot die departement se krediet dat hierdie moeilike proses van
herstrukturering nou grotendeels afgehandel is.

Die departement het ook daarin geslaag om talle primêre
gesondheidsorgklinieke te vestig - let wel, nie noodwendig effektief te
bedryf nie - en moet krediet ontvang vir die immuniseringsprojekte en
-programme vir polio, masels en hepatitis B. Voedingskemas vir kinders het
ook, ten spyte van talle probleme, tot 'n algemene verbetering van
gesondheid gely.

Die tyd van transformasie en herstrukturering is egter nou verby, en ons
moet nou begin kyk na effektiewe, volhoubare dienslewering. In hierdie
opsig skiet die Departement van Gesondheid te kort. Dit wil voorkom asof
die verhoogde las van Vigs, TB en geweld, waarby padongelukke ingesluit
word, daarvoor verantwoordelik is dat die konsep van primêre gesondheidsorg
en roetine mediese dienste heeltemal oorskadu word.

Die gevolg van hierdie verhoogde las word ervaar in die vorm van
onaanvaarbaar lang wagtye vir roetine- mediese diens, byvoorbeeld
operasies, met 'n gevolglik verhoogde druk op 'n reeds oorwerkte
gesondheidspersoneel. Koppel 'n mens nou hieraan die dodelike kombinasie
van 'n gebrek aan fondse en toerusting, onbevoegdheid, wanadministrasie,
wanbestuur, diefstal, vermorsing, stakings en 'n verlaagde moraal onder
gesondheidswerkers, dan kan jy verstaan hoekom daar gevrees word dat
staatsgesondheidsdienste 'n totale ineenstorting in die gesig staar.

Sedert 1994 was daar 'n vloedgolf gesondheidswetgewing. Behalwe vir
transformasie was die doel daarvan in die meeste gevalle om 'n
bekostigbare, beskikbare en volhoubare gesondheidsdiens daar te stel.
Ongelukkig het heelwat van die wetgewing nie altyd in hulle doel geslaag
nie, en in sekere gevalle selfs die teenoorgestelde effek gehad.

Die Ministerie en Departement van Gesondheid het in die meeste gevalle self
die hindernisse en probleme ten opsigte van hierdie wetgewing geskep,
byvoorbeeld deur nie altyd die volle implikasies van goedbedoelde wetgewing
te oorweeg nie; deur 'n merkbare tekort aan konsultasie, navorsing en
onderhandeling; deur meestal 'n voorafbepaalde eensydige agenda
doodeenvoudig deur te druk; deur te veel aan regulasies oor te laat; deur
groeiende verwydering tussen die staat en die private sektor toe te laat
terwyl die private sektor juis die potensiaal en die vermoë het om 'n groot
rol in die oplossings van hierdie probleme te speel. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Dr S J GOUS: Mr Chairman, since 1994 Health has been enjoying increasing
prominence and, along with Safety and Security, is deemed to be one of the
most important social portfolios these days. The reason for this is mainly
the prevalence of Aids, which has a tangibly negative effect at all levels
of society.

When a budget is assessed, the most important question is whether the
public gets value for money, and that is why it is necessary to draw up a
balance sheet of the successes and failures of the Department of Health.
Since 1994 large-scale transformation has taken place to establish a highly
fragmented health service under one department. It is to the department's
credit that this difficult process of restructuring has now for the most
part been completed.

The department has also succeeded in establishing many primary health care
clinics - take note, not necessarily in running them effectively - and must
be given credit for the immunisation projects and programmes for polio,
measles and hepatitis B. Feeding schemes for children have also, despite
many problems, contributed to a general improvement in health.

The time for transformation and restructuring is now over, however, and we
should begin to look at effective, sustainable service delivery. In this
regard the Department of Health is very wide of the mark. It would seem as
if the increased burden of Aids, TB and violence, including road accidents,
is responsible for the concept of primary health care and routine medical
services being completely overshadowed.

The result of this increased burden manifests itself in unacceptably long
waiting times for routine medical services, for example operations, with
the concomitant increased pressure on already overworked health personnel.
When one links this to the deadly combination of a lack of funds and
equipment, incompetence, maladministration, mismanagement, theft, wastage,
strikes and a low morale among health workers, then one can understand why
there are fears that state health care services are facing complete
collapse.

Since 1994 there has been a flood of health legislation. Apart from
transformation its purpose in most cases was to introduce an affordable,
available and sustainable health service. Unfortunately a great deal of the
legislation did not always succeed in achieving its objective, and in
certain cases even had the opposite effect.

The Ministry and the Department of Health in most cases created the
obstacles and problems in respect of this legislation themselves, for
example by not always fully considering the implications of well-intended
legislation; by a visible lack of consultation, research and negotiation;
by for the most part quite simply forcing through a predetermined, one-
sided agenda; by leaving too much to regulations; by allowing increasing
estrangement to develop between the state and the private sector, while the
private sector in fact has the potential and the ability to play a major
role in resolving these problems.]

HIV/Aids, as a human right, has become politically sensitive. The debate is
mainly driven by the quest to limit and eradicate unfair discrimination
against people living with HIV/Aids. Unfortunately, in this process, we
might be doing the issue more harm than good, when considering the bigger
picture.

When one examines the origins of the discrimination, it becomes clear that
it is mainly due to the stigma associated with the disease. The fact is
that the stigma originated in North America and Europe, due to the
association with homosexuals and intravenous drug users. It then becomes
clear that we in Africa simply inherited and perpetuated this stigma,
despite the obvious difference that, in Africa, the disease is mainly a
heterosexual, sexually transmitted disease.

Why then, do other sexually transmitted diseases such as syphilis and
gonorrhoea not enjoy the same protection? The same question can be asked of
terminal diseases such as cancer. History has shown that diseases such as
TB and leprosy were also stigmatised in the past, but eventually rid
themselves of the stigma. It would therefore logically follow that, if
given time, HIV/Aids would also eventually follow this route.

The first question that needs answering is whether the elevation of
HIV/Aids to a human rights issue is not going to perpetuate the stigma ad
infinitum, long after it should have disappeared naturally. Certain medical
experts have expressed the opinion that a misguided human rights approach
is catastrophic and is, in fact, going to lead to growing inequalities.

If HIV/Aids in Africa is, indeed, unique, as our President also seems to
believe, why are we driving issues which essentially belong to Europe and
North America? The second question that begs investigation is whether a
misguided human rights route is not counterproductive in the fight against
the disease. The issue of HIV testing immediately comes to mind. If one
interprets the Employment Equity Act to the letter of the law, absolutely
no testing - not even voluntary - may be undertaken in occupational health,
unless instructed by the Labour Court.

This becomes an untenable situation for health personnel who have to deal
with diagnosis and treatment, not to mention the prevention of the spread
of the disease. The debate about the notification of HIV/Aids is of late
simply being ignored, despite the fact that HIV/Aids certainly qualifies as
a communicable disease. The obvious conflict in the Occupational Health and
Safety Act and the Employment Equity Act will have to be addressed as a
matter of urgency.

The third question that arises is what the rights of an HIV-negative person
are and whether they are in balance with the rights of an HIV-positive
person. The very legitimate right of an HIV-negative person is certainly to
stay HIV-negative and virtually nothing is being done to directly entrench
this right. Given that with every right comes a responsibility, one must
assume that it is the responsibility of an HIV-positive person not to
spread the disease. Is there any criminal culpability associated with a
wilful spreading of HIV?

There are many possible situations that may unfairly discriminate against
an HIV-negative person and where mandatory testing may be considered, for
example in jails, a situation beyond the control of an individual; in
accidents; in needlestick injury among health workers; in motor vehicle
accidents with blood mingling; in violence, rape and assault. HIV-negative
unborn babies would also fall into this category.

Many questions remain unanswered or are simply ignored. Who may be tested
and under what circumstances? Who is responsible for the cost of testing?
Who is responsible for the cost of prophylactic treatment? Who, and under
what circumstances, qualifies for compensation? After all, a suspect in a
drunken-driving case has very little choice as to whether he wants his
blood tested or not.
It is abundantly clear that the silent majority, who are the HIV-negative
persons, have not spoken on these issues. It is now time that we openly and
seriously debate them. It is also clear that we have a holocaust of Aids on
our hands and therefore do not necessarily have to act politically
correctly, because, in the long run, we might cause more harm than good. We
must opt for a rational approach that will have a real and measurable
effect on the pandemic of HIV/Aids.

Dr E E JASSAT: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister, respected members, for the
past few years the members have been bombarded by horrendous HIV/Aids
statistics of those who are infected, their disabilities and their eventual
death from this pandemic. Even though members have been fed ad nauseam with
these statistics, they are so significant and will have such an impact on
our socioeconomic fabric that a repetition may not be out of place.

Nationally, some 22,4% of women attending antenatal clinics were infected
with HIV, according to estimates provided by the 9th HIV survey of the past
year. These figures translate to approximately 4,2 million people or about
10% of the total population being HIV-positive by the end of 1999, that is
one in 10 persons. [Interjections.] Some 405 000 people in South Africa
have already died of Aids and 167 000 people are sick with Aids.

According to Metlife, by the end of this year, 5,6 million people will be
HIV-positive and by the year 2005, 18% of the workforce will be infected.
It is estimated that 2,1 million people will have died as a result of this
epidemic. According to Unaids, by the year 2010, life expectancy in South
Africa will have dropped from 68,2 years in 1998 to 48 years, ie by 30%.
The population growth rate will also drop from 1,4% at present to 0,04%,
and this will be a decrease of about 71%. Another problem is how South
Africa can cope with this national disaster in the face of limited
resources and a skewed societal infrastructure.

The four components of co-ordinated response include, behavioural changes,
prevention through vaccine or biomedical solutions, bringing down
opportunistic diseases and STDs, the use of antirevitrol drugs, and seeking
a final cure for HIV. These behaviours are moulded by psychosocial
determinants such as self-efficacy, environmental determinants, such as
condom disposal, social determinants, such as power relations between
genders, and, finally, economic determinants such as poverty. The Ugandan
experience demonstrates that behavioural changes can work in Africa. Uganda
is a country in which the decline of HIV seroprevalence rates among young
pregnant women fell from 31% in 1990 to 13% in 1998. Thus it is possible to
bring about change.

The South African Aids vaccine initiative will be launching phase one of a
subtype C vaccine later this year, under the auspices of the MRC. However,
it will take at least five to ten years before a vaccine that can be used
will be available to our people in this country. Treatment of opportunistic
diseases and STDs is, at the moment, the most viable course we can
undertake. Antiretroviral treatment, with a combination of drugs, has been
shown to prolong life among people living with Aids. But the regimen is
complex, numerous side effects will occur and the costs are prohibitive, as
our Minister has pointed out. Complete cure through the use of drugs is
still a pipe-dream.
I would like to conclude by reading a poem by Don Mattera, a poem which
could be a call and cry by an Aids victim. It reads:


  Remember to call at my grave
  When freedom finally
  Walks the land
  That I may rise
  To tread familiar paths
  To see broken chains
  Fallen prejudice
  Forgotten injury
  Pardoned pains

[Applause.]

Mr T ABRAHAMS: Mr Chairman, the scheduling of the debate on this Budget
Vote on Health is unfortunate. I say it is unfortunate because it is taking
place this morning. So many other things are happening. So many committees
are meeting. Members are tied up with so many other matters on this
particular morning that the House is practically empty. So much can be read
into the fact that so many members are not here. That is unfortunate.

Some people will say that there is a lack of interest on the part of the
politicians in the problem of HIV/Aids and health in general. Others will
say that it is because so many of them have HIV/Aids themselves. Yet others
will say that it is because of a sense of denial and because people say:
``This is a virus that will never attack me. It will always attack the next
person, never me.'' However, with that unfortunate situation, this has
brought about that our own spokesperson is tied up elsewhere and I shall
therefore read on his behalf what he has to say about this matter.

He says that it is undeniable that the HIV/Aids phenomenon is a diabolical
killer that has been unleashed upon us. It is stalking us in our
workplaces, in our streets, in our congregations, universities, sports
fields, venues of entertainment and even in our homes. It affects men and
women of all ages and occupations in every province and the virus
recognises no status or station.

The evidence is stark and overwhelming. Well over 4 million people in our
country have HIV/Aids at the moment. Over 1 700 are infected daily and if
this onward thrust is not stopped in its tracks, then one in every four of
our citizens will be HIV infected within a decade. The equivalent of over
three quarters of a million children will be lost because of this
phenomenon. Yet we have this high incidence of denial - the general denial
of the existence or effects of this virus. There is a pervading sense of
acceptance that if this virus does exist, it affects others, not me.

My spokesman calls for the criminalisation of conscious Aids transmission.
He calls for pregnant mothers to be treated to prevent mother-to-child
transmission. Testing must be made more widespread. He calls for the
decriminalisation of sex workers as a means to reduce transmission, and he
also calls for antiretrovirals to be made available to the poor, with the
concurrent adequate infrastructure - and he stresses ``adequate''
infrastructure - to be developed to distribute it.

Mrs M M MALUMISE: Chairperson, South Africa is moving towards a situation
in which more people will live longer and women will continue to have a
longer life expectancy than men. This is a fact. The declaration of the
rights of the elderly states: Older people should be able to live in
dignity and security, and be free of exploitation and physical or mental
abuse.

The Department of Health must be commended for its policy on free health
care and the shift towards primary health care. Although we are seeing
significant improvements in our health system, our health services are
still not completely geared towards the needs of the elderly. There are
very few health services specifically designed for elderly people. They
have to make use of general services and often complain that they are
treated as second-class citizens. This is unacceptable.

Too often, no explanation is given of diseases affecting them, and they are
told that, as they are now old, nothing much can be done for them - and I
am one of them. During the budget hearings of the portfolio committee, very
little emphasis was placed on the needs of the elderly - and this we see
reflected in the department's strategies and the budget allocations.

Today I want to encourage the Minister to give attention to new policies
relating to services for the elderly, and I want to make a few suggestions
in this regard. The budget should make provision for comprehensive services
within a primary health care framework. Preventative services, such as
cancer screening and monitoring of nutritional levels, will enable elderly
people to remain independent and live healthily for a longer period. This
can only be a saving for the state.
The cost of medicines for the elderly must be kept down and in this regard,
the pharmaceutical industry has a role to play by reducing their prices and
allowing the Government to purchase drugs at affordable prices. Hopefully,
by next year, a budget will be set aside for research into the cost of
medicines for the elderly, and we will explore new ways through which
health insurance schemes will expand their coverage of home-based care.

Care of the elderly falls between the two main legs of service provision -
health and welfare. Therefore, we must improve the co-ordination between
the health and welfare. These departments should work closely with Public
Works to ensure that clinics and hospitals are accessible for the elderly,
and that provinces must budget for the transportation of the elderly to
these service points.

Many of the needs of the elderly can be met by people with fairly simple
skills, like myself. What is needed, however, is multilevel training for
different situations, and I want to advocate that the budget should make
provision for multilevel training.

Regarding Aids, we are beginning to see more people living with HIV/Aids,
and we are rightly seeing more and more calls for community-based care.
Here, too, much of the burden of care falls on women, especially elderly
women. We must congratulate the department for its varied strategies
relating to HIV/Aids, but I want to encourage the department to consider
the rural areas in their budget. As we all know, there are fewer facilities
or no facilities for care-givers and few possibilities of establishing day-
care centres. A guiding principle in community care is to find ways to
strengthen the support centres.

In conclusion, concerning disabled people, health service plays a major
role in the wellbeing of the disabled, in particular, women and children.
The following barriers make health services a dream for disabled people.
South Africa has not yet acknowledged the lack of rehabilitation in their
later stages in life for disabled people who are born with disability.

There is a lack of accelerated assistive devices, as the President has
stated in his state of the nation address. Hopefully, this will be
addressed as soon as possible. There is a lack of information training
which leads to health workers' behaviour being very dissatisfactory towards
disabled people in general. Owing to the above and a lack of research and
accessibility to service providers, disabled women are left out out of the
programme.

I support this Vote. [Applause.]

Ms C DUDLEY: Chairman, hon Minister and colleagues, on the 24 April this
year, the Cape Argus reported that more than 100 000 abortions have been
performed in South Africa since the passing of legislation three years ago.
The patients were mostly African women, followed by coloured, white and
Indian.

Much Government funding has clearly been put to the provision of abortion,
despite the fact that most surveys indicate a majority public opposition to
abortions being carried out. However, it would seem that no expenditure has
been provided, either for supporting alternatives to abortion or for
provision of information regarding alternatives. This is a gross injustice
against the many desperate girls and women that the Act purports to help.

Legalising an abortion does not take away the pain. Of the 100 000 aborted
babies, how many of their mothers really had a choice? One option only is
not a choice. One option is not loving a mother. No mother feels nothing at
having her baby removed. Ask any woman who has had a miscarriage. Genuine
love gives genuine choices. Loving a woman means loving her child.

Resources must be spent on providing women with a choice. They must be told
they would not lose their jobs for being pregnant; they must be told about
abortion options; and they must receive advice and help in dealing with
relationships, schooling and other practical issues.

Their desperation and distress do not deserve the callous response of a
disposal clinic on every corner. [Interjections.] Recently, a spokesperson
for the Marie Stopes clinic was heard to say on radio that backstreet
abortions have not decreased. If the aim of the Act was to eliminate
backstreet abortions, then what research has been funded by the Department
of Health to establish whether this has, in fact, taken place?

Only measuring the amount of abortions is irresponsible. This is a twisted
focus. How can more abortions be good and less be bad? In terms of the
budget spending, choice of termination of pregnancy in South Africa today
is clearly a lie. Some have called for stricter measures to force health
care workers and doctors to perform abortions against their consciences and
Hippocratic oath, and it has been reported that the department is also
considering requesting that the Minister of Health review regulations and
legislation to ensure greater commitment from doctors. What kind of
democracy forces doctors and health workers to take lives?

Many politicians and judges have long been reluctant to outlaw abortion
because it might result in illegal backstreet abortions, but one country
has proved that that fear is groundless. For 44 years Poland was dominated
by Russia, and abortion was not only legal, it was paid for by the
government. Then, in 1993, after the iron curtain fell, the Polish
parliament severely restricted abortion. The abortion rate went from
160 000 to only 250 per year.

Pro-abortion groups argue that without legal abortion women have illegal,
partial abortions and then go to the hospital to finish the so-called
miscarriage. Right now there are fewer gynaecological admissions in Polish
hospitals than there were when abortion was legal and there are fewer women
dying of gynaecological problems. Fewer women have died as a result of
pregnancy and childbirth, neonatal births have declined, and induced
abortions performed to save the life and health of the mother have also
become more rare since abortion laws were passed.

When tracing the origins of the pro-abortion movement, we find Margaret
Sanger, founder of the Planned Parenthood Association, who was inspired by
her conviction that the inferior races were in fact human weeds and a
menace to civilisation. She yearned for what she called ``the end of the
Christian reign of benevolence'', an end that the Eugenic socialists
promised. Her greatest aspiration was to create a race of thoroughbreds.
She targeted blacks, Hispanics, fundamentalists and Catholics, and set up
her clinics in their respective communities.

In 1939 Margaret designed a Negro project. Her proposal asserted that the
mass of Negroes, particularly in the South, still bred carelessly and
disastrously.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order, hon member.
Ms C DUDLEY: I still have time.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Yes, I know. Hon member, are you standing on
a point order?

Dr S A NKOMO: Yes, Mr Chairperson. Is the speaker debating the Vote or
another topic? [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Continue hon member. That is not a
point of order.

Ms C DUDLEY: One project director wrote:


  There is a great danger that we will fail, because the Negroes think it
  is a plan for extermination. Hence, lets appear to let the coloured run
  it.

How can Africa have embraced such a horror? How is it that we are found co-
operating in our own elimination? Aids and abortion must not be allowed to
accomplish their task.

The ACDP has no choice but to vote against the Health budget. Major trauma
is involved for everyone who has anything to do with an abortion, health
workers and patients alike. [Interjections.] South Africa is a traumatised
nation owing to its past. Now is the time for healing. We must not continue
to traumatise our people.
On a lighter note, I once heard a man of God say that abortion is the
reason for overpopulation as God gives back tenfold, twentyfold and a
hundredfold what the enemy has stolen. [Interjections.] [Time expired.]

Dr B G MBULAWA-HANS: Mr Chairperson, I am not sure whether the ACDP
interprets the Bible properly because the ACDP says yes to the death
penalty, but now it is discussing abortion. Maybe they should actually use
the deist model of analysing the Bible to interpret in the context which it
fits. [Interjections.] I think the ACDP may be in need of some lecturing. I
can do that because I am doing theology privately.

Madam Speaker, hon Minister and hon members, section 27 of the Constitution
states that everybody has a right to health care services.

Abantu abaninzi baseMzantsi Afrika, ngakumbi abahlala emaphandleni ...
people in South Africa, especially those living in the rural areas ...

...  no private health care facilities. So they depend mainly on public
health care facilities. What the Constitution says can, therefore, only be
realised if there is improvement in public health care facilities. The ten-
point plan that has been developed by the department to consolidate the
gains made and to strengthen the health care system is commendable.

Today I am going to concentrate on one of those priorities, and that is
hospital restructuring.

Abantu abangazange bahlale ezilalini abakwazi ukuyibona into eyenziwa
nguRhulumente okhokelwa yi-ANC ngenxa yokuba oko bahlala ezidolophini,
befumana iimali befumana neenkonzo zempilo ezingcono. Ngoko ke abayazi into
yokuba I ... (Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[People who have never lived in the rural areas have no idea at all of what
is being done there by this ANC-led Government, because they have always
lived in the urban areas enjoying financial comfort and better health
services. Therefore they do not know that ...]

... pital restructuring must start somewhere.

It is important to say that the situation that this Government was given by
the previous regime was horrendous, to say the least. But this Government
has actually improved things by restructuring these institutions. We need
only see this from the commitment that the Government has shown in the
allocation of budget facilities to this programme to restructure hospitals.
In 1998, R100 million was budgeted for. In 1999 it was R2 200 million, and
for the next two years R900 million has been set aside for this programme.
Of course this is not enough for those needy hospitals. We have actually
asked the Minister of Health and the Minister of Finance to look into some
other way of getting more money in order to improve these institutions.

Previously, the managers of these institutions were mainly doctors who were
not trained in managerial skills. Therefore, this created a problem. I
think we should actually commend the department and the Ministry, as well
as the task team for coming to the conclusion that CEOs should be employed
to head these hospitals in order for financial management and financial
accountability to continue. One can therefore only say to the department:
``Hooray! What you are doing is good for our communities out there.''

The other issue which I think is important to say in this debate is that of
the involvement of the community within those hospitals.

Abantu bakuthi kufuneka babe yinxalenye yezigqibo ezithatya thwayo
ezichaphazela izibhedlele. [Our people should be involved in decision-
making processes that pertain to hospitals.]

The hospital boards are doing exactly that. They are actually an extension
of the community into the hospital. Those people are interested in what is
happening in the hospitals. Those people are interested in actually
educating the community and the society in which the hospital is situated
that isibhedlele asiyondawo yokunyanga umkhuhlane. Xa ubani efuna unyango
lomkhuhlane ... [a hospital is not a place for the treatment of flu. When
someone needs treatment for flu ...] - Mr Mpehle is going to talk about
that - kufuneka ahambe aye kwi ... [he or she should go to a ...] primary
health care clinic, which is there for that. So the community is going to
participate in hospital forums.

Political parties like the ACDP should actually make sure that they are
involved in those issues. That is how as Christians they show a helping
hand. Because they say that ukholo olungenamisebenzi lufile [faith without
deeds is useless]. I think this is what the department is trying to do -
extend their hand so that the community participates in whatever is
happening in that hospital.

The other issue which the department is handling very well in Gauteng and
the Western Cape is that of revenue retention. Here, one knows that the
money that the patients pay to a particular hospital will also be used by
that hospital. Therefore, the people who are there will see that the money
they are paying is improving the services, so that the services are not too
poor. That has actually happened in Gauteng and in the Western Cape. We
think this is an invaluable contribution the department is making. This is
actually assisting the people.

People have been talking about HIV/Aids at this podium. They have said
quite a lot of things which Dr Jassat has addressed. I think it is
important for Christian parties, such as the ACDP, to say: ``Here we are.
We are assisting the department by actually promoting the fact that home-
based care is there.'' That would alleviate what is happening in the
hospitals so that there is no overcrowding because when a patient occupies
a bed in a hospital and there is nothing the hospital can do for him or
her, it is almost like the patient staying at the Holiday Inn. One patient
costs the state about R400 per day to feed. I think that those parties
should actually be part and parcel of what is being done.

Let us just thank the department and the Ministry for actually looking into
the public institutions that we as ordinary people are using, and let us
say to the people out there that the Government of the ANC cares.
[Applause.]

Dr M S MOGOBA: Hon Chair, hon Minister and hon members, the health policy
of a nation is a clear indicator of its wellbeing and its future,
particularly for a nation that is carrying the heavy baggage of
underdevelopment from centuries of neglect and from oppression bordering on
genocide.

It is common knowledge that there is a clear correlation between poverty
and poor health, and between unemployment and poor medical schemes. The
Government policy of free public health was clearly an inspired policy,
although its implementation has been feeble, even apologetic.

Regarding the new debate on the Choice on Termination of Pregnancy Act, the
PAC supports the growing demand that the Act should be repealed. Over 100
ANC MPs did not vote for it. They stayed away on that day when it was voted
into law, because their consciences would not allow them to vote in favour
of abortion on demand. [Interjections.]

The Government policy on HIV/Aids has become its albatross. Protracted
equivocation on this subject was tragic in the extreme. The PAC reiterates
its position that research into the cure for HIV should be intensified, and
that millions spent on arms, corruption, Government parties and overseas
trips should be poured into research and into providing AZT and nevirapine
to pregnant mothers. It is estimated that, at a cost of R100 million, we
could save at least 35 000 babies. With the current climate of compassion
or common sense among pharmaceutical firms, many more could be saved.

To politicise HIV/Aids is criminal. HIV/Aids should be destigmatised.
People should be screened and encouraged to declare their status. It is old
fashioned and ignorant to suggest that those who have HIV/Aids are immoral.
None of us in this House can be sure of escaping HIV/Aids infection
forever.

The Saturday Star of last week, 3 June, carried a High Court judge's
decision in which the hon judge said that it was reasonable for a parent to
take his children away from South Africa because there were dangers in
South Africa, including HIV infection. I believe that this is a heart-
rending decision by the High Court. It sounds like a wake-up call to this
Parliament and to Government. [Time expired.]

Ms S K MNUMZANA: Mr Chairperson, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, I want
to address the issue of women and health. It has been acknowledged that
violence against women in South Africa takes on many forms. Such violence
includes the continued disregard and denial of women's reproductive rights.
It is within this context that the department undertook the confidential
enquiry into maternal deaths - an enquiry that shows that women still die,
despite the provision of free health care to pregnant and lactating women
and the Choice on Termination of Pregnancy Act of 1996.

The report into maternal deaths in South Africa indicated that there were
43 early pregnancy deaths. Of these, 26 deaths were due to complications of
septic abortions. However, there appears to be significant underreporting
of early pregnancy deaths. Most deaths occur in women of low parity and
between the ages of 20 and 34 years.

I want to commend the Minister and Dr Eddie Mhlanga for their tireless
effort to address the needs of women. The Choice on Termination of
Pregnancy Act of 1996 has resulted in a number of women choosing to have
safe termination of pregnancy. While numbers are increasing yearly, there
continues to be obstacles to women exercising their right to choose. At a
briefing of the joint monitoring committee on the improvement of quality of
life and status of women, Dr Mhlanga identified the following problems.

I will mention one or two of the identified problems. There are still
obstacles that prevent women, particularly rural and poor women, from
accessing pregnancy termination services. There is still victimisation and
isolation of those that seek termination of pregnancy services. There is
not enough information for women to make a choice and to know where they
need to go for assistance if they choose termination of a pregnancy. Dr
Mhlanga stressed that the widespread intimidation meant that, although
legislation was in place to protect women's rights to choose, they remain
discriminated against.

The Department of Health revealed that a large number of facilities set up
around the country to provide termination of pregnancy services, remain
unused. According to the South African Health Review of 1999, of the 246
designated public health facilities, 73 are currently providing services
and 99% of these are hospitals. Only two are community health care centres.
In addition to the public sector facilities, there are 138 private
facilities providing termination of pregnancies.

The statistics have shown that the total number of termination of
pregnancies per province from February 1997 to November 1998 are as
follows: Gauteng - 45 546; Mpumalanga - 5 337; Free State - 9 482; KwaZulu-
Natal - 12 593; Northern Cape - 1 525; Northern Province - 2 512; Western
Cape - 13 582; Eastern Cape - 8 207; North West - 2 417. In their daily
life, women face the additional threat of violence, rape and abuse, and
this includes people with disabilities.
Reproductive health services are crucial to empowering women and giving
them control over their own lives. Reproductive health is not just about
women. Our challenge is to involve men in taking responsible decisions
about reproductive health.

Owing to the skewed power relations between men and women, women are more
vulnerable to sexually transmitted diseases and HIV infections. The female
condom is a mechanism which not only provides choice but also protection. I
want to ask the Minister to reconsider her stance on the female condom.

Cervical cancer and breast cancer afflict far too many women. Public
education and screening are essential to protecting and improving women's
health. We need to ensure that the intended screening and awareness
campaigns will be directed towards rural women and that programmes will be
sustainable over time.

Most importantly, the fight against HIV/Aids and other sexually transmitted
diseases requires good and accessible reproductive health services. Already
the infection rates for women are staggering, and, as we know, young women
are hardest hit by this terrible disease.
In conclusion, I want to urge the Minister to give attention to the wide
variation in the number of termination of pregnancies performed across the
provinces; and I am calling on the MECs to ensure that their departments'
budgets are adequate for termination of pregnancies. Legalisation of
abortion has made services more available. However access for specific
groups, especially women from rural areas and adolescents, continues to
cause problems. We support the Vote. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr G E BALOI: Mr Chairperson, social service expenditure remains the
largest function category of the Government expenditure at approximately
57,3% of non-interest spending. Over the medium term, expenditure will grow
by an average of 5,6% per year - slightly exceeding the expected inflation
rates. Hospital managements are being strengthened through pilot projects
to decentralise management. However, conditional grants are targeted at
hospital rehabilitation and the provision of tertiary service in
underserviced provinces.

The allocated amount of R6 290 000, for the year 2000-2001, represents an
increase of R329 514, which is 5,53% compared to the 1999-2000 Budget. It
enables the Minister to keep the hospitals in provinces. This will be
unlike the closure of hospitals, like the Derdepoort community hospital,
which served 14 surrounding villages.

Is this what we term Batho Pele? To me Batho Pele means ``people first''.
That means the needs of the people should be taken into consideration
first. The community of Molatedi in the North West province want to retain
their hospital, because it is of benefit to them and their future
generations. We support the development and maintenance of our provincial
hospitals.

On the other hand, we as the people of South Africa congratulate the
Minister of Health and her compatriots on the efforts they make in fighting
HIV/Aids. The rate of HIV/Aids is growing in big numbers in our country and
it needs to be fought with everything at our disposal. HIV/Aids kills and
has no colour line. Hospitals are crowded with young patients suffering
from Aids-related illnesses.

The direct allocation to HIV/Aids will total R127 million in the 2000-01
departmental budget. This allocation will be used to support the
Government's Aids action plan. This project funds and supports research and
disease surveillance. Our Cabinet has also approved a special allocation in
the national Budget to support an integrated strategy to address the issue
of HIV/Aids. With regard to this, the Department of Health will act as the
lead department in collaboration with the Departments of Education, and
Welfare. The UCDP supports the Vote.

Ms N M TWALA: Chairperson, our struggle in this country has been about
rights - the right to live where we please, to elect our own government, to
join the profession of our choice, to ownership of our land and to our
destiny. As we transform all the institutions of our society, we must
ensure that this emphasis is not lost. We need to be in control of our
lives. We cannot simply be subject to the whims of politicians or
officials, or to those who believe they know better. This is why we have
committed ourselves to the national patients' rights charter. Our
Constitution guarantees us the right to a healthy and safe environment, but
our rights go further than that.

We are entitled to make decisions regarding our own health. We have all
seen that too often health professionals treat the least advantaged of our
citizens with a lack of consideration. We have seen doctors shouting at
patients because they cannot communicate in their own language. How often
are patients not informed of possible alternative treatment? How often are
decisions made on behalf of patients without their participation in
selecting or approving the form of treatment they receive?

The patients' rights charter represents a significant step in ensuring that
patients are able to participate in decisions and policies regarding
matters affecting their own health. The charter lays out clearly that
everyone has the right to receive timely emergency care, that patients have
the right to treatment and rehabilitation, and to be informed about the
treatment they receive and its consequences. The charter specifies that all
have the right to counselling without discrimination, coercion or violence
on matters such as reproductive health, cancer or HIV/Aids.

These are the rights that those who have always lived a life of privilege
take for granted, but they represent a major step forward for those who
have always had limited access to health care. The charter represents a
significant step forward in ensuring that we are all active participants in
maintaining our own health. The charter includes the right to refuse
treatment, to ask for a second opinion, and stresses that everyone has the
right to complain about health care services and to have their complaints
dealt with properly.

However, with all rights come responsibilities and the charter does not
shrink from specifying this. The individual has the responsibility to take
care of his or her health, and here I am going to expand a little. How
empty would our hospitals be, particularly in cities, if all those who are
patients as a result of alcohol abuse were not there, if all the victims of
road accidents, family violence and gang violence, resulting from alcohol
and drug abuse, were removed from our health system? Can hon members
imagine how much stress would be removed from our public health system.

And now I come to the smokers. One can visit any chest unit and ask how
many of the patients smoke or have smoked. Lung cancer, heart disease and
circulation problems are all preventable diseases, preventable by healthy
lifestyles. Diseases that can be controlled by diet are high blood
pressure, diabetes, cardiac problems. So many of those suffering expect the
health service to provide drugs, but are not prepared to make an effort to
live healthy lifestyles. They would rather be dependent on drugs.

The fault does not lie exclusively with patients. Our health system is not
geared towards treating the whole patient. Patients receive too little
counselling about how to control their illnesses through lifestyle. All
institutions of society both civil and government, must joint hands in
promoting health education and healthy lifestyles. This would take some of
the pressure off the health system, by focusing on prevention rather than
cure.

Our Government is to be commended for the long process of producing the
patients' rights charter. It is the culmination of three years of
consultation with all major stakeholders, communities, academics, health
providers, the legal fraternity, professional councils, organised labour,
NGOs, human rights bodies and other interested groups. Now it is up to us
as leaders to ensure that we spread the message of healthy living through
our constituencies. [Applause.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, Minister, the increasing cost of health care
in South Africa has had a catastrophical impact both on state expenditure
and the household budget of individual consumers. The historically
determined social, economic and political realities of South Africa
inevitably weaved a social dimension of discrimination into the health care
system.

Therefore, the new democratic Government is tasked with the fundamental
duty of transforming health care by restructuring the current pluralistic
care system, which has contributed to the dramatic rise in the financial
and social cost of health care in this country. The dual issue of
unaffordability in the health care system requires the promotion of
economic and financial efficiency.

The MF advocates that the goal of the Government should be to strive for
health care for all. The MF supports a comprehensive community-based
approach to health care and, if it is implemented correctly, this approach
could make health care financially affordable and, at the same time, it
could also promote equality, justice and fairness. Health care is a basic
human right. Nobody must be refused the right to basic health care because
of financial constraints.
A community-based health care approach entails the provision of an
appropriate health care service and facilities of the highest possible
standard and quality at the lowest possible cost, in accordance with the
actual health care needs and demands of the broad South African population
in all its diversity. The most important guiding principles of community-
based health care are appropriateness and relevance, acceptability,
accessibility, affordability, adoptability and flexibility. When these
principles are implemented, considerable attention must be given to the
adaptation and alteration of the existing structure, process and practice
of South African health care.

The functions of the policy framework are to make sure that the
implementation of the principle of local autonomy does not integrate into
anarchy, and to prevent the supporting guiding process from degenerating
into stringent, bureaucratic prescriptiveness. The shift in emphasis to a
socially accountable health care approach is aimed at providing a fair
balance between disease care and the biomedical, technocratic model of
care, and to divert more attention to sociodemographic needs. The
establishment and maintenance of a communication network to distribute
information to managers, medical providers and consumers of health care is
necessary to facilitate community participation in health care.

State subsidisation of private health care must be strategically allocated.
[Time expired.]

Ms F B MARSHOFF: Chairperson and hon Minister, the Health budget has always
generated a heated debate amongst the many role-players in the health care
delivery system. In this Vote debate it is evident that it has done so
again today.

We cannot run away from the fact that the health status of a nation is one
of the key indicators of the level of development in a country. It is
therefore not surprising hon Minister that the total health care
expenditure, both at national and provincial levels, has increased
tremendously over the past few years. This increase in the budget
allocation is to give effect to the key objective of the Department of
Health, which is to promote the health of all the people in South Africa
through a caring and effective national health service based on the primary
health care approach.
To give effect to this, the health sector has undergone major
transformative changes. The shift from tertiary, curative care towards
preventative primary health-care has also brought about changes in resource
allocation. Although we must agree that we have experienced some setbacks
in achieving our objectives, on the whole the department has done
remarkably well towards achieving its goals.

I doubt whether anyone can say that there is no political commitment on the
part of the Government to address the health needs of the most
disadvantaged members of society, particularly at primary-care level. In
order to achieve these objectives, a range of interventions has been
implemented to improve upon the efficiencies of publicly funded health
services. It is generally accepted that these efficiency gains will result
in improved outcomes, the results of which speak speak for themselves.

One only has to go to some of these facilities and speak to the clients to
realise that we have brought major changes to people's lives. Many who have
never had access to health care can now benefit from these services,
especially in the rural areas and more especially women and children. The
Department of Health has managed to ensure that within the limited and
scarce financial resources available to them, they have managed to redirect
those resources to those who need them most.

However, one of the key areas still facing us is the redistribution of
health personnel to underresourced areas. This still remains the problem
area, but I am confident, that the Minister will ensure that problematic
areas will be addressed and that solutions will be forthcoming. It is,
however, obvious that there are other crucial policy issues that need to be
addressed and will need prioritisation.

Another area that needs to be addressed is the improvement in the quality
and compassion of care that we provide. We have to ensure that all those
involved in health care provision do so with the full understanding that
this department is driven by a caring, sympathetic and empathetic ethos. To
this extent, the patients' health rights charter will go a long way in
achieving these objectives.

Allow me quickly to focus on another key area within this budget, and that
is the issue of conditional grants to provinces, which will constitute
approximately 96% of the total programme of this budget. These amounts are
allocated for, amongst other things, central hospital services, to which an
amount of R3,1 billion has been allocated; health professional training and
research; redistribution of specialised services; and the hospital
reconstruction and rehabilitation programme.

These allocations are distributed amongst various provinces to achieve
various policy objectives. It is also intended to buffer some of the
provinces which have to render levels of care to provinces which do not
have these facilities and levels of care within their delivery systems. To
a large extent that, too, has managed to bring about a more equitable
distribution of resources, especially to the poorer provinces which have
had to render services to communities which have never had access to these
services. This is but some of the programmes which benefit from conditional
grants. There are quite a few others and I do not have time to refer to
them.

We would like to urge the department to keep a watchful eye how these
moneys are expended in these provinces. It has come to our knowledge
through the budget hearings that there is a bit of underspending on these
conditional grants in some of the provinces, and that is of concern to us.
We are also aware that the department has put measures in place to ensure
that this problem will be addressed and that, with improved accounting
systems, moneys can be accounted for in an appropriate way.

Despite deep challenges and constraints, the health service delivery
machinery is now well geared to take service delivery to new heights. We as
the ANC fully support this Vote and wish the Minister and her department
success in implementing all the programmes that have been identified and
prioritised here today. We will support her. [Applause.]

Mr S B FARROW: Chairperson, let me focus on some of the problems relating
to the state of our health services in the province. Although I note the
marginal increases in health transfers to the provinces for the 2000-01
financial year, like most provincial budgets, personnel expenditure has
again consumed the majority of these budgets, despite the so-called
rationalisation and transformation that took place in these departments.
This has resulted in a tendency for critical maintenance and repairs of
buildings and equipment not to take place and the inadequacy of provincial
departments to provide food and supplies.

The majority of hospitals and clinics in provinces continue to face
financial crisis year after year. In some provinces, major hospitals are
faced with total closure of wards, dysfunctional medical equipment, rentals
on such equipment not being paid, and airconditioning in operating theatres
not working and making operations very susceptible to infections. The
shortage of linen is a major problem in many of these hospitals as are
drugs, food and critical staff shortages, staff unqualified to deal with
the technical nature of some of the equipment, frozen posts and even the
irregular payment of salaries to dead employees in some of these areas.
Similar problems exist in the primary health institutions, but I will not
elaborate on them. In general, we hear also of low staff morale brought
about by the failure of some provinces to finalise rank promotions, major
thefts of drugs and equipment, corruption and unreliable delivery. Now, I
am not suggesting for one minute that this is prevalent in all our
provinces, but, needless to say, what I have outlined here does not in any
way paint a pretty picture.

Health services in many provinces are in dire straits, to put it mildly.
The question is whether the budget does address these problems in the
provinces adequately. The answer to this is categorically no. Unless a
major injection of funds takes place to rectify these shortfalls, many of
these affected hospitals and clinics will deteriorate to the point of no
return. I urge the Minister, therefore, to refocus her thinking towards
fixing up that which we have before considering any further expansion
programmes.

The budget is inadequate in that it is much like trying to put a Band-Aid
on a serious wound of an ailing department. For example, while I respect
the need to curtail the influence of tobacco smoke in public places and
restaurants and bars of 35 seats or more, I question the need to regulate
tobacco and its products at great cost when our hospitals and clinics need
funding desperately to keep them operational.

Whether the Minister likes it or not, regulation does cost money and
policing smoking will have an impact on the department's budget, never mind
the economic impact it will have on all the tobacco producers, and on
advertisers and sponsors that give generously to our sports teams and
clubs. This money will now have to be sourced from other funds - a case of
robbing Peter to pay Paul. Tobacco production is the fifth-largest cash
crop in South Africa and the sector employs 48 710 people with over 150 000
dependants. The department's proposals to lower the limit to 1,2 mg of
nicotine will lead to thousands of job losses, due to the restrictive
timeframes and the difficulty to produce low-nicotine tobacco in our
climatic region.

The DP has a belief that a number of the regulations are ultra vires and
will, no doubt, be challenged in terms of the Constitution. We also find it
difficult to believe that the department continues to try to regulate an
industry and product, without looking at international practices in other
countries. Sufficient time was given to the industry to implement the
regulations, and practical conditions on the ground were taken into
account, in order to ensure great acceptability by the stakeholders. To
implement many of these regulations in the prescribed timeframe is both
impractical and unreasonable.

It is impossible to remove all of the over 70 000 current point-of-sale
advertisers overnight, to expect the retailers to meet the costs, and, for
that matter, our belief is that to expect restaurants or bars to construct
walls, to put up smoking-room signs and to ensure separate ventilation,
without provision for the phasing in of the proposal, is also
discriminatory and difficult to enforce.

Let me finally turn to the aspect of nurses. Nurses in this country must be
in one of the most poorly paid and overworked sectors of our Public
Service. For this reason, the attraction of opportunities overseas, in the
private sector, has resulted in more and more of our nurses leaving the
country. This is not surprising considering that many have not had
promotions, despite promises, for over five years. I believe that this
issue is also not adequately addressed in the budget, and it will continue
to force our nurses to look for greener pastures elsewhere. [Time expired.]

Mr M MPEHLE: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, I have been
sitting down, listening to the previous speaker. I want to say, quite
openly, that it is tragic to sit here and listen to some intellectuals who
have absolutely no semblance of honesty in so far as facts are concerned,
absolutely no respect at all, for the truth.

The last speaker here has not said one good thing about this Government ...

Mr M J ELLIS: Chairperson, on a point of order: I do not believe it is
parliamentary for a member to stand here and say that what the opposition
parties are saying has no semblance of truth. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! He was not referring to an individual
member, but to a party. That is not unparliamentary. [Interjections.]
Order!

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, on the same point of order: He indicated quite
clearly that speaker after speaker spoke no semblance of truth, and I
believe that he is referring, therefore, directly to members of these
parties. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon Ellis, you have said, in your
first point of order, that he was referring to political parties, not to
individual members. In case he did refer to individual members, let us
check on the Hansard. We can rule on that matter later on.

Mr M MPEHLE: Chairperson, I am not surprised that the hon Ellis should
stand up and say that, because he knows very well, deep down, that what I
am saying is correct. [Applause.] It must be known, particularly by the
intellectuals who only know our people when they go for votes, that before
the 1994 dispensation in this country, the health system in this country
was founded on a principle of a master race philosophy - a philosophy based
on the Calvinistic theory of predestination.

Hon Ellis knows that himself. He knows that this theory, which was used by
the white rulers in this country, believed that God had created two groups
of people - one group to be saved and the other to be destroyed by fire.
This was the philosophy upon which this country was ruled, and this
philosophy has put into danger ...

Mr C AUCAMP: Mr Chairperson, on a point of order: Is it in order for the
hon member to mislead this House by giving a distorted version of what
Calvinism was intended to be? Is that in order? [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! That is not a point of order. We
cannot judge on that. Continue, hon member. [Interjections.]

Mr M MPEHLE: Chairperson, I will continue. I hope you realise that my time
has been ...

Mr J H MOMBERG: Mr Chairman, hon Cassie Aucamp would not know a communist
if he saw one.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! That is not a point of order.
Continue, hon member. [Interjections.] Order!

Mr M MPEHLE: Chairperson, in line with this pernicious theory, it was
believed that even in South Africa, which was characterised by racialism,
people would belong to these two groups. This was the fundamental belief of
the apartheid regime, and nobody can turn us from that. The regime itself
got that from the predestination theory of Calvin.

The health system itself was based on this, and this unacceptable situation
stretches from the pro-British, post-Anglo-Boer-war regimes, right through
the pro-Broederbond-orientated Malan, Verwoerd and De Klerk rules. Health
for all, for these rulers, meant health for whites only in this country.

In theory, there was South African primary health care, but in reality
there was no primary health care in this country. Was it possible to have a
comprehensive primary health care system in a country where the Statute
Book itself declared that only people of European descent should have the
right to vote and be voted into Parliament? The answer is no. It was not
possible to have a comprehensive primary health care system in this
country, for the reasons I have stated.

In conformity with the thinking of the rulers of the country, a
multiplicity of health departments was created. At least, there were 14 of
these ethnic departments - each department with its own set of objectives
related to and corresponding to each separate racial group in the country.
All this was done in defence and in the interest of white, European,
Western and Christian civilisation. [Interjections.]

The architects of this ideological concoction were either downright
dishonest or blatantly ignorant of the whole question of historical
evolution and the growth of human societies. To these architects,
civilisation was not the creation of the peoples of the world. It was their
own creation.

With regard to health, most victims and sufferers under this system were
our rural communities - the real poorest of the poor. Sometimes, these are
referred to by Frans Fanon as the damned of the earth or the wretched of
the earth. In case we have doubts about their conditions, is it not true
that this Government is presently working to take water to these people? Is
it not true that lack of water and sanitation are the immediate causes of
cholera, diarrhoea and other similar illnesses?

Those who do not know that there is a direct relationship between various
communicable diseases, including TB, on the one hand, and the conditions of
squalor and poverty on the other, should take note. According to the policy
of this Government, public health has to be transformed from a fragmented,
racially divided, hospital-centred service favouring the urban areas, into
an integrated comprehensive national service driven by the need to redress
the historical socioeconomic inequalities, and to give priority to the
provision of essential care to the disadvantaged. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, I was still saying we are also
appealing to Pfizer to extend its offer to ensure an affordable package for
the treatment of oropharyngeal thrush, a debilitating condition that is
common in those who are infected with HIV. Let us continue to inform our
nation about our response to the HIV epidemic in a sober manner, not in the
rhetoric and flamboyance of the DP and the blatant ignorance displayed by
Rabinowitz. [Interjections.] Gous also falls into the same category.

We look forward with keen interest to some of the ideas that will emanate
from the presidential international panel on how best to tackle this
epidemic on our continent. We believe that there are many compounding
factors such as poverty, malnutrition, high incidence of sexually
transmitted diseases, malaria and tuberculosis, which have an important
effect on the pathogenesis of Aids in developing countries. A better
understanding of these relationships is crucial for an appropriate and
comprehensive response. We strongly believe that a successful response to
HIV has to be developmental in character and extend well beyond a narrow
biomedical model.
In the coming weeks, we expect to get results on the Saint studies being
conducted in our country comparing shorter courses of AZT with Nevirapine.
In due course, I shall have a report from the researchers. Members on this
side of the House know this very well. We look forward to the proposals
that they may provide effective, safe and affordable interventions that
will help reduce the risk of mother-to-child transmission. We shall have to
deal with this matter with greater sensitivity.

None of us would not want to protect the unborn child from contracting HIV.
But we also have to heed the conclusion of the World Health Organisation
which says that there is currently insufficient information to recommend
wide-scale implementation of Nevirapine to prevent mother-to-child
transmission. Long-term follow-up of mothers and children exposed to
Nevirapine or other antiretrovirals for the prevention of mother-to-child
transmission is required.

It is our sincere hope that our South African studies will contribute to
clarify some of the concerns that we could advance from the statement of
March 2000. In the interim, as an important intervention, we have approved
guidelines for obstetric care that will ensure practices that reduce mother-
to-child transmission. We remain firm in the view that prevention remains
the primary area of focus for us. Let us remember that there is no cure for
Aids. Equally, we continue to support our scientists who are researching an
appropriate vaccine. The reality is that this is at best a medium to long-
term prospect. Our challenge therefore remains to deal with the reality
that prevention measures constitute the only effective social vaccine at
our disposal.

It is really malicious of hon Kalyan to mislead this Parliament on the so-
called Aids budget roll-over. By the way, she has all the documentation.
Probably, she finds it difficult to read budgets. Let us simplify it for
her. [Interjections.] During the previous financial year, R110 million was
allocated for HIV/Aids. By the end of March 2000, R73 000 million had been
disbursed leaving R37 million. Of this amount, however, R28 million was
already committed, leaving an unspent sum of only R9 million. Of the
committed amounts, R8 million was for invoices not received on purchased
condoms, R10 million was allocated to NGOs where verification was necessary
before funds could be released, and R4 million was for outdoor advertising.
The R9 million which was unspent has been earmarked for home-based care.
Members know this.

This year we shall table, before members, some pieces of legislation for
their consideration. We shall continue to count on their support to
facilitate the consolidation of our transformation processes.

Allow me to make a few general remarks about our budget itself. Overall,
the health sector is being allocated R26,8 billion. Of this amount,
approximately R6,3 billion will go to the national department. Of that
amount, slightly in excess of R5,7 billion will be conditional grants meant
for provincial spending, leaving just below R600 million for actual
spending by the national department. As the members can see, the bulk of
the funds will go to the provinces where actual delivery takes place.

Among the conditional grants, we have allocated R273 million for the
completion of the Durban academic hospital, recently named after iNkosi
Albert Luthuli. It is our wish that the health workers in this institution
emulate this outstanding leader and patriot who did so much to serve our
country. An amount of R1,174 billion will be allocated for health
professionals' training and research.
I have argued earlier in this address for the need for us to pay particular
attention to this area of human resource development to ensure that this
investment is well spent. Furthermore, we shall allocate R3,1 billion to
support our major referral hospitals, whilst R176 million will be allocated
to the provinces of Mpumalanga, North West, Northern Province, Eastern Cape
and Northern Cape in order to assist these provinces incrementally to build
their capacity to provide specialised services. We believe that we are on
track, also in the provision of health care services for people with
disabilities and for the elderly.

There are many difficulties ahead, but I am confident that we shall
discharge our duty to our country. We shall make many mistakes on the way,
but we stand ready to learn. Whatever our faults, let us never be accused
of having avoided to act decisively or to confront difficult decisions only
because we were lured by the comforts of office.

I wish to thank my colleagues, the MECs for health, for holding my hand as
we navigated these early months together. They have enabled me to stand
here with confidence in the full knowledge that what I say here today
represents our collective view. Let them be assured that I do not take
their support for granted. On my part, I shall be consistently sensitive to
their own anxieties and concerns. I recognise the critical input of the
representatives of Salga who attended our meetings.

To the Portfolio Committee on Health and its able chairperson, I reiterate
my undertaking to work with them. I treasure their constructive criticism
and support. The same goes to our statutory bodies, the private sector, the
NGO movement and many co-operating partners, both domestic and
international. I say thank you, too, to our officials in all three spheres
of Government. We shall continue to depend on their loyal support and
critical advice.

I would like to welcome amongst the ranks of the top management of the
national department, Mrs Nthari Matsau and Dr Kamy Chetty, recently
appointed as deputy directors-general. I trust that they will live up to
our expectations. Their appointments are a further demonstration of our
commitment to open avenues for capable women of all races to serve our
nation. At the same time, I wish to say farewell and thank you to Dr
Pretorius who will leave for health reasons at the end of June after a
period of long, loyal service spanning 17 years. [Applause.]

Finally, I wish to pay tribute to many dedicated health workers who toil,
sometimes under very difficult circumstances. They are the true and unsung
heroes and heroines. Our country and people shall forever be eternally
grateful to them. I would also like to thank the hon members for a lovely
debate. The work towards the realisation of the African dream has just
begun. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

                           PETROL PRICE STRUCTURE

                                 (Statement)

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Chairperson, hon members, the subject
we are about today is a subject that touches all of us. [Interjections.]
The price paid by South African consumers for petrol, diesel or paraffin is
directly linked to the price of crude oil. I agree. It is determined
internationally by forces of supply and demand beyond the control of this
Government.
Over the years, the price of crude oil has shown great movement, starting
from the oil crisis of 1973 when Opec started flexing its muscles. At the
height of the Gulf War in 1991, the crude oil price rose to unprecedented
levels of over US $30 per barrel, but dropped again at the end of that war.

The past year has been a very difficult one for consumers, not just in
South Africa, I imagine, but everywhere else in the world. We did our bit
as the South African Government to try to persuade our colleagues in Opec,
to see if they could not produce more oil so that the price could be more
manageable for consumers. We obviously have not been as successful as we
would like to be, but we will continue, nevertheless.

So, during the period in question, oil prices rose from $10 per barrel in
January 1999 to $30 per barrel in March this year - a 300% increase. The
rand/dollar exchange rate declined at the same time by 15% and, therefore,
since the pricing of oil is linked to the exchange rate between the dollar
and the rand, that also had a very negative impact on what the consumers
paid in the end.

Despite these massive increases in what South Africa paid for its crude oil
imports, the petrol price rose by only 28% for the consumers, and I think
that that is important to indicate. Countries, like us, which are not oil-
producing and depend a lot on crude oil imported from other countries, saw
petrol price increases and rises of up to 70% in some countries.

During the same time of difficulties - I think we must acknowledge that in
South Africa - we have continued to have security of supply and efficient
supply - all of which takes a lot of co-ordination and working together by
the industry in order to make sure that the shocks that are created by the
sudden increase in crude oil prices do not in any way create a situation in
which one is standing with a spakupaku [paraffin container] outside the
garage, because there is a crisis in terms of supply.

We should actually be paying over R4 per litre of petrol, but what we have
done in order to cushion the consumers during this period was to take from
the equalisation fund levy and subsidise the price by eight cents per
litre. Using funds from the equalisation fund has somehow managed to
cushion the consumers, though I will be the first one to say that we would
have liked to do more.

It is true that the petrol price includes a significant portion of taxes
and levies. These are the fuel tax, the customs excise duty, the Road
Accident Fund and the equalisation fund. And maybe we need to realise that
for us to be able to provide some of the services that are important in the
whole value chain - oils and the supply of petrol- we need to provide
Government with these taxes.

I would just like to explain what each of the taxes is for. The fuel tax
and the customs excise levy are determined by the Minister of Finance and
the income is paid into the state revenue account. They are presented to
Parliament in the annual Budget speech. The Road Accident Fund levy is used
to compensate victims of motor vehicle accidents and it is determined by
the Minister of Transport. I am sure that members would not like us to take
that one away. The equalisation fund is a fixed monetary levy determined by
the Minister of Minerals and Energy in concurrence with the Minister of
Finance. It operates in terms of the Central Energy Fund Act, Act 38 of
1977. The income from the equalisation fund levy can be used for a variety
of energy-related purposes, for instance, recently the fund has been used
to cushion South Africans when the petrol price was very high, but it has
also been used to afford protection to the synthetic fuels industry - Sasol
and Mossgas - in terms of a specific formula.

Since February, the levy has been nil and the equalisation fund has been
used to subsidise petrol and diesel prices at eight cents per litre, as I
said. Three months after the fund has been passed to the public, it has
almost been depleted. We may be able to manage four cents per litre
subsidies in June during the present period of rapidly rising oil prices.
After June we will again be in a bit of a fix.

There is no doubt that a careful and rigorous regulation of the petrol
price has protected consumers in South Africa from more sudden and more
rapid price increases. However, ultimately there is no escape for South
Africa from the international oil prices and the rand/dollar exchange rate.
That essentially is the main challenge that we are facing, and that is the
reason I said that, for some of these increases, it is really beyond the
South African Government and members of this House.

Members also continue to express concern about the fact that petrol costs
more in South Africa than in the neighbouring countries. As I have
explained, the neighbouring countries do not have these taxes that we have
in South Africa, and as a result, they are forced to subsidise, in order
for them to provide those services, from other taxes and other parts of
their budgets. At the end of the day, in some other way, the public does
pay for those services, or those services are simply not provided for in
those countries. As a result, that also creates inconveniences, not only
for the motorists, but for the industries that depend so heavily on this
commodity.

Members have also raised the question: Can synthetic fuels not ever replace
crude oils? In other words, can we not somehow see to it that the synthetic
fuel that is produced by Sasol replaces the amount of crude oil that we
import? I would just like to indicate to the members that the cost of
manufacturing synthetic fuels and the capacity that we have in the country
is such that it could have the impact of even increasing what one gets out
of the pump. However, we are not closed to that idea, as long as it would
work economically. At this point in time we South Africans seem to be in
many ways in a position where for a long time we will continue to depend on
the crude oil that we import from other countries.

We are also involved in discussing the bringing in of other sources of
energy carriers in the country, particularly gas, and in that way, in an
integrated energy plan that petrol users depend on, they may be able to
find a situation in which gas will, in some cases, replace the liquid fuel
that they use. In that way, they may be able to effect some savings.

The issue of the price of petrol is complex. As long as we do not have our
own crude oil in South Africa, we will be faced with these challenges, and
as long as we have to, amongst other things, depend on the exchange rate
between the rand and the dollar, we will always have these problems,
because that will also make a great impact. And I would like to assure
members that in any way in which we could save and ensure that we reduce
the negative impact, especially amongst those consumers who use diesel and
paraffin - who tend to be our poorest - we will always make sure that we
use whatever is in our power to cushion the price. [Applause.]

Mr R J HEINE: Mr Chairman and hon members, it is perhaps an example of the
Government's impeccable timing that when the prospect of another fuel price
increase is brought before this House, the very parliamentarians who sit on
the minerals and energy affairs portfolio committee are on tour around the
country. While there is no questioning the value of these visits in the
greater scheme of things, our hon minerals and energy affairs colleagues
should be in this House leading this debate, and not looking at coal mines
in Middelburg and platinum mines in Rustenburg. Now is not the time for
feel-good public relations exercises. [Interjections.]

From tomorrow night, millions of South Africans are going to be hit even
harder when the petrol price goes up for the second time in as many months.
April saw the fuel price jump 35 cents to a record high of 322 cents per
litre. When the sun comes up on Thursday morning, Mr Smith will pay eight
cents more per litre when he fills up his car and Mrs Khumalo will probably
have to fork out more for her child's bus fare to school. As companies pass
on the added cost of transporting bread and milk, potatoes and mealie meal,
so will consumers begin to feel the pinch even more.

In April we were led to believe that the petrol price increase would be a
temporary measure only, that the price would come back down and that we
would not pour even more of our hard-earned rands into our petrol tanks.
Now, eight weeks later, we are meant to brace ourselves for another hike.
Then, to add insult to injury, rumours abound that there will be another
increase next month. Where will this all end?

Personally I am tired of the Government's saying that South Africa still
has one of the lowest fuel prices in the world. We accept that the fuel
price is sensitive to the dollar price of crude oil and that therefore
blame cannot be entirely shouldered by the Government. However, fuel is
probably the last commodity vital to the economy which is still regulated,
and it is clear that the way prices are determined has the effect of
boosting the consumer price of fuel.

We have to ask ourselves why fuel at the pump is 50 to 60 cents cheaper in
neighbouring states, despite the fact that they do not have a synfuel
producer such as Sasol and Mossgas, which produce 40% of our fuel
requirement. These anomalies need to be answered, and part of the answer
lies in the fact that our industry is regulated and structured in a way
that has produced effective monopolies in the supply chain.

The first anomaly on which I am pleased to say that Government has finally
acted is the levy of eight cents a litre for the equalisation fund, which
was used to subsidise Sasol and Mossgas when the oil price dropped below
certain levels. The direct subsidy came to about R1,5 billion a year, but
because synfuel makes up 40% of all fuel produced in South Africa, and
because this levy is paid on all fuel produced in South Africa, Sasol and
Mossgas received not just eight cents a litre, but an effective 20 cents a
litre on their own production.

During the past decade something in the region of R8 billion of taxpayers
money has been paid to Sasol by way of subsidy. The original agreement
which provided for the subsidy was designed, and rightly so, to make Sasol
viable in the event of low crude oil prices or a high value of the rand.
But the agreement also provided for Sasol to contribute back to the fund
when the dollar price of oil was above a certain level. Since the ANC
Government came to power, no contribution has been received from Sasol
despite the fact that the dollar price of oil has been above the critical
level. Government needs to explain why this vital clause in the agreement
has disappeared, to the detriment of the consumer.

Also in urgent need of attention is the distortion caused by the arbitrary
price-fixing by monopolies such as the pipeline and rail systems. To hold
down costs throughout the country, the cost of transporting fuel has to be
competitive and tariffs set at a realistic levels. A further question which
has to be answered is why South Africa's fuel price is still based on a
formula for crude in Bahrain and Singapore while it can be obtained at
lower prices elsewhere. Oil that is cheap, partly owing to minimal
transportation costs, can be sourced from Angola, but the oil price is
still calculated according to the old formula. Another anomaly that needs
to be rectified is the customs and excise duty of four cents a litre on
fuel even though 40% of the country's requirement is produced locally by
Sasol and Mossgas.

Finally, the status and the enforceability of the Ratplan need to be
discussed as a matter of urgency. Petrol stations are springing up all over
the place, resulting in uneconomic levels of pump throughput and in an
average loss for the fuel retailer of approximately 0,7 cents a litre. This
is unsustainable and just adds to inefficiency in the industry and
ultimately a further demand for higher fuel prices at the pump. Clearly,
the industry has to be restructured and reregulated as a matter of urgency.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Rev K M ZONDI: Chairperson, this is one debate which is very difficult to
enter if one intends to score political points. I say so because this issue
is not one in which we can do what we like, as the hon the Minister
informed us here of a very difficult tightrope which we have to walk.

The impending rise in the price of fuel indicates the deep crisis into
which our economy is in danger of sliding. For the poorest of the poor this
will be a difficult blow to take. We all know what the consequence of this
will be: higher food prices, especially those of basic commodities that a
population already struggling under rising levels of unemployment and
poverty will not be able to afford.

We know that there are no easy answers, especially because the price of
fuel is largely determined by currency fluctuations linked to the US
dollar. As the rand continues to take a hammering and as it glides on a
downward slide, it is inevitable that the price of crude oil will shoot up
to levels that make motoring and transportation very expensive undertakings
indeed.

We in the IFP believe that the time has come for the Ministry to face this
problem head-on - not that they have not been doing so, but so that this
matter can be put on the national agenda for this country once and for all.
We believe the time has come for a firm policy to be developed, a policy
that will give practical guidance on the necessary practical steps that
need to be taken to bring this problem to surmountable levels. We believe
that this is a national challenge that requires a solid national response.
Perhaps this is not the time to give our own uninformed knee-jerk
reactions, trying to advise the Government what to do.

That is why we suggest that this is perhaps a time to consider a national
indaba on this matter, because it renders our entire economy painfully
vulnerable. We think that the hon the Minister, in fact, if she had the
wherewithal, would keep the price down, but we need to carry our
communities so as to be able to explain to them in very uncomplicated terms
why we have this national debacle.

Mnr F BEUKMAN: Mnr die Voorsitter, daar is twee tipes faktore wat daartoe
bydra dat die prys van petrol styg; eerstens eksterne en tweedens interne
faktore. Die Minister het verwys na die eksterne faktore en die sentrale
Regering het weinig beheer hieroor. Dit sluit in 'n hoë prys van olie op
internasionale markte, die optrede van Opul en die regulering van
produksie, aanbod- en aanvraagtendense op die mark en internasionale
politieke gebeure.

Wat die interne faktore betref, glo die Nuwe NP, moet die Regering egter 'n
deel van die blaam kry vir die verhoging in die petrolprys. Eerstens maak
die belastinggedeelte van die petrolprys 'n groot gedeelte van die bedrag
per liter uit wat die verbruikers moet betaal, en die Minister het daarna
verwys. Tweedens is daar die verswakking van die rand teenoor die
Amerikaanse dollar op 'n jaarbasis. Omdat ons in dollar vir ru-olie betaal,
gaan die verdere verswakking van die rand in die volgende ses maande 'n
geweldig negatiewe invloed op die Suid-Afrikaanse ekonomie hê, soos 'n
verhoging in die inflasiekoers, toenemende druk op rentekoerse, 'n algehele
verlaging in sakevertroue en 'n moontlike inkrimping van ekonomiese groei.

Wat egter direk tot die rand se daling en die uitvloei van kapitaal bydra
is die negatiewe stemming oor Zimbabwe, asook beter opbrengsgeleenthede in
Noord- en Suid-Amerika. Fondsbestuurders se vertroue in Suider-Afrika is
weens die Mugabe-faktor negatief. Hierdie negatiwiteit gaan voortduur
totdat daar 'n herstel van die regstaat, die erkenning van private
eiendomsreg en 'n beëindiging van moord en doodslag in dié betrokke SAOG-
staat is. Dit is hier waar die Mbeki-faktor bepalend is. President Mbeki
sal baie sterker leiding moet neem om fondsbestuurders te oortuig dat
Suider-Afrika, waaronder Zimbabwe, 'n veilige plek vir belegging en 'n
beter opbrengs as ander opkomende markte inhou.

Derdens verwys ek na die huidige verwarring oor die data wat deur die
Departement van Minerale en Energie gebruik word om die maandelikse
veranderings in petrol- en dieselpryse te bepaal. Volgens 'n berig in die
Business Day van vandag het 'n amptenaar van dié betrokke departement sy
uiterste kommer uitgespreek oor die groot verskil tussen ongeouditeerde
internasionale produkdata wat op 'n daaglikse basis deur die Sentrale
Energiefonds geouditeer word en die finale syfers waarop die prys gebaseer
word.

Die Nuwe NP wil 'n dringende beroep op die Minister doen om hulle huis in
die departement en die energiefamilie in orde te kry. Om in hierdie laat
stadium na alternatiewe bronne van informasie te kyk weens die huidige druk
van die petrolprysdebat is onaanvaarbaar. Die Minister moet toesien dat 'n
behoorlike ouditering van die berekening van die petrolprys en die betrokke
meganismes plaasvind.

Ten slotte, die Nuwe NP is van mening dat daar op die kort en medium termyn
drie proaktiewe stappe is wat die Regering kan doen: eerstens, 'n tydelike
verlaging in die belasting op brandstof van 8 sent tot 10 sent; tweedens,
die behoorlike hantering van die Zimbabwiese krisis om sodoende by te dra
dat die rand verstewig teenoor die Amerikaanse dollar; en, derdens, 'n
behoorlike hersiening en ouditering van die berekeningsmetodes van die
Sentrale Energiefonds en die departement in die vasstelling van die
pompprys van brandstof. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr F BEUKMAN: Mr Chairperson, there are two types of factors which
contribute to the price of petrol rising; firstly external and secondly
internal factors. The Minister referred to the external factors and central
Government has little control over these. They include a high price of oil
on international markets, the activities of Opec and the regulation of
production, supply and demand trends in the market, and international
political events.

However, as far as the internal factors are concerned, the New NP believes
that the Government should bear part of the blame for the increase in the
petrol price. Firstly, the tax portion of the petrol price constitutes a
large part of the amount per litre which consumers have to pay, and the
Minister has referred to this. Secondly, there is the weakening of the rand
against the American dollar on an annual basis. Due to the fact that we pay
for crude oil in dollars the further weakening of the rand in the next six
months is going to have a tremendously negative impact on the South African
economy, such as an increase in the inflation rate, increasing pressure on
interest rates, a general reduction in business confidence and a possible
decline in economic growth.

However, what is contributing directly to the rand's decline and the
outflow of capital is the negative mood regarding Zimbabwe, as well as
improved opportunities for returns in North and South America. Fund
managers' confidence in Southern Africa is negative as a result of the
Mugabe factor. This negativity will continue until there is a restoration
of the constitutional state, the recognition of private property rights and
an end to extreme violence in this particular SADC state. It is here that
the Mbeki factor is a determining one. President Mbeki will have to give
much firmer guidance in convincing fund managers that Southern Africa,
including Zimbabwe, constitutes a safe place for investment and better
returns than other emerging markets.

Thirdly, I want to refer to the current confusion about the data used by
the Department of Minerals and Energy to determine the monthly adjustments
in petrol and diesel prices. According to a report in Business Day of
today, an official from this particular department expressed his extreme
concern about the big difference between unaudited international product
data which is audited by the Central Energy Fund on a daily basis, and the
final figures on which the price is based.

The New NP wants to direct an urgent appeal to the Minister to get their
house in the department and in the energy family in order. It is
unacceptable at this late stage to look at alternative sources of
information as a result of the current pressure of the petrol price debate.
The Minister must see to it that a proper audit of the calculation of the
petrol price and the relevant mechanisms takes place.

In conclusion the New NP is of the opinion that in the short and medium
term there are three proactive steps which the Government can take.
Firstly, a temporary reduction in the tax on petrol of from 8 cents to 10
cents; secondly, the efficient handling of the Zimbabwean crisis, in order
to contribute to the rand stabilising against the American dollar; and,
thirdly, a comprehensive review and audit of the calculation methods of the
Central Energy Fund and the department in determining the pump price of
petrol.]

Mr M N RAMODIKE: Mr Chairperson, the Minister confirmed, a moment ago, that
problems encountered by South Africa in terms of the escalation of the
crude oil and petrol price are related to the rand and dollar exchange
rate. This statement by the Minister will therefore further confirm that
inflation is on the rise and that the already exorbitant price of fuel in
South Africa is playing a major role in this regard.

It is therefore further evident that higher cost in consumer products will
lead to the Reserve Bank having no option but to increase interest rates
and then the consumer will have to bear the brunt of that as well. While we
would sympathise and agree with the hon the Minister that this is a
worldwide problem, the UDM believes that the problem could be surmountable
and would involve, indeed, a lot of intensive research.

The recent announcement of a further rise in the price of petrol comes as a
shock to consumers and, in particular, to commuters who travel long
distances to and from their places of work on a daily basis. There is a
direct social impact of the continuous increase in the price of petrol on
millions of disadvantaged people in the poverty-stricken areas.

We would like to re-emphasise that the Government cannot, indeed, fold its
arms and say that this is a worldwide problem and nothing can be done about
it. True enough, the Government has, to some extent, tried to find ways and
means to resolve this crisis, but I believe it is still necessary to
continuously explore ways and means to resolve these problems.

Ms C DUDLEY: Mr Chairperson, as a member of the Portfolio Committee on
Minerals and Energy, I would like to just put on record that the portfolio
committee trips that I have been involved in have been incredibly
enlightening and very fruitful and very important, I think, to the job that
we have to do. [Applause.]

I would also like to say that the ACDP has confidence in the Minister, and
we realise that serious and difficult decisions have to be made for the
secure and efficient supply of fuel. Of course, issues that affect the
value of the rand are, we feel, the most critical. Notably, of course, the
negative sentiment caused by the President's attitude towards the present
situation in Zimbabwe, has had obvious repercussions.

One other thought is that, in the light of the incredible success that the
South African Revenue Services have had in collecting taxes, we as the
ACDP, feel that perhaps the tax on petrol should be reconsidered.
Generally, we know that the public of South Africa has an incredible burden
in terms of taxes, and perhaps this is an area that can be looked at.

Dr C P MULDER: Mnr die Voorsitter, vanaf môreaand 12:00 sal sommige
motoriste in Suid-Afrika R3,30 per liter petrol betaal, en dit terwyl mense
in ons buurlande, byvoorbeeld Swaziland, petrol kan koop teen R2,49 per
liter. In Lesotho is petrol selfs R1 goedkoper as in Suid-Afrika, en so kan
ek voortgaan. [Tussenwerpsels.] Ek het gehoor waaroor dit gaan, en ek sal
dit nou aan daardie agb lid verduidelik.

Dit is wel so dat die olieproduserende state olieproduksie ingekort het met
die doel om 'n tekort te skep sodat die internasionale olieprys kon styg.
Dit is vanselfsprekend so dat dit vir Suid-Afrika, wat 70% van sy olie moet
invoer, probleme skep. Hy doen sy aankope op die internasionale mark, wat
aan voortdurende prysskommelings onderhewig is, en dit is inderdaad so dat
die wisselkoers van die rand teenoor die dollar alle waarskynlikheid nie
gaan beter word nie, maar eerder swakker.

Die probleem is, buiten die basiese koste van brandstof, is die ander
grootste gedeelte van die brandstofprys die talle heffings en belastings
wat die staat op die brandstofprys hef. Tans is dit ongeveer 114 sent per
liter, wat soos volg bereken word: 'n basiese brandstofbelasting van 95,6
sent per liter, 'n doeaneheffing van 4 sent per liter, en 'n heffing van
14,5 sent per liter wat gebruik word vir die Padongelukfonds.

Dit mag so wees dat daar 'n tyd was dat die brandstofprys baie effektief
gebruik kon word vir belastings, en wel toe die prys laer was. Dit is
inderdaad so dat die prys as gevolg van ander faktore nou só hoog geword
het dat dit nie meer 'n gerieflike manier is om belasting in te vorder nie.
Die effek daarvan is vernietigend vir die Suid-Afrikaanse ekonomie en vir
baie mense.

Op 28 Maart 2000 is in Beeld gerapporteer dat die Minister geantwoord het
dat daar in Suid-Afrika in daardie stadium 'n oorvloed brandstof was, en
dat Suid-Afrika brandstof na 17 Afrikastate uitvoer, naamlik Tanzanië, die
Ivoorkus, Uganda, Malawi, Kenia en andere. Die punt is, die prys waarteen
daardie brandstof uitgevoer is, was in sekere gevalle maar net 16 sent per
liter vir diesel. Aan Zimbabwe is dit gelewer teen 58 sent per liter. Die
vraag is, waarom betaal party ander state soveel minder, en hoekom voer
Suid-Afrika in elk geval potensiële belasting ter waarde van R520 miljoen
uit? Die Regering sal drasties 'n plan hier moet maak. [Tyd verstreke.]
(Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr C P MULDER: Mr Chairperson, from midnight tomorrow night some motorists
in South Africa will be paying R3,30 per litre of petrol, whereas people in
neighbouring countries, for example Swaziland, can buy petrol for R2,49 per
litre. In Lesotho petrol is even R1 cheaper than in South Africa, and so I
can go on. [Interjections.] I have heard what is at issue, and I will now
explain it to that hon member.

It is a fact that the oil-producing states have cut back on oil production
with the objective of creating a shortage, so that the international oil
price can rise. It goes without saying that this causes problems for South
Africa, which must import 70% of its oil. It makes its purchases on the
international market, which is subject to constant price fluctuations, and
the fact is that the exchange rate of the rand as against the dollar is in
all probability not going to improve, but is going to worsen instead.

The problem is that, apart from the basic cost of fuel, the largest
remaining part of the fuel price consists of the many levies and taxes
which the state imposes on the fuel price. At present this totals
approximately 114 cents per litre, which is calculated as follows: a basic
fuel tax of 95,6 cents per litre,  an excise levy of 4 cents per litre, and
a levy of 14,5 cents per litre which is used for the Road Accident Fund.

It may be true that there was a time when the fuel price could be used very
effectively for taxes, and this was indeed the case when the price was
lower. It is a fact that the price has now become so high as a result of
other factors that this is no longer a convenient way of collecting tax.
This has a destructive effect on the South African economy and on many
people.

On 28 March 2000 it was reported in Beeld that the Minister had replied
that at that stage there was a fuel surplus in South Africa, and that South
Africa was exporting fuel to 17 African states, namely Tanzania, the Ivory
Coast, Uganda, Malawi, Kenya and others. The point is, the price at which
that fuel was exported, was in certain cases a mere 16 cents per litre for
diesel. It was supplied to Zimbabwe for 58 cents a litre. The question is,
why do some other states pay so much less, and why is South Africa
exporting potential tax to the value of R520 million in any case? The
Government will have to make a drastic plan in this regard. [Time
expired.]]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Mr Chairperson, I would like to address one area today that
nobody seems to be addressing or wants to touch on, and that is the
ownership of the oil companies and the oil industries. South African oil
industries are run and controlled by foreign companies who make decisions
affecting this nation in their coffee clubs. Perhaps we need to investigate
them. They control entry into the market, and today, I want to appeal to
the Minister of Minerals and Energy to speed up the entry of new South
African companies into the oil market, because that will also bring about a
decrease in the price of petrol, and real competition will take place and
not the artificial competition that we are seeing at the moment.

Coming back to the subsidies, the PAC feels that the subsidies should be
directed at the poorest of the poor. What are the areas that directly
affect the poor? Firstly, it is public transport, and we appeal to
Government to find a way to directly subsidise public transport. Secondly,
paraffin is also very important because the poor depend on it for so many
purposes such as cooking and heating.

The value of the rand alone cannot be blamed for the high fuel price
because when there is an improvement in the value of the rand, we do not
always see a decrease in the petrol price. I hope that the Minister is
trying her best to keep the prices as low as possible, but I think we need
to do more to, at least, cover the poorest of the poor.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister, the recent rise in the oil
price has directly resulted in the increase in the retail petrol price
throughout the African continent. Fuel is an unavoidable element which
critically affects the South African economy. Therefore the Government must
exercise a viable strategy to immediately speed up the process of
deregulating and restructuring the fuel industry.

The consumer consumption of fuel generates countless transactions in the
marketplace every single day between buyers and sellers of goods and
services. The delivery of almost every single product depends on fuel which
literally makes the necessity of fuel the master of the economy. That is
why it is important that the Government should promote public understanding
about the dynamic nature of the fuel market. In order to maintain
reasonable price control on fuel under diverse economic conditions, the
pricing of fuel requires a holistic restructuring and the taxing of fuel
must be subjected to periodic adjustment, depending on both national and
international market conditions and the state revenue needs.

The monopolisation of price-fixing by major refiners or marketers must be
monitored under the guidance of a national energy policy framework. To
achieve this major role, roleplayers must be involved in the oil-price
regulation. The customs and excise duty on Sasol's production must be
reviewed where necessary. The fuel industry must experience the economic
liberty to source oil at lower prices anywhere on the international market.
Appropriate deregulation and restructuring of the fuel industry have the
potential to reduce the fuel price, thus protecting South Africa and the
economy from a sharp decline.

Mnr C AUCAMP: Mnr die Voorsitter, die brandstofprys in Suid-Afrika is
onaanvaarbaar hoog. Weer eens moes die Minister keer vir haar paaltjies oor
die brandstofprys, en hoeveel verklarings en verskonings is nie alreeds
daarvoor aangebied nie! Telkens word die fout op die verkeerde plek gesoek.
Ja, die wisselkoers en die prys van ru-olie het 'n effek, maar dit is net
'n halwe deel van die waarheid.

Die grondliggende rede vir ons astronomiese brandstofpryse is eenvoudig dat
brandstof op 'n misplaaste wyse aangewend word as bron van
belastinginkomste. Die staatsheffing is eenvoudig te hoog, en daardeur word
'n bepaalde segment van die ekonomie onbillik en eensydig belas. As die
verbruiker waarde vir sy rand teruggekry het in die vorm van beter
infrastruktuur, sou 'n mens dit nog kon verstaan. Die teendeel is egter
waar. Elke provinsie in Suid-Afrika het seker 20 dorpe met die naam
``Potholes'', want dit pryk op haas elke pad in die land. Daar is geen
aanduiding dat hierdie fondse aangewend word vir beter vervoerstrukture
nie.

Die enigste ontwikkeling in ons paaienetwerk is dié van geprivatiseerde
tolpaaie waar die publiek weer eens moet uithaal en wys. 'n Uitstappie van
Pretoria na Louis Trichardt en terug kos die motoris nou al R100 aan
tolgeld alleen.

Ek het nog 'n paar vrae. Waarom ontvang die padgebruiker geen voordeel uit
Sasol nie, wat vroeër wel om strategiese redes bedryf is, al was dit teen
'n verlies, maar nou aansienlik goedkoper brandstof produseer? Waarom word
brandstof tweedens uitgevoer na byvoorbeeld die DRK en Zimbabwe teen minder
as 'n derde van wat die Suid-Afrikaanse motoris daarvoor moet betaal? Is
dit om Kabila se oorlog en Mugabe se manewales te finansier? Hoekom kan ons
nie eerder hierdie voorraad opbou vir wanneer die pryse styg nie?

Laastens wil ek 'n ernstige beroep doen op die Minister dat diesel vir
landboudoeleindes weer gesubsidieer moet word soos vir die visbedryf. Die
onlangse oorstromings het die kommersiële landbou in Suid-Afrika in 'n
bestaanskrisis gedompel en elke beskikbare maatreël van verligting moet
aangewend word. [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr C AUCAMP: Mr Chairperson, the petrol price in South Africa is
unacceptably high. Once again the Minister had to guard her wicket
concerning the petrol price, and how many statements and excuses have not
already been provided! Time and again the fault is sought in the wrong
place. Yes, the exchange rate and the price of crude oil have an effect,
but that is only half the truth.

The underlying reason for our astronomical petrol price is simply that
petrol is being used in an inappropriate manner as a source of tax revenue.
The Government levy is simply too high, and because of that a certain
segment of the economy is being unfairly and one-sidedly taxed. If the
consumer received value for his rand in the form of better infrastructure,
one could still understand it. However, the opposite is true.

Every province in South Africa probably has 20 towns with the name
``Potholes'', because this sign appears on virtually every road in the
country. There is no indication that these funds will be utilised for
better transport structures. The only development in our road network is
privatised toll roads, where the public must once again pay their way. An
excursion from Pretoria to Louis Trichardt and back now costs the motorist
R100 in toll money alone.

I have a few more questions. Why does the road user not receive any benefit
from Sasol, which was previously operated for strategic reasons, although
at a loss, but is now producing considerably cheaper petrol? Secondly, why
is petrol being exported to the DRC and Zimbabwe, for example, for less
than a third of what the South African motorist must pay for it? Is it to
finance Kabila's war and Mugabe's antics? Why can we not rather build up
these supplies for when the prices rise?

Lastly, I want to make a serious appeal to the Minister for diesel for
agricultural purposes to be subsidised again, as it is for the fishing
industry. The recent floods have plunged commercial agriculture in South
Africa into a crisis that threatens its very existence, and every available
measure of relief should be applied. [Time expired.]]

Mnu D M NKOSI: Sihlalo, kuMnu uHeine we-DP ngithi makangathi uma eswele
angakusho azodakelwa ekomidini. Makasebenzele kude nathi. Asivakashile
futhi asidlali, siyasebenza ekomidini.

Asiwukhiqizi uwoyela lapha eNingizimu Afrika kodwa siyawuthenga.
Ekuthengeni kwethu uwoyela kufanele sizame ukulinganisa izindlela
esisebenza ngazo ngokomnotho wezwe. Uma sithenga, kufanele sithenge
ngokwesivumelwano senani langempela eliyintengo yokuthenga. (Translation of
Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr D M NKOSI: Chairperson, I would like to warn Mr Heine of the DP that if
he does not know what to say, he must not come to our committee to talk
nonsense. He must work far from us. We are here neither to pay a visit nor
the play. We are really working in our committee.

In South Africa we do not produce oil, instead we import it. Whenever we
buy, we must ensure that we equalise our buying method with the economic
situation of the country. When we buy, we must ensure that we buy at an
acceptable price.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, I do not hear any
interpretation of this. I wonder whether they can sort it out quickly.
[Interjections.]

Mr D M NKOSI: Sihlalo, angazi noma sengingaqhubeka yini? [Chairperson, I am
not sure at the moment. May I proceed?]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Continue, hon member.

Mnu D M NKOSI: Sihlalo, enye indlela ebalulekile okusetshenziswa ngayo
uwoyela ngukusetshenziswa kukawoyela ogciniwe okuthiwa yi-strategic
stockpile, ukuze sizivikele njengeNingizimu Afrika uma intengo kawoyela
iphakeme kakhulu, futhi uwoyela siwuthenge uma intengo yehlile. Ingxaki
esingaba nayo sekungaba ngeyesikhathi ukuthi kwenzeka nini lokho.

Kubalulekile ukuthi nalabo abasebenza ngowoyela basebenze kangcono uma
bethutha uwoyela usuka lapho ukhiqizwa khona ukuze uye lapho siwudinga
khona. Izikhungo lapho imikhumbi isebenzela khona kudingeka zithuthukiswe
ukuze uwoyela ungachithekeli olwandle.

Kufanele indlela yentengo kaphethilolo iguqulwe ngoba njengamanje
sisasebenzisa indlela endala yombuso wencindezelo. Kukhona ukuthi mhlawumbe
ngaphambilini kwakuvikelwa izindlela zokusebenza zika-Sasol no-Mossgas
ukwenza indlela yokuthi lezi zinkampani ziqhubeke zibe ngezikhiqizayo noma
zingakhiqizi ngendlela efanele. Indaba efana neye-Equalisation Fund
kufanele sibone ukuthi siyayichitha.
Inselelo esibhekene nayo ngeyokuthi uma senza noma yiluphi uguquko,
silwenze ngendlela ephelele, singachibiyeli. Kufanele senze uhlelo
lwentengiso oluzosekela ukuthuthuka komnotho wezwe lakithi. Uguquko nanoma
yiluphi luzoba nezingqinamba zalo. Kuzoba khona amathuba nezinselelo.
Izinselelo yilezi ezilandelayo: Imboni kawoyela kuzokwenzeka ukuthi
ingayitholi le nzuzo ejwayele ukuyithola. Okunye ngukuthi osomabhizinisi
bakawoyela abamnyama abasafufusa bazodonsa kanzima noma bavale izitolo
zabo. Amathuba wona angaba ngukuthi intengo kawoyela noma kaphethilolo,
upharafini nodizili, izokwehla. Lokho sikubona kuyithuba. Umnotho wezwe
uzothuthuka. Abasemaphandleni, abahluphekayo nalabo mhlawumbe abahlulekayo
ngokomnotho bazokwazi ukuthenga ngentengo ephansi, impilo ibe ngcono.

Ukuba phezulu kwentengo kawoyela kukhuphula intengo kapharafini,
kaphethilolo kanye nekadizili. Impumelelo yohlelo lwentengo kawoyela izoya
ngokuthi abantu abanolwazi basebenza kanjani ekuthuthukiseni umnotho.

Ngicela ukusho kuNgqongqoshe ukuthi, njengekomidi, sizolindela ukubonisana
naye ngendlela entsha ephelele yokuthi mhlawumbe njengoba ikhuphuka intengo
kaphethilolo, uwoyela, udizili nopharafini, yini esingayenza ukuthi senze
uhlelo lokuthenga uwoyela emazweni angaphandle ngoba asiwukhiqizi lapha
ukuze ube ngendlela ezokwazi ukuthi abantu basekhaya lapha eNingizimu
Afrika bahlomule. Okufanele sikwenze ukuthi lonke uhlelo njengoba
silubekile, luguquke ngokuphelele; kungabi ngukuthi mhlawumbe sizochibiyela
sithi sivala izikhala ngoba uma sichibiyela kuzokonakala kakhulu.
[Ihlombe.] (Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr D M NKOSI: Chairperson, another important way of using petrol is to use
the oil that is kept in the strategic stockpile if the oil price is high.
This will enable us as a country to save money because we will be buying
only if the oil price is low. The problem that we might have will be with
the timeframe, as we never know when the price will go up.

It is important for those who transport oil to do their work more
efficiently when they transport oil from oil industries to oil stations.
Harbours should be improved so that oil will not spill into the sea.

We should now change the apartheid government's way of buying oil. It is
true that its way was followed by Sasol and Mossgas and it was protected so
that these companies would continue to produce oil even though they did not
produce it in a satisfactory manner. That issue of the Equilisation Fund
must be got rid of.

The challenge that we are facing, is that whatever change we make, should
be completed. There should be no need to amend it in future. We must devise
a trading plan that will support the growth of the economy of our country.
Any change will create some problems. We might face the following
challenges: The oil industry might not get the profit it used to get in the
past. Another challenge will be that new black business people in the oil
industry will face severe problems, some will even think of closing down
their shops. The advantages will be that prices of oil, petrol, paraffin
and diesel will decrease. We see this as an opportunity to improve our
economy. Rural and poor people will be able to buy oil at a cheaper price.
This will enable their lives to improve.

When the oil price increases, the prices of paraffin, petrol and diesel
follow suit. Our success in bringing down the oil price depends on the
success of knowledgeable people in improving the economy of our country.

I would like to inform the hon the Minister that as a committee we will
wait until we have consulted with her regarding the course of action as far
as the increase of oil prices is concerned. How should we improve our
importing of petrol into South Africa so that people of this country will
gain as we do not produce petrol in this country? We need to change the
whole process completely, as we have done before. We should not amend
anything because that will hinder the progress of other things.
[Applause.]]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, I am sorry that there
was no full interpretation for that. It was arranged but the interpreter
was not there. I hope the translated version will appear in the Hansard.

Debate concluded.

Business suspended at 12:41 and resumed at 14:03.

                              Afternoon Sitting

                              NOTICES OF MOTION
Mr R S NTULI: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the DP and other organisations and individuals highlighted the
           problems associated with Curriculum 2005 in 1998 and predicted
           that it would collapse; and

       (b)  the former Minister of Education labelled critics of the
           curriculum as ``reactionary forces'' and stated that ``the only
           crisis in education was a crisis for previously advantaged South
           Africans who do not want things to change'';


  (2) welcomes the recognition by the Minister of Education that criticism
       by the DP and others was founded on a sound factual basis rather than
       on racism; and

  (3) urges that the new Curriculum 21 be drawn up by experts who fully and
       properly understand the needs of South Africa and the expectations of
       teachers, pupils and parents, and that its implementation takes place
       when teachers have been properly trained.

[Time expired.]

Ms C C MAHLALELA: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  that a powerful earthquake and dozens of strong aftershocks
           struck the Indonesian island of Sumatra; and

       (b)  that at least 48 people were killed, hundreds were injured and
           thousands were left homeless;


  (2) sends its sympathies and condolences to the families of the deceased;
       and

  (3) calls on the UN and other parastatals to assist in rebuilding the
       affected communities.

[Applause.]

Mrs L R MBUYAZI: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) recognises that environmental protection and nature conservation have
       a longstanding tradition within the African community;

  (2) notes that part of this tradition is exemplary embodied in the work
       and philosophy of Dr M G Buthelezi, who, throughout his life, has
       been an environmentalist before it became fashionable and when a
       concern for animals and plants was often ridiculed when adopted by
       people of his calibre;


  (3) further notes that Minister Buthelezi -


       (a)  became the patron of some of the first environmental
           associations of South Africa, such as the Elephant and Rhino
           Foundation, and developed advanced concepts and projects of
           nature conservation based on the notion of the participation of
           communities with a stake in nature conservation;

       (b)  co-operated with international organisations promoting
           environmental management based on the responsible ...

[Time expired.]

Ms G L MAHLANGU: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) congratulates -


       (a)  Minister Valli Moosa on the excellent work done in raising the
           profile of environmental issues and in particular on his
           exhaustive programme during this year's Environmental Week; and

       (b)  the Minister on the release of the White Paper on Integrated
           Pollution and Waste Management, including the announcement of
           plastic bag regulation, and the launch this morning of the White
           Paper on Coastal Management; and


  (2) notes that these policy statements provide a blueprint for the
       country to achieve the national objective of efficient and effective
       management of our country's resources.

Dr S J GOUS: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of the
House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that, as the New NP predicted -


       (a)  many health workers refuse to assist with legal abortions;

       (b)  more illegal abortions are now being done than before the Choice
           on Termination of Pregnancy Act;

       (c)  nobody has been investigated, charged, prosecuted or found
           guilty in terms of the Choice on Termination of Pregnancy Act;
           and

       (d)  it is now a free for all;


  (2) further notes that -


       (a)  abortion legislation is misused by corrupt health workers;

       (b)  Misoprostol, a medicine with known teratogenic effects, is
           widely used as an abortifacient in state institutions, despite
           it not being registered for that purpose by the patent holder;

       (c)  the Minister of Health has urged health workers to put duty
           before their beliefs, which is nothing else but intimidation and
           a threat; and

       (d)  it is a right of health workers not to participate in any form
           of abortion for whatever reason, and they can therefore ignore
           the Minister of Health;


  (3) notes that the New NP reiterates its position that abortion on demand
       without considering other factors is doomed to failure; and

  (4) therefore calls on the Minister of Health to refrain from prescribing
       to health workers, as it serves no purpose other than to hide the
       Government's embarrassment with the failure of its idealistic,
       controversial abortion legislation.

[Time expired.]

Mr S J DE BEER: Chairperson, I give notice that at the next sitting of the
House I will move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the findings of the committee set up by the Minister of
       Education, Kader Asmal, to review Curriculum 2005, highlighting the
       tragic consequences of hasty decisions taken by the ANC Government;

  (2) welcomes Minister Asmal's move to review this issue, whilst warning
       the Minister not to fall into the same trap by rushing into this new
       process and making another grievous error with our children's future;

  (3) acknowledges that valuable education, time and money have been lost
       with Curriculum 2005 and that South Africa cannot afford blunders of
       this magnitude;

  (4) urges the Minister to consult with all role-players when he starts
       this new process in order for them to play a valuable role in
       creating a workable education system; and

  (5) states unambiguously that the importance of education for assuring
       all South Africans a world-class future is non-negotiable.

[Time expired.]
Mr M I MOSS: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of the
House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:
  That the House -


  (1) recognises that desertification is a leading cause of poverty in the
       most arid regions of the world;

  (2) acknowledges that the United Nations Convention to Combat
       Desertification is an important step in restoring damaged lands,
       improving food security, encouraging the transition to sustainable
       agriculture and land and environmental management;

  (3) congratulates the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism on
       its support of the convention; and

  (4) urges all members to support South Africa in hosting the Rio +10
       conference in the year 2002.

[Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I will move on behalf of the ACDP:


  That the House calls on -


  (1) the Ministers of Health and of Trade and Industry to establish an
       independent inquiry into the reasons for the discontinuation of the
       manufacturing of medical products in South Africa by approximately 30
       international pharmaceutical companies; and

  (2) the Government to take every possible step to reverse this process
       and to stop the investment and technological drain from South Africa,
       which has resulted in the loss of jobs and skills.

Mr C AUCAMP: Chairperson, for a change, I have a moderate motion from the
AEB. I give notice that on the next sitting day of the House I will move on
behalf of the AEB:


  That the House -


  (1) expresses its appreciation for the good work done by the research
       department of Parliament;

  (2) congratulates Dr Gabriel and his staff on the thorough, speedy and
       user-friendly work they do in assistance of members of Parliament;

  (3) encourages the members of the research department to keep up their
       good work;

  (4) urges Parliament to make sure that this important department is
       provided with the necessary financial and other resources at all
       times in order to maintain a high standard of service to members; and

  (5) notes that the motivation for this motion is the fact that for me, as
       a single member of a relatively small caucus without state-funded
       researchers, who is required to speak very often in this House, the
       research department of Parliament has turned out to be a useful
       source of objective information and an effective instrument in the
       capacity-building of members of Parliament who make use of their
       services.

Mr N H MASITHELA: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -
       (a)  14 world leaders, including US President Bill Clinton, have
           openly backed President Thabo Mbeki's campaign to emphasise the
           role of poverty in the spread of Aids; and

       (b)  the heads of state adopted President Mbeki's stance that the
           Aids debate had failed to recognise Africa-specific issues in
           the spread of the disease;


  (2) recognises that, as a result of our President's efforts, these
       countries have committed themselves to fostering the development of
       new vaccines and immunisations to combat poverty diseases such as TB,
       malaria and HIV/Aids; and

  (3) calls on the President to continue with his excellent work in placing
       Africa on the agenda of rich and powerful countries.

[Applause.]

Mnr T D LEE: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag namens die DP sal voorstel:
  Dat die Huis -


  (1) met kommer kennis neem dat R600 000, wat in 1996 beskikbaar gestel is
       vir die ontwikkeling van die landelike gebied Enon in die Oos-Kaap,
       nog nie aangewend is nie;

  (2) sy ontevredenheid uitspreek oor hierdie verdere voorbeeld van hoe die
       ANC-regering die agtergeblewe gemeenskappe in die steek laat; en

  (3) die Minister vir Provinsiale en Plaaslike Regering versoek om -


       (a)  'n deurtastende ondersoek te begin om vas te stel wat van die
           geld geword het; en

       (b)  'n dringende vergadering met die mense van Enon te belê om te
           besluit hoe dié geld aangewend moet word.

[Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr T D LEE: Mr Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with concern that R600 000 which was made available in 1996 for
       the development of the rural area of Enon in the Eastern Cape, has
       not yet been utilised;

  (2) expresses its dissatisfaction at this further example of how the ANC
       Government is leaving the disadvantaged communities in the lurch; and

  (3) requests the Minister for Provincial and Local Government to -


       (a)  launch a thorough investigation to determine what has become of
           the money; and

       (b)  convene an urgent meeting with the people of Enon to decide how
           this money should be utilised.

[Interjections.]]
Mr M F CASSIM: Chair, I give notice that on the next sitting day of the
House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that many towns and cities are conscious of the pollution
       caused by discarded plastic bags and would like to see South Africa
       returned to its pristine and singular beauty;

  (2) acknowledges that many manufacturers and dispensers of plastic bags
       of about 20 micron thickness have seen for themselves the devastation
       caused by such bags, which are nonbiodegradable and will remain so
       for thousands of years;

  (3) notes that the visible and invisible impact of such plastic bags on
       the environment and marine life is vast and negative;

  (4) warmly applauds the town of Douglas for taking the first positive
       steps by declaring war on this bane of modern life;

  (5) also applauds the Sunday Times for its coverage on this subject; and

  (6) calls on the Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism to write a
       congratulatory note to all those who are involved in making our
       country free and beautiful for all to live in ...

[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mrs M M MALUMISE: Chairperson, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the South African Government is represented at the Beijing +5
           conference; and


       (b)  this conference serves as a benchmark of the Government's
           implementation of previous Beijing resolutions;
  (2) recognises that the women in South Africa can attest to the
       achievements and obstacles on the long journey towards empowering
       women in South Africa; and

  (3) hopes that South Africa will continue its standard of being a leader
       in advancing the women's rights.

Mr H A SMIT: Mr Chair, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House notes -


  (1) the statement of the ANC's secretary-general, namely that the ANC's
       ideals, which were their motivation, are being eroded by the abuse of
       political power within the ANC in order to bring about personal
       wealth;

  (2) the dismantling of the ANC's executive committees in the Free State
       and Gauteng, which was evidently the result of individuals' desires
       to fill positions in order to influence tenders; and

  (3) that the New NP -


       (a)  requests that the Heath Investigating Unit be asked to
           investigate these allegations;

       (b)  demands the ANC's full support; and

       (c)  demands that the ANC provides the commission with the
           particulars of the members concerned.

[Interjections.]

Mr T ABRAHAMS: Mr Chairman, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) recognises the fact that we are living in the age of information and
       that the technology of this age has led to an ever-declining need for
       manual labour by big business;

  (2) notes that, while big business is generally able to survive
       industrial action, it is emerging as a destroyer rather than a
       creator of jobs because of automation and computerisation;

  (3) laments the truth that the creators of jobs today can be found in the
       small business sector and that it is this very sector which is most
       vulnerable to the stereotyped methods being used by organised labour;
       and

  (4) calls upon the governing party to beseech its labour organisation
       allies to find modern, productive methods to pressurise the private
       sector into meeting its social obligations.

                   CONGRATULATIONS TO SA U/23 SOCCER TEAM

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr G Q M DOIDGE: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the victory of South African soccer under 23 team over New
       Zealand in the Olympic Qualifier;
  (2) recognises that the victory by Amaglug-glug is a milestone for South
       African sport;

  (3) congratulates coach Shakes Mashaba and the boys for this sporting
       achievement; and

  (4) wishes Amaglug-glug all of the best during the Olympic Millennium
       Games in Sydney, Australia.

Agreed to.

[Applause.]

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 18 - Justice and Constitutional Development:

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, it is
indeed an honour for me to present to you and this House the report of the
Department of Justice and Constitutional Development for the first year of
the second democratic Parliament.

At the very outset, allow me to express my appreciation for the co-
operation received from all my fellow Ministers within the justice cluster,
which comprises the Ministers and Deputy Ministers of Correctional
Services, Defence, Finance, Home Affairs, Intelligence, Justice and
Constitutional Development and Safety and Security.

The approach and work of the Department of Justice and Constitutional
Development has to be seen in the context of the broad work of this
cluster. May I add that we are also working very well with the Minister and
Deputy Minister of Education, particularly with regard to violence,
possession of guns, possession of drugs and related matters, in our
schools.

Since we were appointed to our respective portfolios, last year, we have,
at all times, diligently sought to co-operate and interact with one
another. The objective has been to ensure that we respond to matters
relating to the criminal justice system in an integrated manner. With this
in mind, the cluster has striven to hold regular meetings under the able
stewardship of Minister Tshwete.

The effective management of the Government's responsibilities in this
regard depends on this co-operation. Revolutionary changes took place over
the past six years. We successfully made the transition from apartheid and
white minority rule to a nonracial and nonsexist democracy. We established
a new constitutional order and a polity that is predicated upon the will of
the majority. This required the creation of a new department out of eleven
departments of justice with diverse cultures, and an overhaul of the entire
system of justice.

New policies and laws were also required. With hardly sufficient time or
resources to adequately meet the challenges of this revolution, we are,
today, faced with yet a new revolutionary process, with a new set of even
more demanding challenges. Our department is relatively new. Our
administration is woefully underfunded and has, in many instances, less
appropriate human resources. The large volumes of case backlogs and
increasing awaiting-trial prisoner population are causes of major concern.
To make matters worse, crime, particularly serious and violent crime, has
grown to unacceptably high levels.

Whilst the challenges facing my department may seem to be daunting, the
current situation presents us with exciting opportunities. It is,
therefore, exciting to announce some of the important developments that are
due to unfold in our environment. A month ago, I had the pleasure of
presenting my first report to the justice and constitutional development
portfolio committee. I provided the committee with a detailed report on our
activities over the past year. I will therefore, today, address only some
of our key challenges and how the Department of Justice and Constitutional
Development is responding to them.

Globalisation is a reality. It impacts on our new democracy in a most
dramatic fashion, particularly in the justice environment. Capital
virtually moves at the speed of thought between and to those markets that
are regarded as most favourable and profitable. This new global economy is
fuelled and energised by the Internet revolution. The Internet itself will
also have a profound impact on our economy and legal system. As part of the
world economy, we are also confronted by organised crime which has also
become an important part of globalisation. We are directly affected by the
scourge of money-laundering - the lifeblood of drug dealers, fraudsters,
smugglers, kidnappers, arms dealers, terrorists, extortionists and tax
evaders. Yet, we still have to enact legislation that will enable us to
respond appropriately to this challenge.

Another area that requires urgent attention is cyber crime. We do not as
yet have legislation, in South Africa, to deal with this problem. We have
agreed to co-operate with, among others, the United States Department of
Justice, with the view to developing appropriate responses. Special
training will also have to be provided to our police, prosecutors and
judicial officers in this regard. Needless to say, the unacceptably high
level of crime and the quality of the administration of justice have a
serious impact on our effectiveness as an emerging market and our ability
to attract increasing foreign direct investment. This represents our most
pressing challenge yet.

What bothers me most is corruption within my own department and within the
broad criminal justice system. It was reported to me recently, and I have
subsequently informed our portfolio committee, that about 480 cases of
malfeasance involving members of my own department were investigated. Of
these, 38 are cases of fraud, 26 are of corruption and 30 are of theft.
These cases are pending before our courts. We are acting in conjunction
with the SA Police Service and the National Prosecuting Authority with a
view to expediting the investigation and prosecution of similar matters.

Today, we are required to make a clear statement that we are meeting these
challenges. The statement must not only be made to the international
community, but should also be addressed to the South African people. These
new challenges have substantially influenced our plans and the approach
that I intend to take. Together with my colleagues in the justice cluster,
we are determined to play our role in building a better future for all
South Africans and in making our country a more attractive market. I am,
however, confident that this scourge will be rooted out. As for the e-
revolution, it is anticipated that the Internet will, in the coming years,
be the premier vehicle for all commercial trade. We are therefore obliged
to consider the manner in which it will impact on our rules of court and
laws of evidence. The SA Law Commission is already studying these.

One of the first tasks that I performed as Minister, was to visit as many
of our courts as possible. I still do this regularly. The full impact of
the difficult conditions in which our courts operate became quite apparent.
More to the point, the shortcomings in our delivery of services were
glaring. The department has embarked upon a campaign to ensure that all
head office managers visit our various offices. This would ensure that
senior officials and policy makers familiarise themselves with those issues
pertinent to the efficient functioning of our courts. I will encourage this
practice. It will sharpen our managers' senses to our essential priorities.
This project is called Operation Mutingati which, in Tshivenda, means
``working together as a team''. The operation kicked off on 1 June with the
director-general and senior officials visiting the Eastern Cape courts.

We have also embarked upon a redeployment project. The intention is to take
a number of suitably qualified lawyers, magistrates and prosecutors who are
currently doing administrative work back to the courts in order to
reinforce our delivery processes. The Department of the Public Service and
Administration issued a directive in 1999 obliging each department to
develop an integrated implementation plan consisting of a strategic plan
and a human resources plan. This also coincided with the department's
review of Justice Vision 2000. I am pleased to report that the department
has successfully completed the requirements stipulated by the DPSA.
An approach of our Government has been to develop and strengthen our public-
private partnerships. It is our intention to pursue these strategic
partnerships where it would lead to mutual benefits. In this regard, we
have had tremendous success already. We have, for instance, been assisted
by the organised legal profession, members of which, every now and then,
come forward to act as prosecutors, magistrates and judges. We have been
offered the services of senior counsels in order to ensure that our high
courts continue to function even during court recesses. The legal
profession has offered to help in the training of our officials,
particularly prosecutors. Business, people and companies have even given us
assets such as photocopiers, computers and motor vehicles. In one instance,
Vodacom helped in the refurbishment and automation of a magistrates' court
and a police station, all of which cost in excess of R20 million.

Similar ventures were concluded in Sophiatown, with the full assistance of
Phillips. I have also secured, free of charge, the assistance of various
senior business executives in reviewing and finalising our strategic plans
and change management process. I wish to express my gratitude to them for
their contribution. The model that they are using is based on best business
practices adopted in the private sector. It is anticipated that the team
will submit their report by the end of July and implementation will be
completed by October this year.

Some of the key areas which they have already identified as requiring
urgent attention are the zero-rated budgeting process. Independent and
skilled specialists will conduct a budgeting exercise in each sector of the
department based on strategic plans and the duplication of effort between
various structures of management. Consideration will be given to the
possibility of generating revenue streams for the ultimate benefit of the
department and a review of the manner in which our court infrastructure is
maintained. In this regard, I am confident that the processes we have
embarked upon will result in greater efficiency and more effective service
delivery.

During our cluster's visit to a number of our courts, police stations and
prisons, we found the physical infrastructure and conditions in which
people live and operate simply unacceptable. This cannot be permitted to
continue. The upgrading of our courts will therefore be a major challenge
that my administration will face. In this regard, I am pleased to report
that the allocation of R145 million for capital works during 1999 has
enabled the department to commence with the construction of new buildings
and other major works. This will take place at centres where there were no
facilities at all before and where service delivery was seriously hampered
because of a lack of facilities.

Despite insufficient funding, the largest number of major and minor
building services ever is currently under construction. This is due to an
efficient management of the limited resources at our disposal. This
significant progress is substantiated by 56 new court rooms at 19 court
buildings, which have been completed, and a further 88 new court rooms at
28 court buildings, which are to be constructed during the year 2000. Most
of these worthy projects have been undertaken in previously disadvantaged
rural areas of our country. This will contribute to the department's goal
of bringing justice closer to the people.

What is particularly satisfactory about our initiatives in this area is
that we have also, in the process, won several awards for the innovative
approaches adopted in our construction work. In addition, facilities for
specialised courts, such as sexual offences courts and family courts, have
been provided at new court buildings in places such as Waterval, Knysna,
Bethlehem and Alexandra. These facilities will also be included in the
planning of all new buildings and additions to buildings. In any major
renovations, as with the construction of all new buildings, the special
needs of the disabled are being incorporated.

A new challenge has arisen over the past few years in the form of the
declining security in and around our court buildings. This has been a
matter of serious concern to me and the Government. The traditional
approach has been to employ trained and equipped security officials to
serve in this capacity. Burglary continues to be one of the biggest threats
to the department and these burglaries have escalated each year. Two
hundred and ninety-six burglaries have taken place in our courts since
1990. We have also witnessed an escalation of shooting incidents in our
courts, in some of which death has ensued. To address these problems, we
have initiated a process of outsourcing our security requirements. In this
financial year, we have invested a further R14 million to meet this
challenge.

Allow me to proceed and deal with yet another matter, that is the issue of
legal aid which confronts us as a department and certainly as a country.
With the appointment of the Legal Aid Board, last year, and the gallant
efforts particularly by its chairperson, Judge Mohamed Navsa, we have only
recently come to understand the full impact of the problems that we are
confronted with. Despite the allocation of additional funds to enable the
board to provide legal aid to the indigent, the board has not been able to
effectively fulfil our constitutional obligations and is at present in a
state of financial crisis.

We are experiencing inordinate delays in the payment of legal fees. The
primary method of delivery of legal aid services has thus far been by way
of judicare. This method has proved to be unacceptably expensive and
cumbersome to administer. A business plan has now been prepared and
judicare will drastically be scaled down and eventually replaced by a new
system based on salaried employees in legal aid clinics, advice offices and
public defenders. I am confident that the measures soon to be put in place
will address the problems that are currently being faced by the board.
Needless to say, I will be monitoring developments in this area of our work
much more closely. New legislation is also being considered.
The rules of procedure followed by our lower and higher courts are, in many
respects, outdated, and certainly complex and cumbersome for ordinary
people to understand and apply. They, therefore, require to be overhauled
if they are to help us assert and defend our rights in the new
constitutional dispensation.

An observation has been made, however, that our Rules Board, which consists
of 12 members, is perhaps too large to promote efficiency and achieve this
objective. The availability of members for board work and meetings is
erratic and, besides, budgetary constraints prevent the board from holding
regular meetings. If the truth were to be told, we have achieved
representivity in race, gender and geographic terms at the cost of
efficiency. I have discussed this with the chairman, Judge Sandile Ngcobo,
who has assured me that the board itself agrees that the board needs
restructuring and downsizing. For this purpose, the Rules Board for Courts
of Law Act, Act 107 of 1985 may have to be amended.

Meanwhile, the Rules Board is still studying the rules of both lower and
higher courts with a view to bringing them in line with the Constitution
and harmonising them. The board is also looking at simplifying the rules.
These must be easily understood and applied even by nonlawyers. This will
certainly enhance our effort at promoting accessibility of our courts.

Since 1994, the department has been responsible for the promotion of 72
Acts of Parliament. This represents an average of 12 Acts per year. Most of
the 72 statutes emanate directly or indirectly from our constitutional
obligations. The department has, quite legitimately, been criticised for
not doing the necessary financial planning and costing in respect of
legislation hurriedly pushed through Parliament. As a result, in some
instances, we have had to delay the implementation of legislation or
certain provisions thereof. We are now beginning to address this problem.

The department has also been faced with the challenge of implementing many
pieces of legislation within a short space of time and with limited
resources. Problems were inevitable. I am, however, confident that, despite
the limited resources, the new legislation has brought about many positive
changes and impacted positively on the lives of many of our people.
I must, however, be quite frank. This year we have a shortened session of
Parliament due to the forthcoming local government elections and quite a
few Bills on the legislative programme will only possibly be nearing
completion when it might be too late for them to be considered by
Parliament during the year 2000. This means that we must prioritise.

The Bills on the current programme, which I think must be finalised by
Parliament as a matter of urgency, are the following: the Directorate of
Special Operations Bill, which seeks to establish a proper statutory
framework for the Scorpions; the Superior Courts Bill, which is, inter
alia, intended to bring the superior courts' structure in line with the
Constitution; the Interception and Monitoring Prohibition Amendment Bill,
which will help bring the legislation dealing with the interception and
monitoring of conversations which have a bearing on criminal activities in
line with the latest telecommunications technology; the Judicial Matters
Amendment Bill, which contains numerous amendments to different Acts of
Parliament; and the Judicial Service Commission Amendment Bill. This is,
for self-evident reasons, an important Bill.

In our legal system, other than the provisions of the Constitution in terms
of which a judge may be removed from office if the Judicial Service
Commission finds that he or she suffers from an incapacity, is grossly
incompetent or is guilty of gross misconduct, there are no provisions
pertaining to a complaints mechanism for the public or any interested
parties regarding the conduct of a judge, the procedure to be followed in
following up a complaint against a judge, or steps that may be taken
against a judge where his or her alleged misconduct does not necessarily
justify removal from office.

It should be emphasised that the decision to conduct research on this
question, and to draft proposals regarding the establishment of a
complaints mechanism in respect of judges, emanated from within the
Judicial Service Commission, as long ago as 1997. The Judicial Service
Commission identified certain guidelines in accordance with which the draft
proposals had to be prepared. These were, for example, that provision
should be made for the establishment of a complaints committee, and that
the committee should consist of members of the judiciary and the
commission, but not exclusively.

My department prepared a draft. I took this to the Judicial Service
Commission and proposed to the commission that instead of going directly to
Cabinet, we should first consult the judiciary on a matter such as this
one. This proposal was accepted and an ad hoc committee of the JSC,
consisting of the Chief Justice, the President of the Constitutional Court
and Judge President Ngoepe, was appointed to oversee the consultation
process.

It should also be mentioned that the JSC appointed a drafting committee to
consider the proposals, taking into account the legislation of various
other countries in this regard. If Cabinet approves the draft Bill, the
legislative process will follow its normal course, including the
comprehensive consultation process that takes place when considering
legislation.

It should further be noted that the draft legislation would in no way be
aimed at interfering with the functioning of the courts and judicial
independence. Judicial acts such as judgments and sentencing will always be
dealt with in terms of judicial procedures, such as review and appeal
proceedings. The proposed legislation will only be dealing with complaints
or allegations of misconduct by judges.
I have given this lengthy explanation primarily to respond to numerous and
obviously misinformed media articles in this regard. I would like to
express my appreciation to those members of the judiciary for the positive
contributions on this matter. I also want to especially thank the members
of the drafting committee for their contribution towards the drafting of
this legislation.

The national prosecuting authority has continued to make strides in major
areas in the administration of criminal justice and the fight against crime
in collaboration with the SA Police Service. It has continued to strive for
an efficient and effective prosecution service. The Office of the National
Director of Public Prosecutions has created new national entities in order
to begin to address some of the challenges facing the prosecuting
authority. I will now deal with the work that some of these entities and
units have embarked upon recently.

Before the court management unit was established in the Office of the
National Director of Public Prosecutions, the prosecution had no statistics
on which to base its management decisions. In a sense, senior management in
the prosecuting authority had been groping in the dark. However, with the
establishment of this unit, we are now in a position to manage and monitor
the performance of each court. We are now able to identify and shift human
and material resources to areas where they are sorely needed.

Shortly after my appointment as Minister for Justice and Constitutional
Development, the Minister of Safety and Security and I visited the
Mdantsane Magistrates' Court at the invitation of the National Director of
Public Prosecutions. What we found there was that the courts were working
for an average of one hour per day. The courts would start working at about
11:00 in the morning or 14:00 every day. Prosecutors and magistrates were
coming to work under the influence of liquor.

We immediately intervened to correct the state of affairs. We appointed new
chief and senior prosecutors and court orderlies and put in additional
resources. I am pleased to report that, since then, the Mdantsane
Magistrates' Court has become one of the best performing courts in terms of
the performance targets set for the prosecuting authority. [Applause.] The
same is true of the court in Zwelitsha and other courts. Further, for the
first time in the history of this country, we have established a High Court
seat in the Mdantsane township to deal with sexual offences.

Having achieved the targets it has set for itself for the past year, the
national prosecuting authority has set itself other targets for this year.
We have already begun to see that the prosecutors are meeting even the new
targets. We are already beginning to see the following: Further increases
in the average court hours; reduction in the outstanding court rolls;
increases in the number of cases finalised with a verdict; reduction in the
outstanding decision dockets; reduction in the numbers of prisoners
awaiting trial; and reduction in the finalisation period of matters already
in the system.

The newly established Sexual Offences and Community Affairs Unit in the
Office of the National Director of Public Prosecutions has come up with
innovative ideas to deal with crimes against women and children. A number
of sexual offences courts have already been established in a number of
areas throughout the country. The unit, in conjunction with other
departments and Ministries such as Health, Welfare, Safety and Security and
nongovernmental organisations is demonstrating a collaborative effort that
seeks to improve the investigation and prosecution of rape and sexual abuse
cases.

Based on the findings of a study focusing on the experiences of rape
victims on the Cape Flats, we will soon be announcing the creation of a
care centre on the Cape Flats to demonstrate that it is possible to improve
services to rape victims. If successful, the project will be extended to
major centres.

Before dealing with the work that the investigative directorates under the
National Director of Public Prosecutions has been doing, I would like first
to congratulate all of them on their excellent performance. In particular,
I would like to thank all the members of the investigative directorate who
sacrificed their December vacations and answered the call to come and work
when the country was experiencing devastating bombings in the Cape
Peninsula during the festive season.

We have seen the same kind of success in respect of drug trafficking and
gangsterism on the Cape Flats. At the beginning, we targeted five main drug
suppliers on the Cape Flats, while SAPS continued to deal with ordinary
drug suppliers and dealers. As a result of this approach, five suspects are
before our courts now. As far as the gangs are concerned, we are making
breakthroughs there as well. Soon we will be bringing prosecutions against
one of the major gangs on the Cape Flats.

In the Gauteng Province the investigative directorate operating there has
managed to dismantle a large number of car-hijacking syndicates. Car-
hijacking in Gauteng, as we all know, has decreased quite dramatically. In
KwaZulu-Natal, the investigative directorate that deals with political
violence has done outstanding work.

Although the Asset Forfeiture Unit has had one or two setbacks in some of
its major cases, asset forfeiture remains our main weapon in the fight
against organised crime. Interestingly enough, in all of the cases that the
unit has lost, none of the accused persons denied that the property sought
to be seized constituted proceeds of crime. Instead of dealing with the
merits of the case, the respondents chose to deal with the technicalities
relating to the drafting of the Act.

Despite these difficulties, the unit has been more successful than what it
expected when it started. Overall, the unit has initiated a total of 23
cases and it has been successful in 18 of these cases - a success rate of
over 75%. In total, the assets seized so far amount to well over R70
million.

The Directorate of Special Operations, popularly known as the Scorpions,
has already been set up in terms of the mandate from the President. The
directorate will deal with national priority crimes including organised
crime. The Bill for the establishment of the directorate has been referred
to Cabinet and will soon be introduced.

Allow me to mention that I have just returned from Scotland Yard in Hendon,
London and the FBI Academy in Quantico, Virginia, USA and have seen the
training of our new DSO recruits. I am satisfied with the training of these
new recruits. Looking at our young people undergoing the intensive
training, I wished I were much younger than I am. [Interjections.]

I am satisfied that the National Prosecuting Authority is well on its way
to establishing a prosecuting service that is representative, professional,
ready to fight crime, legitimate in the eyes of the people it serves, and
is regarded as the true people's lawyers.

To help deal with the backlogs, particularly, in the Western Cape and
Eastern Cape, several additional regional and even High Courts have been
established. For example, nine additional regional courts have been
established here in the Western Cape, including two additional sexual
offence courts, in Wynberg. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Please put those cellphones
off or take them to your offices. [Applause.]

The MINISTER: Mr Chairperson, thank you. More such courts are envisaged. In
Pretoria we have established a special regional commercial court to deal
expeditiously with and dispose of economic offences such as fraud.

May I say that, unfortunately, though we have concluded investigation and
are ready to dispose of about 120 cases that were investigated by both the
directorate dealing with serious economic offences and the police, because
of a paucity of skills amongst our prosecutors, we are not able to start
these cases as yet. We might have to, indeed, think of sourcing resources
from the private sector, which exercise might cost us about R30 million,
for which we have not provided in our budget.

In conjunction with Sars, we have established a special tax court in
Bellville, to deal with tax-related offences. For this purpose, indeed, I
have designated certain members of Sars, who are qualified lawyers, as
prosecutors, so that they should help us prosecute in these matters. Again,
in conjunction with the National Association of Democratic Lawyers, the
Black Lawyers Association and members of the traditional legal profession,
we are doing quite a lot of work in our courts where lawyers are taking
turns and serving as magistrates and prosecutors free of charge. This is
working and we hope to be able to roll it out to other parts of the
country.

The training programme, under the auspices of the Justice College, is also
continuing apace, and, indeed, we are in the process of giving more
specialised training to our prosecutors and magistrates so that we can meet
the challenges that we face. We are also part of what is called an
integrated justice system. May I, in this regard, only say that the
integrated justice system is doing exceptionally well. Our research and
analysis over the past few years have shown that the only effective
solution to our problems is to adopt an integrated cluster approach, which,
as I have already said, we have adopted.

It is now my intention to deal, in brief, with a matter which I regard as
being currently topical. In this regard, it would be useful to remember
that, as a country, when we embarked upon the transition from apartheid to
democracy, and as part of our political settlement, we chose to retain the
judicial structures and personnel we inherited from our past, in fact, but
for the establishment of one new court, the Constitutional Court, we chose
to use such structures and personnel as the foundation for postapartheid
justice. This was notwithstanding the fact that the majority of our people
legitimately had no faith in any of those structures.

We are in the process of remaking our country in its entirety, and within
our known constraints, tremendous work is being done to transform our
courts. The judiciary as an institution, under the leadership of our Chief
Justice and the President of the Constitutional Court, is part of the
efforts that are being made. Great strides are being made and black people
and women are gradually becoming more visible in the echelons of our
judiciary. Many suitably qualified South Africans, whose commitment to
human rights cannot be gainsaid and who, in the past, would find it
unthinkable to join the institution, are coming forward and offering to
join the ranks of the judiciary.

At the same time, it would be sheer dishonesty, if not the height of self-
delusion, to deny that there is still a long way for all of us to go before
we have a judiciary which is next to the ideal in racial and gender terms.
Similarly, it would be foolhardy to pretend that our judiciary as an
institution was spared, or was sealed, hermetically so, from the full
impact of apartheid or that the mere fact that April 1994 happened
instantaneously transformed South Africa into a nonracial and nonsexist
society predicated upon the values we now all espouse.

Those of us who were at the receiving end of apartheid still have fresh
memories of what was done to us as we struggled against the evil system.
Victims of pass laws and forced removals under the Group Areas Act, for
example, knew that they could not easily approach our courts with any hope
for justice, as our courts would then simply tell them that theirs was not
to make, but to interpret and apply, the law as given by Parliament.

There is a lingering public perception that things are not changing fast
enough in the judiciary. Leaders and some commentators even list certain
instances relating to apparent and disturbing sentencing disparities, from
which a judicial racial bias can be gleaned. Except to sensitise us to what
still has to be done, statistics may not necessarily help us in performing
our arduous task in this regard.

All of us, including the judiciary, as builders of a new South Africa, have
a responsibility to work hard at enhancing the image of our judiciary and
promoting popular confidence in our courts. Part of this responsibility is
to desist from indulging in uninformed criticism of the work of the
judiciary or ascribing certain motives to judges when they rule in certain
matters. The other part is for judges themselves to desist from making
statements on or off the bench that would bring reasonable people to the
conclusion that the judge's behaviour or attitude is impermissible.

On behalf of Government, may I appeal, through this House, to all South
Africans of goodwill, particularly political leaders, to support the little
that we are doing in this regard. No democracy can thrive without a strong
judiciary in which all of us have full confidence. As a democracy, we
cannot instruct people not to express opinions on any matter of public
concern, not even on the judiciary. If we did so at the instance of the
judiciary or on the pretext of protecting the judiciary from particularly
informed and responsible criticism, we would certainly be stifling public
debate on matters of public importance and the price, over time, would
prove to be too high to pay.

I also want to deal briefly with the issue of sentencing policy. I have
asked the SA Law Commission to quickly investigate this matter, and the Law
Commission has since published a draft working paper which is available for
discussion. Again, time allowing us, we would be able to go into some of
the proposals that they are making.

It should be remembered that, as was envisaged by Parliament in 1997, the
1997 Act in this regard is a temporary measure. In all democracies that we
have looked at, the notion has developed that judicial sentencing
discretion should be properly structured to ensure that like cases are
treated alike. This would indeed help obviate this debate - which, as far
as I am concerned, is a sterile one - that there is a racial bias each time
we look at the results of the work of our courts.

Lastly, the President dealt adequately with the issue of TRC reparations. I
only want to say that since the President's report here in Parliament when
he was answering questions, we have received about 12 000 cases including
those that the President alluded to. About 10 000 of these have already
been paid interim relief. In the meantime, a lot of work is being done to
address the issue of longer-term reparations and the question will be
brought to this House pretty soon. [Applause.]

Adv J H DE LANGE: Deputy Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon members, ladies
and gentlemen, I rise on behalf of the ANC and unconditionally support the
2000 Justice Vote and want to express an unconditional vote of confidence
in support of the work undertaken by our previous and present Ministers,
the previous and present directors-general and the staff of the department
during the past year. I want to congratulate them for what they have done
and what they have been able to achieve under very difficult circumstances.

Now hon members may ask me what the scarf that I am wearing is for.
[Interjections.] This is called a tais. This is part of the national dress
of the East Timorese people. I recently had the opportunity to participate
in certain activities of the National Association of Jurists of East Timor,
and as a sign of gratitude, I was handed this tais. [Applause.]

I promised that on the first occasion I appeared in Parliament after
returning, I would wear this tais and, secondly, that I would raise the
issue of East Timor. I now do so. As hon members know, East Timor was a
colony for a very long time and recently, in a referendum, there was a
decision by the vast majority to move for independence. However, the
militia - these are the people that were opposed to the independence of
East Timor - then embarked on a scorched earth policy and basically
destroyed the whole economic, political and legal infrastructure of East
Timor. If one goes there, it is devastating to see it. There are 12 little
towns in East Timor, and the militia moved to every single town and ...
[Interjections.]
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member De Lange, you are
moving away from the topic at hand, but in the interest of democracy, I
shall give you few seconds to wind up. [Laughter.]

Adv J H DE LANGE: Thank you for the reminder, but I would remind you that
this is an issue of human rights and justice, and I thought that that is
what we are debating. What happened is that everything was taken away. The
whole infrastructure was then burned down, and basically the East Timorese
were left with a hollow shell to build their future independence on.

I therefore want to call on all South Africans, whether in Government,
civil society or business, to assist in every way possible, through
financial, moral and intellectual support, the desire of the East Timorese
to attain independence, and to assist in reconstructing the country's
political, economical, social and legal infrastructure, which has suffered,
firstly under its colonial legacy and, more recently, because of the
militia.

Let me now turn briefly to outline the activities of the committee in
preparation. I can take the scarf off now, because it is extremely hot, I
might add. I do not know how they wear it in tropical areas.
[Interjections.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: Perhaps that is all they wear. [Laughter.]

Adv J H DE LANGE: Thank you, Dougie! Over a three week period, we had
extensive public hearings to thoroughly and candidly look at every aspect
of the budget of the Justice department. We started off with the Minister,
who gave the overview and the political direction of his department, then,
for two or three days, we looked in detail, with officials of the
department, at what they were doing. Thereafter, we called the prosecuting
authority, the Legal Aid Board, the Human Rights Commission, the TRC, the
Commission for Gender Equality, the Public Protector, the Heath Special
Investigating Unit, the Board for Sheriffs and the Bureau of Justice
Assistance and we had a thorough oversight of all the activities of those
structures.

We want to thank and congratulate, on behalf of the committee, people on
the effort that they made in preparing for these activities and,
especially, for being very candid and open and thorough in dealing with
their problems and what their plans were for the future. This made our
oversight role in the committee much easier.

There was one small hiccup and that was that we called upon the NCPS, as we
have done in the past, to come and give us an input on what their
activities are. Unfortunately, they did not arrive. I still have not
received a satisfactory answer as to whether they do or do not exist and I
am sure that, in future, we will receive a briefing from the Minister on
how to deal with this matter. I must say that the way the matter was dealt
with was highly unsatisfactory.

During the hearings, many issues were raised and candidly discussed and we
all had ample opportunity - that is, everyone from the majority and the
minority parties - to deal with all our problems and all the questions we
had. My colleagues from both sides will touch upon some of these aspects.

I would like to make a few brief comments on the way that I see the
transformation process has unfolded during this transitional period in the
department. In a nutshell, as hon members know, in 1994, there were 12
departments of justice in this country and 12 legal systems in this
country. Over a period of a few years, the previous Minister had to firstly
rationalise all these structures. He had to rationalise 12 directors-
general, 50 deputy directors-general, and all those type of activities and,
of course, all the institutions, the practices and attitudes that go with
that. This was of course an enormous task for the department.

Secondly, the 11 legal systems had to be all rationalised into one legal
system. Again, this is an enormous task and we are still busy with some of
those activities. Up till today, this has not been accomplished, six years
down the line.

The end of the story is that, over a long period of time, the department
was able to amalgamate into one department, one set of personnel with one
vision for the department, and has moved away from the fractured system
that existed previously and, equally, has moved to one legal system. At the
same time, while this rationalisation was taking place, delivery had to
continue, not only delivery of the usual functions of the department as
they existed, but also delivery of those functions that were being
reprioritised in the department. However, more so - as hon members in our
committee and in Parliament will know - this department has passed more
than 70 pieces of legislation in the past five or six years.

Not only has there been an enormous burden on the department to generate
that kind of legislation, but equally, of course, it then had to implement
it and find the finances or the money to do so. Having this rationalisation
process on the one side and having to deliver on the other side, has been
the sphere in which the department has had to operate over the past six
years.

It is important to note, as the Minister has outlined, that the percentage
of the budget has remained relatively constant in relation to the rest of
the budget. Although our budget has increased at times, like all the
departments, we struggle with a massive deficit in our budget. In fact, I
think that the Justice budget is something like 0,75% of our annual Budget
and the department just operates as a conduit passing a big part of that
money through to the commission.

So we can see that with a very limited budget, very limited capacity to
expand, a lot of work has been done. It is clear that the rationalisation
processes, personnel changes and new practices introduced by the department
over six years, plus the extra work burden brought on through new
legislation and reprioritising of activities, have created space for
certain problems to manifest themselves or to be introduced. These
difficulties have manifested themselves in many ways through failures of
proper management systems, wrong options taken, failures of delivery
services, increased malpractices in use and expenditure of funds, increased
fraud and corruption, increased disciplinary problems and so forth.

However, I am of the view that during the past two years through the
concerted efforts of both the previous Minister and the present Minister,
and both previous and present directors-general, and by putting in place
new systems and mechanisms to deal with these problems, we have turned the
corner in respect of these problems. I have no doubt that we are on an
upward curve, and we will be watching the department very carefully to make
sure that the curve does not only remain on the up, but, in fact, increases
in momentum.

I now want to turn to two issues which have received considerable attention
during the hearings and which, in some instances, may even be regarded as
controversial. The first is the delays in the implementation of
legislature. We canvassed this matter fully with the Minister and DG, and,
in most instances, satisfactory explanations were given either in general
terms for delays or in specific instances. The Minister has also outlined
again capacity problems - financial and in human terms, and so on - that
have created some of these problems.

However, there are two factors leading to delays that we dealt with in the
hearings which need to be elaborated on in Parliament itself. It appears
that financial implications of legislation are not always considered or not
properly considered, and not thoroughly analysed and evaluated before
legislation is introduced to either the Cabinet or Parliament. I think the
Minister and the department have dealt with this fully and admitted to it.

A whole plan is being put in place by the department to make sure that in
the future before legislation is introduced, it has been very carefully
looked at in terms of the financial implications, and that finances have
actually been provided in this instance. I must say that one of the
problems that we do have is that some of the practices of state expenditure
have contributed to these problems. For example, if the department knows
that it is going to introduce the Prosecuting Authority Bill this year and
it wants to include, therefore, a budget for the Bill, state expenditure
will not allow them to do so because the legislation has not been passed.
Then, during the year we pass legislation, there is no budget for it, and
when one has to implement the legislation, it cannot be done. I think that
part of the problem is that state expenditure should also be looking at
some of their practices in this regard to make sure that the departments
can fulfil these functions much better.

Secondly, we raised with the Minister during the hearings and aired our
dissatisfaction as a committee with the delays in the implementation of
certain legislation caused by the possible attitudes, approaches or even
obstacles of certain public servants in one or two departments. Pieces of
legislation that I give as examples are the amendments to the laws relating
to confessions, section 49 of the Criminal Procedure Act and section 29 of
the Correctional Services Act.

The problem is twofold in this regard. Firstly, the legitimacy, efficiency
and integrity of Parliament and its committees, as the highest legislative
authority in the country, is being severely undermined. Let me explain. If
legislation gets introduced by the department after thorough consultation
with other departments, and usually with the Law Commission, by the
Minister and the department in Cabinet, Cabinet then approves this
legislation and it comes to Parliament. The committee has thorough
hearings, hears all other departments' views on the matter, hears the view
of civil society and then goes through the caucuses to the parties. The
caucuses approve this legislation and, in some instances, they do not
approve it, but that does not happen very often.

We then pass the legislation in the National Assembly and it goes through
the NCOP committee and the NCOP, who will agree to the legislation. It is
very difficult for the committee to accept the long period of time or the
few years that it then takes to further implement it because some other
departments have problems with this. I want to stress, and we have stressed
this to the Minister, that we have on record as far as our department is
concerned, clearly been wanting to implement the legislation and to do so
very quickly at an early stage. But we have problems in that when certain
departments have raised these issues in the committees, the problems they
have raised have either been rejected or found to have no validity, and now
for two or three years the legislation is not passed. It is very important
that this matter is dealt with.

The second problem is that some of this legislation is in fact
unconstitutional at the moment. For example, we all agree, both in
Government and civil society at all levels, that section 49 of the Criminal
Procedure Act is unconstitutional. That is the law that allows the police
to use force when they arrest someone. At the moment, it is as it was under
the apartheid regime. Clearly, this piece of legislation is
unconstitutional at present.

We have waited one and a half years for the legislation that Parliament has
passed to be implemented and it has not happened. It is very difficult to
explain to people and the media what these holdups are. We have raised with
the Minister in the committee that these matters be speeded up, that these
pieces of legislation either be implemented immediately or other remedial
steps be taken to finalise the matter.
Let me deal with the other controversial issue that the Minister has also
touched on. That is the issue of the reparations arising out of the TRC.
Many voices have been raised in this regard recently. Personally, I have
been quite stunned by some of the voices that have been raised and their
content. For some reason, it seems that we have just forgotten completely
about the history of the TRC legislation and how we drafted it. It was very
clear when we drafted the legislation, and it is very clear as the
legislation stands now, that final reparations will be dealt with once the
TRC has done all its work and gives the Government a final report,
including its final recommendations on reparations. That is as clear as
daylight in the legislation, and it has always been our intention, and all
the parties here have accepted that.

From that process the recommendations then go to the Government.
Government, as we have agreed, will have an actuarial report done on the
costs and so on. They will then look at the matter holistically and make
recommendations to Parliament on the issue. Parliament will then look at
the issue and either approve or not approve it, add to or subtract from it,
and then regulations will be passed to deal with this matter. These are not
things that we sucked out of our thumbs. This is clearly what is in the
law.

Now some people are coming along and saying that most of the work of the
TRC has been done. Some say 95% of the work has been done, others say 90%.
They say that, therefore, they do not have to worry about what the law says
- that is, wait until the final report is given - they want to quickly
finalise the reparations, tag on and deal with the rest later. Either one
is an adherent of the rule of law or one is not. Either we apply the laws
properly and stick to them, or we do not. If we are unhappy with the law as
it is stated now, then there should be recommendations from people to amend
the law in order to change it and do what is being suggested.

In the meantime, the issue of final reparations is clearly dealt with in
the legislation. This Government has committed itself to complying with all
its obligations in terms of the final reparations, and it has also been
stated in the Azapo case that, clearly, the way we have limited people's
rights in terms of amnesty, both their civil and criminal litigation
rights, means that we have to therefore provide for a process of
reparations or else that legislation will ultimately be found to be
unconstitutional. It was found constitutional on the basis that there would
be a reparations process.

We as the ANC have stated over and again that we will comply with our
obligations in this regard. But we have not left victims destitute in the
meantime. We have provided for a process of interim relief and reparations,
but this process and mechanism is in the hands of the TRC. It is for the
TRC to deal with interim relief and reparations. They have to receive the
applications, process them and give their recommendations to the Government
- as the Minister says - and all the Government will do is pay the money
from the fund.

The Government has made R300 million available over two years for interim
reparations. It is sitting in the President's Fund. To date, we have only
paid out R30 million of this money. R270 million is available. It is
incumbent on the TRC to make sure that they have structures in place to
inform the victims of their rights in the meantime and to make sure the
victims apply for this money. Those that comply with the criteria of the
TRC will be helped in the interim, while we are waiting for finalisation of
this matter.

I therefore want to strongly reiterate the ANC's position which has been
stated ad nauseam. We will comply with all our legal and moral obligations
to victims, as contained in the TRC report. We have every intention to
provide for a process of final reparation once the TRC has completed its
work and handed to the Government its final report, which will include a
final report on final reparations. In the interim, the Government will
fulfil all its obligations relating to interim reparations, but emphasises
strongly that this is first and foremost the legal and moral obligation of
the TRC. I ask them to act responsibly and diligently in this regard, and
to provide a proper and adequate infrastructure for victims, not only to
enable the TRC to fulfil its legal and moral obligations, but to allow
victims with special and immediate needs the space to seek such interim
redress.

I think it is very important, and I am not accusing anyone, that we be very
careful to guard against any form of opportunism in this regard. Victims
are the most vulnerable groupings one can find in society. It is wrong for
us to create the wrong impression - suggest approaches to the issue of
reparations which fall outside the law. It is incumbent on all of us to
fulfil our duties towards victims and we should do so in terms of the law.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Dr J T DELPORT: Mr Chairman, for one brief moment, I thought the hon
colleague Mr De Lange had achieved greater heights in the ring, hence the
purple belt he was wearing.

Drieduisend jaar gelede het 'n regering in Babilon dae lank met 'n duisend
gaste feesgevier. Dit het goed gegaan, en toe verskyn daar aan die muur 'n
hand wat skrywe, 'n hand wat sê: ``Jy is geweeg en te lig bevind.''
Belsasar se koninkryk was besig om in sy fondamente te verkrummel.
[Tussenwerpsels.]

Die reg en die regstelsel is 'n hoeksteen van enige staat, en 'n staat wat
nie sekuriteit en vrede en toegang tot die reg aan sy mense kan gee nie,
kan nie oorleef nie. Ek sou graag vandag my tyd wou gebruik om positiewe en
opbouende voorstelle te doen, maar laat ons begin by die foute sodat ons
dit kan regstel en hanteer. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Three thousand years ago a government in Babylon celebrated for days on
end with a thousand guests. The festivities went very well, and then a hand
appeared on the wall which wrote: ``You have been weighed in the balances,
and found wanting.'' Belshazzar's kingdom was crumbling at its foundations.
[Interjections.]

The law and the legal system are a cornerstone of any state, and a state
which cannot provide its people with security and peace and access to the
law, cannot survive. I would have liked to spend my time today making
positive and constructive suggestions, but let us begin with the mistakes
in order for us to rectify and deal with them.]

I want to address the hon the Minister personally and say what I have said
on more than one occasion, that the Minister is prepared to admit the
serious and even sometimes chaotic condition in which our legal system
currently is. That is a good start, if one is prepared to admit the
problems we are facing.

Die eerste hand wat skrywe - en die Minister het dit alreeds erken - is dat
daar 'n gebrek aan administratiewe dissipline in die Departement van
Justisie is. Hoe is dit moontlik dat ons einde Januarie 130 000
agterstallige sake gehad het? Dit is moontlik as landdroshowe gemiddeld
maar drie uur en 40 minute per dag sit. Wat sê die departement self?
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The first hand writes - and the Minister has already admitted this - that
there is a lack of administrative discipline in the Department of Justice.
How is it possible that at the end of January we had a backlog of 130 000
cases? It is possible if the magistrates' courts sit, on average, for only
about three hours and 40 minutes per day. What does the department itself
say?]

This is what they say: Three specific problems have been identified, namely
a lack of discipline amongst the various role-players, including the court
orderlies, prosecutors, interpreters and even magistrates; secondly, bad or
ineffective court roll planning; and thirdly, the crisis of Legal Aid
payment of legal representatives.

In die algemeen kla hulle dat daar 'n ``inadequate court management
system'' in plek is, soos hulle dit noem. Hierdie hand wat so ontstellend
skryf, die hand van die departement self, gaan voort om te sê:
  A lot needs to be done to dispel the notion that the courts have not been
  effective in the fight against crime, particularly serious crimes and
  crimes against women and children.

Ek noem nie eens die groot probleem met wangedrag in die departement nie,
en selfs die miljoene rande wat weens bedrog en korrupsie verskuldig geraak
het. Die direkteur-generaal self sê reëls word eenvoudig blatant
geïgnoreer. Ek kan verskeie voorbeelde noem, maar laat ek op hierdie vlak
volstaan met wat 'n adjunkpresident van 'n afdeling van die Hooggeregshof
skryf. Hy sê:


  It is evident that proper and firm intervention is needed to prevent that
  also this division comes to a point of breakdown, as one has observed in
  some other courts.

Dit is nie snaaks nie, en dit is waar, wanneer The New York Times
rapporteer dat Suid-Afrikaners nie meer vertroue in die regstelsel het nie.
Wat 'n aanklag! Wat 'n hand wat skryf teen die muur! (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[In general they complain that there is an ``inadequate court management
system'' in place. This hand that is writing so alarmingly, the hand of the
department itself, goes on to say:


  A lot needs to be done to dispel the notion that the courts have not been
  effective in the fight against crime, particularly serious crimes and
  crimes against women and children.

I am not even mentioning the big problem as regards misconduct in the
department, and even the millions of rands which are owed due to fraud and
corruption. The director-general himself says that rules are simply being
blatantly ignored. I can mention various examples, but in this regard what
a deputy president of a division of the Supreme Court has written will
suffice. He says:


  It is evident that proper and firm intervention is needed to prevent that
  also this division comes to a point of breakdown, as one has observed in
  some other courts.

It is no joke, and it is the truth, when The New York Times reports that
South Africans no longer have faith in the legal system. What an
indictment! What a hand that is writing on the wall!]

Secondly, a hand is writing that we have a selective commitment to fighting
crime. Let us listen to the voice of Judge Heath, who leads the most, or
perhaps the only really, successful crime combating unit, reclaiming
hundreds of millions of rands lost through corruption.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF ARTS, CULTURE, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Amen!

Dr J T DELPORT: What does the hon judge say? He says that he questions the
Government's political will to root out corruption. Small wonder! His unit
is totally underfunded, to the extent that he is compelled to approach the
private sector for assistance. [Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: I cannot believe that!

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

Dr J T DELPORT: A direct question: Why has he been the object of abusive
remarks by a Cabinet Minister and today in this House? [Interjections.]
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

Dr J T DELPORT: Is it, perhaps, because Judge Heath knows no fear or
favour? Is it because Government officials are protected? The finger writes
and writes.

There is also absence of support for the rule of law. The surest sign of
crumbling foundations of any state is when the rule of law is undermined or
not supported. A test for the hon the Minister's commitment to the rule of
law and the independence of the judiciary presented itself twice in recent
weeks. First of all, our neighbour in Harare, who, incidentally,
singlehandedly destroyed the economy of Zimbabwe, dealt his own country a
fatal blow by ignoring judgments of his own high court. The comments of our
Minister, the South African Minister for Justice and Constitutional
Development? Nothing. Earthshattering silence.

Secondly, the ANC's Smuts - or is it Hitler Nonkonyana? - speaks
degradingly of the judiciary. Surely our Minister for Justice and
Constitutional Development should react to the uncalled for and recklessly
irresponsible statements by Nonkonyana? After all, he states that the
Appeal Court judges were racially biased, and that the judiciary ought to
be transformed. I applaud the Minister for his remarks here today, and I
welcome them, but once again, his immediate reaction? Nothing.
Earthshattering silence.

It became necessary for the hon Mr Justice Chaskalson, president of the
Constitutional Court, and the hon Chief Justice to react. What did they
say? They said it was a deplorable attack. They said such comments ``cannot
be regarded as legitimate''. They constitute an attack on the judiciary as
an institution, impugning the integrity of six judges and implying that
their decisions were a result of bias. Any such attack is to be deplored.
[Interjections.]

It was necessary for Judge President Ngoepe earlier, as a result of and in
reaction to the cries, also from members of this Parliament, to discipline
the judiciary, and to state that it was in the public interest that the
High Court be preserved and recognised for what it is, the repository of
judicial competence and independence. The finger writes.

Dan wil ek ook iets sê oor selektiewe gelykheid. Een van die hoekstene van
ons Grondwet is die beginsel van gelykheid. Alle vorme van rassisme en
diskriminasie word verbied. Daar is een korrektief en dit is die sogenaamde
regstellende optrede. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Then I also want to say something about selective equality. One of the
cornerstones of our Constitution is the principle of equality. All forms of
racism and discrimination are prohibited. There is one corrective, and that
is so-called affirmative action.]]

The Human Rights Commission had no qualms about embarking on an
investigation into racism in the media. At the same time, however, another
incident occurred. A young schoolgirl qualified for the Olympics. She was
the only one in Africa. Similarly, the South African men's hockey team
qualified to participate. Alas, the schoolgirl gymnast and the hockey team
have to wait. Nocsa says they will not represent South Africa. This was
confirmed this very morning.

This is not affirmative action. It is blatant discrimination. It is blatant
racism. Let us all applaud Minister Balfour, who, at least, tried to
intervene on behalf of the hockey team. But where is the Human Rights
Commission? Where is our Minister for Justice and Constitutional
Development? Deafening silence.

I invite these sportsmen to contact me. Ramsamy should be taken to court.
This is another finger that is writing, extinguishing the spirit of hope.
Nothing is as essential and nothing is as powerful as the spirit of hope,
as a vision which can be pursued, and as a guiding star that will lead and
motivate. How sad, to quote an eminent lawyer, chairman of the General Bar
Council, Jeremy Gauntlett, who says: ``There is a palpably depressed spirit
across the ranks of our judiciary.'' Another finger that writes.

We need to call for drastic measures. I have not even touched on the issue
of crime. South Africa is becoming internationally known for its crimes of
violence, murder, rape, torture and robbery. The line must now be drawn.

Let me state first of all, as a legal theoretician, that I am against the
death penalty. But I call upon the Government to call for and to allow a
free vote in Parliament on the introduction of the death penalty in extreme
cases of indiscriminate murder, rape with torture and the murder of
policemen. Allow everyone in this Parliament to heed his own conscience.
Let everyone in this House ask himself whether Parliament is doing its duty
to a defenceless public which is at the mercy of killers and rapists.

In conclusion, we in the DP have become used to personal attacks and name
calling whenever we touch a raw nerve. [Interjections.] I would like to
thank that hon colleague but it is not for him to say that; it is for the
Chair to decide.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Carry on with your speech.

Mr J T DELPORT: I have endeavoured today not to speak myself but to let
others speak. [Interjections.] Let others do the writing on the wall. But
whether the DP says so or whether others say so, the fact remains that the
very existence of the Government's contract with the people of our country
is at stake. The sacred promises of safety, security and access to justice
at all times, as contained in our Constitution, are at risk.
If the Minister is really dedicated, and I do believe he is, to
transformation, efficiency and excellence, then he can count on the DP's
support. But many fingers are writing on the wall. Many fingers are
warning. I urge the members to heed the writing before it is too late.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Chairperson, I will confine my contribution to the
Justice Vote, which the IFP supports. [Interjections.] We support it
without that scarf that Johnny has imported. [Laughter.] [Interjections.] I
will continue as well. The IFP joins other speakers who addressed words of
appreciation to those in the department who have done their duty,
especially those who have suffered under very abnormal circumstances.

As far as the hon the Minister is concerned, he was criticised by the DP,
but I think they are making a mistake, because this hon Minister is facing
an almost impossible task. He finds himself in the position of an heir who
inherited an insolvent estate. The problems in the Justice department did
not originate yesterday. They started in the days of the old NP, before
1994, when particularly Mr Kobie Coetzee proved himself to be a useless
justice Minister. [Laughter.] I told him so at the time.

We in the IFP believe that the justice system of any country forms the very
backbone of that country. The justice system ensures law and order. It
tries and sends criminals to jail. It settles disputes between citizens. It
protects the citizens against unfair governments. The point is, with an
effective justice system, a country has law and order. Without an effective
justice system, it has anarchy.

Various prominent people have warned that South Africa's justice system is
collapsing. One of them is the previous director-general. I have noticed
that the DP has also emphasised numerous crisis areas such as, they say, a
total lack of administrative discipline, a chaotic state that has arisen in
the criminal justice systems and the backlog of 130 000 cases, and The New
York Times has reported that we no longer trust the justice system.

The point is that we can mention many more examples of this state of
affairs, such as that the awaiting-trial accused, in some cases, have to
wait in jail, awaiting trial for longer than a year. More than 60 000
people are at the moment in jail awaiting trial and they are overcrowding
our prisons. There are not sufficient funds available to finance the
system. There are many more examples, but I think that the point is the
following. We all see the problem, but the question is: What do we do to
solve the crisis?

The Zulus have a very applicable saying when a cow is stuck in the mud.
They say: Iwe ngophondo. Iwe ngophondo. [It fell on its horn.] Then all in
the area spontaneously jump in to get the cow out of the mud. I see the
Minister of the SA Police Service shakes his head and says that he knows of
the cow in the mud and that we all have to help to get it out. [Laughter.]
As far as the justice system is concerned, we in the IFP say today: Iwe
ngophondo. In other words, let us all jump in to get the justice cow out of
the mud.
The matter is no longer of a party-political nature. It has become a
national problem and it requires extraordinary measures to save our system.
I believe that lawyers in KwaZulu-Natal and the Western Cape have offered
to serve free of charge in magistrates' courts. The Minister also referred
to those helping hands. This is an excellent start to the process of
getting the cow out of the mud. The proposal of the IFP is an urgent call
on all members of Parliament who are lawyers to lend a hand. We propose
that all MPs who are lawyers offer part of their constituency weeks to
report for work in our courts free of charge.

We could help as magistrates, prosecutors, clerks of the court,
interpreters and as messengers. To Sheila, I say: Any work; even to make
tea or wash dishes. There are dozens of lawyers in Parliament and in the
nine provincial legislatures. They could publicly demonstrate Parliament's
resolve to help to save our justice system. This dramatic step by
parliamentarians would hopefully encourage more lawyers and retired legal
practitioners to also join in this drastic movement to help to save our
justice system.

We do not know whether this is legally possible. If not, the hon the
Minister can consider ways and means of changing it. I can already see Mr
Johnny de Lange as a magistrate. If I were Mr Jannie Momberg, I would not
appear in front of him. [Laughter.]

In conclusion, let it be seen that Parliament is serious and committed to
save our justice system. Let us all jump in and get the justice cow out of
the mud. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Before hon Chohan-Kota speaks,
I would like all members to please pay attention, especially Mr M Da
Camara. This debate will do you a lot of good, sir. Please take your seat.
[Laughter.]

Ms F I CHOHAN-KOTA: Chairperson, it would be nice if the hon Van der Merwe
actually came to our justice portfolio committee meetings more often. We
are obviously in dire need of learning about cows, mud and things like
that. [Laughter.]

On a more serious note, I say to the Minister that it follows logically
that for the people of this country to accord the law due deference, the
lawmakers and the enforcers of those laws should themselves accord due
deference to the law. It is by and large the legislature's task to make the
law and it is by and large the task of the courts to enforce those laws
through due processes.

When judges start criticising the law, not because the law is
unconstitutional, but because they simply do not like it, the message that
is conveyed is that the law deserves no respect. That observation can be
made in the case of minimum mandatory sentences of the Criminal Law
Amendment Act, and I want to quote from the lead article of the Cape Argus
of 24 May 2000 entitled: ``Rape life term law a failure. Judges lash
draconian sentences.'' It says:


  From the outset, judges have been extremely critical of the legislation
  saying it was ``appallingly drafted'', ``draconian'' and that it limited
  their discretion.

I would like to deal with each of these separately. On the question of the
legislation being appallingly drafted, let me say that casting aspersions
in this way does enormous harm. And by the way, every one in this House
should be affronted by the statement, because this law was passed
unanimously by all parties.

I say that it does enormous harm because we are, after all, all of us here,
legitimately elected representatives of the people of this country. It is
the choice of the people that is being berated. This kind of statement
questions our very competence as law-makers. It undermines the very essence
of the checks and balances in our system of governance.

Let me say immediately that I am not for one minute suggesting that we, as
members of Parliament, are above criticism. What I am saying is that the
criticism should, at the very least, be founded on some sort of objective
truth. The truth is that the mandatory minimum sentences two years down the
line have not been found to be unconstitutional. Even the most critical
judges have never suggested that this law was unconstitutional, and the
reason for this is simple - we took extreme care when we drafted this law
to ensure its constitutionality.

Given the fact that the law is constitutional, it is the job of the
judiciary to implement it. To say that minimum sentences are draconian is
inappropriate in the extreme. Members will remember that we imposed these
mandatory sentences on the most heinous of crimes - sexual violence against
children, gang rapes, murder, hijacking, and armed robbery, to name a few.
When judges start pronouncing on anything other than the legality of the
law, then they are no longer acting as judges, but as politicians.

The criticism that mandatory sentences limit judicial discretion does have
some merit. But this law does not replace judicial discretion. If it did,
it would be unconstitutional. The law allows judges to deviate from the
sentences when there are substantial and compelling reasons to do so. The
kinds of sentences that were being handed down for similar cases were
unacceptably disparate and, in some instances, inappropriate for the kinds
of serious crimes being committed.

The trend internationally is to offer guidelines to judges when faced with
the difficult task of sentencing. There is a growing awareness
internationally that judicial discretion, if left unstructured, leads to
disparities and uncertainties, and this in turn impacts very directly on
the very legitimacy of our judiciary. A child-rapist in Johannesburg should
be treated very similarly to a child-rapist in Cape Town. Similar cases, as
the Minister said, should be treated similarly. That was the objective of
the legislation and, as the Minister pointed out, certainty in sentencing
will only enhance the legitimacy of our courts.
Nothing will harm the judiciary in this country as much as their own
actions or inactions. If Parliament gives them the tools with which to
strike out hard against serious crimes and criminals, and they fail to use
those tools, then they will have only themselves to blame for the
inevitable legitimacy crisis that will follow.

To the credit of the judiciary, most judges have welcomed these minimum
sentence laws, and many have been applying the law correctly, without
feeling insecure about their turf and so on, and they showed sufficient
concern for victims of serious crime. I have with me one such example where
in the hijack murder of 19-year-old Regan Roode, whose only crime was
obeying traffic laws when he stopped at the stop sign where his assailants
murdered him, the judge handed down the minimum sentence of life
imprisonment, despite the fact that the assailants, too, were very young.
Other judges, even though they eventually did not apply the mandatory
sentences, used their discretion in accordance with the law, and with that
we can have absolutely no argument.

The Law Commission, in its latest proposal, seems to have come up with a
good way to deal with the balancing act of providing guidelines without
totally removing judicial discretion. They now propose more general
guidelines and propose a judicial discretion, if the circumstances are
substantial and compelling, within a spectrum of deviation, so that judges
will now be able to deviate, either higher or lower, but within a minimum
set range.

The commission is also looking at sentencing processes more broadly, and it
is suggesting things like payment of compensation to victims and allowing
victims to be heard at sentencing. All of these proposals are refreshing,
and it would be in the best interest of the country and, in particular, the
judiciary, if our judges were to attend these workshops that are being held
around the country in the next few weeks and were to embrace this process
with a great deal of enthusiasm. [Applause.]

Mrs S M CAMERER: Chairperson, the New NP intends to support the Justice
Vote. This can be seen as a leap of faith for various reasons. The facts on
the ground, namely the inadequacy of the budget, the bad state of our
courts and the court rolls, the previous mismanagement of the department's
finances, the unsatisfactory degree of implementation of recently passed
statutes promoted by the Department of Justice, leave a lot to be desired.

However, we believe that we should give the Minister and his department the
benefit of the doubt this time around. Our main reason for taking this
position is that the department is now headed up by a bunch of new brooms.
The new team must be given a chance to rectify matters.

Firstly, the Minister inherited a bad situation from his predecessor and
has been in office for only a year. He got off to a fairly bad start,
shooting his mouth off about Constitutional Court judges who did not work
hard enough and was rapped over the knuckles by the Deputy President of the
Constitutional Court himself, Pius Langa. However, he does seem to have
settled down in the post, and he now demonstrates a praiseworthy
inclination to question the established order and to indulge in some
lateral thinking about the justice system.

I would like to congratulate the Minister on his call, reported in today's
newspapers, for leaders from all walks of life to tone down their criticism
of the judiciary. Hopefully, top ANC officials like Smuts Ngonyama will
take this to heart. It is also to the Minister's credit that he is working
with the private sector team to overhaul the department's management
structure.

Then there is the Deputy Minister who is also new. Not much is heard from
her, and I must say she does not appear to be here today, but she has given
undertakings to the Public Accounts Committee of Parliament to get the
department's internal audit under control and we will watch this very
carefully.

The director-general is also newly appointed. Having acted in the post for
nearly a year, Mr Vusi Pikoli has now taken over the reins. In the briefing
to the portfolio committee on the budget, he has demonstrated an admirable
frankness when questioned about the problems facing the department. We in
the New NP wish him well with his important and daunting task. We would
also like to congratulate all other members of the department involved in
an excellent and detailed budget briefing to the Portfolio Committee on
Justice.

Having said that, we believe we must draw attention to some severe
shortcomings in the budget and in the department. In the first place, the
budget is inadequate. Throughout the briefings to the justice portfolio
committee the Minister, the director-general and various officials have
acknowledged this, and the Minister confirmed here today that his
department is, as he put it ``woefully underfunded''.

As Mr Hassan Ebrahim, deputy director-general in charge of the department's
finances, also acknowledged, this year's marginal increase of about 10% was
less than satisfactory and barely keeps up with inflation. In fact, he made
a point that the department has less funding for its operations this year
than last year, which is entirely unsatisfactory. In fact, virtually every
Justice department official who gave evidence to the committee on the
budget deplored their lack of resources in their particular compartment of
the department.

In a recent briefing to Parliament the Deputy Minister said: ``Justice is
primarily about the courts.'' And the courts are in a bad way. In the
briefings, the director-general painted a grim picture, which has already
been mentioned today. He admitted to huge backlogs of 130 000 criminal
cases countrywide at the beginning of February this year, an inability to
cope with the numbers of accused resulting from crime crackdowns - well,
that is hopeless - unproductive lower courts which still sit less than an
average of 3,5 hours a day, and a lack of discipline among court staff.

If one adds to this large numbers of vacant posts because of insufficient
resources, it is small wonder that conviction rates in our courts have
plummeted since 1994 when the ANC Government took office. The new brooms
are faced with a probably impossible task, unless Government makes more
funding available for the Department of Justice.

One of the major casualties of this lack of resources is the implementation
of legislation. Sections of a dozen pieces of legislation passed by
Parliament between 1996 and 1998 still have not been put into operation -
in certain important cases because of lack of funds. For example, an
improvement to the Criminal Procedure Act, providing for cost orders
against parties delaying criminal proceedings, cannot be implemented, owing
to financial and personnel constraints.

The appointment of lay assessors in the magistrates' courts is also on hold
because of lack of funds. The relevant legislation is detailed and
sophisticated and in place, but witness protection is still in its infancy
in our country because of lack of funding to implement it. This is a vital
aspect of the prevention of organised crime, but it is not being done.

Possibly, the worst casualty of all is the failure of the Department of
Justice to make financial provision for the appointment of maintenance
investigators in terms of the new Maintenance Act of 1998. We all know that
the maintenance courts are hopelessly inadequate at present. We were
briefed, at the time we passed it with great fanfare, by the previous
Minister that these maintenance investigators were the lynchpin of a new
deal for women as far as the collection of maintenance is concerned.

The success or failure of the new maintenance dispensation is dependent on
the appointment of these maintenance investigators. Well, so far, there can
only be failure as there is apparently insufficient money to make the
appointments. This new deal was universally welcomed by women and the way
the department and the Government has dragged its feet over this issue is a
bitter disappointment.

It is to his credit that the Minister has acknowledged the frustration of
the justice committee at this state of affairs where legislation is rushed
through Parliament and then there is a prolonged period before
implementation. He has agreed that our criticism is justified. Hopefully,
this will lead to improvements.

Besides lack of funding, there is another worrying aspect of the non-
implementation of legislation, and that is the interference by departmental
officials from Justice and other departments to stymie and delay the
implementation of laws that have been passed by this Parliament. Prime
examples are the domestic violence law, the legal aid guide and new
provisions in the Criminal Procedure Act. This trend appears to be
snowballing and it is entirely undemocratic, and we in the New NP appeal to
the Minister to remain vigilant on this score and to stop the delays that
are coming from this source.

In the few minutes that I have left, I would also like to draw attention to
one area of the criminal law which we in the New NP believe merits urgent
and detailed attention, and that is the rights of victims of crime. We are
aware that the SA Law Commission is investigating and reporting to the
Minister on aspects of these rights, in particular the right to
compensation and the establishment of a victims' fund. However, this has
been going on for some time now, and nothing seems to materialise. We
believe that there should be more urgency about the matter.

By way of private members' legislation already submitted to the relevant
committee, I have proposed, on behalf of the New NP, amendments to the
Criminal Procedure Act to give victims of crime a more prominent role in
court proceedings relating to the crimes committed against them. For
example, instead of being treated as a mere witnesses, the victim of the
crime would have a clearly defined role with the right to address the court
in bail applications and sentencing proceedings and to have an input in
parole hearings.

The victim should have a right to give the court a first-hand impression of
the impact that the crime has had on his or her life. Last year, I
submitted this draft legislation to the department and the previous
Minister for comment, but received no response, which is why I have now
gone the private member's route.

In addition, the New NP believes that convicted criminals should be forced
to take full time jobs in jail in order to pay compensation to their
victims. The New NP proposes that changes to the law be investigated with
the purpose of giving judges new powers to order anyone sent to prison for
a serious or violent crime to make financial restitution to their victims
for the physical and emotional harm they have inflicted. This should apply
to every category of serious crime from theft and assault to rape and
murder.

The New NP believes that the best way prisoners can reform is to work a
full day and pay compensation to their victims. If we had our way, judges
would get the power to decide a reparation order when handing down a
sentence. The Government is presently considering an overhaul of
correctional services and this aspect should also be taken into account.

We also have some questions for the Minister on aspects of the budget,
which came to light only after his own briefing to the portfolio committee,
and we would appreciate it if he could give us some answers today. The
first question is about the Heath Unit. Everyone agrees that the Heath Unit
is continuing to do a great job. Last financial year it recovered R314,8
million worth of Government assets of which more than R100 million were in
cash - more than last year, when it was only R78 million. This year it is
R100 million in cash.

However, the resources allocated to the unit have been decreased. In
addition, some 127 draft proclamations asked for by the unit, which relate
to corruption and maladministration cases involving upwards of R2 billion,
are gathering dust in the Department of Justice. Until these proclamations
are forwarded to the President for signature, no investigation can take
place. Some of these relate to cases dating from 1997 and 1998. Apparently,
the pretext for the delays and the financial squeeze on the unit is the
possibility of creating another unit.

However, paralysis seems to have set in on all counts. Like Judge Heath
yesterday, we want to ask the Minister: Does he not agree that this
Government's dithering is sending the wrong message to the country and the
investing public about the Government's approach to corruption? Why is the
Heath Unit not properly funded? Why are the draft proclamations not being
forwarded for the President's signature? What is happening about the other
units that are being talked about? We would appreciate it if the hon
Minister could give us answers today.

Secondly, about the TRC reparations, it is surely unsatisfactory that a
President's Fund in excess of R300 million has been available for some
time, and yet only 10% of that amount has been allocated thus far, and only
a third of the allocated amount has actually been paid to identified TRC
victims. Now, the Minister mentioned that a lot more victims have been
identified and paid. He did not mention the amounts but I gathered that it
still does not even amount to 10% of what is sitting there in the
President's Fund, which amounts to allocations made from the Justice Vote
in the past two years.

In response to questions I and others put to the President during the
President's question time a couple of weeks ago, President Mbeki remarked
that, yes, he supposed the process could be speeded up. Yesterday Hlengiwe
Mkhize, chairperson of the TRC's reparation committee, asked that the
process be speeded up. Could the Minister tell us whether he agrees with
the President and Ms Mkhize that the process should be speeded up? If so,
what steps does he propose to speed up the payments? Could he also clarify
why there is this enormous discrepancy between what actually has been paid
- 10% which is around R30 million out of the R300 million that is actually
available - and yet the department is saying that possibly R3 000 million
might have to be paid in future. There does not seem to be any connection
between these amounts. I think some reality ought to come into the picture.
[Time expired.]

Ms D P S JANA: Chairperson, hon Ministers and members, participating in
this first budget debate of Minister Penuell Maduna is a very special
honour for me, an honour I dedicate to friend, colleague, comrade and human
rights lawyer Shun Chetty who recently passed on. I do so as a tribute to
him and to those legendary lawyers who made very meaningful contributions
to justice and the rule of law in South Africa - Bram Fischer, Duma Nokwe,
Joe Slovo, Victoria and Griffiths Mxenge and Bheki Mlangeni. [Applause.]

My chairperson has encroached on my topic so I had to make some very hasty
changes. Whether it was Niewoudt or Strydom or Williamson, once again
apartheid's ruthless murderer and superspy has been granted amnesty for the
murders of Ruth First, Jeannette Schoon and her seven-year-old daughter,
Katryn. Williamson walks free, totally absolved from criminal and delictual
liability for these murders. The question is being asked: Is this justice?
Emphatically, no! Justice means investigating the truth, punishing the
guilty and granting reparation to the victim. However, our desperate quest
for a peaceful, negotiated settlement for freedom and democracy compelled
us to make a hard and compromising choice of truth and reconciliation
before justice.

This was the price for freedom, a freedom born out of the painful
sacrifices of victims of apartheid. We respect the amnesty commission's
decision and have to accept their findings, amongst other criteria, that
Williamson's murderous acts were committed with the political objective of
apartheid, that he made a full disclosure and that the relationship between
the murders he committed, including that of a little baby, was
proportionate to the objectives of apartheid. What is difficult to accept
is the evident disequilibrium in respect of the perpetrator and victim in
the process of truth and reconciliation.

The amnesty has reopened wounds, and again inflicted pain and trauma on the
families and friends of Ruth First, Jeannette and Katryn Schoon. They feel
angry. They feel disillusioned and, perhaps, they even feel betrayed, but
not surprisingly they are not crying out for compensation, because they
know that there can never be adequate compensation for their pain and loss.
What they are crying out for is some concrete gesture of genuine remorse
from the perpetrators.

Remorse is not prescribed in the Constitution nor in the legislation. After
all, it is a humane response that should flow from the depths of one's
conscience. We know that until that happens, the reconciliation that we so
proudly claim and for which the entire world applauds us will be rendered a
hollow victory. And any reparation intended to restore the dignity of
victims will remain incomplete. One wonders why there is no criticism from
opposition parties, especially the DP, against perpetrators who have been
granted amnesty, but have failed to show remorse. However, they are quick
to criticise the Government, quite unjustifiably, for not granting final
reparation. Is this not sheer political opportunism?

The Government is firmly committed to the Constitution and its legal
obligations, including international human rights law, for reparation to
the victims recommended by the TRC. As President Mbeki said when questioned
here in this house during Question Time, Government's commitment to
reparation is not only to victims whose fundamental human rights were
violated by abuse, torture and death, but also to victims who endured pain,
suffering, loss and injustice through dispossession of land, forced
removals, poverty, malnutrition, homelessness, education deprivation and
disempowerment.

The Government is further committed to equate reparations for victims
recommended by the TRC with those victims of gross violations of human
rights who were not part of the TRC process, but nonetheless deserving of
reparation. Under the enormity of the Government's responsibility and
limitation of resources, reparation was never intended as compensation for
individual delictual claim, but as mitigation for loss and suffering. It is
therefore directed more holistically towards reconciliation and
reconstruction of society. Therefore, final reparation will have to be
integrated with national programmes of social development.

Urgent reparations for cash amounts have already been implemented, as we
heard the Minister say, but final reparation is, however, pending the
completion of the outstanding matters of the amnesty committee. There are
about 730 matters which are expected to be finalised in the next few
months. The budget allocation for this is R8,5 million. However, the TRC
has motivated for a total of about R30 million. We must urge the Government
to facilitate the completion of the TRC's mandate within the timeframe.
Much time has elapsed already since the perpetration of the violations.
Therefore, it is imperative that reparation must be effected soon, or else
the healing process will be aborted.

In the meantime there are serious concerns about policy formulation,
structuring and co-ordinating mechanisms nationally and provincially,
allocating resources and generating funds from donors and the private
sector, and consultation and debate among Government, the private sector,
NGOs and civil society. There appears to be no reason why these processes
cannot begin now.

Finally, reparation is a moral obligation of all South Africans, but it
places a special moral onus on the beneficiaries of apartheid privilege,
especially those in this House who are so vociferous about reparation. They
should put their money where their mouth is. In support of this budget, I
conclude with a poem selected by ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M E MABETA: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, we rise today to
speak in support of this budget. Our approach is a simple one. The central
issue here is transformation in the Justice department. Secondly, we visit
the issue of reconciliation and reparations, and thirdly, the role of
traditional courts and community courts in the justice system in our
country.

I would like to start by commending the portfolio chairperson, hon De
Lange, and his stand-in at times, Ms Jana, on their efforts in engaging
members of the committee in an exciting and pointed manner in discussing
the passage of a piece of legislation at different stages. I thank them
very much.

We must be proud that, for the first time in our society, we have justice
that is accessible to all people at a cost that is effective for everyone.
These efforts, when seen against the much universally recognised moral
imperative which prompted South Africans to introduce the Promotion of
National Unity and Reconciliation Act of 1995, are historic and honourable.
We should be proud and give credit to those whose wisdom and foresight gave
birth to them, because a special psychological and spiritual avenue,
previously blocked by the evil ideology of apartheid, carefully crafted and
ruthlessly implemented by the NP government, was created for all South
Africans to find each other and reconcile themselves.
The important aspect in the issue of reconciliation is that the cycle of
reconciliation must be completed, so that when the perpetrators are
pardoned and walk away in the comfort and assurance that they can start new
lives, their victims are fully aware of how the interim relief funds and
other arrangements will enable them to plan their own lives. I find the
suggestion by Ms Jana very interesting, ie that maybe there should be a
requirement in the legislation that those who have been pardoned, the
perpetrators, must be forced to make a sizeable contribution towards
meeting or addressing the difficulties facing the victims of their actions.

We in my party do not believe that if this were to be done, it would be
vindictive or retributive, but rather feel that those who were perpetrators
would be forced to accept the moral responsibility for their actions and to
find an avenue, free from the fray and the heat of politics, to simply say:
``I am sorry, thank you. Rise and let us go.'' There is nothing wrong with
money as reparation, because we are dealing with victims who have families
and children, some of whom cannot go to school while others have to consult
doctors for the rest of their lives. One is dealing with a real life
situation for the most part, of people who even before they were
victimised, were finding it very difficult to meet their daily needs of
life.

On the question of traditional courts, we believe that they have a very
significant role to play in our society in that the chiefs can be trained,
and have assessors and administrative staff made available to them. They
can then play a much more rehabilitative role than the criminal justice
system does, which tends to incarcerate but does not rehabilitate
individuals. On the question of training, there needs to be more
convergence in the training of magistrates, prosecutors and the
investigating officials, so that one should not have this pattern of
disappearing police dockets to a point where the victim and the ordinary
person in the street feel that justice has not been meted out.

We are concerned that there is this talk about financial mismanagement in
the Department of Justice. Our suggestion is that maybe the Minister needs
to seriously revisit the issue of the nature of the management structures
in the Department of Justice. How does Coca-Cola win a bid from Pepsi-Cola,
and then allow the Pepsi-Cola management to run the company?
[Interjections.] [Time expired.]
Mr J S MGIDI: Mr Chairperson, the fight against crime and the creation of a
just society based on the principles of equality and freedom are a
collective responsibility of all of us in this House and outside.

The Government, private sector, NGOs, community-based organisations and
inidividuals all need to constitute a single and very powerful offensive
against crime. Crime is a national menace against which we should all close
ranks and destroy it. Our public utterances about crime, therefore, should
not create an impression that some of us hate crime and are determined to
fight it, whilst others wish that it could boom so that they can use it to
gain cheap political capital.

Yes, there are weaknesses here and there that need attention, but the
resolve of this Government to deal with crime is by now beyond question.
One of the praiseworthy strides made by this Government in its endeavour to
fight crime was the creation of the National Directorate of Public
Prosecutions and its subsidiaries. Noteworthy amongst these is the Assets
Forfeiture Unit, a novel concept in our judiciary. This unit, which is only
about a year old, has already made an incredible impact in our Government's
effort to deal with serious and organised crime. Already, it is sending a
very clear message to criminals, especially the bosses of organised crime
syndicates, that crime does not and will not pay in our country. With a
meagre staff complement of about seven professionals only, this unit has
shown unparalleled dedication, commitment and capability to cause sleepless
nights for criminals.

Through these and other crime agencies, our Government is taking the war to
criminals, and I believe that this is a war the criminals will never win.
As is the case with most novel concepts, the first few months of the
existence of the Assets Forfeiture Unit were not without worrying
difficulties and challenges. When it was created, many experts and
commentators from some jurisdictions in the world warned that we should
expect a fierce legal battle orchestrated, marshalled and commanded by the
rich and very powerful criminals who obviously want to protect and retain
their ill-gotten wealth. For this purpose, they would use their ill-gotten
resources to employ the best legal brains available in the market.

Using their power and wealth, I want to believe that they will also try to
secure the services of some of our unscrupulous and unprincipled
politicians in this regard. In addition, we were warned that some
honourable judges would be reluctant to implement the law, which they would
see as draconian in spite of its intended and noble objective of fighting
crime, regarded by many as a national menace. Indeed, probably to the
delight of those who want to use the scourge of crime as an opportunity for
political point-scoring, these experts were proved correct. The unit has
been in and out of court on countless occasions because, as predicted,
these criminals are trying to find some possible weaknesses or
uncertainties in the law for their own survival.

It is pleasing, however, to note that, despite all the technical and legal
hiccups, overall, the unit is making tremendous successes. We have just
been told by the Minister today that, of the 25 cases that the unit
initiated, it was successful with 23 of them. This represents an admirable
success. Again, we have heard that the unit has thus far seized assets to
the value of about R70 million. Is it not something that this nation should
be proud of? The message is now loud and clear to the criminals, and that
is that in a matter of time the law will catch up with them.

The Government is determined to hit the criminals where it hurt most - that
is, in their pockets. This Government will do this by closing down their
infrastructure, such as the drug houses, bars and clubs from which criminal
activities are planned and committed, amongst others. We must all warn
these criminals that winning a case not on merit, but on technicalities can
only give them temporary relief. The Government is determined to
continuously improve the legal framework, while at the same time continuing
to launch a fierce legal offensive on the criminals until there is not a
single technical hole through which the criminals can escape the wrath of
the law.

The unit is amongst a few other strategic crime-fighting agencies designed
to combat crime, as well as create a safe and better life for our people.
Among these, we have a court management unit whose basic task is to improve
the managerial capacity of the courts. The National Prosecution Authority,
whose overall objective includes improving the prosecutorial capacity of
our court system, the newly established Sexual Offences and Community
Affairs Unit, the Directorate of Special Operations or the Scorpions, and
others, are all an indication of this Government's absolute resolve to
combat crime, despite certain attention-deserving technical weaknesses.

We are humbled by the commitment of the private sector and other sectors in
dealing with crime. This House and, indeed, the people on whose behalf it
speaks, are appreciative of their patriotism, and we welcome their
contribution and call for some more.

When the hon Dr Delport began his speech, he promised to defy what has
become the DP's tradition of destructive criticism, and to make a
constructive input. However, what he, unfortunately, was successful in
doing, was to publicly display his selective morality and his skewed
conception of racism.

Who would be regarded as being discriminating, between a team that defies
the rules of its own association and excludes all others except players of
a particular racial group and is seen by its own association as, thereby,
perpetuating racial discrimination, and an association that says: ``Hey,
open up. This is the new South Africa. There is democracy and no more
discrimination.'' [Applause.]
Mr S N SWART: Mr Chairperson and hon Minister, the purpose of Government is
primarily to protect the life, liberty and property of all individuals, by
punishing criminals and protecting law-abiding citizens. There is no doubt,
however, that the South African criminal justice system is struggling to
cope, and that without an equitable and adequate system of law enforcement
and criminal prosecution, the high levels of crime and violence will become
institutionalised in the social fabric of our society.

During the recent budget hearings and the Budget Vote, it became apparent
that a number of serious issues are facing the department. The allegations
related to corruption and the large number of outstanding misconduct
hearings are matters of grave concern which clearly require urgent
attention.

The Justice department should be the role model in Government and,
therefore, these aspects are particularly disturbing. The ACDP welcomes the
undertakings given by the director-general, Mr Pikoli, to address these
issues as a matter of great urgency. Clearly, the whole controversy
surrounding the Legal Aid Board is a cause for further concern. However,
Judge Navsa's approach is, indeed, refreshing and, depending on the extent
of the unknown factor referred to by the judge in his submission, we, in
the ACDP, believe that he and his team will be able to rectify the
financial crisis experienced by the board.

I do not wish to labour the issue of the Heath Special Investigating Unit,
referred to by my colleagues in the opposition. Suffice it to say that the
ACDP is of the view that the unit has developed expert investigative skills
and an impressive infrastructure over a period of time, and that, instead
of its work being curtailed, the unit should be given the necessary
resources to continue with its nationally and internationally acclaimed
fight against crime and corruption.

The call by the National Director of Public Prosecutions that there should
be a duty on accused persons to disclose their defence, should be
supported, as this will definitely speed up the finalisation of criminal
matters. If the state is obliged to discover police dockets, the defence
should similarly disclose its case.

As far as maintenance is concerned, the ACDP looks forward to the
implementation of sections 5 and 7 of the Maintenance Act, related to the
appointment of maintenance investigators, as the lack of such
investigations is a cause of great hardship and frustration to many women
in our country.

In conclusion, it should be noted that the recent United Nations crime
conference emphasised victims' rights and considered the concept of
restorative justice. Restorative justice is, in the first instance, a form
of criminal justice based on reparation to victims. The goal of the process
is to heal the wounds of every person affected by crime. In this context,
reparation to the victim and community is regarded as a duty or obligation
on the offender. Judge Fred McElrea holds the view that restorative justice
offers the world the healing power of repentance and forgiveness, of
justice with mercy, of God's love for all people. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Mr G B MAGWANISHE: Mr Chairperson and hon members, in less than two weeks
from today, we will be celebrating the national Youth Day. It is with this
in mind that, in supporting this budget, I think it will be paying a
special tribute to young men and women who sacrificed their lives for this
freedom.

Budget Day, in the past, used to be a day of sorrow and pain for the
majority of South Africans, because it meant more resources for that
financial year - resources for repression and oppression of the population.
Today, Budget Day brings hope where there is no hope. It brings one a
message that something is being done on one's behalf. I might not benefit
today or tomorrow, but that day is also coming to me.

One of the most important pillars of any just society is its ability to
make justice accessible to the entire population. As this Government, we
are in the process of creating a society in which access to justice is not
determined by the amount of capital one has or by any other discriminatory
measures, but by the fact that one is a human being and one has rights.

In making sure that all South Africans have access to justice, we need to
bear in mind that the present judicare is too costly to be sustainable, and
a more affordable system must be introduced. The best system for a country
like ours will be a public defender system. This system allows for salaried
lawyers to be employed. Those lawyers will then assist people by giving
them legal advice and representing those who cannot afford to pay for legal
representation.

It is important to note that even though there is a hierarchy of needs,
there is no hierarchy of rights. A right to privacy is not more important
than the right to education, and vice versa. As Government, we must make
sure that we balance resources so that all these rights can be exercised by
all South Africans. There will be no point in paying for a lawyer for every
person who appears in court, if one will not be in a position to buy
medicine for the sick.

Young law graduates will now be ready, once the national youth service
programme is passed by this Parliament, to perform one year of community
service to the poor. This programme will give them skills and it will give
more access to legal services. It is also important to recognise and thank
the role that is being played by organisations like the Legal Resources
Centre, Lawyers for Human Rights, law clinics, advice centres, donor
agencies and companies that are sponsoring these organisations.
These organisations provide free legal service to people who might not be
in a position to afford such services and some whose rights have been
seriously violated. There are some lawyers who also contribute a lot of
their time and skills in making sure that there is justice for all. These
noble contributions are highly appreciated by us, South Africans. The
challenge we face as this country cannot be overcome by Government alone,
but by collective and individual efforts of all of us.

More courts are being built in previously disadvantaged communities. These
courts will also take into account the needs of disabled people. We are
trying to bring justice to all people.

The new Legal Aid Board, under Judge Navsa, is trying its level best to
make sure that South Africans will now get value for their money. We hope
that two years from today, we shall see the good fruits of their labour.
The inaccessibility of justice to all people of South Africa becomes a
licence to women and children-abusers to continue with their brutal
actions, even for criminals to continue terrorising this nation, and that
we shall not allow.

Our words and actions ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member Hangana and hon
member George, please pay attention to the debate! [Laughter.]

Mr G B MAGWANISHE: Our words and actions must show that justice is on our
side and, therefore, no one will defeat us. [Applause.]

Mr M T MASUTHA: Chairperson, central to the struggle for democracy in South
Africa was the call for the installation of a human rights dispensation.
Indeed, the Freedom Charter bears evidence of the ANC's long-held belief
that there can be neither democracy without human rights nor human rights
without democracy.

To demonstrate this, the very first two of the Freedom Charter's ideals
were, firstly, that the people shall govern and, secondly, that all
national groups shall have equal rights. In its founding provisions, as
contained in Chapter 1 of the Constitution under section 1, it states:


  The Republic of South Africa is one, sovereign, democratic state founded
  on the following values:


  (a) Human dignity, the achievement of equality and the advancement of
       human rights and freedoms.

The Constitution then proceeds, in Chapter 2, to establish a Bill of Rights
and states under section 7(1) that:


  This Bill of Rights is a cornerstone of democracy in South Africa. It
  enshrines the rights of all people in our country and affirms the
  democratic values of human dignity, equality and freedom.

Finally, the Constitution concludes, in this regard, in Chapter 9, by
establishing state institutions supporting constitutional democracy, one of
which is the Human Rights Commission. In terms of section 184 of the
Constitution, which lays out the functions of the Human Rights Commission:


  The Human Rights Commission must -

  (a) promote respect for human rights and a culture of human rights;
  (b) promote the protection, development and attainment of human rights;
       and

  (c) monitor and assess the observance of human rights in the Republic.

The Human Rights Commission deserves applause for the invaluable work it
has performed since its inception, some five years ago, in promoting
respect for, monitoring and assessing the observance of, human rights in
South Africa. A more recent example of this is the commission's inquiry
into racism in the media which has stirred up many reactions, and still
remains one of the topical issues in our society.

May I at this point mention in passing that I find it rather discomforting
that the Official Opposition has, thus far, shown little commitment to the
strengthening of a human rights culture in South Africa, apart from
generally opposing and, in fact, attacking most efforts aimed at fostering
a culture of human rights in this country, especially efforts aimed at
eradicating racism except in situations where white people seem to be the
victims of racism, as has been demonstrated by the hon Dr Delport this
afternoon. [Interjections.] It has gone further to launch an uncalled-for
attack on the Human Rights Commission, as observed previously in this House
and, more recently, at the committee's budget hearings.

On a personal level, I find it even more ironic, when I reflect on memories
of my past experiences as a law student at Wits University a decade ago,
where the leader of the Official Opposition, the hon Mr Leon, lectured me
on the subject of human rights. I recall how he, as a lecturer in this
field, would so tenaciously defend the notion of a human rights
dispensation through the introduction of a bill of rights in South Africa.
Perhaps it was the recognition and protection of property rights, more than
anything else, that he was interested in. [Applause.] I am especially
making this observation against the backdrop of the DP's fervent reaction
to the land issue in Zimbabwe on the one hand, and on the other hand, its
apparent lack of interest in the difficulties that are being experienced
with regard to land distribution in South Africa, especially in view of the
willing buyer-willing seller situation. [Applause.]

Turning back to the role of the commission, I wish to make an observation
that, whilst many successes may have been achieved in the areas of work I
referred to earlier, more work still needs to be done, especially in
promoting the protection and attainment of human rights through, amongst
other means, litigation against human rights violations. The onslaught
against human rights tends to take vicious forms, and to counteract it
therefore often requires tougher measures than merely educating people
about or sensitising them towards a human rights culture.

May I, in conclusion, wish the Human Rights Commission well in its work and
express my sincere hope that the allocation made for it in this Vote will
enable it not only to sustain, but also to develop, its outreach so as to
achieve maximum impact in its struggle against human rights violations
which must, by the way, remain a struggle for all of us. Aluta continua!
[Applause.]

Gen C L VILJOEN: Chairperson, hon Minister, in the three minutes at my
disposal, I would like to draw the Minister's attention to two issues,
firstly, the Heath Special Investigating Unit and, secondly, the
effectiveness of our courts.

Ten opsigte van die Heath Spesiale Ondersoekeenheid wil ek eerstens sê dit
is 'n baie effektiewe eenheid, en ek wil die VF se gelukwense aan hulle
oordra. Daar is aan my gerapporteer dat daar in een boekjaar R111 miljoen
se staatsgeld herwin is. In die tydperk voor daardie jaar was dit R60
miljoen, wat dus duidelik aandui dat die eenheid omtrent drie keer meer
geld herwin as wat dit kos om aan die gang te hou.

Dit is tweedens 'n broodnodige eenheid. Daar is tans 'n baie groot
hoeveelheid sake by die eenheid, ongeag die rompslomp. Ek hoop ook die
Minister sal die aandag oor hierdie prosedures opknap, soos die agb lid mev
Camerer gevra het. Korrupsie is 'n kanker en hierdie eenheid is 'n
afskrikmiddel. Daarom het dit 'n broodnodige funksie, en behoort dit meer
aandag te kry.

Derdens wil ek by die Minister pleit dat hy nou vir die Heath-eenheid sy
groter begroting moet gee. Hy vra 'n addisionele R10 miljoen tot R15
miljoen wat hy tans nodig het vir die uitbreidings. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[I firstly want to say in respect of the Heath Special Investigating Unit
that it is a very effective unit, and I want to convey the compliments of
the FF to them. It has been reported to me that in one financial year state
funds to the value of R111 million were recovered. In the period prior to
that year the amount was R60 million, which therefore clearly indicates
that the unit is recovering about three times as much money as it costs to
keep them operational.

In the second place, this is an essential unit. The unit is currently
investigating a large number of cases, in spite of the red tape. I also
hope that the Minister will tighten up these procedures, as requested by
the hon member Mrs Camerer. Corruption is a cancer and this unit is a
deterrent. That is why it performs an essential function and should be
receiving more attention.

In the third place, I appeal to the Minister to give the Heath unit its
increased budget. They are currently asking for an additional R10 million
to R15 million, which is needed for extensions.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member over there, you are
not allowed to talk to members across the benches. Please take your seat.

Genl C L VILJOEN: As die Minister dan nie die geld het om vir die eenheid
te gee nie, vra ek hom om dan vir die Heath-eenheid 'n uitdaging te stel en
te sê elke jaar se begroting sal 'n limiet hê wat die helfte is van die
vorige jaar se besparings of herwinnings van die staat se geld.

Hoekom pleit ek so? Eerstens omdat dit 'n effektiewe eenheid is wat meer
geld vir die staat terugbring as wat dit die staat kos, en tweedens omdat
dit net eenvoudig goeie besigheid is. Derdens meen ek dit is 'n broodnodige
eenheid wat as teenkorrupsie-instrument werk. Ek pleit ook by die private
sektor dat hulle hierdie eenheid om dieselfde redes sover moontlik moet
help, ook omdat dit grondwetlik toelaatbaar is vir hierdie eenheid om by
die private sektor geld te kry.

Die tweede saak wat ek wil noem, is die doeltreffendheid van ons howe. Ons
howe se onvermoë is 'n versteekte oorsaak van die swak misdaadsituasie in
ons land. Eerstens is ons tronke oorvol verhoorafwagtende mense. Die agb
lid Patricia de Lille het in die afgelope paar dae ná haar besoek aan
Pollsmoor weer hieroor gerapporteer. Groot hoeveelhede jong mense sit in
die gevangenis en wag om verhoor te word. Daar is groot frustrasie onder
hierdie verhoorafwagtendes, en dan word daar baie staatsgeld vermors met
sake wat laat begin, dossiere wat wegraak en swak administrasie en
voorbereiding in die algemeen. Ek wil die agb Minister 'n vraag vra.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Gen C L Viljoen: If the Minister does not have the money to give to the
unit, I then ask him to set the Heath unit a challenge by stating that each
annual budget will carry with it a limit that amounts to half of the
previous year's savings or state funds recovered.

Why do I make this plea? Firstly, because it is an effective unit which
returns more money to the state than it is costing the state and, secondly,
because this simply is good business practice. In the third place, I am of
the opinion that it is an essential unit which operates as an
anticorruption instrument. I am also appealing to the private sector to
assist this unit as much as possible for the same reasons, also because it
is constitutionally acceptable for this unit to receive funds from the
private sector.

The second issue that I would like to mention is the effectiveness of our
courts. The failure of our courts is a covert reason for the bad crime
situation in our country. In the first place our prisons are crowded with
people awaiting trial. Over the past few days the hon member Patricia de
Lille has again reported about this after her visit to Pollsmoor. Large
numbers of young people are sitting in jail awaiting trial. There is great
frustration among these people awaiting trial, and then a lot of state
funds are being wasted on cases that start late, files that disappear and
generally poor administration and preparatory work. I want to ask the
Minister a question.]

I realise the complexity of our court systems. However, will the Minister
not consider the immediate initiation of a proper, professional work study
team or a project to streamline the procedures in our courts to improve the
methods of applying justice and to recommend better utilisation of
resources and the around-the-clock working of our courts? [Time expired.]

Ms N G W BOTHA: Chairperson and hon members, the success of democracy in a
country depends very much on the representation and accommodation of a
cross-section of the population's interests and viewpoints.

Thus, in today's Vote, it is important to examine how gender-responsive our
Department of Justice and Constitutional Development has been thus far.
Looking at the legislation passed by this Parliament to date, which affects
particularly women in South Africa, I would like to focus on a few, namely
the Divorce Courts Amendment Act, the Recognition of Customary Marriages
Act, the Domestic Violence Act, the Maintenance Act and the Promotion of
Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act. Our Government is to
be commended for its commitment to democratic principles and gender
equality.

Whereas the amendment of the Divorce Courts Act is to be appreciated, we
are looking forward to the establishment of permanent family courts. We
believe that these courts would assist tremendously in alleviating the
problems experienced by women, men and children in the process of
attempting to resolve family disputes.

We also appreciate the daunting task placed before the department to draft
regulations pertaining to the Recognition of Customary Marriages Act. We
believe, however, that further amendments may be required to address the
whole question of conflict between customary law and the common law with
regard to marriages.

We are also awaiting with interest the outcome of the amendment of the
Customary Law of Succession Bill, which is intended to provide for the
protection of spouses and children in a potentially polygamous marriage.

With regard to the Domestic Violence Act, which replaced and improved upon
the Prevention of Family Violence Act in providing for the granting of
protection orders with regard to domestic violence, this came into effect
on 15 December. The national SA Police Services' instruction has also
assisted tremendously in the implementation of this Act.

However, comments attributed to some senior members of the SAPS are
disturbing. It was reported in the Sunday Tribune not so long ago that
there were so many arrests made within the first two months of the Act
coming into operation that the SAPS head office had to tell police to slow
down and refer to the Act which provides that arrests must only be effected
``if there is a danger that persons may be harmed if the person is not
arrested''.
This attitude may be perceived by victims of domestic violence, the police
and the public as meaning that these matters are of lesser importance. It
has also been brought to our attention that deliberate delays in acting
against perpetrators of domestic violence are caused by some irresponsible
police officers, particularly in cases where a perpetrator is a police
officer. This is totally unacceptable.

We appreciate the work done by the Department of Justice in this regard,
and would suggest that it continues to provide training for magistrates,
and judges in particular, as well as ensuring that police officers are
trained and act decisively in dealing with such matters. We also need to
revisit the entire sexual offences legislation, and we look forward to it
being tabled soon.

With regard to the Maintenance Act, which came into operation on 25
November last year, except for certain sections which relate to maintenance
investigators, we trust that adequate provision has been made for the
funding for investigators and that the approval of a policy relating to the
appointment of maintenance investigators will be expedited. This Act has
alleviated the problem of nonpayment of maintenance which resulted in the
burden of supporting a family, in most instances, falling on women.

Here, too, it is important to note that not all maintenance officers are
prepared to assist claimants, who are invariably women. This is a matter of
concern and we urge the department to ensure that officers are properly
trained and supervised to carry out the intentions of this legislation.

The Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act is
the cornerstone of our democracy and its objective is to give effect to the
letter and spirit of the Constitution, especially to the founding values of
equality, human dignity and freedom of expression.
It is heartening to learn that the departmental implementation task team is
hard at work attending to the recommendations made by Parliament with
regard to this legislation. We trust that, as soon as the Equality Review
Committee is established, the Minister will look into the possibility,
together with this committee, of the inclusion of additional prohibited
grounds for discrimination, in particular HIV/Aids status, socioeconomic
status and nationality. We must, however, urge the Minister and the
department to hasten the auditing of existing legislation so as to identify
laws which may conflict with this Act and to eliminate any inconsistencies.

Gender equality is a relatively new concept to most South Africans. We are
still in the process of laying the foundations of a society that fully
understands, respects and promotes the human rights of women. Civil society
and the private sector constantly require more information and training on
gender issues. Similarly, those of us who are entrusted with the making of
laws and policies are constantly striving towards a clearer understanding
of gender equality. A sound knowledge of gender issues is essential in
ensuring that laws and policies do not discriminate on the grounds of
gender, and actively promote gender equality.

One of the crucial responsibilities of the Commission on Gender Equality is
the evaluation of legislation and policies in all spheres of Government.
The Commission reported to the portfolio committee recently that it has had
to restrict its focus to national Government because of its limited
resources and financial constraints.

Furthermore, the increased awareness of the public of the activities of the
commission has resulted in a steady increase in gender-related complaints
being referred to them. In addition to the commission's task to monitor the
Government's implementation of Cedaw and other international instruments,
the commission is sometimes invited to give input and guidance to SADC
forums, as many countries in the SADC region are only taking the first
steps towards setting up similar structures.

The CGE budget simply does not allow this kind of international
interaction. We commend the CGE for the excellent work that they have been
doing. We are particularly heartened by the clean report of the Auditor-
General in respect of financial statements of the CGE. This is very
encouraging.

In conclusion, I would like us to remember the women who are gathered in
the United States at the Beijing + 5 conference deliberating on the issues
relating to the improvement of the quality of life and status of women. We
also commend our Government for committing itself, in practical ways, to
the promotion of gender equality, and the department for its effort to
transform the justice system.

Lastly, we would like to thank the Minister, the Deputy Minister and the
department for the continued support they have given us as the portfolio
committee and as individuals. It is always a pleasure to work with them.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Chairperson and hon Minister, fighting crime is a key
national priority. This budget provides support to that fight with
substantial extra spending on justice. The emphasis is on vigorous, focused
and orientated programmes to strengthen and integrate prevention,
direction, prosecution and punishment.

The aim of the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development is to
promote order within the community by maintaining an efficient system of
judicial administration, and to promote constitutional development. It
endeavours to do this by conducting the overall management of the
department and providing for support of the management and administration
of all courts in the RSA. It also provides legal and legislative services
to the state and citizens of South Africa, provides a co-ordinated
prosecutorial service to the state and renders supporting services.

It is gratifying to note that the department has identified certain
priority areas such as providing for the support of the management and
administration of all courts in South Africa, that is the Constitutional
Court, Supreme Court of Appeal, High Court, specialised courts and lower
courts. Therefore, the increase from R1,2 billion to R1,5 billion is
reasonable and justifiable.

However, it is regrettable for the Truth and Reconciliation Commission to
fold up, leaving behind it what is perceived by many as a failure to
address the expectations and hardships of the bereaved. More funds could
have been made available to compensate the victims for the loss of their
loved ones and for the trauma which they suffered.

Many South Africans are expecting a lot from the new Directorate of Special
Operations, known as the Scorpions, to bring the crime rate, political
violence and serious economic offences down to an acceptable level. Let us
create a good working relationship with this unit, by encouraging it to do
only the best for the people of this wonderful country. Let us give it a
chance to settle down and focus on the eradication of crime for the comfort
of us all.

This department should strive to take service to the farthest corners of
South Africa. Incentives should be created to encourage prosecutors and
magistrates to enjoy serving in these areas. Administrative facilities
should also be improved, to facilitate the service delivery. [Time
expired.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Mr Chairman, the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional
Development is technically a double Ministry. It has a Herculean task in
the development of the jurisprudence of this country. Its budget is
inadequate. Nevertheless, the PAC supports the Vote on it.
For the justice system to be effective it must have well-trained court
officers, court interpreters must be trained in medico-legal terminology,
especially in rape cases; and pay and conditions of service must be good,
so as to create a climate conducive to prevent inefficiency and corruption
where dockets get lost or where the accused sits in jail for five years
without trial.

The case of Mrs Julia Mashele is particularly outrageous in a country which
boasts of protecting human rights. It is a cardinal principle of law that
justice delayed is justice denied. The death penalty was abolished in this
country, but there are prisoners whose death sentences have not been
commuted to this day. This must be corrected at once.

The question of the development of the Constitution is critical if human
rights in this country are to have a meaning. In order to benefit the
citizens of this country, especially the poor, the positive aspects of this
Constitution must be translated into reality. For instance, what good is
the right of access, if many poor people in this country have no means of
access to legal process and legal aid has literally collapsed?

The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Development must see that the
Constitution means what it says and the rights it proclaims are not
prohibitive financially. Despite the provisions of section 26 of the
Constitution, the poor are evicted from land every day.

The Constitution, in its preamble, says it honours those who suffered for
justice and freedom in our land. But many former freedom fighters in this
country, especially members of the Azanian Peoples Liberation Army,
languish in the prisons of South Africa.

The Constitution claims that it recognises principles of international law,
but somehow it is blind to the serious implications of ignoring the
International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of
Apartheid; hence the Truth and Reconciliation Commission can criminalise
the African struggle for liberation by putting the former freedom fighters
of this country on the same pedestal with the former perpetrators of
apartheid.

The Constitution purports to recognise traditional leaders, but in practice
it does not recognise their traditional control of land and their
custodianship of African customary law and culture in their areas. Sections
211 and 212 are couched in a language that does not really give rise to
traditional leaders.

Section 25(7) on land claims, which only covers the period after June 1913,
is a political scandal of our time. It is a betrayal of the struggle for
land repossession. Section 235 is a mutilation of the principle of self-
determination as understood in international law. It must be repealed. It
can only cause trouble in the future.

Much work is to be done on this Constitution, so that it serves the
interests of the economically downtrodden and socially degraded majority of
the country. Justice is truth in action! Justice is truth in action!
[Laughter.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister, South Africa was an outcast
during the rule of the apartheid regime. Most people in the country were
excluded from participating in international dialogue. As a result, this
excluded our legal system from enjoying the full benefit of international
development in the diverse branches of law and human rights.

The vision for a new system of justice in the democratic South Africa
implements the values of the Constitution, especially the values of
equality and dignity, so that every person should have a fair and equal
access to justice and dignity. The rights and security of every individual,
regardless of race, gender, material status or any other difference, are
guaranteed.  Implementing and monitoring a sophisticated justice system
within the confinement of our limited resources is an enormous challenge,
because our country is still in a transition phase.

The justice and constitutional development system is dealing with problems
that are experienced in societies in transition, such as an increase in
crime, social decay and a decline in the law officials' morale, which
hampers the transformation process and imposes more demands on the material
and human resources. Several strategic priorities have been implemented, or
are receiving attention, eg the system of specialised courts, the
Directorate of Special Operations, the Commission on Gender Equality, and
the investigation of the role of traditional courts in the administration
of justice.

The existence of the Public Protector system is utilised as a remedy
mechanism against any illegitimate act that contradicts the Constitution or
legislation. The duty of the Public Protector is to demonstrate how the
rule of law should be implemented to protect the rights of the people, as
set out in the legislation and the Constitution. The presence of the Public
Protector is one of the cornerstones of democracy in South Africa.

The goal of the justice and constitutional development system is to meet
the diverse needs of the disadvantaged. Unfortunately the backlog in case
works, the lack of qualified administrative support staff, the lack of
manpower, an inadequate basic infrastructure, a slow access to relevant
information, the high cost of legal fees and the absence of competitive
salaries to public prosecutors inhibit an effective management of courts
and the administration of justice.

The legal aid fiscal policy must be reviewed, for it must take into
consideration that serious offences and the requirement to earn less than
R2 000 must not be the underlying criteria in determining an individual's
access to legal aid. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Mr Chairperson, the justice system, and I quote from a
speech by the hon the Minister to the Pretoria Press Club, ``is in danger
of collapse''. We, however, differ on the reasons for this. The inadequate
budgets of previous years have led to clear breakdowns in the system. The
following serves as an illustration. A visit to Westville Prison in KwaZulu-
Natal on 31 May last week indicated a 200% overcrowding of awaiting-trial
prisoners. Today's Business Day reports threats by the Western Cape
commissioner to refuse to accept more prisoners if the justice and police
departments do not gain control over their departments.

A letter by the Deputy Judge President of the Witwatersrand Local Division
to the hon the Minister states the following with regard to the allocated
budget, and I quote:


  Last year, the recording of court proceedings cost approximately R725
  000. What reason is there for anyone in his right senses to think that we
  can, this year, get through on R450 000? These examples can be manifold,
  but I must not omit specific mention of cutting back on staff.

A certain Mr Ranchod whose wife's murderers were released yesterday, stated
in The Star of today:


  I am very disappointed with the law. Ministers keep harping on about
  coming down hard on crime. It does not show here. The criminals seem to
  have more rights than the victims.

Daar is 'n ernstige en duur opeenhoping van sake in die howe, wat die
belastingbetalers miljoene rande per dag kos. So blyk dit dat die
departement dit tans oorweeg om toegekende merietebelonings aan personeel,
insluitende dié aan senior landdroste, nie te betaal nie.

'n Donasie van R10 miljoen deur Vodacom wat in die Wynberg-landdroskantoor
'n uitstekende infrastruktuur gelewer het, word gekortwiek deur tydelike
personeel kennis te gee van die beëindiging van hulle dienskontrakte. Die
gevolg is 'n uitstekende struktuur met 'n totale gebrek aan personeel. 'n
Magstryd tussen streekkantore en die nasionale hoofkantoor van die
departement ontaard tans in die maak van bewerings dat die departement op
die randjie staan van 'n totale ineenstorting.

Die onderbefondsing van regsbiblioteke, onder meer dié van die
hooggeregshowe, die mobilisering van private regslui om bydraes te maak tot
die befondsing van hulle plaaslike landdroskantore, die bedanking van tot
agt senior landdroste in 'n streek op een dag, die radikale besnoeiing van
begrotings aan streke en die gepaardgaande vlakke van stres, depressie en
angs onder amptenary is besig om te lei tot 'n krisis in die departement.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)
[There is a serious and expensive accumulation of cases in the courts,
which is costing the taxpayers millions of rands every day. Apparently the
department is now considering not paying staff, including senior
magistrates, merit awards that have been allocated to them.

A donation of R10 million by Vodacom, which provided an excellent
infrastructure in the Wynberg magistrates' office, is being hampered by the
fact that temporary staff are being notified of the termination of their
service contracts. The result is an excellent structure with a total lack
of staff. A power struggle between regional offices and the national head
office of the department is at present causing adverse statements to be
made that the department is on the brink of total collapse.

The underfinancing of law libraries, inter alia those of the supreme
courts, the mobilisation of private legal practitioners to make
contributions to the financing of their local magistrates' offices, the
resignation of up to eight senior magistrates in a region in a single day,
the radical reduction in budgets to regions and the associated levels of
stress, depression and anxiety among officials, is giving rise to a crisis
in the department.]
Practical solutions to these problems are urgently needed. In order to
improve the public's confidence in the justice system, the following
proposals are made. A rigorous spending review, including a value-for-money
audit, needs to be undertaken; the maintenance and development of the
infrastructure should be located in a criminal justice infrastructure
development and maintenance agency with a mandate to seek public-private
partnerships in the construction of facilities; specialised courts should
be expanded for specific crimes, as in the case of the recently-established
rape courts; a programme should be set up to co-ordinate victim-support
functions in court; community services should be outsourced to NGOs which
specialise in the rehabilitation of offenders; specialised investigation
agencies such as the Scorpions should be accountable to Parliament in the
first instance, and not to the hon the President; infrastructure should be
constructed through build-operate-transfer concessions with the private
sector; temporary courts should be set up to deal with less serious cases
so that the courts are free to try awaiting-trial prisoners for more
serious crimes; transportation of awaiting-trial prisoners should be
outsourced to private security companies to reduce trial delays due to
prisoners arriving late at courts; the Ministeries of Justice and
Correctional Services should be abolished and their functions absorbed into
the Department of Justice.

In conclusion, these proposals will assist in ensuring that prosecutors,
magistrates and judges lead the way in improving the shattered confidence
the public has in the criminal justice system. [Time expired.]

Prof L B G NDABANDABA: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, we welcome
and commend the department's initiatives to transform the criminal justice
system in our country. It is common knowledge that South Africa today is
enriched by having black judges. This was something not known during the
dark days of apartheid. The department's initiatives should give us, to use
an Afrikaans expression, ``pitkos om oor na te dink'' [food for thought].

I want to tell the hon the Minister that courts of traditional leaders have
historically contributed decisively to the maintenance of stability and low
levels of crime, and they continue to do so. These traditional structures
are recognised in sections 211 and 212 of the Constitution. They need to be
strengthened so that the South African criminal justice system is enriched
and better able to serve our diverse population more effectively.

Could the hon the Minister outline his vision in respect of these important
traditional institutions in the maintenance of justice in our country. As
Camus, the French writer, stated, ``Those who will not study history may be
forced to live through it again.'' Whether we will learn anything from
history or not, one thing that the history of criminal justice shows us
starkly is how the role played by history can be important in our
understanding of present crimes.

My hope is that the role played by traditional institutions and courts in
the preservation of law and order should be encouraged. Is it possible, for
example, for the Portfolio Committee on Justice to invite a person to
address them on the role of traditional leaders in the preservation of law
and order? These institutions are important in my view and should therefore
be upgraded. The IFP accepts that, though South Africa cannot be
transformed overnight, the traditional leaders can play a big role in the
solving of crime, especially in the rural areas. Our crime prevention
strategy cannot succeed if there is no community involvement in the fight
against crime.
We support the budget and wish the department success in its fight against
crime.

Mnr C AUCAMP: Mnr die Voorsitter en agb Minister, met hierdie begrotingspos
het ons inderdaad te doen met die hartklop van wat Suid-Afrika veronderstel
is om te wees; 'n konstitusionele demokrasie gebaseer op die oppergesag van
die reg. In die kort tydsbestek wil ek agb lede se aandag fokus op die twee
bene van hierdie begrotingspos, naamlik justisie en konstitusionele
ontwikkeling. Onder justisie is daar twee sake wat ek wil aanroer, naamlik
die onafhanklikheid van ons regbank en die effektiwiteit van ons howe.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr C AUCAMP: Mr Chairman and hon Minister, in this Vote we are indeed
dealing with the heartbeat of what South Africa is supposed to be - a
constitutional democracy based on the supreme authority of the law. In the
brief time at my disposal I want to focus hon members' attention on the two
branches of this Vote, namely justice and constitutional development. Under
justice there are two matters that I want to touch on, namely the
independence of our judiciary and the effectiveness of our courts.]

The Constitution as the supreme law of the country provides for the trias
politica - the separation of the powers of the state, a cornerstone of
democracy. Whereas the judicial authority is vested in the courts, the
latter will only remain independent, impartial and subject only to the
Constitution if the Government refrains from influencing the judicial
process. The AEB is indeed worried that there are ominous signs on the
horizon of Government interference in this process. I have to warn against
the fact that the obsession of transforming the judiciary in a certain way
may have devastating effects on the quality of judgment in South Africa.

For example, regarding the appointment of judges of the Supreme Court, I
must emphasise the paramount importance of experience in the sphere of law.
The appointment of juniors - people with merit, but without a proven record
over time - will undermine the basic principle of the Constitution. There
are other ominous signs of interference. The Boesak case serves as an
example. We believe that by their very acts, some Ministers and party
officials gave the impression of trying to influence the court, contrary to
the requirement of the Constitution.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: And the Eugene Terre'Blanche case.

Mr C AUCAMP: Yes. The proposed tribunals  ... [Interjections.] We are not
related. The proposed tribunal to monitor the conduct of judges is another
example of reluctance by the ANC to respect this independence.

Much has already been said today about the unsatisfactory performance of
the department. The alarmingly low figure of successful convictions in our
courts only proves that inexperienced and underpaid state prosecutors are
not able to compete with seasoned attorneys and advocates for the defence.
The result is that a large number of criminals, arrested through great
effort by an also understaffed police force, still freely roam the streets
and plains of our country.

As a result, nothing has been realised of the promise in April '94 of a
stable society. The utopian dream has become a nightmare in the sense that,
since that time, nearly 1 000 farmers have been brutally murdered on their
property. In addition, we were promised that the department would rid the
criminal justice system of major bottlenecks. To date, none of these
promises have been realised with, as a result, ever-increasing court rolls
and overcrowded prisons.

It is time that the Minister, if he is listening, should go back to basics
and concentrate on these core issues. The real transformation of the
Department of Justice does not lie in the political or ideological sphere
but in the basic principles of sound administration, effective service and
competent personnel.

Die tweede been van hierdie debat is konstitusionele ontwikkeling. Die
blote bestaan van 'n portefeulje met so 'n naam sê tog vir ons in duidelike
taal die Grondwet kan nie staties wees nie; dit is nie in beton gegiet nie.
Die AEB voorsien inderdaad dat daar nog heelwat konstitusionele
ontwikkeling in Suid-Afrika moet plaasvind. Ons moet in gedagte hou dat
hierdie Grondwet in sy wese 'n onderhandelde skikking was tussen
opponerende partye in 'n bepaalde stadium in ons geskiedenis.

Vir 'n land met 'n homogene bevolkingsamestelling sou hierdie Grondwet
voldoende wees. Dit is egter die standpunt van die AEB dat die huidige
Grondwet nie die pluraliteit en die verskeidenheid van die Suid-Afrikaanse
bevolking genoegsaam verdiskonteer nie. Dit is juis op hierdie terrein dat
verdere konstitusionele ontwikkeling nog moet plaasvind. As gekyk word na
grondwetlike oplossings in ander multikulturele lande waar die vertrekpunt
nie bloot X aantal individue was nie, maar verskeie etniese, kulturele of
religieuse gemeenskappe, toon die huidige Grondwet inderdaad reeds tekens
van veroudering.

Terreine waaraan aandag gegee kan word, is die volgende. Hoewel die
verskillende vlakke van die staatshuishouding, naamlik sentraal,
provinsiaal en plaaslik in die Grondwet onderskei word, is die verhouding
deurgaans dié van onderhorigheid en ondergeskiktheid aan die sentrale
owerheid. Suid-Afrika se Grondwet vertoon in alle opsigte die beeld van 'n
unitêre staat van oordrewe sentralisme. In dié verband is daar 'n
merkwaardige ooreenkoms met die grondwet van Sowjet-Rusland, wat die toets
van die tyd nie kon deurstaan nie:


  The Soviet State is organised and functions on the principle of
  democratic centralism ... the obligation of lower bodies to observe the
  decisions of higher ones.

In ons huidige Grondwet moet die beginsel van interne outonomie van
gemeenskappe oor sake van hulle eie telkens terugstaan voor die
sentralistiese eenheidsmodel. [Tussenwerpsels.] Ek sal voorbeelde noem.
Voorbeelde hiervan is die bepaling dat die volle uitoefening van taalregte
afhanklik gemaak word van doenlikheid, koste-effektiwiteit en voorkeure
deur die gemeenskap; die feit dat onderwys in eie idioom en kulturele
agtergrond de facto staatsubsidiëring ontneem word, en dan ook die feit dat
die reg op moedertaalonderrig afhanklik gemaak word van redelike
doenlikheid.

Verder staan die Suid-Afrikaanse Grondwet agter by ander omdat dit slegs
gebaseer is op 'n deklarasie van individuele regte. 'n Akte van kulturele
groepsregte, wat die sluitsteen van demokrasie in Suid-Afrika behoort te
wees, ontbreek steeds. So 'n akte sou kan voldoen aan regte wat noodsaaklik
is vir vrede en stabiliteit in 'n multikulturele samelewing.

Mag die Departement van Konstitusionele Ontwikkeling en die betrokke
portefeuljekomitee van die Parlement hulle naam gestand doen, en met visie
en progressie werk vir staatkundige ontwikkeling wat Suid-Afrika en al sy
mense vir altyd op die wenpad sal plaas. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[The second leg of this debate is constitutional development. The mere
existence of a portfolio with such a name surely tells us clearly that the
Constitution cannot be static; it is not cast in stone. The AEB in fact
foresees that a great deal of constitutional development must still take
place in South Africa. We must keep in mind that this Constitution is in
essence a negotiated settlement between opposing parties at a specific
stage in our history.

For a country with a homogenous population this Constitution would have
been adequate. However, it is the standpoint of the AEB that the present
Constitution does not adequately reflect the plurality and diversity of the
South African population. It is precisely in this field that further
constitutional development must still take place. When one looks at
constitutional solutions in other multicultural countries where the point
of departure was not simply X number of individuals, but various ethnic,
cultural or religious communities, the present Constitution is indeed
already showing signs of obsolescence.
Spheres to which attention must be given are the following. Although the
different levels of the state economy, namely central, provincial and
local, are distinguished in the Constitution, the relationship is that of
one subordination and subjection to the central authority. South Africa's
Constitution in every respect presents the image of a unitary state
comprising exaggerated centralism. In this regard there is a remarkable
resemblance to the constitution of Soviet Russia, which could not stand the
test of time:


  The Soviet State is organised and functions on the principle of
  democratic centralism ... the obligation of lower bodies to observe the
  decisions of higher ones.

In our present Constitution the principle of internal autonomy of
communities over their own affairs must time and again take a back seat to
the centralised unitary model. [Interjections.] I shall give examples.
Examples of this are: the provision that the full exercising of language
rights depends on feasibility, cost-effectiveness and preferences of the
community; the fact that education in one's own idiom and cultural
background is de facto being deprived of subsidisation by the state; and
the fact that the right to mother-tongue education is being made dependent
on reasonable feasibility.

The South African Constitution also takes a back seat to others because it
is only based on a declaration of individual rights. A bill of cultural
group rights, which should be the keystone of democracy in South Africa, is
still lacking. Such a bill could comply with rights that are essential to
peace and stability in a multicultural society.

May the Department of Constitutional Development and the relevant portfolio
committee of Parliament be true to their name, and with vision and in a
progressive manner work towards constitutional development that will place
South Africa and all its people on the road to victory forever.]

Mr L T LANDERS: Mr Chairperson, when the Constitutional Court declared that
the death penalty was unconstitutional in 1994 or 1995, it meant that the
position of prisoners on death row had to be decided by way of an
appropriate sentence and the amendment of relevant laws. In terms of the
Constitutional Court ruling, Parliament had to pass a law which would
determine the legal procedure and processes to be followed in the cases of
all prisoners on death row, particularly those who had exhausted all legal
appeals and procedures, and whose death penalty sentences had already been
confirmed by the Appellate Division.

Accordingly, Parliament approved the Criminal Law Amendment Act 105 of
1997. The provisions of this law were clearly spelt out during the debate
on the Bill. Amongst other things, it provides that all death sentences
should be set aside and substituted with lawful and appropriate
punishments. It also provides the following steps. Every person who has
been sentenced to death and has exhausted all avenues available to him or
her shall have his or her case referred back to the court in which the
death sentence was imposed, that the court shall consist of the judge who
imposed the death sentence, failing which any other judge of that court
should be designated, that after considering written and oral arguments,
the court shall advise the President of the appropriate sentence, and
finally, that the President shall set aside the sentence of death and
substitute it with the sentence decided upon by the court.

When matters of this nature are reported on by the media, one expects
responsible journalism and the presentation of factual information. I refer
to the headlines of The Independent on Saturday, dated 27 May 2000, which
reads: ``Mbeki to set killers free''.

In my view, and I am sure in the view of the families of the victims of the
murders and rapes, this headline is misleading, inciteful and
irresponsible, given the process that is spelt out by the Criminal Law
Amendment Act. What the headline does not say is that death row prisoners
would be reprieved or have their death sentences set aside and that a panel
of judges would determine the appropriate sentence in place of that death
sentence. Having done that, the panel would advise President Mbeki, in this
case, what that sentence was, and President Mbeki would then be obliged to
implement it. In other words, our President acts as a rubber stamp for a
change, and does not have any discretion in doing so.

I must also agree with Prof Rycroft of Natal University who, in a letter to
The Independent on Saturday, wrote, and I quote:


  The impression created by this article is that Mbeki personally is about
  to set free those previously sentenced to death.

The second issue which I thought should be raised in today's debate
revolves around the question of human rights which has already been touched
on by other hon members. In Rome on 17 July 1998, 120 countries, including
South Africa, voted to adopt a statute which would create an international
criminal court. On this occasion, 21 countries abstained and seven states
indicated their opposition to the creation of the international criminal
court. Amongst the seven that abstained are the United States, China, India
and Israel.

I want to focus on the role of the USA in this matter, because media
reports of late have highlighted the fact that President Clinton, during
his tour of the EU countries, attempted to drum up support for America's
position. The USA has always made it clear that it wants an international
criminal court that is controlled or given its mandate by the United
Nations Security Council. This would ensure that America could exercise its
veto against any embarrassing prosecutions, and also ensure that the
international criminal court would never work against the interests of the
USA, thereby placing the USA above or outside international law.

Indeed, Jesse Helms, Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee,
announced that the Rome treaty would be ``dead on arrival'' in congress, if
there was any prospect of the indictment of a single American soldier. The
implications of this statement and the actions of the political leaders of
the USA are that American soldiers or citizens can commit crimes against
humanity with impunity. Significantly, countries such as Iraq, Iran, Libya
and North Korea, none of which can be regarded as allies of the USA, and a
number of other rogue states are unlikely to ever sign accession to the
Rome treaty. This therefore places the USA and Jesse Helms in the same camp
as those rogue states, which means that alleged perpetrators of the worst
human rights violations could remain outside this court's jurisdiction.

The amendments to the court's procedures sought by the USA would also make
it impossible for the court to indict alleged criminals from countries that
are not signatories to the Rome treaty, unless those countries consent.
This action by the USA must be condemned in the strongest possible terms.
Of course, we are reminded that the USA has set the dangerous precedent of
allowing their security forces to kidnap people from other countries in
order that they face trial in America, regardless of where the crime may
have occurred. Nowhere else in the democratic world is this allowed. Even
here in South Africa during the apartheid years, a member of this
honourable House, hon Ebrahim Ebrahim, was kidnapped in Swaziland in order
that he face trial. South Africa's courts to their credit shot down this
practice. Can one imagine what would happen if every country embarked on
such action? This would certainly be a recipe for anarchy. One's own
recollection of the concept of an international criminal court began with
the Nuremberg trials and, currently, with the international criminal
tribunal in Arusha, Tanzania.

The concept of the international criminal court is gaining momentum and
achieving successes. Actions of countries such as the USA, considered by
many to be the world's most powerful, must not be allowed to put a break on
this momentum. We look forward to the day when South Africa joins those
nations which have ratified their own treaty. [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, I
first want to thank all hon members for what I regard as a vibrant
discussion of my department's Vote. It is indeed important, I think, to
clarify just one or two matters which members raised. However, before I do
so, I think I should thank the hon Dr Delport for this statement: `` A
state that does not guarantee security and justice for its people cannot
survive.'' I think he has lived long enough to realise that, indeed, that
kind of state that did not provide security and justice for the majority of
its people has long died. [Applause.]

The problem, I think, we all have is that a new culture has been introduced
in the politics of this country by the ANC - the culture of openness. When
we openly admit that there are problems and difficulties in the department,
we are not then saying that these difficulties are insurmountable. We are
saying that, yes, there are these difficulties and I took quite a lot of
time this afternoon to outline what we are doing to grapple with these
problems, not only as the Department of Justice and Constitutional
Development, but also as the cluster responsible for the management of the
criminal justice system.

Again, we know that the DP has, I think, decided to promote the notion that
the Mbeki Government is a failure. Therefore, they have to look for
failures and find them even where none exist. [Interjections.] In the
process, of course, the hon member transposes what certainly was applicable
to the state which he served so avidly and with so much dedication in the
past, with what is happening now.

Honest observers in the world will tell us that Mbeki is a success.
[Applause.] However, I have also ... [Interjections.] Yes, thank you. Now,
the criminal element on the ground is also acknowledging that the tide is
fast being turned against it.

It was none other than this Government that went into Alexandra and
intervened decisively and got our children to go back to school. No
apartheid Minister intervened in 1976 as young, unarmed children were being
shot. They never intervened. Instead they came here to sing the praises of
those murderers who were killing us in the townships. [Applause.]

The hon member further says that we are sitting on R270 million which we
should be dishing out by way of reparations. I want the hon member to know
that there is a fundamental distinction between interim and final
reparations. The money in the kitty is meant solely for interim
reparations, and, whether he likes it or not, the payment is determined by
the numbers that are given to us by the TRC and not otherwise.

So we are not going to say: You are lucky because there are only 12 000 of
you so far and you can, therefore, take the whole R300 million and divide
it whichever way you want to. That would be total anarchy, total chaos; and
we will not want to be party to that ourselves. [Interjections.]

The fact that we have paid only R30 million so far, does not necessarily
mean that we are not willing to pay. We will pay as and when, indeed,
recommendations are made, appropriately so, by the TRC. We do not, in other
words, dream up figures or imagine that so-and-so might have been slapped
around the ears and, therefore, they deserve money, and there is R300
million in the kitty. We do not operate that way.

I am astounded at the notion that I have the power to sign proclamations. I
always thought that the hon member, as a long-established lawyer, would
know what powers a Minister has and does not have, and would also know that
there is no proclamation before a proclamation has been issued by the
President, in any event.

An HON MEMBER: The President?

The MINISTER: By the President. That is what it says. I am reading it here.
This is not my own statement. The statement says the Minister must merely
sign. Dear sir, you are utterly wrong. The Minister does not have to merely
sign.

Let me also say that the mere fact that people have reported matters to my
department does not mean that, therefore, we shall hurriedly and with
tongues hanging out, panting and sweating, issue proclamations. We do not
operate that way. We must, first and foremost, be satisfied that there is,
in each instance, a prima facie case, and if there is one, we must also
determine whether or not there are not any other more effective, cost-
effective and efficient mechanisms of addressing those problems. There is
no one-man show against corruption in this country. The police are dealing
with corruption. Other structures, including the Office of the National
Director of Public Prosecutions and the Scorpions, are dealing with that.

I will just use one instance. One of the so-called 127 outstanding
proclamations is a matter relating to Bhiki Minyuku. When we conducted this
exercise that I have just outlined to the House, the department affected,
namely the Department of Education, came back to me and said: ``No, but we
have already dealt with this matter''. And the matter must, indeed,
eventually be dealt with by different structures, not necessarily by this
one.

May I also say, with the time still remaining, that it is untrue that the
Heath unit has not had any increase. Anybody who can read figures will note
this. In the financial year 1999-2000, the money set aside or given to the
Heath unit was R16 894 000. In the year 2000-01, the figure is R17 739 000.
This is an obvious increase of 5%. This increase is not dictated by the
whims and the wishes of a Minister. It is determined by the reality that
this Government and this country faces. There is no money, so we cannot
give more money than we have.

In any event, the figure is determined by the proclamations already given,
and not by imaginary proclamations. Therefore, we cannot sit back and say
that we imagine that there will be 1 000 proclamations and, therefore, we
budget so much. This, after all, is not a line item. It is not a permanent
feature of our structures. That is why there is no line item about it.

Having said so, I think I must also say that it is important for hon
members, at all times, to bear in mind that there are so many good things
that are being done by various structures of Government against corruption.
The police are arresting hundreds, if not thousands, of members among them,
in their own ranks, and they are being prosecuted for corruption.

Elsewhere, there are similar actions against them. Now hon members cannot,
for God's sake, say that they will have to take money from all those
structures, the performance of which is well known, and give it to one
unit. They cannot. In any event, the law, as given to us by this
Parliament, will not allow us to do that. Members should remember that the
Public Finance Management Act allows us to shift only up to 8% from
existing projects and nothing more. The question is: Where will we shift
money from and for what purpose?
Again, I must say that there is this interesting notion that the starting
point is giving information to the Heath Unit and then the Heath Unit
merely comes to us to say, that we must give them proclamations. That is
not how this works. The Heath Unit must be given a mandate by way of a
proclamation by the head of state. Before that has happened, one cannot say
that this is what the costs are going to be. We are not a bunch of sangomas
throwing bones about what has to be investigated or not. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

                  PRECEDENCE TO DISCUSSION ON TAXI VIOLENCE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr G Q M DOIDGE: Chairperson, with leave, I move without notice:

  That, notwithstanding the provisions of Rules 29, 110 and 115, a subject
  for discussion on taxi violence in the Western Cape takes precedence
  tomorrow.

Agreed to.
                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 2 - Parliament:

The SPEAKER: Chairperson, I know that I am holding myself hostage here to
calls of order. [Interjections.]

A year ago today, most of us were eagerly awaiting the results of South
Africa's second democratic election. Most of us who succeeded in entering
this institution face the challenge of completing the transformation of
Parliament and the law-making process.

Parliament has changed radically since 1994, not only in its composition,
but also in its conception, functions and responsibilities. Until last
year, Parliament's budget was prepared by adding resources here and there
to a design that was no longer appropriate for our new institution. We
needed to rethink our approach and prepare a totally new budget that would
meet the needs of the democratic participatory institution that is required
by our Constitution.

Last year, the presiding officers discussed this need with the Ministry of
Finance and we have to take this process further. It is clear, however,
that the Minister of Finance now has a clearer understanding of the needs
of a modern, democratic parliament and has committed himself to
facilitating the process of determining an appropriate budget for
Parliament by meeting with the presiding officers and arranging for them to
make an input into the Cabinet's Budget Committee before budget guidelines
are determined.

It is expected, however, that Parliament will also re-examine its ways to
ensure that we do not continue with practices simply because they have been
done in a particular way before or because that is the way other
parliaments do them. At the same time, we will need to accommodate our own
needs, however desirable, within the overall requirement to eliminate
poverty and provide for the basic needs of the majority of South Africans.
The current Budget process is still not running as smoothly as it should.
But, there is now greater participation by members, committee chairpersons
and political parties.

The recognition in the executive of the needs of Parliament has been
manifested in the current Vote where we have been given what we asked for.
R22 million of this is by way of a capital injection.

I am sure members are aware that state-of-the-art laptop computers have
been bought and are currently being distributed. [Applause.] Let me repeat,
they are being distributed to members together with a set of rules
governing the management thereof. [Interjections.] Printers are on order.
The cabling project that will link all members and staff is well under way
with the NCOP Wing, the Old Assembly Wing and Marks Building already
cabled.

I want to thank Mr Manuel in his absence and we look forward to discussing
our further needs with the members for next year. [Applause.] However, it
is necessary to say that our problems will not be solved or our needs met
simply by providing new resources.

As members are aware, four years ago, we negotiated a financing agreement
for support from the European Union. We have now agreed on an extension
until May 2001. This became necessary as both provincial legislatures and
Parliament had not been able to use the resources provided. Part of the
problem has been with the difficult and sometimes incomprehensible
procedures required by Brussels. But the major problem has been our own
failure to devise programmes and projects within the guidelines of the
European Union. For example, funds available for training members of
Parliament in constituency work, management of constituency offices and
communication have not been used at all. In the period ending last month,
78% of the funds available for public education and participation were not
used. However, in this last case, I understand that the Secretary is making
plans which will show considerable improvement in the months ahead.

As we have done in the past, we will be tabling the remaining budget for
the European Union support programme shortly. An amount of R21,9 million is
available to us to be used before May 2001. I also intend to table a report
on all other resources provided to this Parliament by donors. I hope that,
this year, we can agree to take this out of committees and enable all
members to join in the debate, so that all our resources are used for the
benefit of this institution.

Since 1994 we have established an elaborate system of committees involving
members in the organisation of Parliament. I believe the time has come to
review the system and to streamline our procedures so that politicians deal
with broad policy issues, while the Secretary provides and manages the
support system that we require. Perhaps we need to examine and emulate
other parliaments by setting up a small multiparty directing authority
which would engage with management or division heads regularly and channel
the concerns of members on an ongoing basis.

Parliament will be introducing two new Bills later this year to allow for
better organisation and financial management. The powers and privileges
committee will be considering the necessary amendments to the legislation
and we will be reporting to the Assembly at the beginning of next term.

The Public Finance Management Act does not address all the needs of
Parliament. Aspects of financial management are located in the Powers and
Privileges of Parliament Act of 1963, which is still in force, and in the
Exchequer Act of 1975 where this is still applicable. It is clear that the
management of our financial affairs is fragmented and, to an extent,
inadequate. In order to bring legal certainty, new legislation specific to
Parliament is being drafted and will, of course, go through our own
committees.

I should say however that Parliament has taken the lead in the public
sector in the way that we already have an internal audit committee. Towards
the end of last year, the presiding officers appointed Miss Zyda Rylands
and Mr Derrick Msibi from the private sector, and the hon Don Gumede and
hon Van Niekerk, as members of the committee. The internal auditing process
has already identified a number of risk areas and has produced two reports
on how they should be handled.

An area that has seen dramatic transformation in this Parliament has been
interparliamentary and international relations. Often, visits to foreign
parliaments or exchanges among MPs have been viewed as a perk or an
opportunity to see the world. This is certainly not true of the democratic
Parliament. That over-used word ``globalisation'' does not simply refer to
the impact of international developments on South Africa. It requires our
public representatives to engage in the international arena in order to
influence developments to suit this country's needs.

A declaration that will be submitted by 134 presiding officers to the UN
General Assembly in September calls for the greater involvement of
parliaments in the work of the United Nations, thus adding a more
democratic dimension to international decision-making and co-operation.
This will give effect to the opening words of the UN Charter: We, the
peoples of the United Nations ...

An important aspect of the work of Parliament is to ratify international
agreements. Between the six months to December 1999, 32 agreements were
tabled in Parliament. How many did we debate? If Parliament is to be more
than a rubber stamp, it is necessary for MPs to be aware of and to monitor
the negotiations before they are completed and agreements are signed.

I am glad to say that we have now been able to include members of
Parliament in the delegations to major United Nations conferences, such as
the Beijing +5, currently meeting in New York, and the forthcoming summit
on social development. The presiding officers will be participating in
their first world conference that will precede the millennium General
Assembly summit in September. All these conferences will be working on
setting a global agenda for the millennium. I have suggested to the
programme committee that, in August, the National Assembly meet to consider
the report of these delegations and to allow all MPs to contribute to the
new agenda.

As South Africans, we have a particular responsibility to be in the
forefront of building unity in our region, our continent and among all
developing countries, as the building blocks of the changes in the global
environment that are necessary in the 21st century. The Chairperson of the
National Council of Provinces and I have just returned from an OAU meeting
where we discussed the implementation of the Sirte declaration by heads of
state, stating their intention to establish an African Union and a Pan-
African Parliament.

A framework treaty is being finalised which will draw the implementation of
the African economic community into the process of strengthening the OAU.
Members of national Parliaments will meet initially in a parliamentary
forum somewhat similar to the SADC parliamentary forum that we have already
established. The draft protocols will be tabled for discussion, so that we
are involved and contribute to the process of unification of our continent.
A particular challenge that we have faced this year has been to facilitate
the full participation of members with disabilities in our own proceedings.
It has required more than simply providing access to the Chamber and all
the rooms in the precinct. Given the scarcity of resources for all members,
our achievements are significant and an example to most other parliaments.
We have provided Braille scanners, allowing the production and use of
papers in Braille, and introduced interpretation for sign language. But
much more needs to be done.

On the other hand, we must admit that we have fallen down in providing
adequate facilities for the use of all our official languages. Many more
members are addressing the House in a range of languages, but we have not
been able to provide adequate interpretation facilities. Notwithstanding
the availability of resources for training, the members' support committee
has not requested provision for language courses, nor taken up earlier
proposals for establishing a language laboratory. Perhaps, in this second
Parliament, this need can be addressed, if political parties wish to take
that process forward. There are many other examples which I will not go
into, on what remains to be done. What is important is that doing these
things is our collective task - a task in which all members of Parliament
need to be involved.

In conclusion, I want to thank the Secretary to Parliament, Mr Mfenyana;
the general manager, Mr Lucas; the Secretary to the National Assembly and
the Table staff, as well as the service officers and all departments that
contribute to the debates we have here. [Applause.] I also want to
genuinely thank the Chief Whips and the political parties for the co-
operation they have established amongst themselves, which makes the work of
both members and presiding officers much easier.

Mr G Q M DOIDGE: Chairperson, we have consistently, in the course of the
past few years and in every debate on the Vote of Parliament, stated and
restated our historic mission to transform this Parliament and, in turn,
the lives of our people.

Today, we have an international reputation to find solutions to complex
problems, and pride ourselves in our unique ability to avert crises through
intelligible dialogue. We have ensured that Parliament receives and debates
reports from committees on all their activities and ensured that Parliament
scrutinises, monitors and increasingly oversees the work of Government.

We have proposed more labour-intensive constituency periods to listen to
peoples' concerns, reproaches, grievances, but also their gratitude and
encouragement. Today, we celebrate the growth of our democracy from a
fragile infancy to a virile adolescence.

A major milestone for this second democratic Parliament is the positive way
in which we have transformed the questions system in a very short space of
time. This reflects hard work on the part of the different parties, a
commitment to change the archaic and outdated, and a commitment to embrace
the new society.

We thank all parties that opted for positive change, in spite of the
relative safety that the trenches of the past offered. Change is not always
easy. There remains some of us who continue to throw their toys out of the
cot, who want to be dragged out of those trenches, kicking and screaming,
and who resist change. We trust they will come around to see the wisdom
locked up in the simple phrase: Nothing is as constant as change.
The trial run and the sporadic hitches afforded us an opportunity to assess
and recommend improvements to the system for it to become an extension and
a celebration of our democracy. We must applaud ourselves for our
persistence and perseverance in seeking to perfect this new system.

It is evident that we have travelled a long and arduous road that demanded
from us tireless commitment, exhaustive planning and crucial
implementation. Our single most significant feat lies in the fact that we
have progressed as far as we have, given the very real financial
constraints that exist. Yet, we remain somewhere in the middle of our
journey, where we are looking ahead without exactly knowing what our
destination is, when we will get there, or what we will find when we get
there.

We can no longer proceed along this path without sitting ourselves down
under the shade of the Marula tree, like the age-old councils of the
African elders, and ponder these critical matters of times to come. When we
rise from this pensive pose, we will have clear and concise, yet demanding,
instructions, maps and navigational apparatuses that will, instead of
guessing, pinpoint the undetermined, unknown.

For now, we must insist that there is greater participation in the Budget
process, especially the budget of Parliament, by political parties. It is
crucial for parties to exercise closer scrutiny and more intense
interrogation of Parliament's budget, and even more crucial that the budget
addresses the real needs of parties and members. This will allow Parliament
to fulfil its own mandate of accelerating delivery, ensuring
accountability, exercising oversight and serving constituencies.

No one is more acutely aware of the fact that Parliament is underresourced
than you, Madam Speaker. By international comparison, our Parliament lags
far behind that of most other countries where the adequate resourcing of
Parliament is never compromised. It is the responsibility of Parliament to
provide members with the requisite support to enable them to fulfil their
institutional responsibilities optimally. But the current budget cannot
even begin to address some of the more critical issues faced by Parliament,
like adequate support staff, adequate, up-to-date technology and
information technology, adequate research staff and facilities; adequate
facilities for the development of members of Parliament, and adequate
facilities for those members of Parliament with disabilities.

This is an untenable situation that deserves our rejection, because if
Parliament is weakened, democracy is weakened. The speedier transformation
of Parliament itself should be prioritised to reflect a democracy that has
arisen out of unique historical conditions - a democracy based on the
foundations of co-operation, consensus and national unity; a democracy in
which Parliament is not a mere rubber stamp for the executive, but provides
relevant checks and balances for unfettered power; a democracy that serves
the needs of the poor majority, not just the privileged few.

So we, the watchdogs of our democracy, must ensure that we budget for the
transformation of Parliament. The parliamentary symbols, the art, the
internal arrangements, accessibility, especially for the disabled, and the
out-of-date proceedings, must begin to reflect the very nature of our new
society. It must begin to reflect the mother continent and our own
Africanness.

Transformation in itself is not the destination but the journey we have
embarked on consciously, deliberately and in a focused manner; and a
journey that we are committed to complete, and to build on the milestones
we have already achieved. We are proposing, in keeping with our tradition,
that this Assembly calls an indaba where parties and members can discuss a
mission and vision for Parliament - a gathering of the custodians of the
wishes of over 40 million people; to set out a way of working, a set of
guiding principles, clear objectives, plausible timeframes and exacting
evaluation and monitoring mechanisms.

Recently the SADC parliaments came together in this fashion and emerged
from these sessions not only richer from its deliberations but also much
more guided and directed as to the way forward. At no other point in our
collective history were we more poised to converge around the fire of
collective knowledge to contemplate our path than we are right now.

This year, the year 2000, is an important benchmark and beacon in the
history of Africans and the world. It does not only mark the end of the
20th century and the beginning of the 21st century. Nor does it solely
serve as a historical beacon between the end of the second millennium and
the beginning of the next. It is important, because what we do at this
juncture will dictate the destiny of Africa and ultimately the world. It is
the year in which we must all, in all that we do, at any given moment of
time, in our sleep or waking hours, ensure the revival of Africa.

The President of our country, His Excellency President Thabo Mbeki, has
tasked us to come up with the resolution of the problem of the colour line.
We are charged with resolving the questions of poverty, illiteracy,
unemployment and crime. We must pledge all our energies to finding a
lasting cure for the HIV/Aids pandemic. We must produce the requisite
number of scientists so that we can once more lead the world exploration
into the abyss of future technology and information technology.

The same goes for communication, infrastructure, and information-sharing.
We share the burden of ridding our continent of the unnecessary evils of
civil war, hunger, disease and power-drunk tyrants. We are assigned to
foster maximum unity and peace in the region and on the continent. We can
do so by promoting and pursuing the idea of a Pan-African Parliament.

It is our duty to cultivate and nourish mutually beneficial economic and
political relations with our neighbours, both in the region and as far
north as Cairo and Casablanca. We have started to play the renaissance role
which the rest of Africa and the world expected us to play, and we will
continue to do so. This Parliament is willing and committed to play a
positive role in building and promoting sustainable democracies in the
region and continent.

Tomorrow a delegation of members of this Parliament will leave for Zimbabwe
to serve as independent monitors in the elections there. Our leadership
abilities in the region received due recognition when we were elected to
chair the SADC Parliamentary Forum. We are setting the tone of debate in
our own country to move away from xenophobia, racism and ethnic prejudice.
Within the collectives of the OAU, the SADC, the NAM, the Commonwealth, the
UN and Socialist International, we raise the concerns of the voiceless poor
- the Third World populations of Africa, Latin America and Asia.

If there is a single great statesman of world-renown who has taken the
torch to lead the way in championing the cause of poor people around the
world, it is our President, Thabo Mbeki. We have historical and moral
obligation to emulate this through our own words and deeds, every minute of
every day. This is what the world and history require from us.

In conclusion, the role of the presiding officers in setting the national
agenda is laudable. The most crucial national debates are treated with the
necessary importance, sincerity and sensitivity, because they are
introduced in this House as Speaker's debates not as party-political
debates. It is an appropriate moment, at the time of the first
Appropriation Vote of the second democratic Parliament, for us to
congratulate our comrades Frene Ginwala and Baleka Mbete on their re-
election as Speaker and Deputy Speaker of this Assembly. [Applause.]

Their leadership, guidance, dignity and sophistication are revered here and
beyond the shores of Africa, by foreign nations in every nook and cranny of
the world. We must commend, as we do, the Budget Subcommittee of the Rules
Committee, under Comrade Pallo Jordan, for the hard work it has put in to
the Budget process to ensure that parties and the institution benefit
maximally from this process, and for the support it has given to the
presiding officers. [Applause.]

We must laud, as we do, the Chief Whip of the Majority Party, Comrade Tony
Yengeni, for his hands-on approach to the political management of
Parliament. His leadership, guidance and ability to do hard work under
extremely difficult and strenuous circumstances are exemplary and
inspirational, both for the ANC caucus and for Parliament at large.
[Applause.] We must thank, too, as we do, all the parties here for their
participation in the Chief Whips' Forum, and the positive and open-minded
contributions they make to ensuring that Parliament operates smoothly and
efficiently.

It is here where we foster and build consensus and co-operation. We must
all thank, as we do, the EU for the significant support it has given, and
continues to give, to all parties in this Parliament. We must also thank
the UK Department for International Development for funding the Technical
Support Team to the public service and administration portfolio committee
since 1997. This significantly boosted the capacity and outputs of that
committee. Negotiations are under way to extend this support programme to
the committees such as Public Accounts and Finance as well, because of the
interrelated nature of these committees.

We must recognise the support, research and political staff of the parties
without whose tireless, and sometimes thankless work, none of us would be
able to produce a reasonable standard of work. We must acknowledge, as we
do, the major contributions of constituency office staff who remain a
crucial link between the people on the ground, Parliament and the
Government. We thank and commend all these role-players. It is because of
the contributions of all of us, as a greater collective, that we can justly
remain optimistic that in the words of our esteemed President: ``We are on
course.''

It is this commitment to accelerated delivery that wipes away the dark
clouds of despair and inspires hope in the hearts of our people. They live
in Mafikeng, Kokstad, Barrydale, Newcastle, Prieska, Matatiele, Mkhuhlu,
Mount Ayliff and Thohoyandou. They live there every day, and do the things
that people do in the normal course of their lives. Yet when Parliament
sits, all their dreams, aspirations and hope turn to Parliament in Cape
Town. Their gaze is fixed on us, their future pivoted on the successes or
failures of this institution. We must do all we can to realise those
dreams, aspirations and hope. In supporting this Vote on behalf of the ANC,
I reiterate our commitment to justice, peace and equality for all our
people.

Mr D H M GIBSON: Mr Chairperson, it is difficult to be hugely controversial
in a Vote about which we had all agreed and for which everybody is going to
vote. I will do my best in my few six minutes, as opposed to the hon Deputy
Chief Whip with 16 minutes, to say a few interesting things.
[Interjections.]

This debate gives us a chance to measure whether we have succeeded in
deepening and strengthening parliamentary democracy. It is one of our most
important tasks to nurture democracy and to advance a democratic culture in
a country which has had a democratic Constitution for only six years.
Parliament needs, always, to remember that it must set a democratic example
to a country which previously experienced a profoundly undemocratic
political system and parliament. If we falter in our commitment to
democracy and to democratic values and practices, we fail our people, we
fail our Constitution and we fail our oath of allegiance as members of
Parliament.
I must say that we showed up badly over the introduction of the new
national symbols of our country. I cannot think of any other democratic
country in the world which would introduce new national symbols, where they
would simply appear in Parliament without any ceremony, without any
discussion of the matter and without any approval from the representatives
of the people. I think that was undemocratic practice, and I do not think
it showed us up to good advantage.

Hon members will understand that when the DP complains about deficiencies
and shortcomings, we are performing the task for which we were elected.
There are sufficient praise singers on the other side. We do not have to
join that chorus. The DP is not required or expected to chirp along and
give hearty approval to things which are not right. So very often hon
members might think that we are negative in this Chamber, but that is our
job.

I would, however, be churlish in the extreme if I did not express my
personal thanks for the kindness and thoughtfulness of the staff of
Parliament when I had a personal misfortune recently of spending six weeks
in plaster and on crutches with my broken ankle. Everyone from the sister
in the first aid room to the people in glaskas, Mr Stadler and his staff,
those patient people who have to lock and unlock the disabled entrance at
Marks Building, and all our security people at all the entrances to
Parliament, I found to be unfailingly kind, helpful and considerate. I very
much appreciate the friendly and concerned treatment which I received from
them all.

Some aspects of Parliament are not operating as they should - hon
colleagues will mention those. I think it is time we were all networked. I
cannot believe that in this day and age it is still necessary for people to
take a piece of paper across the road to tell me about a meeting which is
going to take place. It is wrong, especially when the meeting takes place
this morning, I get in at 10:00 and the notice is delivered to my office at
10:25. It is wrong and it should not happen in this day and age.
[Interjections.]

Another thing that is wrong is that this morning the mace - which is the
symbol of parliamentary authority, and the authority of the Speaker and the
presiding officers - was not here. My hon colleague, Mr Ellis, had to point
it out and we were then told that the person who was responsible had not
shown up for work today. That should not happen in a Parliament. It is that
sort of thing which makes us very sad sometimes, because it shows us at a
disadvantage when what we want to do is to be proud of what happens here,
to work efficiently, to work effectively, and to set an example to South
Africa.

I want to say to hon members that we certainly have not set an example to
South Africa when it comes to the question of multilingualism. Members of
this Parliament should be ashamed of the fact that we are not living up to
the promise of our Constitution. Years have gone by and we still have not
done what our Constitution promises the languages and the people of South
Africa, and that is to use them. They are not used and this Parliament is
not setting an example. [Interjections.]

The DP proposed at least two years ago that we should use four languages
initially in Order Papers, agendas and notices, and that other languages
should alternate. When we were told this would cost R5 million to
introduce, the DP said: Cut out the lunch subsidies for parliamentary
workers and MPs and that would pay for the introduction of multilingualism
so that we can set an example to the people of South Africa.
[Interjections.]
My party does not regard the languages of South Africa and the different
cultures, colours, traditions and religions as something that is a
weakness. We regard it as a national treasure to be nurtured, and this
Parliament should be setting the example. I hope that in the next year we
are going to do that, ie we are going to pay some attention to what our
Constitution promises.

I also want to thank all the Whips of Parliament for the way in which we co-
operate: Mr Tony Yengeni, the Chief Whip, his deputy Geoff Doidge, Jannie
Momberg of the ANC, with whom we interact often, the Chief Whips of all of
the other parties and the Whips of my own party. It is because they all
work and co-operate so well that this Parliament operates at all. I would
like to refer also to Mr Mfenyana and the whole parliamentary staff, and to
say that most of them do a good job; and those people we thank. There are
some who do a poor job - they know who they are, and I hope they get fired
this year. [Laughter.]

Finally, Madam Speaker, to you and the presiding officers, thank you for
presiding with wit and a slight touch of acerbity sometimes, always with
dignity, and for just being the very special Speaker that you are in this
Parliament. We appreciate it, and I thank you for what you do for all of
us. [Applause.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Mr Chairperson, I agree with about 40% of what Dougie
has been saying here, in particular the language issue and the votes of
appreciation which he has dished out, especially to Madam Speaker, but not
to Johnny de Lange. [Laughter.]

I think we are all proud of the way our Parliament is functioning. In fact
our Parliament functions excellently, and we can all be proud of that. In
particular, the IFP wishes to say thank you to one person, and that is Mr
Tony Yengeni, the Chief Whip, who has proved himself to be an exceptionally
good Chief Whip: objective, fair and always available to fellow Whips, and
this coming from somebody who has been under the whip of many of the old NP
Chief Whips, who were horrible. [Applause.]

We also wish to thank the other Whips for the good co-operation and a warm
team spirit which has especially developed in the Chief Whips' Forum. The
Chief Whips' Forum is developing into a very effective parliamentary
mechanism. Quick and effective decisions are taken at this forum, because
the Chief Whips are all there, properly mandated by their various caucuses.
I predict that the Chief Whips' Forum is going to play an increasingly
prominent and effective role in future in the proper managing of our
Parliament.

As far as support for members is concerned, we feel that Parliament does
not yet adequately cater for all the particular needs of members of
Parliament, to empower them to effectively do their work as
parliamentarians. Members have often requested additional facilities such
as more air tickets, which have been turned down. Our members need more air
tickets to travel between their constituencies and Parliament. This is
something that needs urgent attention, otherwise members of Parliament
simply cannot do their work properly.

We wish to thank Madam Speaker and the rest of her team for the computers
which were handed to us recently. They are excellent computers, and this
will help members of Parliament to do their work properly. Unfortunately,
we had to wait many years for this matter to be finalised, and we sincerely
hope that in future there will be no further similar delays.
There are other areas that need urgent attention. One of them - and I am
sure hon members will agree with me - is Hansard. The Chief Whips have
looked at this matter, and I am convinced that something drastic should be
done to revamp the Hansard section. In the past a member could ask for a
copy of a speech and could get it within a few hours, a day or two. Now one
has to wait for three to four weeks before one can get a copy of a speech.
One also does not get the usual monthly books and bound copies: we have not
seen them for years.

Mr M J ELLIS: Ask Madam Speaker for cars!

Mr Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: For what? Cars? [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker, we also want cars, houses and
aeroplanes! [Laughter.] We want lots of things.

Returning to Hansard, the impression that I got from the discussion the
Chief Whips conducted on this issue, is that the problem lies with
competency at the highest Hansard level.
Members also need more telephone units to make telephone calls, otherwise
they have to pay from their own pockets. In mentioning these problems, I do
wish to point out that the position of a member of Parliament in the new
South Africa has improved tremendously in comparison with the position we
had in the old South African Parliament. Thanks in particular to our
members' support committee. I served for 17 years in the old South African
Parliament and can state confidently that the needs of members were then
largely ignored.

An HON MEMBER: How many doors did you break?

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: I broke only one door, and the next thing I will
break is your jaw! [Laughter.] I am, therefore, very thankful for the many
improvements that have been introduced by this Parliament. I look forward
to the day when all members of Parliament are properly empowered, so that
we can do our work. We wish the Speaker, the presiding officers, staff,
members and Whips a very happy New Year. We look forward to all the needs
of the MPs being properly catered for. [Applause.]

Mr C H F GREYLING: Mr Chairperson, as you can see, I have a difficulty with
Mr Van der Merwe, that is why I am looking the way I do. [Interjections.]

On behalf of the New NP, I would like to participate in this debate on a
positive note, as we will not be doing this Parliament and all the voters
out there a favour if we only attempt to score political points during this
Vote. On the other hand, we should not overlook specific shortcomings, and
I shall briefly mention a few.

We appreciate the fact that the budget has been increased by R75 million,
from R341 million to R460 million, especially the capital injection mainly
for the replacement of the outdated computer equipment in Parliament, which
is something very important. We accept also with great appreciation the
provision of the excellent new computers for our members. We hope that we
will receive the printers within the near future.

The provision for party support which is increased from R14,4 million to
R21 million is also very welcome, because this will enable members to
perform their duties more effectively as required by the Constitution. The
increase of R2,6 million for the printing of Hansard is also welcome.
However, at the Chief Whip's workshop last week, we were concerned to learn
of problems regarding the printing and provision of Hansard to members. We
would like to request that management gives urgent attention to this big
problem.

There are also other important matters which should receive attention.
Firstly, the amount for constituency allowances has only been increased
from R4 500 to R4 833 per member monthly. I believe that most, if not all,
members will agree that this amount - which must be used for the renting of
an office, staff salaries, telephones, fax, photocopying facilities and
other essential expenses - is not nearly sufficient to do justice to the
effective functioning of such a constituency office. We trust that the
matter will receive attention in the next budget.

Wanneer ons praat van effektiwiteit moet ons ons afvra of die Parlement
effektief funksioneer, en dan moet ons erken dat daar wel bepaalde leemtes
in dié verband bestaan. Primêr gaan hierdie begrotingspos oor hoe die
Parlement die fondse bestee wat deur die belastingbetalers van Suid-Afrika
aan ons toevertrou word, en of ons dit wel deursigtig en effektief doen.
As ons net kyk na die aantal dae waarop hierdie Raad werklik die afgelope
jaar gesit het sedert die Eerste Sessie van die Tweede Parlement op 14
Junie verlede jaar begin het, dan het ons tot vandag, byna 'n volle jaar
later, slegs 64 sittingsdae gehad. Dit dui daarop dat daarna gekyk moet
word of die Parlement nie weer in die eerste helfte van die jaar 'n
intensiewe en aaneenlopende sessie moet hê nie, en in die tweede helfte van
die jaar slegs 'n kort sessie sodat noodsaaklike wetgewing afgehandel kan
word.

Dit móét mos net meer koste-effektief wees, en lede sal nie onnodig teen
hoë koste en tydverkwistend net vir byvoorbeeld een week na kiesafdelings
hoef te reis nie. Die wetgewende program sal baie beter beplan kan word en
baie van die administratiewe probleme sal ook uitgeskakel kan word, soos
die dikwels te kort kennisgewings van vergaderings, die oorvleueling van
vergaderings, en sittings in hierdie Raad self wat nie altyd stiptelik
begin nie. Die afgelope drie weke het die Raad slegs twee keer op die
bestemde tyd begin sit.

Van ons kant wil ons weer vra dat die pos van Hoofsweep van die Parlement
oorweeg word. So 'n hoofsweep en die Leier van Regeringsaangeleenthede sal
ten nouste kan saamwerk met die swepe om die program vlot te laat verloop
en die Parlement effektief te laat funksioneer.

Ten slotte wil ek graag die Speaker, die Adjunkspeaker, die Voorsitter van
Komitees en die Adjunkvoorsitter van Komitees bedank vir die wyse waarop
hulle hul amp beklee en ook vir die wyse waarop hulle die nuwe vraestelsel
op Woensdae hanteer. Ons wil ook graag van ons kant af die Hoofsweep van
die Meerderheidsparty en die adjunkhoofsweep bedank vir die samewerking in
die hoofswepe-forum. Van ons kant af sal ons saamwerk om die Parlement
effektief te laat werk. [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[When we talk about effectiveness, we should ask ourselves whether
Parliament is functioning effectively, and then we have to admit that there
are, indeed, specific shortcomings in this regard. This Vote primarily
concerns the way in which Parliament spends the funds entrusted to us by
the taxpayers of South Africa, and whether we are, in fact, doing this
transparently and effectively.

If we just look at the number of days on which this House has actually sat
in the past year, since the First Session of the Second Parliament
commenced on 14 June last year, we will see that up to today, almost a full
year later, we have had only 64 sitting days. This indicates that
consideration should be given to whether Parliament should not once again
have an intensive and continuous session in the first half of the year, and
only a short session in the second half of the year so that vital
legislation can be finalised.

This simply has to be more cost-effective, and members will not need to
travel to their constituencies for only one week, for example, at great
expense and a great waste of time. The legislative programme could be
planned far better and many of the administrative problems would also be
eliminated, such as notifications of meetings which frequently arrive at
the last minute, the overlapping of meetings, and sittings in this House
itself which do not always start punctually. In the past three weeks
sittings in the House have only commenced at the appointed time twice.

For our part we want to ask once again that the position of Chief Whip of
Parliament be considered. Such a Chief Whip and the Leader of Government
Business would be able to work very closely with the Whips to ensure the
smooth running of the programme and the effective functioning of
Parliament.

In conclusion I would like to thank the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker, the
Chairperson of Committees and the Deputy Chairperson of Committees for the
way in which they perform their duties, as well as for the way in which
they are handling the new system of questions on Wednesdays. For our part,
we would also like to thank the Chief Whip of the Majority Party and the
Deputy Chief Whip for the co-operation in the Chief Whips' Forum. For our
part, we will co-operate to allow Parliament to function effectively. [Time
expired.]]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Mr Chairperson and colleagues, it is one year already that
Parliament has been sitting and passing legislation, but there are still
shortcomings experienced by MPs themselves. The Speaker herself alluded to
this in her speech earlier.

The provision of resources to enable members to do their work is not up to
scratch, and is not as equitable as it should be. Members of Parliament
whose office are in buildings other than the main parliamentary complex are
at the receiving end, while the majority party members have the pleasure of
receiving documentation on Parliament early. They also have the added
advantage of receiving intermittent reminders on the public address system
about this, that or the other meeting that they have to attend.

The other parties receive their parliamentary documents quite late. Access
to offices by the opposition parties is very cumbersome. More often than
not members remain locked in the building, waiting for some security
officer to come and open for them. Such practices inhibit members from
working until late in their offices. Members who use the main building have
unhindered access and exit to their offices 24 hours around the clock.

Parties on the fourth level in the Marks Building are without pigeon holes
even as we speak, this after countless memoranda have been sent
individually to the household section. Things being normal, items such as
these do not need parties to requisition for over a year. Circumstances
outlined above impact adversely on the affected parties. It is like trying
to have a person on crutches run a race with an athlete of Ben Johnson's
fitness. The man on crutches is at a disadvantage right from the beginning.

We hope that the increase in the budget will, in the long term, benefit
this institution, so that Hansard and copies thereof can be obtained quite
soon and regularly. Some of us have copies of Hansard that are not in
sequence. We hope that they will follow one another logically, and not be
produced and presented to members in a haphazard manner. It is not all hope
lost, however: the research department does exquisite work; they are
prompt, reliable and provide high-quality work. The section deserves all
the support that can be mustered.

The increased constituency allowance is a pointer to bigger and better
things to come. [Time expired.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Chairperson and hon Dr Buthelezi, since he is the elder
person in the House today. [Interjections.] I just wanted to acknowledge
him, since he is the elder person here today.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Mr Chairperson, I am admired by all beauties
here. [Laughter.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Madam Speaker, you referred to a multiparty committee that
must meet to direct and work with the presiding officers. You are aware of
the Chief Whips' Forum under the able leadership of Comrades Tony Yengeni
and Doidge. If it was not for that forum, we would all have come here today
and lumped you with a lot of complaints, but we were able to sort out most
of them there.

I want to support you on the language policy, which is long overdue. I
think Parliament needs to work more closely with the Ministry of Mr Ben
Ngubane, and also to develop and fall in line with the national language
policy for this country. We need to have this language laboratory as soon
as possible.

The role of committees must also be extended to assess and evaluate the
impact of legislation on our country. Committees must also ensure that the
mechanism prescribed in legislation is established, so that we play the
role of also monitoring and ensuring that legislation is implemented.

Finally, regarding the issue of HIV/Aids, last year we put a big red ribbon
around Parliament. That is to be commended, but I think we need to go
beyond just wearing badges and ribbons. Parliament must lead the fight
against this epidemic. Therefore, not wanting to be controversial today, I
want to appeal to all my colleagues to go for an HIV/Aids test to lead the
fight against HIV/Aids.

I thought that Madam Speaker was going to give us more information on how
to improve the image of Parliament, because the image is still out there
that we are sleeping, and if we cannot improve on that image, then Madam
Speaker must give us a one-hour siesta after lunch to sleep in our offices,
and not to sleep in Parliament.

Mnr C AUCAMP: Mnr die Voorsitter, dit is heel gepas dat ons juis vandag
hierdie debat kan voer. Op enkele dae na is dit nou presies een jaar gelede
dat ek en 'n groot aantal nuwelinge die eerste keer in hierdie Parlement
ingehuldig is. Ek wil hierdie toesprakie gebruik vir 'n aantal persoonlike
indrukke en opmerkings eerder as vir gewigtige oordele oor die
begrotingsproses.

Toe ek en my vrou 'n jaar gelede afgevlieg het Kaap toe, het ons omtrent
gevoel soos die apostel Paulus toe hy geskryf het: ``Ek gaan nou, gebind
deur die gees, na Jerusalem, en wat my daar sal oorkom, dit weet ek nie.''
Wel, dit het met ons veel beter gegaan as met Paulus in Jerusalem. Ek sal
oneerlik wees as ek nie meld nie dat die mate van openheid en
welwillendheid wat ons van almal betrokke hier ontvang het vir ons 'n groot
verrassing was.

Ou hardebaard-politici mag wel kla oor dienslewering in die Parlement, maar
persoonlik het ek van alle personeellede nog net die grootste mate van
welwillendheid en goeie diens ervaar, selfs wanneer ek gereeld saans so
teen 11:00 die manne in die Glaskas moet skakel om die Marksgebou te kom
oopsluit, dit is nou sodat ek daar kan uitkom, nie ingaan nie.

Fasiliteite vir lede en partye was vir my 'n aangename verrassing, miskien
omdat ek in die gemeente redelik gewoond was aan 'n soort van help-jouself-
sisteem. Een voorstel wat ek wil doen, is dat die formule vir die
beskikbaarstelling van finansiële steun aan partye sodanig aangepas word
dat daar eers 'n basiese bedrag per party toegeken word en die balans dan
proporsioneel volgens getalle verdeel word.

Ek wil weer eens melding maak van die objektiewe en deurgaans
onbevooroordeelde optrede van al vier die persone wat om die beurt hier in
die Stoel waarneem. In die komitees het ek ook 'n groot mate van openheid
ervaar, telkens totdat een van die ANC-lede die voorstel doen: ``Let's vote
on the matter,'' en dan is die slag natuurlik gelewer.

Oor opposisiepolitiek in hierdie Huis wil ek ook 'n opmerking maak. Ek
ervaar 'n goeie gees van samewerking met en tussen al die kleiner partye in
hierdie Raad, en ook baie mooi samewerking van die groter en ouer partye in
die Raad, selfs wanneer daar verskille is. Ek moet egter noem dat die mate
van wedywering wat daar tans tussen twee van die grootste opposisiepartye,
die Nuwe NP en die DP, bestaan, dikwels effektiewe opposisiepolitiek
grootliks aan bande lê. Dit is nie tot voordeel van hierdie instelling en
van Suid-Afrika as geheel nie. [Tussenwerpsels.]

'n Saak wat ook moet aandag kry, is die volgorde van spreekbeurte van
partye, naamlik van groot na klein. Dit is goed en wel dat ons in die
kwantiteit tyd gepenaliseer word, maar nie in die kwaliteit tyd nie. Dit
bring mee dat die beste toesprake dikwels voor leë banke gehou word, iets
waaraan ek darem gewoond was in die gemeente! [Tussenwerpsels.]

'n Verdere opmerking aan die negatiewe kant - en ek wil hê agb lede moet my
hier goed verstaan - het te doen met die gereelde oordrewe en onsimpatieke
verwysings, veral deur lede van die ANC, na die ``atrocities of the past''.
Kom ons toon groter begrip vir die kompleksiteit van ons verlede. Dit is
nie vir 'n mens aangenaam om feitlik elke dag te hoor jou ouers en voorsate
is maar die eintlike en enigste ``bad guys'' van die verlede nie. Mag ek
hier ook maar weer ietwat buite konteks vir Paulus aanhaal toe hy geskryf
het: ``Ek vergeet wat agter is. Ek strek my uit na wat voor is.''

'n Laaste voorstel is dat die Steyn-kommissie die instelling oorweeg van 'n
spesiale bonus vir lede wat soos ek vandag vyf keer op een dag 'n toespraak
moet lewer! [Tussenwerpsels.] Mag die Here die werksaamhede van hierdie
Parlement seën in die jare wat kom en mag groter wedersydse begrip hier vir
mekaar groei en ook bevrugtend deursuur en uitkring na die res van Suid-
Afrika. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr C AUCAMP: Mr Chairperson, it is entirely appropriate that we are
holding this particular debate today. Give or take a few days, it is now
precisely a year ago that a large number of newcomers and I were first
inducted into this Parliament. I would like to use this speech to give a
number of personal impressions and remarks rather than to make weighty
judgments on the budgeting process.

When my wife and I flew down to the Cape last year, we felt a great deal
like the apostle Paul when he wrote: ``I am leaving now, bound by the
spirit, to Jerusalem, and what will happen to me there, I do not know.''
Well, we had a far better experience than Paul had in Jerusalem. I would be
less than honest if I did not state that the degree of openness and
goodwill which we received here from everyone, was a big surprise to us.

Experienced politicians may well complain about service delivery in
Parliament, but personally I have as yet only experienced the greatest
degree of goodwill and good service from all staff members, even when I
regularly have to phone the people in the Glaskas at approximately 11:00 to
come and unlock the Marks Building, that is so that I can get out, not go
in.

Facilities for members and parties were a pleasant surprise to me, perhaps
because in the congregation I was fairly accustomed to a sort of help-
yourself system. One proposal I would like to make is that the formula for
the release of financial support to parties should be adjusted so that a
basic amount per party is first allocated and the balance is then
proportionally divided according to numbers.

I once again want to mention the objective and consistently unbiased
behaviour of all four of the people who alternately serve in the Chair. I
have also experienced a great degree of openness in the committees, often
until one of the ANC members makes the proposal: ``Let's vote on the
matter,'' and then of course the battle is won.

I would like to make a remark about opposition politics in this House as
well. I have experienced a good spirit of co-operation with and between all
the smaller parties in this House, and also very good co-operation from the
larger and older parties in the House, even when differences arise.
However, I must mention that the degree of rivalry which currently exists
between the two largest opposition parties, the New NP and the DP, often
largely hampers effective opposition politics. This is not to the benefit
of this institution and South Africa as a whole. [Interjections.]

A matter which must receive attention is the sequence of turns to speak of
parties, namely from big to small. It is all very well that we be penalised
with regard to the quantity of time, but not with regard to the quality of
time. This results in the best speeches often being made to empty benches,
something which I was at least accustomed to in the congregation!
[Interjections.]

A further remark on the negative side - and I want hon members to
understand me well here - has to do with the regularly exaggerated and
unsympathetic references, particularly by members of the ANC, to the
atrocities of the past. Let us display greater understanding of the
complexity of our past. It is not pleasant for one to hear virtually every
day that one's parents and ancestors were the actual and only bad guys of
the past. Allow me here once again, somewhat out of context, to quote Paul
when he wrote: ``I forget what is over. I reach for what is before me.''

My final proposal is that the Steyn Commission consider the introduction of
a special bonus for members who, like me today, have to make five speeches
in one day! [Interjections.] May the Lord bless the activities of this
Parliament in the years ahead and may greater mutual understanding for one
another grow here and also fruitfully penetrate and extend to the rest of
South Africa.]

Dr Z P JORDAN: Chairman, Madam Speaker and hon members, I was asked to
participate in this debate in my capacity as Chairperson of the
subcommittee on the Parliament budget.

In terms of our Constitution, our Parliament plays a pivotal role in our
system of government. If one looks at Chapter 4 of the Constitution, one
will see that it accords the legislature equal weight to the other two
pillars of our democracy, the executive and the judiciary. I suppose one
could argue that, in a sense, the relative weight of the legislature is
greater than that of the other two, since the executive is, of itself,
constituted of members of the legislature.

Viewed from this perspective, the Parliament budget must, at least, reflect
that Parliament is an equal partner of the executive and the judiciary in
our democracy, and should, therefore, not be treated as if it was merely
another department of Government. It should also reflect the importance of
the core functions that Parliament performs as the national legislative and
oversight body, created with the specific function of monitoring, checking
and balancing the power of the other two pillars of our democracy.

This Vote is, consequently, about the transformation of Parliament and
about the empowering of members of Parliament, but that, of course, costs
money. Working through the submissions our subcommittee received, it became
clear very early on that the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework guideline
figures, which were provided by the Department of State Expenditure, had
seriously underestimated the actual budgetary needs of Parliament.

Two points need to be underscored in this respect. The first is that at the
end of the financial year 2000-2001, the EU funding, which has assisted
this Parliament in the past, will come to an end and, unless a new
programme can be negotiated, the activities that those funds financed will
have to be funded from the Parliament budget. Second, it was the view
expressed by many divisions which made submissions to the subcommittee that
our Parliament is not, in fact, paying competitive salaries and is,
consequently, unable to attract talent, which talent is better remunerated
elsewhere and, worse still, when Parliament does manage to attract such
talent, these people are very easily poached by other institutions that
offer better salaries.

The Parliament budget should make adequate provision to enable every member
of this Parliament to be as effective a public representative as possible.
However, a number of new realities present themselves and we have to take
account of them if we want to achieve that. At present, close to 33% of the
members of this Parliament are women, some of them single mothers. We
should expect that that number is going to increase. I would say that the
budget for Parliament needs to reflect a greater sensitivity to the special
needs of women. [Applause.]

A number of our MPs also have disabilities. That number increased after the
June 1999 elections. There are now more than 10 members of Parliament with
disabilities who have highly specialised needs. The parliamentary budget
must reflect the growing representivity of Parliament to reflect the
diversity of our population and must take account of the provisions which
now need to be institutionalised to assist MPs with disabilities in the
performance of their functions. [Applause.] Our approach to the
parliamentary budget was informed by these caveats.

Parliament's budget is an aspect of the overall strategy of democratic
transformation that entails restructuring the key centres of power in our
society so as to deepen democracy. Public hearings, for example, have
become a regular feature of our parliamentary life but, thus far, only the
well-resourced have been in a position to exploit this new accessibility.
This budget will, hopefully, devise ways of extending access to Parliament
to the poor and the underresourced.

The Medium-Term Expenditure Framework devised by the Department of State
Expenditure remains our baseline. That being the case, we regard the budget
for Parliament as a component of the Government's thrust to maintain fiscal
discipline while transforming the core institutions of our democracy. This
budget itself, I believe, will encourage and incentivise the leadership of
Parliament to think strategically about the objectives we wish to attain in
our immediate and medium term.

I want to take this opportunity to thank Madam Speaker and the Deputy
Speaker for the way they have conducted the sessions of this Parliament
with dignity, with great humour and I think with a great deal of patience,
considering the rowdiness that they are sometimes subjected to. I want to
acknowledge also the role played by the Secretary to Parliament, Mr Sindiso
Mfenyana, and his staff, without whom I think many of us would not be able
to find their way about this Parliament. I want to acknowledge, also, the
role played by the Whippery of all parties in assisting in drawing up the
programme of Parliament and ensuring that we do work efficiently.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

House adjourned at 18:25.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                            TUESDAY, 30 MAY 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 30 May 2000 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bill as a section 75
         Bill:


         (i)     General Intelligence Law Amendment Bill [B 36 - 2000]
              (National Assembly - sec 75). The Bill has not yet been
              referred to a committee.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development:


     Reports of the South African Law Commission on the -
     (a)    Constitutional Jurisdiction of Magistrates' Courts, Project 111
         [RP 80-2000];

     (b)    Conflicts of Law, Project 90 [RP 81-2000];

     (c)    Sharing of Pension Benefits, Project 112 [RP 82-2000];

     (d)    Review of the Law of Insolvency, Project 63 (Volume 1) [RP 89-
         2000];

     (e)    Review of the Law of Insolvency, Project 63 (Volume 2) [RP 88-
         2000].

                           WEDNESDAY, 31 MAY 2000

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Recommendations of the Financial and Fiscal Commission on 2001-2004
     Medium-Term Expenditure Framework Cycle, submitted in terms of section
     9(1) of the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act, 1997 (Act No 97 of
     1997).

                            THURSDAY, 1 JUNE 2000

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Report of the Auditor-General on Performance Audits completed at the
     South African Revenue Service during 1999 [RP 96-2000].

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Public Service and
     Administration on SITA's 2000-01 Business Plan, dated 26 May 2000:


     The Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration, having
     considered the Business Plan of the State Information Technology Agency
     (SITA) for 2000-01, reports as follows:


     A.     Introduction


         At a meeting of the Committee on 12 April 2000, the Chairperson of
         the Board of SITA, Mr Sello Rasethaba, and the Acting Managing
         Director, Mr Sello Mokale, briefed the Committee on SITA's
         Business Plan for 2000-01. The briefing was given in compliance
         with a resolution of the Portfolio Committee on Public Service and
         Administration of the previous Parliament, which was tabled on 21
         September 1998 and adopted by the National Assembly on 23
         September 1998.


     B.     Background: Report of Presidential Review Commission
         In March 1998 the Presidential Review Commission (PRC),
         established by Pres Mandela to investigate the Public Service,
         reported that in respect of information management, systems and
         technology (IMST), South Africa's current Public Service practice
         lagged behind the private sector, which itself was slipping behind
         developments elsewhere in the world.

         The Commission felt that the State should have a major role to
         play in promoting the information society, but that the Public
         Service had not used IMST in a systematic manner to improve
         service delivery, public participation, government transparency or
         accountability. The PRC stressed the need for greater integration
         and inter-operability of Public Service data banks, which would
         require the setting of basic standards first and the formulation
         of a more comprehensive set of standards later.

         The PRC argued that technology must be driven primarily by the
         business objectives of the State, and not the other way around.
         The PRC believed that "IT can significantly change the manner in
         which the Public Service conducts its business, and indeed should
         be used to radically re-engineer its processes, but this
         transformation must be shaped by the strategic and operational
         needs of the Public Service, particularly in relation to the
         provision of efficient, effective and equitable service delivery"
         (p 192 of PRC report). Important decisions regarding IMST should
         therefore not be delegated or outsourced, but taken by the senior
         political and managerial leadership of the State.

         The Commission made several recommendations relating to IMST,
         summarised as follows:


         1. A short-term procurement moratorium on all large (above R5
              million) IT systems and technology must be imposed until some
              basic standards are agreed upon to facilitate future data
              exchange and data operability.


         2. Basic standards, most immediately the standards required for
              exchange of information (the "unique identifier" and network
              standards), should be established.


         3. A more holistic business, information, systems and technology
              architecture, derived from the current IT Business
              Architecture and/or subsequent projects, must be developed.


         4. The above projects should be consolidated into a national
              information management strategy, information systems
              strategies and an IT strategy for the Public Service.


         5. The post of Chief Information Officer (CIO) should be created
              in the Office of the President, the incumbent of which would
              head a Policy Committee and a Technology Forum.


         6. The "lead agency" concept, whereby a particular State agency
              would be given primary responsibility to co-ordinate a whole-
              of-government IMST initiative in relation to a specific set of
              IT functions in conjunction with other participating
              departments, should be accepted and implemented. Personnel and
              resources would need to be shared on a programme and/or
              project basis, but ultimately the Minister and senior
              management responsible for the lead agency would be held
              accountable for performance.


         7. The current functional differentiation of the Public Service
              needs to be addressed on the basis of business process re-
              engineering, using the National Crime Prevention Strategy as a
              model.


         8. A systematic skills development plan needs to be designed and
              implemented to train new entrants to the information
              management and technology field, including a four-year
              internship programme to produce an accelerated but equivalent
              qualification to those offered at tertiary institutions.


         9. The government should give serious consideration to migrating
              completely to electronic communication within the next five
              years.
         10.     New procurement models should be used in the development,
              operation, maintenance and upgrading of information management
              systems and technology. "Alternative service delivery" models
              and the "request for solution" method should be explored to
              ensure that risks and rewards are appropriately shared between
              the public and private sectors.


              (Pp 226-228 of PRC report.)


     C.     SITA Bill and Committee's Report


         In August and September 1998, the Committee considered and
         reported on the State Information Technology Agency Bill [B 96 -
         98], which was introduced by the Minister for the Public Service
         and Administration, in line with the recommendation of the PRC
         (see B.6 above) regarding the establishment of a "lead agency" to
         consolidate and co-ordinate the State's IMST interests.

         The primary reasons for the creation of SITA were the government's
         difficulty in -
         1. recruiting, developing and retaining skilled IT personnel;


         2. managing IT procurement and ensuring that the government gets
              value for money;


         3. using IT to support transformation and service delivery;


         4. utilising effectively expensive IT resources; and


         5. integrating IT initiatives.


         In reporting to the National Assembly on the SITA Bill (ATCs of 21
         September 1998), the Committee expressed concern that the
         legislation was preceding a policy framework for IMST. A more
         orthodox progression would have been that the policy would inform
         any legislation that was required. The Committee, however,
         accepted that the establishment of SITA was a matter of urgency,
         and therefore agreed to postpone a review of policy.

         The other key recommendation of the Committee was "that the Board
         of Directors of SITA present SITA's business plan to the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts once it has been finalised". The
         Standing Committee on Public Accounts conducted a review of the
         roles and responsibilities of the various IT role-players in
         government (see ATCs of 23 July 1998). The Committee itself
         followed up on its resolution regarding SITA's Business Plan.


     D.     Establishment of SITA


         The SITA Act was gazetted on 16 October 1998 and came into
         operation on 2 November 1998. SITA's role was to provide IT, IS
         and related services in a maintained information systems security
         environment to, or on behalf of, participating departments and
         organs of state (sec 6 of the SITA Act).

         To achieve this objective, SITA may -


         1. provide data processing services;


         2. provide IT and IM training;
         3. provide application software development and maintenance
              services;


         4. promote the effective utilisation of IT to enhance efficiency
              at all levels of the Public Service;


         5. provide technical, functional and business advice and support
              regarding IT;


         6. provide IT and IS management services;


         7. with regard to any of the above functions, act as procurement
              agency in respect of IT requirements, in accordance with State
              procurement policy; and


         8. perform any other function that the Minister may, from time to
              time, determine to give effect to the objective of the agency.


              (Sec 7 of the Act.)


         The Minister for the Public Service and Administration is the sole
         shareholder on behalf of the State (sec 17 and 18). Initial
         components to be incorporated, were the Central Computer Services
         (CCS), a chief directorate in the Department of State Expenditure,
         ISSAPS (the SAPS IT component) and Infoplan (a division of the
         parastatal Denel) (sec 3(4)).

         Participation by departments in SITA was to be phased in, as
         determined by Cabinet on recommendation of the Minister (sec
         3(6)). Participation is in terms of a business agreement between
         SITA and the department concerned, and such a business agreement
         must be supported by a service level agreement (sec 20).

         SITA (Pty) Ltd was established in terms of the Companies Act on 1
         April 1999. In November 1999, the Board of Directors was
         restructured in line with the tenets of good governance expounded
         in the King Report on corporate governance. The Board of Directors
         is reflected as follows:

         Non-executive directors
         Chairperson   Mr Sello Rasethaba
         DPSA nominee Mr Robinson Ramaite
         Department of Finance
         Nominee Vacant
         Department of
         Communications nominee Mr Andile Ngcaba
         Legal expert Ms Khomotso Moroka
         Finance expert Ms Lindiwe Mthimunye
         Organisational
         development expert Mr Gavin Pieterse

         Executive directors

         (Acting) MD & CEO Mr Sello Mokale
         COO Ms Makano Mojapelo
         CFO Vacant


     E.     Initial briefing by SITA on 8 September 1999


         In an initial briefing by SITA to the newly constituted Committee
         on 8 September 1999, Mr Sello Rasethaba, Chairperson of the Board
         of SITA, took issue with the requirement in terms of sec 16(9) of
         the SITA Act that the books and records of account must be audited
         by the Auditor-General. Mr Rasethaba argued that SITA itself could
         more effectively promote the empowerment of SMMFs. The Committee
         investigated the Auditor-General's procurement processes (with the
         co-operation of the Auditor-General and mindful of sec 181(3) of
         the Constitution) and expressed its approval of the affirmative
         procurement policies of the Auditor-General (ATCs, 12 October
         1999).


     F.     Briefing by SITA on 12 April 2000


         Mr Sello Mokale, Acting Managing Director of SITA, briefed the
         Committee on SITA's Statement of Strategic Direction and Business
         Plan. SITA's statement of intent is as follows:


           "Management is committed to demonstrate that the State
           Information Technology Agency (Pty) Ltd is:


           *     The vehicle for Government IT in effective service
              delivery to the citizens;
           *     Leveraging IT as a strategic resource for Government,
              fostering competitiveness and industry through best practice
              procurement processes; and
           *     Establishing South Africa as a global information and
              communications technology player".


         SITA's vision is -


           "to become a leading and respected public sector IT company in
           the world that:


           *     Provides relevant products and services to the Government
              cost-effectively;
           *     Is an employer of choice;
           *     Is an advanced user of information technology; and
           *     Delivers value for money to the stakeholder".


         SITA's mission is to continually -


         1. increase the speed of delivery of the products and services to
              SITA;


         2. improve the return on investment on government IT expenditure;


         3. improve the quality of the products and services of SITA;


         4. improve the security environment in which SITA operates;


         5. innovate with respect to its products and services; and


         6. support the socio-economic policies of the government.


         The "Business Plan to guide SITA Operations" uses each of the
         elements of the above mission statement as an individual goal
         statement. Goal 1, for example, is to increase the speed of
         delivery of SITA products and services, and outcomes are listed as
         follows:


         -  Reduced delivery times.
         -  Faster and guaranteed access to information required for
              decision-making.
         -  Improved business processes.
         -  Strategic partnerships.
         -  Interactive approach to IT services between all role-players
              involved in the upstream and downstream processes.


         A number of short-, medium- and long-term initiatives, with
         specified targets in each case, are listed in respect of each of
         the identified goals. For example, one of the initiatives listed
         under Goal 1 is the "improvement of the procurement process", and
         a target emanating from this is a "30 per cent reduction in the
         time from the definition of the tender specification to the
         publication of the tender".

         In addition to the six goals and various outputs attached to each,
         SITA has identified five "strategic projects":


         A: Integrate organs of state.
         B: Adopt best practices and standards.
         C: Consolidate and rationalise.
         D: Capacity-building through skills and knowledge development.
         E: Adopt common applications across the government.


         In terms of strategic project A, for example, it is projected that
         all IT functions of national and provincial governments will be
         incorporated into SITA by March 2003. A schedule for incorporation
         should be agreed upon with the DPSA by May 2000. The lessons
         learnt during the integration of the CCS, ISSAPS and Infoplan are
         currently used to establish the base that is required to effect a
         smoother integration of organs of state with less interruption.

         The Eastern Cape Provincial Government signed up with SITA on 14
         September 1999. Transfers currently under way include the
         following:

         *  DPSA (completed by April 2000).
         *  Department of Minerals and Energy (by May 2000).
         *  KwaZulu-Natal Provincial Government (by July 2000).


     G.     Key issues raised by SITA at briefing


         Mr Rasethaba concluded SITA's presentation by drawing the
         attention of the Committee to a number of factors that were
         regarded by SITA as substantial obstacles to the efficient and
         effective performance of its duties and exercise of its powers:


         1. IT procurement by government departments


              The first issue raised, was IT procurement by government
              departments. Uncoordinated IT procurement had already resulted
              in the co-existence of three non-compatible identification
              systems: The bar-coded ID, the smart card and the driver's
              licence. (Mr Rasethaba compared this state of affairs with the
              United States, where one number, the social security number,
              provided access to the full range of identity systems.)

              SITA's role was to ensure that duplication of this kind does
              not occur. However, while government departments remain free
              to conduct their own large system procurement, the problem of
              non-compatibility of systems will continue to escalate. Mr
              Rasethaba said he was aware that three different departments
              were intending to tender (separately) for a document
              management service.

              He asked the Committee to consider recommending a moratorium
              on procurement, as recommended by the PRC in 1998 (see B
              above). In practical terms, a moratorium could be effected by
              requiring that departments wishing to procure IT goods and
              services would have to obtain a certificate from the
              Department of Finance. With such a requirement in place, SITA
              could achieve an immediate saving of 20% on IT procurement.

              SITA is putting into place a procurement system that will be
              fair, equitable and effective. At the same time, it is
              necessary that the system be efficient in terms of costs and
              time needed to procure. Once the policy is in place, it will
              be submitted to Cabinet for approval. SITA will hopefully take
              over the procurement of IT in government after this process.


         2. Funding for capacity-building and promotion of representivity


              SITA's workforce is currently 70% to 80% white, a situation
              which had been inherited. Mr Rasethaba asked that its
              "operating profit" (funds not spent) of R64 million may be
              utilised for training. SITA's profile did not match the
              private sector profile. SITA would like to follow the example
              of the Scorpions and send certain employees on degree courses
              to address those shortcomings.


         3. Necessary component not transferred to SITA


              The SITA Act intended to transfer all IT-related components
              from the Department of State Expenditure to SITA. Yet only the
              CCS was transferred, and not the strategically important
              Centre for Applied Government Financial Management, a chief
              directorate in State Expenditure, which has responsibility for
              developing, implementing and maintaining an acceptable
              accounting and reporting system. Its directorates oversee the
              BAS/FMS financial management systems, the PERSAL salary system
              and the LOGIC provisioning system. Mr Rasethaba therefore
              requested this chief directorate's immediate transfer to SITA.


         4. PFMA scheduling and related request


              Mr Rasethaba said that SITA should have been listed as a
              Schedule 2 entity in terms of the Public Finance Management
              Act (PFMA), 1999, which came into operation on 1 April 2000.
              This would have enabled SITA to appoint its own auditors,
              provided it was done in agreement with the Auditor-General,
              had it not been for the specific provision in sec 16(9) of the
              SITA Act, which requires SITA to be audited by the Auditor-
              General. Therefore, Mr Rasethaba requests either that the Act
              be amended or that such change be effected by regulation, if
              it is deemed lawful by the State.


         5. SITA's debtors


              An amount of R339 million in outstanding debt was owed to
              SITA. The SAPS, Defence and certain provincial governments
              were named as culprits. Mr Rasethaba asked that the applicable
              rules be strengthened to ensure that government institutions
              settle all their obligations and pay all money owing within
              the prescribed or agreed periods. He said that under the
              current circumstances SITA's accounting officer was likely to
              be called by the Standing Committee on Public Accounts in
              terms of the PFMA to account for the uncollected debt.


     H.     Findings


         1. SITA has substantially complied with the resolution of the
              Committee regarding the tabling of its business plan. The
              business plan's framework of goals, strategic projects and
              alignment with government priorities could be more effectively
              integrated. The business plan is largely at strategic level,
              and it is hoped that the operational plans which are due to be
              presented to the SITA Board this month will outline specific
              activities in more concrete terms.


         2. The Committee remains concerned about the absence of a
              government IT policy. On 21 September 1998, it was recommended
              that such a policy be put in place, echoing an earlier
              resolution of the Public Accounts Committee. The PRC report
              and SITA's briefing make it clear that the absence of an IT
              policy/strategy may potentially undermine the government's
              efforts at achieving economy, efficiency and effectiveness in
              respect of governmental IT in a coherent and co-ordinated
              manner.


         3. The Committee is broadly in support of the requests and
              recommendations made by SITA, as outlined in paragraph G of
              this Report and summarised as follows:


              (1) The imposition of a moratorium on large (R5 million)
                  government IT procurement/a centralised certification
                  process for the approval of government IT procurement.


              (2) The return to SITA of its operating profit of R64 million
                  for the purposes of investment in training.


              (3) The transfer of the Chief Directorate: Centre for Applied
                  Government Financial Management from the Department of
                  State Expenditure to SITA.


              (4) The rescheduling of SITA as a schedule 2 entity in terms
                  of the PFMA.


         4. SITA did not provide sufficient reasons for the proposed change
              in the auditing arrangements, which would necessitate an
              amendment to the Act or a regulation. Nonetheless, it would
              appear logical that, if SITA were to be rescheduled as a
              schedule 2 entity, it should conform to the auditing
              arrangements applicable to such entities. A recommendation to
              that effect from the Committee would be dependent on the
              Auditor-General supporting such a course of action.


     J.     Recommendations


         The Committee therefore recommends as follows:


         1. That SITA present its business plan to the Committee on an
              annual basis at the commencement of the financial year.


         2. That the DPSA table a draft IT policy/strategy for the Public
              Service by the end of October 2000.


         3. That the Auditor-General offer his expert opinion to the
              Committee regarding the proposed change in the auditing
              arrangements for SITA, (as outlined in H.4 above), citing any
              factors he may deem relevant, by 30 June 2000.


         4. That the Directors-General of Finance, of State Expenditure and
              of Public Service and Administration jointly submit the
              following in writing to the Committee by 31 July 2000:


              (1) Their considered opinion regarding the requests and
                  recommendations of SITA (summarised in H.3 above).


              (2) In respect of each request/recommendation -


                  (a)  details regarding any objections they may have to
                       the expeditious implementation of those
                       requests/recommendations; and


                  (b)  a plan with timeframes for the implementation of
                       requests/recommendations in those instances where
                       there are no substantial objections.


     Report to be considered.

                             MONDAY, 5 JUNE 2000
ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker:


     The Minister in The Presidency on 30 May 2000 submitted a letter,
     requesting Parliament to advise the President on the appointment of
     Commissioners to serve on the National Youth Commission as envisaged in
     section 4 of the National Youth Commission Act, 1996 (Act No 19 of
     1996).

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Public Service and
     Administration on Performance Agreements and White Paper on Public
     Service Training and Education, dated 19 May 2000:


     The Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration, having
     considered the implementation of performance agreements for heads of
     department and senior managers, as well as the White Paper on Public
     Service Training and Education (White Paper), reports as follows:


     A.     Introduction


         The First Parliament, 1994-1999, was dedicated to the
         consideration and passage of more than 500 laws and the scrutiny
         of more than 100 new policy papers. In this Second Parliament,
         1999-2004, greater emphasis must therefore be placed on ensuring
         that the new laws and policies are successfully implemented by
         government departments.

         Sec 55(2)(b)(i) of the Constitution requires that the National
         Assembly provide mechanisms to maintain oversight of the exercise
         of national executive authority, including the implementation of
         legislation. Rule 201(1)(b)(i) of the Rules of the National
         Assembly requires that portfolio committees carry out this task on
         behalf of the Assembly.

         The Committee has initially identified two key areas in which to
         commence its oversight activities in respect of the implementation
         of legislation and policy: Firstly, the implementation of
         performance management systems for senior management in the Public
         Service and, secondly, the implementation of the White Paper.

         The Committee requested a report from the Department of Public
         Service and Administration (the Department) on each of these
         areas, and the Director-General, Mr Robinson Ramaite, presented
         these reports at a meeting of the Committee on 1 March. Additional
         information on certain aspects of the Committee's two focal areas
         was also given by the Director-General: Office of the Public
         Service Commission, Mr Mpume Sikhosana, at a briefing on 3 March,
         in response to questions from members.


     B.     Performance management for senior managers


         1. Relevant policy provisions
              The new Public Service Management Framework is made up of the
              Public Service Act, 1994, the Public Service Regulations,
              1999, and the Collective Agreements of the Public Service Co-
              ordinating Bargaining Council (PSCBC). One of the key policy
              goals informing the new framework, which commenced in July
              1999, was to replace a hierarchical, highly centralised and
              rule-bound culture in the Public Service with one that permits
              maximum departmental autonomy, while strengthening
              accountability in respect of performance and delivery.

              In order to steer departments at national and provincial level
              towards greater autonomy, while strengthening accountability,
              the regulations stipulate that all executing authorities
              determine a system for performance management and development
              for employees in their departments by 1 January 2001.

              However, the establishment of a performance management system
              for each and every employee in the Public Service will take
              some time to implement fully. The immediate focus of the new
              regulations is therefore that performance management must
              become the basis of the relationship between executing
              authorities and their heads of department, and in turn between
              heads of department and their senior management staff.

              The Act, as amended, accordingly includes a new dispensation
              for all heads of department, including, in terms of an
              extended definition of "head of department", heads of
              department at provincial level. Sec 12 of the Act requires
              that all heads of department be employed on the basis of fixed-
              term contracts. The terms of such contracts may be five years
              or a lesser period, and may be extended.

              In terms of sec 3B of the Act, the power to appoint heads of
              department is vested in the President in respect of national
              departments and in Premiers in respect of provincial
              departments, but these powers, including the power to enter
              into a performance-linked agreement with the head of
              department, are exercised in terms of delegations by the
              Ministers or MECs themselves. In order to establish a strong
              incentive for senior managers (from director upwards) to
              follow suit and enter into a performance agreement with their
              heads of department (or immediate superiors), an agreement was
              reached in the PSCBC, which made the award of the annual
              increase for 1998-99 conditional upon the conclusion of such a
              contract (Resolution No. 13 of 1998).

              The Minister is responsible for issuing guidelines on
              performance agreements on an annual basis. The guidelines
              include stipulations regarding the minimum and maximum
              salaries at each level, the percentage increase to be awarded
              and the maximum percentage cash bonus.


         2. Report-back by Director-General on progress with implementation


              The Department is currently undertaking a comprehensive survey
              of the conditions of service and employment practices of
              senior managers (including heads of department) and of how to
              create stronger incentives for improved performance within the
              existing framework.

              An initial report on the investigation into senior managers
              was to be completed by the end of April 2000, and the
              Department would at that stage have been in a better position
              to report and comment on the extent to which performance
              agreements are in place throughout the Public Service.

              In the interim, it may be said that performance agreements are
              now the basis for the awarding of bonuses and merit awards for
              all heads of department and most senior managers. In the
              medium term, the Department seeks to see a shift towards
              individual contracts for senior managers, in addition to heads
              of department who are already on fixed-term contracts. It is
              envisaged that their conditions of service will remain subject
              to the PSCBC in terms of benefits, but not in terms of
              salaries, which will be linked to performance criteria.

              Experience has shown that the critical performance agreement
              between an executing authority and a head of department is
              inoperable without key delegations from the Minister or MEC to
              that head of department. A problem has arisen in the sense
              that certain executing authorities do not delegate, but
              nonetheless expect heads of department to perform.

              The Department is preparing a memorandum to Cabinet,
              recommending that the President in the national sphere, and
              Premiers in the provincial sphere, issue instructions to
              Ministers/MECs to delegate the necessary powers. The aim in
              the medium- to long-term is to entrench the linkage between
              these delegations and the performance agreements.

              All performance agreements between executing authorities and
              heads of department are registered and kept by the Department.
              Most agreements scrutinised by the Department have been too
              broad, and it was therefore difficult to evaluate whether
              performance criteria were being met. The Department receives
              no feedback on evaluation, and can currently only assess their
              effectiveness in terms of the bonuses and awards granted to
              heads of department.

              In addition, it is apparent that not all executing authorities
              are evaluating their heads of department on a regular basis.
              It must be said that some Ministers and MECs make a point of
              sitting down with their heads of department every three months
              to conduct a performance evaluation. The Department has
              therefore identified the need for a support structure to be
              established for the evaluation of heads of department.

              The Department accordingly requested the Public Service
              Commission to assist, and the Public Service Commission has
              indicated that it would develop a methodology for evaluating
              heads of department, based on comparative research, and on an
              ongoing basis render advice to executing authorities on the
              evaluation of heads of department. The Department will also be
              developing competency profiles for heads of department and
              disseminating good practices.


     C.     White Paper


         1. 1998 investigation by Committee


              In 1997, the Committee approved the draft White Paper, and the
              following year it conducted an assessment of the
              implementation of the White Paper as an aspect of a broader
              enquiry into training in the Public Service.

              Key findings from that Committee Report (ATCs of 17 December
              1998) include the following:


              (1) Instruments aimed at facilitating improved strategic
                  planning and budgeting for public service training and
                  education, such as the Capacity Development Standard
                  proposed by the White Paper, were not yet in place.


              (2) Most departments in the Public Service were already
                  setting aside 1% of their wage bills for training, as was
                  proposed in the Skills Development Bill (now Act No. 97
                  of 1998).


              (3) There was insufficient monitoring and evaluation of
                  departmental training programmes. The only instrument
                  available at the time, the Department's Annual Report on
                  Training, reflected incomplete and inconsistently
                  presented (non-comparable) information from one year to
                  the next.


              (4) The role of the South African Management Development
                  Institute (SAMDI) needed to be reviewed and redesigned
                  (the Director-General of SAMDI subsequently briefed the
                  Committee on the "turnaround strategy" for the institute
                  in February 2000. The Committee intends reporting on this
                  in its report on the Budget Vote for 2000-01).


              (5) Initial steps towards the establishment of a Public
                  Service Training and Education Authority (PSETA), along
                  the lines proposed by the White Paper and proposed in
                  terms of the Skills Development Bill, had been taken.


         2. Relevant policy provisions


              Skills development in both the public and private sectors is
              regulated by the Minister of Labour, who is responsible for
              determining policy in this area.

              The South African Qualifications Authority Act (SAQA Act),
              which came into operation in 1995, addresses the key issues of
              quality and access. The Skills Development Act and the Skills
              Development Levies Act focus on investment and prioritisation
              for economic growth and development. The SAQA Act and the
              Skills Development Act are regarded as "mutually
              interdependent and fully compatible" (Department of Labour
              homepage).


              On 20 March 2000, the Minister of Labour formally established
              25 Sector Education and Training Authorities (SETAs), as
              required in terms of the Skills Development Act. These SETAs
              are made up of representatives of business and labour in every
              sector of the economy (and in some sectors government
              representatives). They will be tasked with designing and
              implementing skills development strategies to meet skills
              needs in their respective sectors. In terms of the White
              Paper, the Department must establish a SETA for the public
              service.

              In terms of the Skills Development Levies Act, which came into
              effect on 1 April 2000, employers will have to pay a skills
              levy of 0,5% of their payroll. The levy increases from 1 April
              2001 to 1% of the payroll. The SETAs are to play a major role
              in the disbursement of these funds to employers as grants.
         3. Report-back by Director-General on progress with implementation
              The role of the Department in terms of education, training and
              development is to develop policy and strategy. It is not
              responsible for training - each department has its own budget
              for training and carries out its own training programme.
              SAMDI, which is under policy control of the Department, is a
              training provider that focuses on management development.

              The establishment of a Public Service Training and Education
              Authority has run into problems in terms of the envisaged
              scope of coverage. The Department of Labour requires that
              authorities be established for each "economic sector", yet the
              Public Service is not homogeneous and consists of more than
              one economic sector. Only the regulatory departments (the
              Department, Finance, State Expenditure, and Labour) do not
              fall into a predetermined economic sector, and current
              legislation does not provide for dual membership. The
              Department hopes to finalise the steps required for the
              establishment of the PSETA very soon.

              In addition, there are funding problems in terms of the levy
              required by the skills development legislation. Departments
              cannot in fact contribute to it, although the requisite
              percentage of the wage bill has been isolated by departments.
              These obstacles will have to be negotiated in consultation
              with the Department of Labour.

              In 1998, the PSCBC committed R10 million to sectors to
              finalise skills development plans. Some sectors have made
              progress in this regard, such as health and education, which
              have developed human resource development strategies, but an
              integrated approach has not been adopted on human resource
              development. The sectoral plans must be finalised.

              The Department will be registering with SAQA as a service
              provider. Competencies for managers must then be prescribed in
              co-operation with SAQA. Targeted programmes for senior
              managers must result. Lower employees must, however, not be
              neglected, and a renewed effort must be made to ensure that
              departments give attention to their upliftment and
              advancement.

              In addition, skills in respect of which there are severe
              shortages (such as IT, project management and training on the
              Public Finance Management Act) must be fast-tracked. The
              Department has commenced a process, firstly, to identify
              scarce skills and, secondly, to develop a strategy to build
              capacity of the Public Service in these areas.

              The Department will continue supporting the process of SAMDI's
              restructuring, and will be holding talks on the training fund
              for the Public Service, provided for in sec 4 of the Public
              Service Act, and on SAMDI's readiness for and the
              appropriateness of commercialisation. SAMDI has also been
              requested by the President to give attention to the
              development needs of Directors-General.

              An important future focal area is the monitoring and
              evaluation of training taking place in the Public Service.
              Initially there is a need to identify the real status of
              training and development by carrying out a study to identify
              the baseline in each department.


     D.     Findings


         1. Performance agreements


              (1) There is a need to review the content of performance
                  agreements between executing authorities and heads of
                  department to ensure that they are giving effect to the
                  following:


                  (a)  Implementation of government policy priorities.


                  (b)  Co-ordinated priorities of Cabinet and Exco
                       clusters.
                  (c)  Linkages between national departments and
                       corresponding provincial departments.


                  (d)  Priorities identified by the Minister/MEC for the
                       department itself.


              (2) Even more urgent is the need to develop a mechanism to
                  facilitate the regular and systematic evaluation of heads
                  of department by (or on behalf of) executing authorities.
                  The Public Service Commission has undertaken to research
                  and design a mechanism for the evaluation of heads of
                  department and to complete a report on the methodology
                  for evaluating heads of department. It has also
                  undertaken to provide advice to executing authorities on
                  an ongoing basis.


         2. Implementation of White Paper


              (1) The Department is not responsible for the provision of
                  training, but is responsible for the development of a
                  coherent and integrated HRD strategy, which by its own
                  admission is not in place at this stage. The finalisation
                  of the sectoral skills development plans must be a
                  priority.


              (2) The Department has a critical responsibility in terms of
                  the Public Service Education and Training Authoriy, SETAs
                  and the funding issues, which it has not yet discharged.
                  The obstacles that remain in terms of the requirements of
                  the Skills Development Act and Skills Development Levies
                  Act must be removed as a matter of urgency, in
                  consultation with the Department of Labour.


              (3) The positioning and role of SAMDI has been fluid for
                  almost two years since its descheduling in June 1998. A
                  review of the policy and a full consultation with the
                  relevant stakeholders should form core parts of a process
                  towards the resolution and finalisation of SAMDI's
                  future. The Financing Agreement between the European
                  Community and the RSA concerning the Public Service
                  Management Development Programme has been referred to the
                  Committee (ATCs of 13 April 2000), and consideration of
                  this Agreement presents a useful opportunity for further
                  deliberations on the role and positioning of SAMDI, since
                  SAMDI is a key beneficiary of the Agreement.


     E.Recommendations


         1. Performance agreements


              The Committee recommends as follows:


              (1) That the Department report back to the Committee on its
                  "initial report" regarding its investigation into senior
                  management, as indicated on the Committee's programme.


              (2) That the above-mentioned report-back include a report on
                  compliance levels and a review (assessment, commentary
                  and recommendations) of the content of the performance
                  agreements registered with the Department in terms of the
                  criteria listed in paragraph D.1.(1) above.


              (3) That the Public Service Commission present its report on a
                  methodology for the evaluation of heads of department to
                  the Committee, as indicated on the Committee's programme.


              (4) That the Department and the Public Service Commission
                  submit to the Committee in writing an outline of
                  institutions' respective roles and responsibilities in
                  respect of performance of heads of department and related
                  matters, as indicated on the Committee's programme.


         2. White Paper


              The Committee recommends as follows:


              (1) That the Department report back to the Committee on
                  progress made towards the successful implementation of
                  the White Paper, as indicated on the Committee's
                  programme, focussing on the following:


                  (a)  The implementation of the Skills Development Act and
                       the Skills Development Levies Act, in respect of its
                       own duties in relation to the Public Service as a
                       whole.


                  (b)  The development of a more coherent human resources
                       development strategy for the Public Service (based on
                       such considerations as a review of the White Paper
                       proposals, the sectoral plans, the need to fast-track
                       certain skills and the need to provide for the
                       advancement of the lowest level workers in the Public
                       Service).


              (2) That the Department and the Public Service Commission
                  submit to the Committee in writing an outline of
                  institutions' respective roles and responsibilities in
                  respect of the monitoring and evaluation of the training
                  provided to public servants, as indicated on the
                  Committee's programme.


     Report to be considered.

                            TUESDAY, 6 JUNE 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     The following changes have been made to the membership of Committees,
     viz:


2.    Transport:

     Appointed: Farrow, S B; Pillay, S; Semple, J A (Alt); Seremane, W J
     (Alt).
     Discharged: Ntuli, R S; Swart, P S.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry:


     (1)    Report and Financial Statements of the Investment South Africa
         for 1998-99.

     (2)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Gambling Board
         for 1998-99, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 1998-99.

2.    The Minister of Health:


     (1)    Government Notice No 341 published in the Government Gazette No
         21042 dated 7 April 2000, Correction notice regarding Government
         Notice No 149 of 11 February 2000 made in terms of Pharmacy
         Amendment Act, 2000 (Act No 1 of 2000).

     (2)    Government Notice No R.397 published in the Government Gazette
         No 21100 dated 14 April 2000, Amendment of regulations, changing
         deadline for comment as published in the Government Notice R.137
         of 18 February 2000, regarding the performance of community
         service by persons registering in terms of the Medical, Dental and
         Supplementary Health Service Professions Act, 1974 (Act No 56 of
         1974).

     (3)    Government Notice No R.427 published in the Government Gazette
         No 21136 dated 5 May 2000, Amendment of regulations governing
         Microbiological Standards for mineral water made in terms of
         Foodstuff, Cosmetics and Disinfectants Act, 1972 (Act No 54 of
         1972).

     (4)    Government Notice No R.428 published in the Government Gazette
         No 21136 dated 5 May 2000, Amendment of regulations governing
         Microbiological Standards for edible ices and egg products made in
         terms of Foodstuff, Cosmetics and Disinfectants Act, 1972 (Act No
         54 of 1972).

     (5)    Government Notice No R.450 published in the Government Gazette
         No 21144 dated 5 May 2000, Regulations regarding the performance
         of community service by pharmacists made in terms of the Pharmacy
         Act, 1974 (Act No 53 of 1974).

     (6)    Government Notice No R.498 published in the Government Gazette
         No 21178 dated 19 May 2000, Amendment of regulations regarding the
         performance of community service by persons registering in terms
         of the Medical, Dental and Supplementary Health Service
         Professions Act, 1974 (Act No 56 of 1974).

     (7)    Government Notice No R.497 published in the Government Gazette
         No 21175 dated 19 May 2000, Date of commencement of community
         service by dentists made in terms of the Medical, Dental and
         Supplementary Health Service Professions Act, 1974 (Act No 56 of
         1974).

     (8)    Government Notice No R.499 published in the Government Gazette
         No 21178 dated 19 May 2000, List of approved health facilities for
         the purpose of performing community service by dentists in the
         year 2000-2001 made in terms of the Medical, Dental and
         Supplementary Health Service Professions Act, 1974 (Act No 56 of
         1974).

     (9)    Government Notice No R.547 published in the Government Gazette
         No 21237 dated 29 May 2000, Amendment to the list of approved
         health facilities for the purpose of performing community service
         by dentists in the year 2000-2001 made in terms of the Medical,
         Dental and Supplementary Health Service Professions Act, 1974 (Act
         No 56 of 1974).

National Assembly:

Bills:

1.    The Minister of Public Works:


     (1)    Wetsontwerp op die Landskapsargitektuurprofessie [W 18 - 2000]


         The Landscape Architectural Profession Bill [B 18 - 2000]
         (National Assembly - sec 75) was introduced by the Minister of
         Public Works on 6 April 2000 and referred to the Portfolio
         Committee on Public Works.


     (2)    Wetsontwerp op die Ingenieursweseprofessie [W 19 - 2000]


         The Engineering Profession Bill [B 19 - 2000] (National Assembly -
         sec 75) was introduced by the Minister of Public Works on 6 April
         2000 and referred to the Portfolio Committee on Public Works.


     (3)    Wetsontwerp op die Projek- en Konstruksiebestuursprofessies [W
         21 - 2000]


         The Project and Construction Management Professions Bill [B 21 -
         2000] (National Assembly - sec 75) was introduced by the Minister
         of Public Works on 6 April 2000 and referred to the Portfolio
         Committee on Public Works.


     (4)    Wetsontwerp op die Bourekenaarsprofessie [W 22 - 2000]


         The Quantity Surveying Profession Bill [B 22 - 2000] (National
         Assembly - sec 75) was introduced by the Minister of Public Works
         on 6 April 2000 and referred to the Portfolio Committee on Public
         Works.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of
     Life and Status of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons on the National
     Youth Commission Amendment Bill [B 25 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec
     75), dated 5 June 2000:


         The Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life
         and Status of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons, having
         considered the subject of the National Youth Commission Amendment
         Bill [B 25 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it
         and classified by the JTM as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill
         without amendment.

         The Committee further reports that the New NP opposed the Bill.
         The DP indicated that it was not in favour of the process
         followed: The Bill was not discussed by the Committee and
         therefore not properly considered by it. The DP felt that the Bill
         should be referred back to the Committee for proper discussion and
         consideration.


