---
title: 'National Assembly - 23 February 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2000-02-23
---

WEDNESDAY, 23 FEBRUARY 2000
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Introduction)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, President Mbeki, Deputy President
Zuma, Cabinet colleagues, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, I turn again
to the words of that great African author Ben Okri, who writes:


  They tell me that nature is the survival of the fittest. And yet, look
  how many wondrous gold and yellow fishes prosper amongst the silent
  stones of the ocean beds, while sharks eternally prowl the waters in
  their impossible dreams of oceanic domination and while whales become
  extinct; look how many does and antelopes, ants and fleas, birds of
  aquamarine plumage, birds that have mastered Chinua Achebe's art of
  flying without perching, how many butterflies and iguanas thrive, while
  elephants turn into endangered species, and while even lions growl in
  their dwindling solitude. Nature and history are not just about the
  survival of the fittest, but also about the survival of the wisest, the
  most adaptive and the most aware.

Our history implores us to use our freedoms to light the path to a more
humane, more caring society. It demands that we lift our sights far into
the horizon, that we use our voices to proclaim our freedoms. Our history
teaches us courage and resilience, that we embrace the challenges, that we
be strong, that we be confident, that we be humble, and that we be patient.
It demands that we overcome fear and embrace the power of transformation,
that we grasp the complexity of each other and of the world we live in,
that we see beyond the illusions and the truths we often create for
ourselves. If we see only the beauty of the yellow and gold fish and the
fierce jaws of the shark, we will not believe that they swim in the same
waters, but they can and they do and they thrive. We need to accept that
reality to understand why.

It is the ability to understand, to change, to adapt, to experience
suffering and to learn from it, to see beyond the illusions of power, that
determines success. Our history demands that we show the world that the
butterfly does not have to die so that the elephant is saved, that the
shark and the yellow fish can thrive in the same water. Our history of
struggle and the indomitable spirit of our people have taught us that
survival is not about fitness alone. It is about perseverance, comradeship,
wisdom and caring. To grow and develop one needs to be strong to stay the
course, to adapt to change and to take care of those displaced by it.

What we present today represents yet another step in the process of
creating a society that is strong, responsive to our changing circumstances
and sensitive to the needs of those adversely affected by the old and the
new. We need to see beyond the illusion of easy solutions. We need to avoid
what the economist Paul Krugman calls ``pop internationalism'' - a doctrine
he describes as one offering the gain of apparent sophistication without
the pain of hard thinking. According to this, the pretender sophisticates,
recites standard texts about what the markets demand, but does not think
about what real people should do to end human poverty, the underdevelopment
of entire societies and the denial of dignity to billions of people across
the globe.

This is the fourth year that I stand before this House to present a budget.
In the Budgets of the past four years we have remained true to the
reconstruction and development goals we set ourselves, and we have been
alert to the changes required by the circumstances and challenges of our
time. Our vision and our commitment are clear: To build a better life for
all our people. This is our course.

Sustainable growth and development call for ongoing structural
transformation of our economy so that we can take advantage of the untapped
potential in our midst and the opportunities presented by globalisation.
Sustainable growth and development also depend on our ability to overcome
the scourge of poverty and the deep inequalities that we inherited. Each
one of the Budgets we have put before this House, including the Budget we
present here today, advances these same objectives, step by step.

In 1997 we integrated the RDP, provided significant tax relief to low-
income earners, announced a substantial liberalisation of exchange controls
and introduced a range of new industrial policy measures to assist firms to
expand, invest in technology and take advantage of export opportunities.

In 1998 we published the first three-year Medium-Term Expenditure
Framework. The 1998 Budget also introduced a formula-based equitable
division of revenue between national, provincial and local government, as
required by our Constitution. The RDP initiatives were expanded and
reinforced. A demutualisation charge was announced to finance the
establishment of the Umsobomvu Fund, and the Budget granted further relief
to income-earners.

In 1999 we published the first National Expenditure Survey, providing a
comprehensive review of spending programmes and policy commitments. We
announced the introduction of the skills development programme and the
lowering of the company tax rate to encourage investment. In the context of
severe macroeconomic uncertainty and a slowdown in growth we succeeded in
protecting social spending and extending Government's poverty relief
programmes.

In this Budget we are able to lower the tax burden again. [Applause.] We
can announce increases in spending on public services of more than
R8,3 billion above earlier estimates. We anticipate a budget deficit of
2,6% of GDP in 2000-01 and we take still further steps in relaxing exchange
controls. The Budget confirms several fiscal objectives to be achieved by
2002. We will ensure that Government's current expenditure is brought into
line with revenue, that we eliminate the negative contribution of public
finances to national saving. We will continue to lower the burden of debt
service costs in the Budget and we aim to maintain real growth of more than
5% a year in capital spending. A healthy fiscal policy must be matched with
sound monetary measures. We have agreed to an inflation target with the
Governor of the Reserve Bank.

As the hon the President stated at this podium in his state of the nation
address at the opening of Parliament:
   
  ... at no point during its entire history has our country been in a
  better position to confront the challenges we face than it is today.

[Applause.] The fundamental challenge we continue to face as a country is
how to grow our economy in a sustainable way so that poverty is eradicated
and the prosperity and wellbeing of all our people is increased. How do we
construct a vibrant, flexible and competitive economy able to take
advantage of the resources of our people and the opportunities of the
global economy? How do we do so without resorting to what Krugman calls
``pop internationalism''?

For small, open economies like ours, we have to think hard about the world
we live in - a world that is becoming increasingly more complex, where time
differences and geographical distances have disappeared, where real time
and virtual reality are the order of the day. It is a world in which the
borders between countries are little more than picket fences. We inhabit a
world that is now infinitely more prosperous than at any point in recorded
history, but it is also a troubled world where poverty and inequality
between and within nations abide.
We need to understand that when the hype and the glamour - gigabytes and
cyberspace, multibillion dollar mergers and acquisitions, Seattle
protesters posing as television stars - are all stripped away, the issues
are really no different from 100, 200 - nay, 300 - years ago. At the heart
of this is our capacity and our ability to respond to change - how we
choose to overcome our own fears, prejudices, sectoral interests and
biases. It is about extending the limits of our potential while
replenishing and reaffirming our humanity, our values and our beliefs.

We have to consider how we protect the poorest and most vulnerable in our
society. We have to ensure that growth leads to greater equity and
prosperity for all and to the narrowing of the chasm between rich and poor.
These are the challenges we face. As Ben Okri writes:


  Nature and history are not just about the survival of the fittest, but
  also about the survival of the wisest, the most adaptive and the most
  aware.

Our economy has undergone a substantial transformation. We now have a more
open economy, which competes with the rest of the world. Mature industries
have restructured and many new industries have developed. The transition to
democracy in 1994 marked the turning point in our country's economic
performance. Economic growth recovered, capital inflows resumed and
business and consumer confidence increased.

Prudent fiscal management, lower inflation and renewed capital inflows
allowed interest rates to fall sharply during the course of 1999, thereby
reducing the cost of capital and creating the conditions for an
acceleration in investment spending over the next three years. Lower
interest rates are also providing welcome relief to many ordinary people,
as is reflected in lower household debt levels. The economy is poised to
grow robustly at an average rate of 3,4% over the next three years. The
deficit on the current account of the balance of payments is expected to
average around 1% of GDP. Inflation is expected to remain well within the
band that we will announce today.

This Budget makes a strong contribution to enhancing the growth and
development potential of our economy. Our expenditures will grow markedly
in real terms over the next three years and remain strongly redistributive
in favour of the poor. We plan to reduce the fiscal deficit to 2,2% of GDP
in 2002 so that we reduce our dependence on borrowing and, over time, our
interest costs. More importantly, we are on track to eliminate Government
dissaving by 2002, thereby improving the economy's ability to finance a
higher level of investment, enhance the infrastructure we pass on to our
children and maintain and create productive employment opportunities.

In this Budget we make the most far-reaching tax reforms in decades,
bringing our tax structure more in line with international practice,
introducing measures aimed at promoting small and medium-sized enterprises
and rewarding the development efforts of the nonprofit sector.

Lokhu kwabiwa kwezimali kudlala enkulu indima ekukhuleni nokuthuthuka
komnotho wezwe lethu. [Ihlombe.] Eminyakeni emithathu ezayo, uHulumeni
uzokwenyusa kakhulu incithomali yakhe, ikakhulu kubantu abantulayo. Sihlose
futhi ukwehlisa izinga lemali eshodayo iye ku-2,2% wenani lomkhiqizo wezwe
ukuze sigweme ukwethembela kwethu ekutshelekeni imali, nenzalo okumele
siyikhokhe. [Ihlombe.]

Okusemqoka ukuthi, sisendleleni yokuqeda ngonyaka ka-2002 ukungalondolozi
imali yombuso, lokhu kuzosiza ekutheni sikwazi ukukhokhela ukwakhiwa
kwamathuba emisebenzi, sizobhekela nezingane zethu.

Kulesi sabiwomali, siletha enkulu inguquko kwintela njengoba sizama
ukuthuthukisa osomabhizinisi ... [Uhleko] [Ihlombe] ... abasakhulayo nalezo
nhlangano ... [Ubuwelewele.] (Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[This budget plays an important role in the improvement of the economy of
our country. In three years' time, the Government will greatly increase its
expenditure on helping people, especially those who are living in abject
poverty. We are aiming at decreasing the budget deficit to 2,2% of the
gross domestic product so that we will not rely on borrowing money that we
will have to repay with interest. [Applause.]

What is important is that we are about to stop spending the money of the
state in 2002. This will help us to pay for job creation projects as we
depend on jobs in order to raise our children.

Through this budget we are making big changes in taxes as we are trying to
empower business owners ... [Laughter] [Applause] ... especially the small
business owners and organizations ... [Interjections.]]

What is happening? I am missing something. [Interjections.] [Laughter.]
 
... ezingasebenzeli inzuzo, njengoba kwenziwa emhlabeni jikelele.
[Ihlombe.] [... the nonprofit organisations, as is happening worldwide.
[Applause.]]

What we have been saying is that one of the objectives of our economic
policy is price stability. What does this mean?

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Usuqedile! [Uhleko.] [You have finished!
[Laughter.]]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Simply put, our aim is to counter the erosion of
people's incomes and living standards that comes with rising prices and to
remove the fear of future inflation that undermines investment and savings
decisions.

Enye yezinhloso zomgomo womnotho ukuthi kuzinze indlela izinto ezibiza
ngayo. Ngamanye amazwi, lokhu kuzosiza ekuvikeleni izimali zabantu ngokuthi
intengo yemali ingehli kakhulu uma ukubiza kwezinto kwenyuka njalo.
[Ihlombe.]

UNGQONGQOSHE WEZASEKHAYA: Siyabonga! (Translation of Zulu paragraphs
follows.)

[One of the objectives of the economic policy is to stabilise prices. In
other words this will assist in protecting people's money from inflation if
prices continue to rise. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Thank you very much!]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: As we were saying, price stability is about two
things that directly affect the lives of ordinary people. The first is the
cost of living: How much prices go up and how often they change. High
inflation eats away at the value of people's income. For a pensioner on a
fixed Government pension it matters deeply whether the price of bread goes
up by 10c or 20c a loaf and whether it goes up every single week or once a
year. The second is the disempowering effect of uncertainty on household
and business decisions. There is an element of risk in an unpredictable
inflation trend that weakens our capacity to transact, whether as
businesses engaged in large international investment projects or as
individuals seeking to protect family savings for our retirement years.
 
Maintaining the value of the rand in support of sustainable economic growth
is the constitutional responsibility of the SA Reserve Bank, and in
particular that of Governor Mboweni who is trying to hide in the gallery up
there. [Laughter.] Its main instrument in executing this responsibility is
the level of interest rates and rising inflation is consequently
accompanied by higher interest rates. We know that high interest rates
impose a heavy burden on families and small businesses.

We have agreed with the Reserve Bank that this responsibility should be
more transparently formulated. We should share, as a nation, a common
understanding with the Reserve Bank of the level of inflation we accept as
realistic and prudent. Such an understanding can itself contribute to price
stability and confidence about future price trends. An inflation target
also gives the Reserve Bank an anchor or objective for its monetary policy
decisions. When interest rates rise or fall, we will then know that this
relates to the target for price trends on which we have all agreed.
Inflation targeting increases the transparency and accountability of
monetary policy. It provides stability in the value of money which, in
turn, enhances growth prospects. Inflation targeting is not about setting
wages and prices. It does not undermine collective bargaining or
predetermine the outcome of wage negotiations, nor does it or should it
interfere with price competition, but it creates a benchmark against which
price and wage adjustments can be compared and provides an assurance that
unanticipated inflation will not be allowed unfairly to erode the real
value of workers' wages and pensioners' spending power.

In the early 1920s the economist John Maynard Keynes cautioned that
inflation and deflation cut the moral link between effort and reward,
leading to the unjustified enrichment of some and the unjustified
impoverishment of others. We might add: normally, the many. He highlighted
the critical importance of price stability for the wellbeing of the
economic system. This has not changed. Indeed, the extraordinary record of
price volatility in the 20th century has confirmed the value to ordinary
people and large enterprises alike of price stability and confidence about
future inflation.
The hon the President announced on 4 February that Government would today
be making an announcement on inflation targeting. The Governor of the
Reserve Bank and I have agreed on a target band of 3% to 6% or, as the
Governor would have it, 6% to 3%, to indicate positively the direction in
which he is moving. [Applause.] The objective is to bring inflation within
this band by 2002. To ensure that the bank is targeting an appropriate
measure, a new index of consumer prices - CPIX - has been introduced. This
includes the full basket of goods and services that a typical household
consumes - measured by the familiar consumer price index or CPI - but
excludes interest costs as these are a direct outcome of monetary policy.
In this way, we seek to ensure that the substantial progress we have made
in reducing inflation is secured and extended into the future. This is just
one of many structural improvements we have achieved over the past five
years and on which we will build further in the decade to come.

After falling in real terms between 1990 and 1994, gross fixed capital
formation grew by 4,2% a year between 1995 and 1999. In the years ahead we
must achieve a further expansion in the share of national spending that
goes to investment in productive infrastructure. Growth in real exports
averaged 7,4% a year between 1994 and 1999. We must ensure that our trade
performance continues to strengthen and diversify.

Over the past five years, industrial productivity has improved by some 4% a
year, contributing to steady increases in real wages in the private sector.
In the next decade we intend to deepen and extend this trend. We must
ensure that productive employment opportunities are opened up for new
workseekers. We aim to improve the effectiveness of our labour markets and
we plan to invest more in skills development and training.

The Public Service is being comprehensively transformed and public
enterprises are being restructured. These processes will intensify in the
years to come. Our commitment to improved service delivery and effective
governance leaves no room for complacency. And, as a nation, we must save
more. We will continue to rely on foreign investment to complement our own
savings effort, but sustained higher rates of economic growth cannot be
achieved unless we increase the share of national income we make available
for productive investment.
Our vision is firmly focused on the future. It will take time to meet these
restructuring challenges. But we will, in due course, raise our capacity to
grow beyond the 3,4% we are able to project for the next three years. There
are no quick and easy solutions. There is hard work ahead of us, reinforced
by our commitment to succeed and our extraordinary ability as South
Africans to find the way forward.

Our growth strategy also includes a substantial restructuring of state
assets and extended involvement of the private sector in Public Service
delivery. Our objectives here are twofold: To improve economic efficiency
and to extend services to more people. Government has adopted a strategic
framework to improve the delivery of some public services through
innovative public-private partnerships. The objective is to secure more
efficient and improved services. We acknowledge that there are many areas
of public sector responsibility in which the private sector is better
placed to deliver effective services, perhaps because the dynamics of
competition can be brought into play, or because technical capacity exists
in the private sector or because the investment risks can be better managed
in this way.
There is, however, no automaticity in this, so we have to assist. To this
end the Treasury is establishing a unit that will help national and
provincial departments in identifying, procuring and implementing public-
private partnerships. Treasury regulations will also be promulgated to
provide a proper framework for the development of partnership transactions.
By bringing private capital expertise into state enterprises, we have
gained access to technology, skills transfer, capital needed for expansion
and organisational renewal.

A further economic benefit arises from the reduction of Government debt we
have achieved through privatisation. In the current year some R6,9 billion
in restructuring proceeds has flowed to the Exchequer, mainly through the
conversion of the SA Special Risks Insurance Association, Sasria, to a
public company with a reduced level of reserves. This has brought debt
service costs down, freeing resources for spending on social services and
infrastructure. We anticipate that privatisation proceeds will contribute
R5 billion to debt reduction in 2000-01, increasing to R10 billion two
years later.

The benefits of restructuring are much wider than this. The renewal of
public enterprises includes a strong focus on service delivery, such as the
roll-out of telephones to more people and the extension of broadcasting and
public information services. Bold initiatives in restructuring public
entities are in progress, under the energetic leadership of several of our
Cabinet colleagues.

In our international economic relations, we have also taken several brave
steps. Our involvement in the Southern African region is steadily
increasing, both in expanded trade and in co-operation across many fields
of public policy such as health care, education, transport infrastructure,
regional water and energy matters, air traffic control and the co-
ordination of tax affairs. Trade and financial flows are expected to
strengthen considerably as a result of trade agreements with the European
Union - Alec, with or without grappa! - and the Southern African
Development Community and new opportunities created by the unbundling of
industries and accelerated restructuring of state assets.

Confidence in our democracy and our economic prospects has contributed to a
strong increase in foreign direct and portfolio investment. Since 1994,
South Africa has annually received foreign savings averaging 1% of GDP.
Portfolio inflows into the equity market remain an important source of
financing. Our standing as an investment destination is gaining ground, as
is evidenced by the 10% weight South Africa now enjoys in the emerging-
market funds. Attracting foreign savings and investment remains an
important part of our strategy. It enables us to finance increased levels
of investment which, over time, will create more jobs. Foreign investment
brings with it access to markets and new technology, while allowing us to
meet the deficit between our export earnings and spending on imports from
abroad.

Our ability to grow depends in part on improved export performance. In the
past five years our economy has become more open to trade, with both
imports and exports growing strongly. Trade relations have also diversified
considerably in recent years, including rapid expansion into the Asian and
American markets.

Access to markets and administratively streamlined international trading
arrangements are critical issues for small, open economies. We will
continue to press the international community, and the G7 nations in
particular, to overcome their own protectionist tendencies so that a new
round of World Trade Organisation negotiations, with a development agenda,
can proceed. [Applause.] We need to do this to bring fair access to markets
for developing countries. We are conscious that we will ourselves sometimes
have to make difficult adjustments, that in some industries jobs may be
lost, but that our region and the developing nations of the world have far
more to gain from open,  dynamic and competitive international relations
than from pursuing insular protectionist interests. [Applause.]

This approach is also reflected in our regulation of financial markets.
Since 1994, South Africa has substantially reduced exchange controls on
companies, institutions and individuals. It is worth reminding ourselves
that there are no exchange controls on nonresidents. We chose a gradual
approach to the liberalisation of the capital account, recognising that
these reforms had to accompany other developments in our international
trade relations, financial structure and tax environment. The wisdom of
this approach has been amply demonstrated by our success in negotiating the
stormy waters of the global economy over the past three years.

Today we are able to take several further steps in deregulating foreign
exchange transactions, consistent with the perspectives described by the
outgoing managing director of the IMF, Mr Michel Camdessus, as the
``orderly liberalisation of capital flows''. The Reserve Bank will publish
the details at some point today. Amongst the measures are the following:
Companies will be allowed to use local cash holdings to finance up to 10%
of new foreign investments; companies will be allowed to use local cash
holdings to repay up to 10% of foreign debt they raised to finance foreign
investment; companies wishing to establish or acquire new companies abroad
will be allowed to make use of corporate asset swaps to finance these
investments; unit trusts will be permitted to invest up to 20% of their
total assets under management by way of asset swaps; pension funds, long-
term insurers and unit trusts will be allowed to make foreign currency
transfers in the year 2000 of up to 10% of the net inflow of funds during
the 1999 calendar year, subject to overall limits of 15% of assets under
management for pension funds and long-term insurers and 20% for unit
trusts; and travel allowances and other limits applicable to individuals
will be raised.

We are also in a position to clarify today the conditions that will apply
to companies wishing to establish primary listings offshore. Consideration
will be given in cases where, firstly, foreign expansion is necessary and
integral to the company, given its size and the nature of its business;
secondly, a significant proportion of revenue is derived from outside South
Africa, making the company in effect an international concern; thirdly,
there are clear monetary and balance-of-payments benefits to South Africa;
and, fourthly, a substantial advantage can be demonstrated over alternative
approaches to raising the required capital. Of course, companies and
individuals will need to continue to satisfy the authorities that their tax
affairs are in good standing. [Interjections.]

We brought to this House the proposed framework for the 2000 Budget in
October last year in the medium-term Budget policy statement. We indicated
there the need to achieve a balance between three broad objectives:
Firstly, providing for the Government's social, development and
infrastructure expenditure responsibilities; secondly, reducing the overall
burden of tax, so as to decrease the costs of investment and job creation
and release household spending power; and, thirdly, lowering the budget
deficit to contribute to lower debt service costs and declining interest
rates.
The underlying goals of fiscal policy remain economic growth and job
creation, improved public services and reduced inequality. This Budget
strongly supports these goals. It contributes to the health of the economy
by ensuring that our finances are in order and that we are not borrowing
more than we can afford. The 2000 Budget takes several steps to improve the
tax structure and continues the Government's reprioritisation of spending
in favour of reconstruction and development commitments.

Budget reform is part of Government's broader reform programme, aimed at
providing secure foundations for continual improvements in public finances.
The Public Finance Management Act is the cornerstone of this framework. It
sets out principles of accountability that devolve responsibility for
outputs and service delivery to departmental managers. It sets out clearly
the role and responsibilities of accounting officers and it lays the
foundations for improved Government accounting standards. The Act applies
to all entities under the ownership and control of the state. It is a bold
law, designed to transform the way we do things and enhance accountability.
The Act places South Africa at the forefront of international developments
in public finance management. The implementation of the Act will be phased
in from 1 April this year. Its implementation represents a major challenge
to Parliament, provincial legislatures and national and provincial
departments alike.

This House has heard many a member emphasise that our success as a nation
depends on our ability to reduce inequality and overcome poverty and that
our focus must continue to be on extending social services to the poorest
and most vulnerable. Our future success also depends on our ability to
develop the potential of our children and grandchildren, which is largely a
responsibility of our health and education systems. The 2000 Budget Review
provides new insights into the contribution Government makes to the
distribution of income and opportunities and the impact of social spending
programmes.

Dipatlisiso tse di dirilweng ka 1999 di re fa tiisetso ya gore lekgetho la
rona le tlhabolola ba ba tlhokang. Go dikgato di le tharo tse di tseilweng
go netefatsa gore go abiwa ga madi a setšhaba go mo tseleng e e
tlhamaletseng, jaaka: go thusa ba ba tlhokang matlo, ka maemo a a botoka a
botshelo, le ka madi a go thusa mo go godiseng bana; gore madi a a
reboletsweng dilo tse di botlhokwa - jaaka tsa lefapha la maphelo - a
dirisetswe dikliniki tsa baagi; gape le go dira gore madi a naga yotlhe a
dirisetswe bogolo tse di tlhokwang kwa diporofenseng, ditoropong, dikolong
kgotsa maokelong. [Legofi.]

Go a bontsha gore go simolola ka 1993 go fitlha ka 1997, tiriso ya madi mo
go ba ba tlhokang e tlhatlogile ka 34%, fa ya barui e fokotsegile ka 20%.
Se ruri ke sesupo sa tswelelopele. [Legofi.] Le fa go sa ntse go na le
mathata a magolo a go sa lekalekane, go tshwanelegile gore madi a a leng
teng a dirisiwe ka tshwanelo kwa maokelong, dikolong kgotsa matlong.

Kgolo ya ikonomi le go bulwa ga diphatla tsa ditiro ke dilo tseo di leng
botlhokwa mo go abeng tšhono e ntle ya ikonomi. Ka jalo, go tshwanelegile
gore re dirise tekanyetsokabo go tswala makoa ao a bonagalang magareng ga
ba ba tlhokang le ba ba kgonang. [Legofi.] (Translation of Setswana
paragraphs follows.)

[Research which was done in 1999 shows that our taxes are being used to
improve the lives of the needy. Steps have been taken to ensure that
taxpayers' money is used in a proper way, ie to build houses, improve
health services and provide for child maintenance; to ensure that money
which has been set aside for important areas like the Health department are
used for building community clinics; and to ensure that money from the
national fiscus is used to provide all the things that are needed in the
provinces, towns, schools and hospitals. [Applause.]

Between 1993 and 1997 money to be used to improve the lives of the needy
has increased by 34%, while money to be used in the affluent areas has
decreased by 20%. This really is a sign that things are improving.
[Applause.] As we still have problems of inequality, it is only right and
proper that the money which is available should be used constructively to
build hospitals, schools and houses.

A growing economy and job creation are important in providing everybody
with a chance to improve economically. It is, therefore, desirable to use
the Budget to close the gap between the haves and the have-nots.
[Applause.]]

Primary research undertaken in 1999 to investigate the distributional
impact of the Budget confirms that our tax structure is strongly
progressive and that Government spending programmes have become more
effectively targeted in favour of the poor. The expenditure study focused
on about 60% of Government spending on education, health, social grants,
water provision and housing between 1993 and 1997. It concluded that there
has been a significant shift in social spending from the more affluent in
our society to the poor. An estimated 50% of spending now goes to the
poorest 40% of our people. The share going to the wealthiest 20% is now
just under 9%. We are painfully aware of the fact that the inclusion of
tertiary education tends to continue to skew this in favour of the
wealthier segments of our society.

Redistribution has been achieved in three ways: Firstly, increased spending
on programmes targeted at the poor, such as housing subsidies, poverty
relief and the child support grants; secondly, shifts of priority within
several spending functions, such as the increased emphasis given by health
departments to clinic-based primary health care; and, thirdly, the
redistribution of resources between provinces and between districts or
between schools and hospitals within provinces.

Social spending on the poor increased by an estimated 34% between 1993 and
1997, while per capita spending on the rich has declined by over 20%. This
is significant progress. While the benefits of public administration,
economic infrastructure, justice and security are more broadly dispersed,
it is right that Government spending on education, health, welfare and
housing benefits should go to those less favoured by circumstance or
historical advantage.

Deep inequalities remain. In addition, we are conscious that the benefits
of Government programmes cannot simply be measured by departmental
expenditure records. Much depends on the quality of hospital management,
the content of learning materials or how effectively resources are used.
Our focus must remain more effective and efficient service delivery and an
appropriate mix between personnel expenditure, operating costs and the
maintenance of physical facilities. Broader economic growth and job
creation are undoubtedly the most important elements in redistributing
income and economic opportunities, but the Budget also plays a crucial role
in narrowing the gap between rich and poor.

Revenue this year is expected to be R196,3 billion or R5,4 billion more
than the February 1999 Budget estimate and some 6,5% more than 1998-99
receipts. This is, once again, testimony to the dedication and excellence
of the SA Revenue Service. [Applause.] Expenditure is expected to be
R2,1 billion more than budgeted, or R216 billion. The revised expenditure
estimate takes into account a saving of R1,6 billion in interest on debt,
additional transfers to provinces of R2,1 billion, a transfer of
R855 million to the Umsobomvu Fund not included in the original budget
estimates, and allocations made in the 1999 adjustments appropriation,
including supplementary amounts for the SA Rail Commuter Corporation, the
Independent Electoral Commission and for Y2K-related expenses of local
authorities. The revised estimates indicate a budget deficit of
R19,7 billion in 1999, which is 2,4% of GDP.

Kom ons kyk na die Begroting vir die jaar 2000. Sterker en meer doelgerigte
ekonomiese groei, verbeterde belastinginvordering en laer skulddienskoste
laat ons toe om die besteding op dienste te vermeerder tot R8,3 miljard in
die volgende boekjaar, vergeleke met ons begrotingsvooruitskattings in
1999. Besteding sal toeneem met 'n gemiddelde 7,5% per jaar in die volgende
drie jaar.

Die Begroting maak daarvoor voorsiening dat die uitgawes van R233,5 miljard
in die nuwe boekjaar toeneem tot R266,7 miljard twee jaar later. Dit sal
gefinansier word deur 'n totale inkomste van R210,4 miljard in die boekjaar
2000-01, wat die tekort sal afbring na R23 miljard of 2,6% van die BBP. Die
totale inkomste verhoog tot R243,6 miljard in 2002-03 en die tekort neem af
na 2,2% van die BBP.

Van die R233,5 miljard wat vir uitgawes in die jaar 2000 beskikbaar is,
word R46,5 miljard afgetrek vir skulddienskoste en R2 miljard as
gebeurlikheidsreserwe. Die balans van R185 miljard word dan proporsioneel
verdeel tussen die nasionale, provinsiale en plaaslike regerings. Die
provinsies sal R106 miljard ontvang in die komende boekjaar, wat 57%
verteenwoordig van die rentevrye uitgawes in hierdie Begroting. Hiervan sal
R94,4 miljard verdeel word tussen die provinsies volgens die pro-rata-
aandeelformule. Die balans van R11,6 miljard in die Begroting word
geoormerk as 'n voorwaardelike toekenning aan die provinsies vir die
nasionale begrotingsposte. Die aandeel van plaaslike regerings beloop
R2,8 miljard.

Die Begroting sluit ook 'n gebeurlikheidsreserwe van R2 miljard in vir 2000-
01, wat verhoog word na onderskeidelik R4 miljard en dan R8 miljard in die
laaste jaar, om voorsiening te maak vir makroekonomiese en ander
onvoorsiene uitgawes. Ons voorsien om 'n gedeelte daarvan beskikbaar te
stel vir die herstel van skade weens die onlangse vloedrampe. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Let us look at the Budget for the year 2000. Stronger and more purposeful
economic growth, improved tax collection and lower debt service costs allow
us to increase spending on services to R8,3 billion in the new financial
year, compared with our 1999 Budget forward estimates. Spending will
increase by an average of 7,5% a year in the next three years.

The Budget provides for expenditure of R233,5 billion in the new financial
year, rising to R266,7 billion two years later. This will be financed by a
total revenue of R210,4 billion in the 2000-01 financial year, bringing the
deficit down to R23 billion or 2,6% of GDP. Total revenue increases to
R243,6 billion in 2002-03 and the deficit decreases to 2,2% of GDP.

From the R233,5 billion available for spending in 2000, R46,5 billion is
being deducted for debt service costs and R2 billion for a contingency
reserve. The balance of R185 billion is then to be divided proportionally
between the national, provincial and local governments. The provinces will
receive R106 billion in the coming financial year, representing 57% of
noninterest expenditure in this Budget. Of this, R94,4 billion will be
divided between the provinces according to the pro rata share formula. The
balance of R11,6 billion in the Budget is identified as a conditional grant
to the provinces for the national Votes. The local government share amounts
to R2,8 billion.

The Budget also includes a contingency reserve of R2 billion for 2000-01,
increasing to R4 billion and then R8 billion in the last year, to provide
for macroeconomic and other unforeseen expenses. We expect to make a
portion of this reserve available to repair damage caused by the recent
floods. [Applause.]]

In respect of the 2000 Budget, we are saying that stronger economic growth,
improved tax collection and lower debt service costs allow us to raise
spending on services by R8,3 billion in the new fiscal year, compared with
our 1999 Budget forward estimates. Spending will increase by an average of
7,5% a year for the next three years.
The Budget provides for expenditure of R233,5 billion in 2000-01, rising to
R266,7 billion two years later. This is to be financed by a total revenue
of R210,4 billion in the new fiscal year, bringing the deficit to
R23 billion or 2,6% of GDP. Total revenue increases to R243,6 billion in
2002-03 and the deficit falls to 2,2% of GDP.

From the R233,5 billion available for spending in 2000 we deduct
R46,5 billion for debt service costs and R2 billion to provide for
contingencies. This leaves R185 billion to be divided equitably between the
three spheres of government. Provinces will receive R106 billion in the
coming year, representing some 57% of noninterest expenditure in this
Budget. Of this, R94,4 billion will be distributed between provinces by the
equitable share formula. The remaining R11,6 billion is identified in the
Division of Revenue Bill as conditional grants to provinces on national
Votes. The local government share amounts to R2,8 billion.

The Budget also includes a contingency reserve of R2 billion in the new
fiscal year, increasing to R4 billion and R8 billion, providing for
macroeconomic and other contingencies. We expect, as we said, to allocate a
portion of this reserve to repair damage caused by the recent devastating
floods.

The budget deficit has now been brought firmly under control, reducing our
annual borrowing requirement and steadily contributing to a lower burden of
debt service costs in the annual expenditure estimates. In this way, tax
resources are released for allocation to Government's spending priorities.
The lower deficit also means that Government does not consume quite so much
of the country's savings, releasing finance for investment in industry and
job creation and reducing the pressure on interest rates.

In 1999-2000 debt service costs were R44,5 billion or R1,6 billion less
than budgeted. Higher than expected proceeds from state asset restructuring
contributed significantly to the lowering of debt costs. Debt service costs
are expected to be R46,5 billion in 2000-01 or 5,3% of GDP, falling to 4,9%
in the third year of the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework. Total
Government debt is projected to be R398,3 billion on 31 March 2001 or 45%
of GDP, compared with the estimated 46,5% of GDP at the end of 1999-2000.
Government debt is expected to fall to 42% of GDP by March 2003.
The deficit is a tax on future generations. By reducing it, we free our
children and grandchildren from this burden. We have reversed the
spiralling upward trend in interest costs on the Budget and the strain on
available resources that this inevitably brings. The interest charge is now
falling, allowing us to spend more on services for the poor and most
vulnerable and on infrastructure.

We launched the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework in the 1998 Budget.
Planning for three years ahead and updating those plans every year, allows
Government to combine stability and consistency with reprioritisation. All
Government expenditure has now been scrutinised and planned in three
successive Budgets.

In this Budget, we make certain changes to the baseline projections for
2000-01 and 2001-02 made in last year's expenditure framework. The first of
these is in respect of defence. An investment of R30 billion in modernising
defence equipment begins in the new fiscal year. This follows after sharp
declines in defence spending in previous years. The decision is based on an
intensive analysis of the economic and fiscal impact of the procurements.
To accommodate this programme, defence spending increases by R2,8 billion
above the baseline next year and R3,9 billion the year after. Minister
Lekota is not even smiling! [Laughter.] The procurements will cost some
R5 billion in 2002-03 and after 2003-04 these costs will stabilise in real
terms and then fall.

Recognising that the arms contracts are import-intensive, Government and
the supplier companies have agreed to industrial participation programmes
that are designed to boost investment and exports. The financing of these
purchases forms part of the planned foreign borrowing requirement of the
budget deficit. Export guarantees by supplier countries and innovative
financing have allowed South Africa to secure favourable terms and
conditions. They have helped to keep the purchases affordable and to
contain the financial risks.
 
The second aspect is fighting crime. Fighting crime is a national priority.
This Budget provides support to that fight with substantial extra spending
on police and justice. [Applause.] The emphasis is on vigorous, focused and
co-ordinated programmes to strengthen and integrate the prevention,
detection, prosecution and punishment of crime.
 
The police will receive R1,1 billion more over the next two years above the
1999 Budget projections. [Applause.] This will enable improvements in
information technology for co-ordinating the fight against crime. It will
provide for better fingerprint identification and electronic access to
criminal records. Improvements in the police's social crime prevention
activities will also be financed.

The Department of Justice will receive around R470 million extra over the
next two years. [Applause.] This will support law enforcement by the
Directorate of Special Operations and the National Prosecuting Authority.
It will also target improvements in the courts' administration in order to
ensure that cases can be processed as fairly and effectively as possible.

Correctional Services is proceeding with an innovative public-private
partnership to construct two maximum-security prisons. Other spending also
supports the fight against crime. The Department of Home Affairs' National
Identification System receives R1 billion over five years. This system will
improve the service offered to the public, but it will also help to
identify and combat fraud.

Spending on social services - education, health and welfare - will continue
to take up the bulk of noninterest spending in the new fiscal year. It is
projected to grow moderately in real terms over the next three years. In
this time, personnel spending will grow less quickly than spending on other
elements of social services. This will mean more to spend on inputs such as
medicines and textbooks.

Other reforms also contribute to more effective spending. Supported by
Budget funds, education departments have been implementing programmes to
improve the management capacity, including financial management. In the
2000 Budget we provide R272 million to be used for teachers' professional
development and to support the campaign to promote a culture of learning,
teaching and service, or Colts as it is known.

Provincial welfare departments pay monthly benefits to more than 3 million
beneficiaries at a cost of about R1,4 billion per month. These go to the
most vulnerable in society - the elderly and disabled, as well as to poor
families with children. This social safety net is currently being widened
substantially by the phasing in of the new child support grant. In January
this year 217 000 received this benefit, up from 28 000 in March last year.
About 20 000 new beneficiaries are added per month. This grant will
eventually double the number of welfare beneficiaries as it reaches its
target population, the 3 million poorest children in our country.
 
In addition to this widening of the social safety net, Government will
again increase the value of social grants to reduce the impact of inflation
on recipients of the grant. After consultation with the Minister for
Welfare and Population Development, the Welfare Minmec and the Budget
Council an increase of R20 a month to R540 has been agreed in the maximum
value of the old age grants, disability grants, war veterans' grants and
care dependency grants. [Applause.] Other grants will be increased in line
with this, except for the child support grant which will remain at its
current level. This increase will cost provincial governments an estimated
R472 million in the new fiscal year while the increase in the number of
beneficiaries, particularly because of the increase in child support grant
beneficiaries and carry-through costs from the previous year, will require
an additional R827 million.
 
Hospital management is being strengthened and conditional grants provided
to rehabilitate hospitals and develop tertiary medical services in under-
served provinces. Provinces and national Government continue to work
together to improve services and enhance budgeting methodology. In each
social service - health, education and welfare - national and provincial
departments and treasuries meet regularly to work together on common
issues.

HIV/Aids is one of the biggest challenges this country faces. To assist in
the fight against Aids this Budget makes a special allocation in addition
to existing amounts on departmental budgets to finance an integrated
response to the epidemic: R75 million in the first year, R125 million in
the second year and R300 million in the third year. The Departments of
Education, of Health and of Welfare are finalising a strategy for the use
of this allocation. Principles already agreed are that the broad focus
should be on children and the youth, as they are the most vulnerable and
affected sections of the population.

Government's poverty relief, infrastructure investment and Jobs Summit
programme continue through the next three years. We have already allocated
R1 billion for 1999-2000, increasing to R1,2 billion and R1,5 billion in
the years thereafter. We now add another R1,5 billion to the programme in
2002-03. These funds target the poorest of the poor, especially in the
rural areas. [Applause.] They provide for jobs and community development.
The programmes are designed to contribute to the empowerment of people
through training and development.

These and other programmes will be implemented within the context of the
sustainable and integrated rural development strategy. They will be
supplemented by the Umsobomvu Fund. Its activities will begin this year,
focusing on the employment and training needs of young people. As we
already know, R855 million has been collected as a demutualisation charge
to start the Umsobomvu Fund.

The national Budget includes anticipated receipts of the new skills levy
assigned to the financing of the National Skills Fund and sectoral skills
programmes. It is expected that R1,5 billion will be raised in 2000-01,
increasing to R3 billion in the following year. In addition to training
programmes, spending on other economic services also grows. For example,
land reform allocations increase and support for marketing South Africa as
an international tourist destination is increased by a further R100 million
a year over the baseline. You are not saying thank you, Valli! [Laughter.]

Between 1995-96 and 1998-99 personnel expenditure grew strongly. Beginning
this financial year, the proportion of total spending that goes to
personnel costs has begun to decline. Although we must not forget that it
is people who deliver services, we must also acknowledge that a better
balance between personnel and nonpersonnel spending will improve the
quality of the services we have to deliver. We cannot deliver services
without spending on the maintenance of school buildings or hospitals or,
indeed, on books and medicines.

Improving the quality of public services remains central to the work of
Government. Budgeting has an important part to play in this work and in
helping Parliament and the public to judge the services they are receiving.
With last year's Budget, we published a survey setting out the spending
plans for each national department. The second National Expenditure Survey
is published today. It puts the spending plans of each national department
in the context of that department's objectives, its policies and outputs
that have been and will be delivered. I hope that parliamentarians in
general, and portfolio and select committees in particular, will find it a
useful reference document.

Increased tax collection by Sars has allowed us to increase spending while
reducing tax rates and the deficit. In order to build on this success, the
Budget allocates a further R447 million to Sars. I say thank you! Fairness
and the battle against all forms of criminality demand that tax should be
collected from all those from whom it is due.

Regarding provincial and local government expenditure, as set out in the
Intergovernmental Fiscal Review, provinces have moved from large deficits
to budget surpluses, allowing them to repay debt. Provincial finances have
stabilised; budgeting and planning have become thorough. As a result,
provinces are now able to focus their energies on implementing the
microreforms necessary for the effective delivery of services.
 
The intergovernmental system continues to evolve. Intergovernmental
institutions are maturing, setting the stage for more effective policy and
spending co-ordination. Implementing the Public Finance Management Act will
help to clarify accountability and promote proper financial management.
These and other changes will help provincial and local governments to
become more responsive to the needs of people and to be sources of
innovation and creativity in delivering public services.

Provincial spending is projected to rise from R101,1 billion in 1999-2000
to R108,4 billion in the next fiscal year and to increase by an average of
5,9% a year over the next three years. The share of personnel spending
declines moderately over the period as provinces plan to strengthen other
operating expenditure. Provincial budgets suggest that capital spending
will grow to address infrastructural investment and maintenance
requirements. The MECs of Finance are all sitting in the front row over
there. Next week they will table their budgets and then we will know that
several provinces have set aside funds for infrastructure projects from
unallocated reserves. In addition, the Department of Finance will
administer a supplementary infrastructure grant to provinces in the new
fiscal year.

The Constitution gives provinces certain tax powers. Under the correct
conditions, expanding provincial taxing powers could give provinces more
flexibility to adjust the mix of services in response to the needs of
citizens. Assigning new taxes to the provinces does not, however, guarantee
greater accountability and efficiency in spending. For this reason the
Budget Council endorsed a gradual approach to extending the tax powers of
provinces, as recommended by the Katz Commission. In the meantime,
provinces will concentrate on improving the efficiency of spending.

Local government is expected to receive R6,7 billion in grants, agency
payments and services in kind from the national Budget. These allocations
support vitally important basic services to poor households, such as water,
roads, refuse removal and housing infrastructure. We will continue to use
local economic development funds further to encourage development in our
localities.

It is no secret that many of our local authorities are under financial
pressure. The coming year will be particularly challenging as the
consolidation and transformation resulting from the demarcation process are
being implemented. Amidst these problems and uncertainties, however, what
is encouraging is the bold reforms being undertaken by some of our
municipalities to restructure and modernise their administrations. To show
its support, national Government has set aside R300 million to promote such
restructuring initiatives in bigger municipalities and another R150 million
will be made available for smaller municipalities. A further R50 million is
available to support improvements in financial management. Budget reforms,
like multiyear budgeting, will be introduced through pilot projects in six
large municipalities.

The tax proposals we table before this House today constitute the most
extensive set of tax reforms ever undertaken in this country. [Applause.]
They build on the reforms we have undertaken in the past five years and are
designed to lift the growth potential of our economy. Since this is such an
important issue, I thought it appropriate to deal with the tax proposals in
the language of my ancestors, Xu!. [Laughter.] [Applause.] I will therefore
deliver the speech in Xu!. We have not been able to arrange for translation
because Madam Speaker says that it is not one of the 11 official languages.
[Laughter.] But let me proceed.

The first issue I will deal with is the capital gains tax. [Laughter.]
South Africa does not have a tax on capital gains at present. When
considering the matter in 1995, the Katz Commission acknowledged that there
was a case for such a tax. However, the commission argued that given its
complexity and the lack of administrative capacity within the SA Revenue
Service, it was inopportune at that stage to introduce a capital gains tax.

A capital gains tax essentially aims to make the income tax more equitable.
Realised capital gains are equivalent to income and can be used in the same
way as income. The absence of a capital gains tax encourages taxpayers to
convert income that would ordinarily be taxable into tax-free capital
gains. The Revenue Service reports that there are many opportunities for
this. The result is the erosion of both the corporate and individual income
tax bases. It is for this reason that a capital gains tax forms an
essential backstop to the personal and corporate income tax structure.

Taxes on capital gains are well established in the majority of developed
countries, including Australia, Canada, the United Kingdom, the United
States of America, but also in many developing countries. Its introduction
in South Africa would bring our tax dispensation in line with the systems
of our major trading partners. A tax on realised capital gains is
accordingly proposed to take effect on 1 April 2001 and to apply to gains
accruing and realised after this date. It will not apply to family homes,
private vehicles or ordinary household possessions. Given the complexity of
the tax, a discussion document is to be released today and will be widely
available from Sars offices and on a dedicated website to be established
soon. Taxpayers are invited to comment on the discussion paper and the
draft legislation to be released later this year.

I want to make one point absolutely clear. We will not tolerate any
transactions entered into by taxpayers prior to the effective date for the
purpose of stepping up the base of assets to avoid the impact of the
capital gains tax provisions. [Applause.] The Revenue Service will
scrutinise any such transactions to ensure that the base is not overstated.
In cases where it is found that this kind of avoidance has taken place, the
base cost will be adjusted appropriately and severe penalties will be
imposed. Other anti-avoidance measures, including penalties, will also
apply from today. I caution all South Africans first to understand how this
tax works and to be careful about taking misguided tax advice. We introduce
this tax to promote equity and to benefit all South Africans through lower
income tax rates.

We now turn to a second big change, viz residence-based taxation. There are
two alternative approaches to the taxation of income flows across
international borders. In a source-based system such as we have, tax is
levied on income earned from a source within a country, irrespective of
whether it was earned by a resident or a nonresident. In a residence-based
system, tax is levied on the residents of a country irrespective of where
in the world the income is earned.

Our tax system is currently based on the source principle. This is
increasingly out of line with international practice and inappropriate for
the circumstances of the South African economy. It creates considerable
scope for tax structuring as taxpayers find ways to change income that
would normally be taxed in South Africa into untaxed foreign-source income.
The increased globalisation of our economy also creates opportunities for
taxpayers to avoid tax by routing transactions through countries with low
or zero tax rates or countries with generous tax incentives such as tax
holidays.
 
We therefore intend to move to a residence-based income tax for South
African residents for tax years commencing after 1 January 2001. This
measure will significantly broaden South Africa's tax base and limit the
opportunities for tax arbitrage. It will also bring our tax system in line
with international best practice. As an interim step, foreign-source
dividends accruing to South African residents become taxable as ordinary
income as from today. [Applause.] The additional revenue from this measure
is expected to be R200 million in the new fiscal year.

The third change concerns the plugging of loopholes. We understand only too
well that loopholes in tax legislation are an unintended consequence of the
complexity of modern tax systems. When undue advantage is taken of
deficiencies in the legislation, the tax base is weakened and an increased
burden is placed on other taxpayers. Measures are proposed this year to
address the following loopholes: Firstly, deferring tax liability through
structuring the timing of transactions to benefit from immediate deduction
of expenses while postponing the accrual of income; secondly, the use of
restraint of trade payments to earn tax privileged earnings; and, thirdly,
the avoidance of tax by employees through the use of personal employment
service companies, the so-called personal CCs that receive what should be
salaries as a different kind of income. These measures, together, are
expected to generate R186,5 million in additional revenue. The first two
measures will be effective from 23 February 2000. [Applause.]

The fourth change in the tax system concerns the repatriation of surplus
assets from pension funds. There have been certain judgments that allow
employers to repatriate surplus assets from pension funds. It is clearly
undesirable that an employer should gain a tax advantage from a
repatriation of pension funds. The recoupment of contributions from pension
funds is already taxable. With effect from today, the full amount of any
repatriation will be taxable and no offsetting loss will be allowed against
such income.

Fifthly, we introduce a graduated rate structure for SMEs. The development
of small and medium-sized enterprises is fundamentally important to the
growth and employment potential of our economy. To complement a number of
existing Government initiatives directed at SMEs, we propose to introduce a
graduated company tax rate structure for incorporated small and medium-
sized enterprises. Qualifying small companies will pay 15% on the first
R100 000 of taxable income and 30% thereafter. [Applause.] The new rates
apply to tax years commencing on or after 1 April 2000. We believe that
these measures will further contribute to the development of the labour-
intensive SME sector, generating active business income.

The sixth change, Phumzile, deals with the depreciation of permanent
structures. Infrastructure development is both a challenge and an
opportunity. Meeting the infrastructure needs of our country and our region
provides us with enormous potential for growth and development. To foster
infrastructural development and to provide strong incentives for private-
sector participation, we propose a number of depreciation allowances for
new investments in the following types of permanent structures: Firstly,
pipelines used for transporting oil or gas and their derivative products -
10% a year of the cost of the asset ... [Applause.] [Laughter.] That was a
wonderful solo performance by the Minister of Minerals and Energy!
[Laughter.] Secondly, electricity transmission lines, telephone
transmission lines and railway lines - 5% a year of the cost of the asset.
Very importantly, these allowances will only be available to taxpayers
whose core business is the use of the permanent structure for
transportation or transmission.

The seventh matter is tax relief for nonprofit organisations. These
organisations play an important role in our society. They assist
development by extending social services, often to the poorest of the poor.
The Income Tax Act grants tax-exempt status to approved public-benefit
organisations and allows for donations to some bodies to be deducted from
taxable income. We recognise that it does not go far enough. It was for
this reason that the Government referred the matter to the Katz Commission.
 
Having considered the ninth report of the Katz Commission and the
preliminary findings of the Portfolio Committee on Finance, it is proposed
that provision be made for a new definition of ``public-benefit
organisations'' which would qualify for tax exemption ... [Applause] ...
and that the tax deductibility of donations be extended to preprimary and
primary schools, children's homes, organisations caring for the aged and
those focused on HIV/Aids care. [Applause.] Phumzile, why are they all
applauding with you now? Last time it was a solo performance! [Laughter.]
We are also increasing the deduction for individuals to bring it in line
with that of companies to R1 000 or 5% of taxable income, whichever is the
greater.

We now come to excise duties. Lest the more technical tax proposals tempt
any of the hon members to smoke or drink, I shall now inform the House of
the changes we propose to the taxes on tobacco and alcohol.
[Interjections.] In accordance with our long-standing health policy, excise
duties on tobacco are once again increased to bring the total tax incidence
to 50% of the retail price. [Applause.] No, it is not called a Zuma tax.
[Laughter.] It is called a Tshabalala-Msimang tax. The excise duty on a
packet of 20 cigarettes goes up 38 cents, an increase of 10% in real terms.
[Applause.] As was the case last year, excise duties on pipe tobacco,
cigarette tobacco and cigars are also increased so that the total tax
burden is 50%. In other words, the Minister of Safety and Security will pay
70 cents more for 50g of pipe tobacco. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

Excise duties on alcoholic drinks are increased in line with forecast
inflation. This means an extra 2 cents on a can of beer or cider and 2,6
cents more on a bottle of wine. The excise duty on fortified wines such as
port and sherry goes up by 6 cents a bottle. The excise duty on a bottle of
spirits - whether gin, ouzo, grappa or any other too obscure to mention -
goes up by 51 cents a bottle. [Laughter.] Tax on sorghum beer remains
unchanged. [Laughter.]

For the second year running, we can afford to cut excise duty on soft
drinks, this time by 4 cents a litre. We call on bottlers, wholesalers and,
in particular, retailers to ensure that consumers generally benefit from
this tax cut. The net effect of these excise changes will be additional
revenue estimated at R565 million. In terms of section 58 of the Customs
and Excise Act, 1964, I lay on the Table for consideration by the House the
taxation proposals in respect of customs and excise duties.

Then we come to airport departure tax. [Interjections.] Internationally,
taxes are levied on all or certain categories of individuals leaving a
country. Such taxes are also known as airport taxes, passenger charge fees
or departure taxes. A tax on international air travel of R100 per departure
- this is very rough on the Minister of Foreign Affairs - will be imposed
from 1 August 2000. In line with international practice, the tax will be
payable by the airlines and recovered from travellers as an integral
element of ticket prices.

We now come to diesel fuel taxation. Diesel fuel tax weighs heavily on the
fishing industry and coastal shipping. In the fishing industry the
contribution of the fuel levies to the total cost of production is as high
as 21%, which could render this industry internationally uncompetitive.
These industries are to receive a total tax rebate of 89,4 cents a litre as
from 1 June 2000, at a cost of R66 million. [Applause.]

The diesel fuel tax is also an important issue in a number of other
sectors, including agriculture and forestry, where the granting of tax
relief is complicated by a range of abusive practices, including the mixing
of paraffin and diesel for commercial use. Sars is currently adding to its
capacity and implementing a range of measures to deal with these serious
abuses. In the light of this, we will continue to examine the practice to
ensure that we can extend some rebate to nonroad diesel users in the
future.

The levy on leaded and unleaded petrol will increase by 5 cents a litre and
on diesel by 3 cents a litre with effect from 5 April 2000. These increases
are below the expected inflation rate and take cognisance of the current
high international oil prices. The adjustments will generate R736 million
in additional revenue.

Radio stations, newspapers and websites have run programmes called Tips for
Trevor. We have gleaned from these some wonderful ideas on things such as
the taxation of politicians for the things they say, etc. Even the tie I am
wearing today is as a result of one of the suggestions. Lots of those ideas
were public-spirited. Of course, inevitably some were mean-spirited as
well. Many suggestions in Tips for Trevor came from older citizens of South
Africa - McManus, Mamahlo, Bannister - many of whom are living on modest
incomes, trying hard to save and keep their savings in bank accounts. We
have decided to increase the interest exemption from R2 000 to R3 000 a
year for all taxpayers and from R2 000 to R4 000 a year for those aged 65
and over. This exemption will also apply to taxable dividends. [Applause.]
These adjustments should promote a culture of saving in our country.
Increasing the overall level of savings in our economy is exceedingly
important if we are to generate the levels of investment required for job
creation. This measure will cost Government R220 million in revenue
foregone.
A key objective of our economic policy is to reduce the tax burden on
ordinary people. We have in the past five years worked consistently towards
achieving this objective. This year we are putting R9,9 billion back into
people's pockets, which brings to about R25 billion the changes we have
been able to effect in the past four years. [Applause.]

We have significantly cut the rates and restructured the income tax
brackets. The lowest rate has been reduced from 19% to 18%. The primary
rebate is adjusted to bring those earning below R21 111 below the tax
threshold. Taxpayers over the age of 65 will pay no tax on income below
R36 538. The tax payable on taxable income of R30 000 will fall by 19,6%
and on taxable income of R45 000 by 17,2%. Middle-income and higher-income
earners will also receive some relief. Taxpayers with an income between
R50 000 and R200 000 will have their tax liability reduced by about 10%.
[Applause.]

The biggest beneficiaries of these reductions are people on low incomes to
middle incomes. A total of 41% of the benefit goes to taxpayers with an
income below R70 000, 38% to those with a taxable income between R70 000
and R150 000. The total income tax relief granted since 1995 now amounts to
over R25 billion, as we said earlier. It does not stop just with people on
lower incomes. Even members of Parliament get some relief. There is no
applause, but even members of Parliament's take-home pay will increase
considerably. [Applause.] The changes to the income taxes tabled here today
are designed to promote equity. By putting a substantial amount of money
back into people's pockets, we want to reward work effort, savings and
entrepreneurship.

I have presented to this House a range of ambitious tax reform initiatives
which all seek to broaden the tax base, lower the rates and grant
significant tax relief to all taxpayers. In this connection, it needs to be
noted that none of these bold steps could have been realised in the absence
of a more efficient and effective Sars. During the previous year, Sars
launched a vigorous enforcement campaign which resulted in a spate of
criminal prosecutions and additional collections of revenue. These have
included the introduction of the new income tax system, providing
integrated support to tax collection; a fraud hotline, encouraging the
public to help in the fight against tax evasion; and a special tax criminal
court in Johannesburg, expediting the hearing of statutory offences.

These improvements at Sars will be further strengthened this year. Because
taxpayers have the right to expect good service from the Revenue Service
and to be treated in a fair manner, within the ambit of the revenue laws,
Sars will launch a public discussion on the development of a new taxpayers'
charter. This transparent process will be complemented by the significant
restructuring of internal processes and other administrative arrangements,
including introducing an automated call centre, increasing Sars' capacity
to follow up on debts; implementing a national education and awareness
programme; providing for the electronic submission of VAT, PAYE and
provisional tax returns; streamlining the processing of objections and
appeals; and measurably improving tax assessments times. Tax policy and tax
administration continue to be closely integrated. The comprehensive tax
reforms I propose today will be underpinned by a further strengthening of
Sars' administrative capacity.

Last year, we also started this address with a quotation from Ben Okri. It
read:


  Time is growing. When will our suffering bear fruit?

What we are demonstrating today is that our sufferings are bearing fruit,
not yet in ample quantities, but there is fruit. We also know that the
fruit now is sweeter than before. Again, we must warn ourselves against
complacency. To harvest fruit to the full potential requires that we
continue to prune correctly and that we shelter our young trees from the
ravages of frost, heat and storms.

We are pursuing our policy objectives. This Budget again makes a
significant contribution to the pursuit of fairness in both our expenditure
and revenue instruments. Moreover, we again invite all South Africans to
share with us these remarkable achievements and to continue to hold
Government accountable for the taxes we collect and how we spend them. We
invite our people to share with us in the vision for the future and in the
investments we now make towards that future.

This Budget, this set of commitments, is the work of a large collective and
a statement of the joint responsibility of Cabinet. Permit me to express my
profound appreciation, firstly, to President Mbeki for his leadership,
support and attention to detail - including at 02:30 this morning - but
perhaps most of all, for the manner in which he engages with and challenges
us to be bold to ensure that democracy delivers. I also thank Deputy
President Zuma and my Cabinet colleagues, especially the members of the
Ministers' Committee on the Budget, for their participation, support and
the very strong defence of this Budget. I further wish to express my
appreciation to Deputy Minister Mandisi Sipho Mpahlwa for burden-sharing,
determination and friendship, and to Team Finance, comprising the nine MECs
for Finance, who remain the shock-troops for fiscal discipline in the
provinces.

I also wish to thank those support structures whose contributions assist so
greatly in delivering sound management: The SA Reserve Bank, and especially
Governor Tito Mboweni, as this is his first Budget with us formally as
Governor and he will now be responsible for managing inflation within the
target band - Bonne chance, Tito!; the Financial and Fiscal Commission, and
in particular its chairperson, Murphy Morobe; Prof Michael Katz and the tax
commission; Nedlac, and especially its new executive director, Mr Phillip
Dexter; and Ms Barbara Hogan and Ms Qedani Mahlangu, as chairpersons of the
Portfolio Committee on Finance and the Select Committee on Finance in
Parliament respectively.

My appreciation also goes to the leadership and staff of the departments
centrally involved in budget-making: Mr Pravin Gordhan, Commissioner for
the Revenue Service, and the staff of Sars who exceeded the target last
year and will achieve the same this year, and whose footprint amongst
taxpayers is now unmistakably strong - we will not say on which part of the
anatomy, but the footprint is strong; and Maria Ramos, who now looks after
both the Departments of Finance and of State Expenditure, for her tireless
leadership of that very able team of professionals who have produced this
Budget and will oversee its implementation in the year ahead. [Applause.]
Permit me also to express my sincere gratitude to André Roux, deputy
director-general, who leaves the Department of Finance at the end of this
week. Thank you, André!

I further wish to thank my family, Lynne and the boys, and also my mother,
for their support, and the Mpahlwa family, particularly the parents of
Sipho who are sitting in the gallery, for carrying him in the way that they
do. I also thank the staff of the Ministry for putting up with us. Finally,
I would like to thank each hon member in the Chamber and those on the
trading floors and at home for their interest and patience in listening to
us.

Let me turn to Ben Okri once more. He writes:


  The worst realities of our age are manufactured realities. It is
  therefore our task, as creative participants in the universe, to redream
  our world. The fact of possessing imagination means that everything can
  be redreamed. Each reality can have its alternative possibilities. Human
  beings are blessed with the necessity of transformation.

[Applause.] I now lay the following documents upon the Table:


  (1) Estimate of Expenditure to be defrayed from National Revenue Fund
       during the financial year ending 31 March 2001 [RP 2-2000].

  (2) Estimate of Revenue for the financial year ending 31 March 2001 [RP 3-
       2000].

  (3) Taxation proposals: Income Tax.

  (4) Taxation proposals in respect of Customs and Excise duties [tabled at
       15:25].

  (5) Division of Revenue Bill [B 8 - 2000] (tabled in terms of section
       10(1) of the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act, 1997 (Act No 97
       of 1997)).

  (6) Budget Review 2000, including "Annexure E: Memorandum to accompany
       the Division of Revenue Bill" (tabled in terms of section 10(5) of
       the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act, 1997 (Act No 97 of
       1997)).

  (7) National Expenditure Survey 2000.

  (8) Appropriation Bill [B 7 - 2000].

Bill, together with the introductory speech and papers tabled, referred to
the Portfolio Committee on Finance for consideration and report.

The House adjourned at 15:40.
                                 __________
                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The following Bill was introduced in the National Assembly on 23
         February 2000 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Nonprofit Organisations Amendment Bill [B 9 - 2000]
              (National Assembly - sec 76(1)) - (Portfolio Committee on
              Welfare and Population Development - National Assembly)
              [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
              introduction published in Government Gazette No 20913 of 21
              February 2000.]

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:
Papers:

1.    The President of the Republic:


     Memorandum on Vote No 1 - "Presidency", Main Estimates, 2000-2001.

2.    The Deputy President:


     Memorandum on Vote No 12 - "Government Communication and Information
     System", Main Estimates, 2000-2001.

     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Communications and the Select
     Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises.

3.    The Speaker of the National Assembly and the Chairperson of the
     National Council of Provinces:
      
     Memorandum on Vote No 2 - "Parliament", Main Estimates, 2000-2001.

4.    The Minister of Home Affairs:


     Memorandum on Vote No 14 - "Home Affairs", Main Estimates, 2000-2001.

     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs and the Select
     Committee on Social Services.

5.    The Minister of Education:


     Memorandum on Vote No 8 - "Education", Main Estimates, 2000-2001.

     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Education and the Select
     Committee on Education and Recreation.

6.    The Minister of Foreign Affairs:


     Memorandum on Vote No 11 - "Foreign Affairs", Main Estimates, 2000-
     2001.

     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Select
     Committee on Economic Affairs.

7.    The Minister of Defence:
      
     Memorandum on Vote No 7 - "Defence", Main Estimates, 2000-2001.

     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Defence and the Select Committee
     on Security and Constitutional Affairs.

8.    The Minister of Finance:


     (1)    Memorandum on Vote No 10 - "Finance", Main Estimates, 2000-2001.


     (2)    Memorandum on Vote No 30 - "State Expenditure", Main Estimates,
           2000-2001.
      
     (3)    Memorandum on Vote No 31 - "Statistics South Africa", Main
           Estimates, 2000-2001.


     (4)    Memorandum on South African Revenue Services Vote, Main
           Estimates, 2000-2001.


     (5)    The Budget Speech of the Minister of Finance.


     (6)    Estimate of Expenditure to be defrayed from the National Revenue
           Fund during the financial year ending 31 March 2001 [RP 2-2000].


     (7)    Estimate of Revenue for the financial year ending 31 March 2001
           [RP 3-2000].


     (8)    Taxation proposals: Income Tax.


     (9)    Taxation proposals in respect of Custom and Excise duties laid
           upon the Table at 15:25.


     (10)   Division of Revenue Bill [B 8 - 2000] tabled in terms of section
           10(1) of the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act, 1997 (Act
           No 97 of 1997).


     (11)   Budget Review 2000, including "Annexure E: Memorandum to
           accompany the Division of Revenue Bill", tabled in terms of
           section 10(5) of the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act,
           1997 (Act No 97 of 1997).


     (12)   National Expenditure Survey 2000.


     (13)   Appropriation Bill [B 7 - 2000].
     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance and the Select Committee
     on Finance.

9.    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government:


     Memorandum on Vote No 22 - Provincial and Local Government", Main
     Estimates, 2000-2001.

     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government
     and the Select Committee on Local Government and Administration.

10.   The Minister of Arts, Culture, Science and Technolgy:


     Memorandum on Vote No 4 - "Arts, Culture, Science and Technology", Main
     Estimates, 2000-2001.

     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Arts, Culture, Science and
     Technology and the Select Committee on Education and Recreation.

11.   The Minister of Transport:


     Memorandum on Vote No 33 - "Transport", Main Estimates, 2000-2001.

     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Transport and the Select
     Committee on Public Services.

12.   The Minister for Public Enterprises:
      
     Memorandum on Vote No 23 - "Public Enterprises", Main Estimates, 2000-
     2001.

     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises and the
     Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises.

13.   The Minister of Public Works:


     Memorandum on Vote No 26 - "Public Works", Main Estimates, 2000-2001.

     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Public Works and the Select
     Committee on Public Services.

14.   The Minister for Welfare and Population Development:
      
     Memorandum on Vote No 35 - "Welfare", Main Estimates, 2000-2001.

     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Welfare and Population
     Development and the Select Committee on Social Services.

15.   The Minister for Safety and Security:


     Memorandums on -


     (1)    Vote No 17 - "Independent Complaints Directorate", Main
         Estimates, 2000-2001.
 
     (2)    Vote No 28 - "South African Police Service", Main Estimates,
         2000-2001.


     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security and the
     Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs.

16.   The Minister of Housing:


     Memorandum on Vote No 15 - "Housing", Main Estimates, 2000-2001.

     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Housing and the Select Committee
     on Public Services.

17.   The Minister of Trade and Industry:


     Memorandum on Vote No 32 - "Trade and Industry", Main Estimates, 2000-
     2001.

     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry and the
     Select Committee on Economic Affairs.

18.   The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development:


     Memorandum on Vote No 18 - "Justice and Constitutional Development",
     Main Estimates, 2000-2001.

     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
     Development and the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
     Affairs.

19.   The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism:
     Memorandum on Vote No 9 - "Environmental Affairs and Tourism", Main
     Estimates, 2000-2001.

     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and
     Tourism and the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs.

20.   The Minister for the Public Service and Administration:


     Memorandums on -


     (1)    Vote No 24 - "Public Service and Administration", Main
         Estimates, 2000-2001.

     (2)    Vote No 25 - "Public Service Commission", Main Estimates, 2000-
         2001.

     (3)    Vote No 27 - "South African Management Development Institute",
         Main Estimates, 2000-2001.


     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Public Service and
     Administration and the Select Committee on Local Government and
     Administration.

21.   The Minister of Communications:


     Memorandum on Vote No 5 - "Communications", Main Estimates, 2000-2001.


     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Communications and the Select
     Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises.

22.   The Minister of Labour:


     Memorandum on Vote No 19 - "Labour", Main Estimates, 2000-2001.


     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Labour and the Select Committee
     on Labour and Public Enterprises.

23.   The Minister of Correctional Services:


     Memorandum on Vote No 6 - "Correctional Services", Main Estimates, 2000-
     2001.


     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services and the
     Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs.

24.   The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs:


     Memorandums on -


     (1)    Vote No 3 - "Agriculture", Main Estimates, 2000-2001.

     (2)    Vote No 20 - "Land Affairs", Main Estimates, 2000-2001.


     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs and
     the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs.

25.   The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry:


     Memorandum on Vote No 34 - "Water Affairs and Forestry", Main
     Estimates, 2000-2001.

     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry and
     the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs.

26.   The Minister of Minerals and Energy:


     Memorandum on Vote No 21 - "Minerals and Energy", Main Estimates, 2000-
     2001.

     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy and the
     Select Committee on Economic Affairs.

27.   The Minister of Health:


     Memorandum on Vote No 13 - "Health", Main Estimates, 2000-2001.

     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Health and the Select Committee
     on Social Services.

28.   The Minister of Sport and Recreation:


     Memorandum on Vote No 29 - "Sport and Recreation", Main Estimates, 2000-
     2001.

     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation and the
     Select Committee on Education and Recreation.


