---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 13 October 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2000-10-13
---

FRIDAY, 13 OCTOBER 2000
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 09:38.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, I give notice that I shall move at the next
sitting of the Council:


  That the Council -


  (1) supports the Palestinian people's struggle for freedom, democracy,
       justice and sovereignty;


  (2) expresses its grave concern over the deterioration of the political
       situation in Palestine;


  (3) believes that the uncompromising attitude of Israel's Prime Minister,
       Ehud Barak, is not conducive to ameliorating the present situation;


  (4) further believes that his attitude is in conflict with the
       commitments expressed by him in United Nations resolutions seeking a
       peaceful end to the Middle East conflict; and


  (5) calls on the international community to condemn this intransigent
       behaviour of Israel's Prime Minister and to urge all parties in the
       area to comply with and implement the agreements reached between them
       and to co-operate in the search for a comprehensive, just and lasting
       peace in the region.

                   ELECTION OF MAYOR FOR CAPE TOWN UNICITY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr C ACKERMANN: Chairperson, I move without notice:
  That the Council -


  (1) congratulates Mr Pieter Marais on his appointment by the DA as the
       mayoral candidate for the Cape Town Unicity;


  (2) notes that the ANC and the President of this country have tried their
       utmost to lure Mr Marais into their camp on various occasions;


  (3) notes that the previous President, Mr Mandela, praised Mr Marais on
       various occasions as an excellent politician and MEC for Welfare and
       Poverty Relief;


  (4) also notes that the ANC gave the electorate of the Cape Town Unicity
       a slap in the face by not fielding candidates of the calibre of
       Minister Omar, High Commissioner Carolus, Mr Rasool, their Leader in
       the Western Cape, or the present Mayor of Cape Town;


  (5) further notes that by fielding a fairly unknown, low-profile
       candidate, the ANC is admitting that they will lose the election in
       the Cape Town Unicity; and
  (6) calls on the ANC to support Mr Marais' candidature as Mayor of Cape
       Town Unicity.

[Applause.] [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Is there any objection to that motion?

Mr M V MOOSA: Chairperson, I object mainly because Mr Marais will talk the
city to death.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! There is an objection. The motion
therefore becomes notice of a motion.

  CONGRATULATIONS TO FORMER PRESIDENT MANDELA ON BEING NAMED LEADER OF THE
         CENTURY BY THE INTERNATIONAL WOMEN OF THE YEAR ASSOCIATION

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move without notice ...
[Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon members, could we listen?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Thank you for your assistance, Chairperson.
I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) congratulates the former President of South Africa, Dr Nelson
       Mandela, who has been honoured as the Leader of the Century by the
       International Women of the Year Association in London;


  (2) notes that this year was the 45th annual gathering of the
       association, and for the first time the association decided to honour
       a man and to choose laureates for their contribution to the previous
       century;


  (3) is of the opinion that Mr Mandela, by his own example, has taught
       humanity that hatred and revenge can be transformed into forgiveness,
       acceptance and positive action; and


  (4) congratulates the former President once more for his dedication to
       the fight against the violation of human rights and for his
       compassion and understanding.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

           FAST-TRACKING OF MARINE LIVING RESOURCES AMENDMENT BILL

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move the motion as printed in
my name on the Order Paper:


  That the Council ratifies the decision the Joint Programme Subcommittee
  took on 12 October 2000 in accordance with Joint Rule 216(2), namely that
  the Marine Living Resources Amendment Bill, 2000, be fast-tracked by,
  where necessary, shortening any period within which any step in the
  legislative process relating to the Bill must be completed, in order to
  make it possible for the Bill to be passed by both Houses of Parliament
  before adjournment in November 2000 (see Announcements, Tablings and
  Committee Reports, p 935).

Declaration of vote:

Mev A M VERSVELD: Mevrou die Voorsitter, die Wes-Kaap steun hierdie
voorstel as 'n saak van dringendheid omdat die bedryf stilstaan. Dit is net
jammer dat daar nie ag gegee is op 'n waarskuwing presies 'n jaar gelede
dat juis dit gaan gebeur nie. Ons hoop nie dat dit in die toekoms die geval
gaan wees met alle wetgewing, naamlik dat die afhandeling daarvan versnel
moet word nie.

[Mrs A M VERSVELD: Madam Chairperson, the Western Cape supports this motion
as a matter of urgency, because the industry is at a standstill. It is just
a pity that no heed was given to a warning precisely one year ago that this
was exactly what was going to happen. We hope that this will not be the
case with all future legislation, namely that its finalisation will have to
be expedited.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                    TRANSNET PENSION FUND AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr S L E FENYANE: Chairperson, I feel honoured to assume temporarily the
portfolio of the Minister for Public Enterprises, as I will be introducing
his Bill. I hope you are aware that I really enjoy this privilege.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I was not aware that the Constitution had been
altered to allow you to give yourself such powers. [Laughter.] However, you
may proceed.

Mr S L E FENYANE: The Bill in front of us seeks to establish two statutory
pension funds, namely a defined contribution pension fund, and a defined
second benefit pension fund. The former, that is the defined benefit fund,
will hopefully cater for the pension needs of the 89 000 current active
employees of Transnet. The latter will hopefully cater for the needs of the
approximately 102 000 current pensioners of Transnet. In this scenario we
have, strangely, more pensioners than active members.

The Bill further makes provision for rules and mechanisms that will allow
for current Transnet employees and pensioners to be transferred from the
Transnet Pension Fund, governed by Act 62 of 1990, to either the defined
contribution fund, or the defined second benefit fund. Members, that is
active employees and pensioners, are at liberty to have their pension fund
rights ceded and transferred in the process to the new pension funds
provided for in the Bill.

It is also important to draw a distinction between a defined contribution
fund and a defined benefit fund. With a defined contribution fund, the
investment risks and resultant consequences are the sole responsibility of
the member and not the company or shareholders. Members are at liberty to
seek a variety of investment options, and thereby maximise their returns.
With a defined benefit fund, the risks that flow from the economic
vicissitudes are underwritten and borne by the company and the
shareholders.

Needless to say, Transnet's pension fund, which is effectively amended by
this Bill, was a defined benefit fund. This fund was transferred to
Transnet with effect from 1 April 1990, with an actuarially determined
deficit of R17,2 billion. This debt, which increased yearly as a result of
the compounding of interest, virtually throttled, suffocated and
predisposed Transnet to perpetually experiencing a negative balance on its
income statement. The Bill in front of us attempts to alleviate Transnet of
this horrendous burden.

Please allow me the rare indulgence to traverse memory lane, and to turn
back the clock just for a moment. I believe this will help clarify this
Transnet conundrum easily.

In the year 1971 a singular occurrence happened: The Railways and Harbours
Pensions Act was passed to cater for the exclusive pension needs of
Transnet's white employees. Blacks were excluded. They had to endure that
outrage with stoical sufferance. In 1974 the Railways and Harbours Pensions
for Non-Whites Act was passed. It offered black employees some ridiculous
pension benefits which were not compatible with those of their white
counterparts.

In fact, actuarial evaluations indicated that black employees' pension
investments and benefits then were not only marginal, but they were
somewhat equivalent to an ordinary savings account. However, Transnet's
white employees were assured lofty returns by the same company that treated
blacks differently.

In 1990 Transnet's management experienced a metamorphosis reminiscent of
the biblical Damascus journey wherein Saul was transfigured and transformed
into Paul, through unprecedented divine intervention. The company stopped
patronising its black employees.

The Transnet management passed the Transnet Pension Fund Act in 1990 which
effectively undid the past injustices as it attempted to recognise all
Transnet employees as people who were equal before the law. However, the
black employees of Transnet were still lagging behind their white
counterparts in assets as they had joined the race late. So affirmative
action was needed.

Let me explain the meaning of the words ``affirmative action''. Affirmative
action is a prophylactic measure that is applied by companies, firstly, to
redress past injustices and, secondly, to prevent occurrences of past
injustices in the future with the purpose that, at the end of the day,
employment equity will be attained. That is the meaning of affirmative
action and nothing else.

Transnet was then compelled, after 1994, to commit approximately R275
million to the accounts of black members of the fund so that their asset
value compared favourably with that of their white counterparts. To
complicate the matter further, the fund was a defined contribution,
implying that Transnet was to bear all the risks and obligations attached
to the fund.

The Bill effectively frees Transnet from that pension burden and allows it
at last to shout: ``Eureka! Eureka! I have found freedom at last!'' Members
should understand that Transnet's debt-to-equity ratio will now improve,
and that Transnet's return on equity as well as its return on assets will
improve. This, in consequence, will increase its market capitalisation, and
one can be confident enough to indicate that the shares of Transnet will
definitely be sold at a premium, not at a discount, because its debt-to-
equity ratio will have improved.

The Government can now position Transnet appropriately for any future
competition-driven eventuality. In this process this asset, which is
Transnet, will help to service delivery needs that are espoused by the RDP.
During the committee processes, when the Bill was being navigated through
the NA and the NCOP committee deliberations, all parties present supported
it. We are indeed informed that Transnet's management has not abdicated its
fiduciary responsibilities and that all stakeholders have been duly
consulted about these developments.

We are also informed that Transnet's employees and insurance companies in
the country are eagerly awaiting the passing of this Bill by Parliament.
This response gives me the confidence, in my new position, to commend this
Bill as an excellent piece of legislation and to presume, without
equivocation, that this House will support it. I would like to thank hon
members, one and all. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I was just thinking, Mr Fenyane, I hope
your new elevation is not related to this day being the 13th and a Friday.
[Laughter.] However, I noted the poetry of your input.

Debate concluded.

Declaration of vote:

Ms C BOTHA: Madam Chair, on behalf of the DP I wish to welcome the passing
of this Bill. At the same time I want to say that it was an imaginative way
of dealing with a problem that was caused to a large extent by the state
holding of this company. I hope the future Minister for Public Enterprises
also takes note of the fact that it is the removal of the state from this
pension fund that to a large extent is improving its position. I am sure
that this can only hasten its successful privatisation, which we await
avidly.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.
[Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I am glad that members realise that we
have passed quite an important Bill. The President did make reference to it
in his concluding remarks yesterday. This has been a significant challenge
to the company Transnet as well as the country generally. I think that we
must congratulate members on the fact that this Bill has been passed.

   CHIROPRACTORS, HOMEOPATHS AND ALLIED HEALTH SERVICE PROFESSIONS SECOND
                               AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! We seem to be fortunate enough to have
the Minister of Health as a frequent visitor to the National Council.
Welcome, Dr Tshabalala-Msimang.

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Good morning, Madam Chairperson and all members. I
am indeed pleased to present to the NCOP this Bill which will facilitate
the regulation of allied health service professions. The finalisation of
this Bill up to the stage we are at now, that is having it considered by
this House, has been a long and demanding process. In fact, I think it
started when I was still the chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on
Health.

It should have been expected that the harmonisation of the registration,
procedures and requirements of such a multiplicity of professional groups
would not be smooth sailing. However, I am pleased that we had a
thoroughgoing process and most stakeholders have been consulted. I am also
satisfied that, by and large, we have accommodated the concerns of most
stakeholders.

One of the important features of this Bill is the fact that it does
facilitate the recognition and accreditation of practitioners and
therapists who were previously excluded from the establishment. These
professionals will now have the opportunity to be part of the recognition
process of their independent practices.

A very important sticking point regarding the Bill, which came from most
provinces, was the composition of the new council. The Bill will facilitate
the establishment of a democratic and representative council without the
domination of one group by another.

The Bill also facilitates the participation in the council by those members
who were previously excluded from the establishment. These include the
people who practice Chinese medicine and acupuncture, therapeutic
aromatherapy, therapeutic massage therapy and therapeutic reflexology.

Let me mention a few of the most important tasks of the new council.
Firstly, I am sure that during the first year the new council will be
engaged in facilitating and consolidating the registration of all
practitioners and therapists in a single register. Secondly, an important
task will be to facilitate the accreditation of all professional groups,
including the recognition of the training and scope of practice of the
various persons registered with the council. Thirdly, I know that there has
been a vigorous debate on whether one should have practitioners and
therapists or whether these groups should be combined under a single term.
However, I am sure that this debate will continue even under the new
council, and perhaps that is indeed where it should take place. Hon members
will appreciate, however, that legislatures have the duty to approve
legislation on the basis of the best information, knowledge and
understanding that they have on these debates at any given time.

One of the most progressive things this Bill will achieve is the
recognition of the fact that there are other forms of healing in society
which complement traditional Western medicine. Secondly, it acknowledges
that many people feel quite comfortable consulting these practitioners.
Thirdly, it is possible to harmonise the regulation of these therapeutic
practices. Fourthly, the practitioners themselves are responsible enough to
work together to establish acceptable standards of practice and to protect
the interests of the public.

I hope that we will learn from this experience how we can assist
traditional healers to set standards for the practice of traditional
medicine and to regulate their own profession. We should go further and
find ways and means to encourage the preservation of our traditional
knowledge systems. There are many African herbs and therapeutic practices
that are essential for keeping the body and mind, and perhaps the soul, in
a healthy state. It is unfortunate that these knowledge systems are not
passed on from generation to generation.

I have fully studied the comments from the various provinces. I noted that
Gauteng was concerned about the composition of the council, the omission of
certain groups and the differentiation between practitioner and therapist.
I hope that the formulation of the Bill does meet Gauteng's expectations. I
was encouraged to note that the mandate of the North West allowed its
representatives to hear other points of view and empowered them to exercise
their discretion. For a moment I thought I was alone in my own concern
about African traditional healers, until I noted that the same concerns
were contained in the Northern Province documentation. As always, KwaZulu-
Natal had gone through the Bill with a fine-tooth comb. I am sure that the
Bill reads much better now with all those grammatical and spelling mistakes
corrected. There must have been a retired English schoolteacher in the
KwaZulu-Natal delegation. [Laughter.]

Something very close to my heart was the fact that it was only KwaZulu-
Natal which criticised certain parts of the Bill for not being gender-
sensitive. I thought members would applaud them. [Applause.] Well done,
KwaZulu-Natal! I did not know that the Free State was so concerned about
community participation and jealous of its provincial autonomy. Their
comments served to entrench community participation. They also wanted to
make sure that things were done after consultation with their MEC for
health. Please rest assured that I value and respect the opinions of my
provincial counterparts. I thank Mpumalanga and the Northern Cape for
supporting the Bill in its totality. In view of the Eastern Cape's concern
about consultation, I do want to assure them that there was a thoroughgoing
consultation process on the Bill and that what they see is the product of
that consultation. I hope and pray that the Western Cape will disappoint me
today and support the Bill. [Laughter.]

I would like to give my special thanks to the Chiropractors, Homeopaths and
Allied Health Service Professions Interim Council of South Africa for
keeping the home fires burning. I can safely say that their efforts have
been rewarded, because we now have a Bill which will establish the new
council. I wish to thank them all for their hard work and I know that they
will also support the new council. I know how passionate they are about
this Bill. Amongst the members of the council I can single out Mr Michael
O'Brien. I do not see him, and I do not know where he is today, but he is
always in my office discussing this Bill. He has worked meticulously to
ensure that the Bill includes most of the issues that were agreed upon by
the stakeholders' forum.

My colleagues informed me that unless certain concerns were taken on board,
I would have to meet the council in court. I hope that we can still remain
friends, but remember: I am Minister Manto Tshabalala and not Manto.
[Laughter.] I can assure them that we will do everything to ensure the
smooth functioning of the council and the protection of the public.

Finally, I wish to express my infinite gratitude to the NCOP Select
Committee on Social Services and its chairperson, Ms Loretta Jacobus, for
working tirelessly on the Bill until we reached the stage at which we could
have it considered by the House. I implore all provinces and parties here
present to accept the Bill as presented to members here today. After all,
we have worked hard on this Bill. [Applause.]

Ms L JACOBUS: Chairperson, I will not take the full 10 minutes that I was
allotted, firstly because the Minister stole about half of what I was going
to say. Secondly, with the local government elections just under two months
away, I think we are all anxious to get back to our constituencies and do
work for our different political parties. [Interjections.]

I must also say that one is heartened to note that the Minister has set a
particularly good example by actually going through herself, with a fine-
tooth comb, the inputs that came from the provinces. I think that is an
example that other Ministers could actually take on board, so that these
negotiating and final mandates do not end up as pieces of paper sitting
with the committee section and with the committee itself, but that
Ministers actually do pay attention to those inputs.

The main purpose of the Bill before us today, as the Minister has already
said, is to is to abolish the present Chiropractors, Homeopaths and Allied
Health Service Professions Interim Council and to provide for the
establishment of professional boards for the different practices to be
represented on the new council. This initiative is in line with our
national health policy with particular reference to the establishment of
representative structures for the various practices in the health sector.
The interim council, as the Minister has said, was established as far back
as 1995 by the then Minister of Health, Nkosazana Zuma. One of their main
tasks was to advise the Minister of Health on the constitution of a new
permanent council. Following a long process of consultation and
negotiations with various stakeholders, including educational institutions,
a draft Bill was submitted to the department.

After in-depth consideration of the Bill and extensive discussion within
our respective provinces, we effected the amendments as tabled. The
amendments are numerous and I will not take the House through the
painstaking exercise of tabulating all of them. Suffice it to say that the
proposed council will now have equal representation of all allied health
professions, including those which were previously excluded, and the
Minister tabulated those as well. The new council will have to, within a
period of 12 months, compile registers of all professions registered in
terms of this Act, with members of the council proportionate to the number
of registered members of each profession. This share, in our view, was the
most democratic way of constituting this council since, at this point, we
do not have accurate records of the number of practitioners in all these
professions mentioned in the Bill. Other members may want to elaborate
further on other amendments that were proposed, but the one that I have
just highlighted, as the Minister has also said, dominated our discussions
in the select committee.

May I, at this point, take the opportunity to thank the Minister and her
department - in particular Professor Gumbi at the back there, the chief
director of human resources, Miss Van Zyl somewhere in the corner over
there, who is the legal adviser, and Mr Mabope, the special adviser to the
Minister - for tirelessly sitting with us and going through the Bill to
make sure that we captured everything that we were supposed to, as well as
the director-general, who sat in on almost all our meetings and tried to
assist us through the many processes. Thanks to them as well. We also thank
Johannes, the parliamentary liaison officer, who actually ensured that
there was a free flow of communication and information between ourselves,
the department and the various people dealing with the Bill.

In conclusion I place before this House the committee report that
recommends the adoption of Bill B66B-2000, with all the proposed amendments
which the provinces voted in favour of. [Applause.]

Ms E C GOUWS: Madam Chairperson, hon Minister and members, we have yet
again another Bill before us with aspects that are problematic which will
prove difficult to implement. As I have said in this House before, enacting
a Bill and merely making laws does not ensure practicality and workability
or guarantee that members of the public will be duly protected. My party
says that we should rethink some aspects of this Bill because there are
concerns amongst the public. We hear the complaints and concerns and it is
our duty to take cognisance of them.

Our focus should always be on ensuring a better life for all. The people
should be part of the plan, the legislation and the success. Why, then, no
public hearings on these issues of the Chiropractors, Homeopaths and Allied
Health Service Professions Second Amendment Bill? We know that there were
public hearings up to 1998. This is now a new millennium; it is the year
2000. Why do we accept as sufficient those hearings that took place more
than two years ago? There has been so much development in the meantime. Why
is new input not allowed? Why are we rushing? What do we want to achieve?
Our credibility is at stake.

Ek glo ons moet alle aspekte van gesondheidswette in orde kry. Dit is baie
belangrik dat ons mense veilig voel, fisiek sowel as geestelik. Ons wette
in die Wetboek moet ons daardie beskerming  bied. Ons mense se gesondheid
moet ten alle tye in goeie sorg wees, in die hande van goed toegeruste,
opgeleide en verantwoordelike lede van die mediese professie. Ons wette
moet daardie versekering verskaf en moet gemoedsrus gee aan die professie
sowel as die pasiëntepubliek.

Ons is dit aan die publiek verskuldig dat daar duidelike omskrywings sal
wees sodat daar byvoorbeeld onderskei kan word tussen terapeute en
kosmetiese konsultante. Ons moet daarteen waak dat ons mense uitgebuit
word, ook finansieel, met dienste wat aan hulle gelewer word. Die DP wil
nie teen hierdie wetsontwerp stem nie, want daar is meriete, maar waarom
die haas? Die publiek moet die kans gegun word om insette te lewer, dan kan
ons weer praat. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[I believe that we have to get all aspects of health legislation in order.
It is very important for our people to feel safe, physically as well as
mentally. Our laws in the Statute Book must give us that protection. Our
people's health must be in good hands at all times, in the hands of well-
equipped, trained and responsible members of the medical profession. Our
laws must give that assurance and must give peace of mind to the profession
as well as to the patients.

We owe it to the public to ensure that there are clear definitions, in
order to distinguish between therapists and cosmetic consultants, for
example. We must guard against our people being exploited, also
financially, when services are rendered to them. The DP does not want to
vote against this Bill, because it has merit, but why the undue haste? The
public must be given the chance to make inputs, then we can talk again.]

The secretary of Hasa, the Homeopathic Association of South Africa, warns
that this Bill is not a product of consensus. The DP would like us all to
reconsider those aspects of the Bill that make people feel uncomfortable.
Let us agree to do that in order to promote democracy. My party abstains.

Mrs E N LUBIDLA: Madam Chair, hon Minister, hon members, as one of the few
permanent delegates who have been on this committee since the last
Parliament, let me express my joy that this Bill is finally before this
Council for debate and approval.

I saw the Chiropractors, Homeopaths and Allied Health Service Professions
Interim Council come into being as an interim body, and I have been party
to extending the life of the interim council on what seem to be many
occasions. If I remember correctly, it was on 10 February 1996 that that
council came into being. I was beginning to despair that we would ever get
it permanently constituted when, even as late as the beginning of this
year, we once again extended the life of this interim council.

This Bill has been six long years in the making. Its primary purpose is to
allow those recognised alternative health professions to organise
themselves within the confines of their profession, and determine norms and
standards of practice, and to accommodate these professional boards under
one umbrella council.

We want to congratulate the Minister of Health, who, on her appointment,
immediately put plans into place to ensure that this Bill was tabled in
Parliament. The world we find ourselves in today is looking towards
alternative, nonallopathic means of healing. In my province, especially in
the rural areas, almost 80% of the population consult traditional healers
or herbalists to cure them of ailments. While this Bill does not include
traditional healers, I see it as an important precedent to ensure that
there are adequate control measures for those alternative medical
practitioners. The absence of control measures allows quacks to buy some
kind of qualification and sell potentially toxic substances to the unwary
public.

What this Bill attempts to do, therefore, is to ensure that professional
bodies are established with which a practitioner has to register, thus
ensuring that aggrieved members of the public at all times have recourse to
appropriate action should something go wrong or the service prove harmful
to the vulnerable members of the public.

This Bill, as it stands, is by no means perfect, but it does, especially
with the amendments, incorporate the concept of equal representation on
this envisaged council by all the professions listed. As the ANC, we were
particularly sensitive to the fact that in the original drafting of the
Bill, there was disparity in the weighting of the council. Chiropractors
and homeopaths were allowed three representatives while all the other
professions were only given one seat on this council. Many of us, having
suffered through the inequities of the past, were very disturbed that such
inequities were being perpetuated by the composition of this council.

Some of the areas of contention that have plagued this interim council are
seen by some as the direct result of its being dominated by the two
professions of homeopathy and chiropractic. To perpetuate the disparity in
representation would, we believe, revive the antagonism in the new council,
which is a situation we want to avoid at all costs. In our deliberations
with current council members, it would appear that this is what the current
council members prefer. Needless to say, the ANC fully supports the
amendments brought to this Bill in order to rectify these inequities.

The Bill also amends the principal Act so that the principles of
professional practice, democracy, transparency, equity and community
involvement are adhered to. With this in mind, the constitution of the
council includes four community members appointed by the Minister. This
essentially means that lay people who bring with them no professional bias
would be able to advise the council on policy matters.

The vigorous debate around this Bill also taught us a great lesson, and
that is to be mindful that we do not inadvertently discriminate against
people with disabilities. In our haste to ensure that people who, for one
reason or the other, were no longer capable of performing the
responsibilities required of them in their respective professions did not
endanger the lives of those seeking their services, we very nearly
discriminated against the entire disabled community. Fortunately, we were
able to bring into the Bill the necessary amendments to prevent such a
disaster from occurring.

Our final concern is that this Bill needs to be passed with as little delay
as possible, because it is only once this Bill is passed that the election
of the new council can take place. This essentially means that we have to
agree to regulations, place advertisements and interview candidates before
the expiry date of 10 February 2001, when the current interim council will
cease to exist.

Finally, we, together with the provincial standing committees, have engaged
in a robust debate on this matter. I believe that the amendments we have
deliberated on will go a long way in ensuring that our principles of
democracy have been upheld. With this in mind, the ANC is happy to support
this Bill with all the amendments. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Mrs Lubidla, I saw that you were
determined to complete your speech in good time, but you did have a bit of
time left still.

Mr T MHLAHLO (Eastern Cape) Madam Chair, I am happy that you pronounced my
surname properly, because it appears distorted on the speakers' list.

We, in the Eastern Cape, have concluded that this piece of legislation
represents a necessary change within the health sector in this country,
particularly the establishment of the new council and professional boards.
The inclusion of community representatives articulated in this legislation
represents a turning point.

We therefore support this approach by the Minister of Health. The
composition of the council is very important and we are convinced this is
going to allow the necessary interventions so that we can provide an
effective health service in this country.

As a person who comes from the Eastern Cape, which is a largely rural
province, I am also excited by the fact that traditional authorities will
be accommodated in a way. I am sure this is going to establish a firm base
for us in this country to proceed towards the 21st century. We therefore
support this Bill.

However, I must say we are also disappointed. This is my third time of
coming to this important House and, once again, I witnessed the DP's
opposition to change. If we cannot all do exactly what the hon the
President articulated yesterday, South Africa will stagnate.

In this sense I must say that Ms E Gouws, who also comes from the Eastern
Cape, is a real disappointment to the culture of consensus in that
province. I think she should begin to change her attitude, otherwise South
Africa will not move forward. I am saying this because one can abstain from
change. South Africans must mobilise their efforts so that we can establish
a fully fledged democracy in this country.

With these few words we fully support the Bill and we take note of the
efforts by the Minister, in particular around the health challenges in this
country. We watched television last night when she was speaking in KwaZulu-
Natal. I think we need to provide the necessary support, because if we
cannot do it in this important House, then who else is going to do it? With
these few words we support the Bill. [Applause.]

Mrs T E MILLIN (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members
of this House, while KwaZulu-Natal, as a coalition government between my
party, the IFP, and the ANC, supports the Bill and the essential aims and
objectives before this House, on behalf of my party there are concerns that
require an airing. Due to time constraints, I am limited to one or two.
These include the apparent and inappropriate overlooking of submissions
timeously sent by the current interim council, as evidenced by
documentation dated 4 October 2000 and submitted to the relevant
authorities, as well as concerns regarding the apparent imbalance of the
proposed new council which will comprise a mix of highly qualified
representatives from long-established disciplines with substantial,
recognised texts and practices, with five to six years of rigorous
examination, all of which can be measured and monitored, together with
other practitioners who might have had training measured in terms of hours,
NQF assurances that might not be that assuring after all, and which could,
indeed, open the door to quackery, which in turn would clearly not be in
the public interest.

There could be dangerous and uncharted waters ahead in establishing a
uniform code of practice, governing such disparate disciplines as
contemplated in the proposed new council. Therefore it is reassuring to
hear, notwithstanding the impending passing of the Bill before this House,
that the said Bill will not be considered by the National Assembly until
there has been a hearing of various groups and interested bodies, including
the long-established disciplines and practitioners, when, hopefully, the
apparently justified feelings and concerns about the Bill in its present
form will be listened to and acted upon.

I respectfully submit that I would be failing in my duty and allegiance to
my party, its policies and principles, were I not to voice these essential
concerns, amongst others, while, as the larger part of the government of
KwaZulu-Natal giving our support to the Bill.

No reasonable person ever stated that democracy or democratic government is
cheap or easy. In fact, it is anything but. However, may that hard-won
democracy which was achieved through the blood, sweat and tears of all the
people of our nation, never be abused or fall into disrepute or called into
question by insufficiently open, accountable and transparent governance.
[Applause.]

Dr P J C NEL: Madam Chair, the main objective of any law must be to protect
the public. This fact becomes even more relevant when it comes to the
delivery of medical health services to the public. The safety of all
members of the public must always be a first priority.

The New NP supports some of the clauses in the Bill. One of the main
objectives of the Bill, as hon members have already heard, is to amend the
principal Act to make provision for the abolishment of the interim council
and to establish a new permanent council.

The interim council was instituted to register disciplines other than those
registered with the Health Professions Council, previously the SA Medical
and Dental Council. The interim council and the Act were aimed specifically
at homeopathy and chiropractice. The Bill now gives recognition to the fact
that the growth in the demand for other disciplines has given rise to the
need to establish academic standards and criteria for the registration and
the right to practice such disciplines and to uphold ethical standards to
protect the public, for which the New NP has appreciation.

The Bill also seeks to provide for the establishment of four professional
boards. These boards will, inter alia, monitor the ethical standards. The
Bill further proposes that certain professions defined as practitioners be
allowed to compound and dispense medicines prescribed by themselves but
will now be subject to the provisions of the Medicine and Related
Substances Control Act of 1965 to protect the public.

The New NP also supports the proposed section 16(4)(b) that deals with this
aspect. We are, however, concerned that the Bill does not indicate the
schedule in terms of which such a practitioner may dispense medicines. We
are also concerned about the fact that the Bill does not mention anything
about the establishment of training at official training institutions for
the different disciplines.

The definitions of the different allied health service professions are very
vague and do not give any indication what kind of service the different
professions deliver to the public.

Volgens nuwe inligting wat onlangs tot ons beskikking gekom het, is dit
baie duidelik dat die konsultasieproses totaal en al onvoldoende was. Die
laaste openbare verhore is reeds twee jaar gelede gehou. Daar word nou
aangedring, van die kant van sommige van die professies, dat openbare
verhore weer gehou word voordat daar 'n finale besluit oor die
wysigingswetsontwerp geneem word.

Uit onlangse skrywes wat regstreeks aan lede van die komitee gerig is
vanaf, onder andere, die voorsitter van die interimraad en die Homeopatiese
Vereniging van Suid-Afrika, het dit duidelik geblyk dat daar nog groot
onenigheid en ontevredenheid heers by die verskillende instansies. Dit het
ook uit die skrywes geblyk dat onlangse skriftelike voorleggings wat deur
genoemde instansies aan die komitee gemaak is, nie aan lede van die gekose
komitee beskikbaar gestel en die voorstelle glad nie oorweeg is nie.

Die Nuwe NP is van mening dat dit glad nie nodig is om die stuk wetgewing
so deur te stoomroller nie en steun die voorstel dat verdere openbare
verhore gehou moet word voordat 'n finale besluit oor hierdie
wysigingswetsontwerp geneem kan word. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[According to new information that has recently become available to us it
is very clear that the consultation process was totally inadequate. As it
is the last public hearings had been held two years ago. Some of the
professions are now insisting that public hearings should be held all over
again before a final decision is made about the amending Bill.

From recent letters written directly to members of the committee by, inter
alia, the chairperson of the interim council and the Homoeopathic Medical
Association of South Africa it is clear that there is still large-scale
division and dissatisfaction among the various institutions. This also
became evident from the correspondence indicating that recent written
submissions made to the committee by the aforementioned institutions were
not made available to the members of the select committee and that the
proposals were not given any consideration.

The New NP is of the view that it is not in the least necessary to
steamroller the piece of legislation through like this and supports the
suggestion that further public hearings should be held before a final
decision is made about this amending Bill. [Applause.]]

Ms L JOHNSON (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, health is not a privilege but a
right, and that right needs to be protected. It is Government's
responsibility to ensure that the health of the public is protected by
making laws, and some of these laws control the practices of the health
professions and allied health service professions. It is said that the use
of alternative natural healing methods is increasing worldwide. The Bill
seeks to establish academic standards and criteria for registration and the
right to practise such professions, to uphold ethical standards and to
protect the public.

I would also like to touch on clause 6, which deals with the constitution
of the council. The council has a vital role to play in ensuring that the
public health is not endangered by malpractices and also ensuring that the
professions adhere to high standards of care.

The council also plays a watchdog role. The composition of the council, as
was mentioned earlier by the speakers before me, is very inclusive and
there is equal representation of all the professions. What is also
important is that the members of the community are also represented, which
will enrich the council by giving the community's perspective. We hope that
when elections and appointments of members are made, gender balance will be
ensured. I have no doubt in my mind that that will happen, as our Minister
is known to be very gender sensitive.

Another important structure is the professional boards. The object of a
board, among others, is to advise the council on any matter falling within
the scope of this Act that relates to any profession falling within the
ambit of the professional board, in order to support the universal norms
and values of the profession, with an emphasis on professional practice,
democracy, transparency, equity, accessibility and community involvement.
Another object is to guide the profession and to protect the public.

KwaZulu-Natal supports the Bill as amended. I would, however, like to make
reference to the concern expressed by one of the members about the
consultative process, namely that it was not adequate. When I look at the
bodies that were consulted, I can count a total of 41. My question is: How
many do we need to consult and who and how before we can consider it
sufficient? This number of bodies consulted clearly indicates that there
was broad consultation and that the people who are directly affected have
been part of the process. Therefore it was ensured that everyone had the
opportunity for input in this Bill.

In conclusion I would like to congratulate the Department and the Minister
of Health on a job well done. It is indeed a good piece of legislation.
[Applause.]

Dr A E VAN ZYL (Western Cape): Madam Chair, hon Minister, hon members,
first of all, thank you for the opportunity to participate in this
important debate. I would like to ask the House's indulgence for a minute.
I would like to pass around this plant, with the permission of the Chair.
Members can just take a leaf of it, rub it between their fingers and then
smell it.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: The effect on Mr Makoela is very worrying.
[Laughter.] I would warn members to be very cautious. [Laughter.]

Dr A E VAN ZYL: What all of the members in this House are actually looking
at is the plant called ``buchu''. The Western Cape is the only place in the
world where it is grown. It is grown on the slopes of mountains between
Paarl and Clanwilliam.

Did the House know that it is only grown here? Did the House know that
because of its medicinal properties the Americans and the Australians tried
to grow the herb in their countries, but failed? Did the House know that it
is the only South African herb recognised for its medicinal properties by
the pharmacopoeias of Britain, the United States, France and the
Netherlands? Is the House aware of the fact that we export 99% of buchu as
buchu oil? The current retail price for one kilo of buchu oil is about R22
000.

Where am I going with this publicity for one of the Cape's most unique
herbs? I will tell the hon members. It is also called ``green gold'' here
in the Western Cape. When one speaks of ``gold'', wealth, riches,
prosperity, jobs and comfort are conjured up.

I think it was also in this House that I said:


  If one is poor, if one has no money, one must have imagination.

We must use our imagination, put it together with modern expertise and
start solving our problems of poverty, despondency, socioeconomic
instability, unemployment and crime. Did hon members know that everyone in
the world is working on buchu, except us? Why? Because, perhaps, there are
still no proper structures to regulate and develop these healing herbs of
which buchu is one.

Die Wes-Kaap beskik oor 'n rykdom van 9 000 verskillende soorte medisinale
kruie. Nêrens in die wêreld is dit so gekonsentreerd soos hier by ons nie.
Dit word egter nie benut nie. Ons lewe by die aanvang van 'n nuwe era, waar
die hele wêreld soek na organiese voedselsoorte en natuurlike
geneesmiddele. Dit is tans 'n internasionale tendens om weg te beweeg van
chemies gekweekte voedselsoorte, asook chemiese geneesmiddele. Ons het dus
die antwoord voor ons neus.

Hierdie wetsontwerp is daarom van groot belang, alleen vanweë die
beskermende en regulerende rol wat dit moet verseker. Die homeopatie is 'n
snelgroeiende bedryf wat korrek geadministreer moet word. Sonder regulasies
en meganismes in plek is die kans groot dat die verbruiker, die pasiënt, 'n
slagoffer sal wees en dat dit die land nog meer sal kos. Huidig is daar 'n
groot hoeveelheid ongetoetsde, ongeverifieerde, ongefiltreerde inligting
betreffende alternatiewe geneesmiddele en -metodes.

Die raad moet asseblief goed deurgronde deursigtigheid verseker. Standaarde
moet geformuleer word ten einde die verbruiker, vervaardigers,
prosesseerders en kwekers ten alle tye en onder alle omstandighede te
beskerm.(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The Western Cape has a wealth of 9 000 different kinds of medicinal herbs.
Nowhere in the world are they found in such concentrations as here in the
Western Cape. However, they are not being utilised. We are living at the
beginning of a new era, in which the whole world is seeking organic
foodstuffs and natural remedies. Currently, there is an international trend
to move away from chemically cultivated foodstuffs, as well as chemical
remedies. Therefore, we have the answer right in front of us.

This Bill is therefore of great importance, if only because of the
protective and regulatory role that it has to ensure. Homeopathy is a
rapidly growing industry that must be administered correctly.

Without regulations and mechanisms in place there is a great possibility
that the consumer, the patient, could become a victim and that this could
be even more costly to the country. Currently, there is a large amount of
untested, unverified and unfiltered information regarding alternative
remedies and methods.

The council must please ensure that there is well-grounded transparency.
Standards should be formulated in order for the consumer, manufacturers,
processors and cultivators to be protected at all times and under all
circumstances.]

Also within the context of the African Renaissance, the socioeconomic as
well as the economic implications could have far-reaching negative effects,
not only in South Africa alone, but also for Africa as a whole. It is
essential to protect our resources from unethical and unscrupulous
international exploitation from which neither we as South Africans nor our
neighbours will experience any form of benefit whatsoever.

In conclusion, perhaps this Council ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, I must alert you to the fact that
the leaf being allowed circulation in this House does not indicate that we
will allow herbal practices and entrepreneurship in this House. [Laughter.]

Mr M I MAKOELA: Chairperson, I thought I was going to invite one of our
traditional leaders from the province to come in and do a bit of marketing.

The Northern Province, while supporting the Bill under discussion, would,
however, like to express a little concern, as the Minister has already
mentioned. The House may be aware that the province is largely rural and
therefore, while the majority of the inhabitants may not even have heard
about some of the professions catered for in the Bill, however, like most
of the country, they still believe and follow the practices of traditional
medicine.

As the purpose of this Bill is to cater for those sectors that have been
excluded from the mainstream health professions' structures, we take this
opportunity to implore the Minister to expedite a similar process that will
culminate in the establishment of a body that will cater for the needs of
traditional healers. It should be a body that will be in a position to
regulate and monitor the profession and set up mechanisms to ensure the
protection of the majority of the people in this country against bad
practices. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, let me, first of all, thank all the
members for participating in this debate, it has been quite lively. A
special word of thanks to the hon Dr Van Zyl for the plant. I wish to say
to the hon Jacobus that I may not attend all the select committee meetings,
but I want to assure her that I do read comments and I honestly take them
very, very seriously. I thank her very much for noticing that. In this
regard I would also like to thank my advisors and departmental officials
because they have kept me informed of the select committee's proceedings
and deliberations.

With regard to the hon Ms Gouws's comments, frankly speaking, I would have
been surprised if she had supported this Bill without any lessons. and
comments. I frankly would have been very surprised if she had done that.
She has been very sharp in criticising the Bill, but she has not given us
any proposals on how to proceed. I think it is important that we do pass
this Bill, otherwise, come 12 February 2001, we will have no council.

I want to thank Mama Lubidla for her invaluable comments in this House. I
think we really do need people like her in the other House too who will
preserve the institutional memory of our democracy. I can assure the House
that we will do everything to keep the quacks out of our health system. I
want to say to Mr Mhlahlo of the Eastern Cape that I will always remember
his words: You cannot abstain to transform. I hope Ms Gouws will also
remember those words: You cannot abstain to transform. I support the
accommodation of traditional healers, but I was not sure because the hon
member said ``traditional leaders''. I do not see their role in this Bill.
[Laughter.] But yes, I accept the accommodation of traditional healers, but
not traditional leaders. I think we have other problems with the
traditional leaders and they do not concern this Bill.

I want to say to Mrs Millin from KwaZulu-Natal that I think we should allow
these professionals to constitute a party and to, amongst themselves, sort
out the accreditation of all the groups.

Of course, I know that the opposition has called for further hearings. I
hope that this is not a process aimed at sabotaging the Bill. In fact, one
would want to ask: Why further public hearings? Have the parties been
lobbied and by whom? I honestly hope that the hon member's comments are not
meant to sabotage the passing of this Bill, because it is, indeed, long
overdue. As I said, we started the process when I was still the chairperson
of the Portfolio Committee on Health. I moved on to the Department of
Justice, and I have come back again to Health. So it has been a long, long
time. It is a train that goes slowly, it stops and people get on and off.
But I think, we must really pass the Bill - it has taken a long time. In
fact, it has been nearly six years.

I would like to say to Dr Nel of the New NP that we should not use the red
herring of upholding standards in order to exclude credible parties from
this Bill. The details that he is asking for regarding training and the
scope of practice will certainly be attended to through the regulations,
and I think he should know that by now. Frankly speaking, I am also simply
getting very tired of people talking about lowering of standards, because I
think some parties use this to discredit the new faces in this Parliament
that are entrusted with governing our country.

The hon Ms Johnson from KwaZulu-Natal should be thanked for her comments
about gender sensitivity. Of course, I will be watching this with a very
keen eye. But let me also ask her to follow the process of the
establishment of the council to ensure that, indeed, it is gender
sensitive. I also thank her for reminding us that we have consulted well
over 40 bodies. Again, I ask the question: Who has been lobbying the
opposition parties? Who has been lobbying them so that we have to go
through the whole process of consultation again. But I think we will know
in the near future.

Regarding the hon Dr Van Zyl's comments, I do recognise the fact that she
has a PhD in pharmaceutical sciences and I also know that she has done
extensive work in the pharmaceutical industry in Belgium. I really want to
compliment her on her very progressive comments and also her consideration
of South Africa's traditional herbs. I shall take this herb home with me.
But let me invite the hon Van Zyl to come and work with us in the MCC.
Perhaps she might want to cross over and leave that party on that side.
[Interjections.] But she definitely should apply for a job in the MCC. We
do need people of her calibre. In fact, she may cross over right now.
[Laughter.]

We all know that a piece of legislation, the South African Medicines and
Medical Devices Regulatory Authority Act, was passed, and that it should be
facilitating the registration of medicines. But, as the House knows, the
pharmaceutical industry is holding us to ransom, and we cannot move ahead.
Dr Van Zyl should please come and join us at the MCC so that we can
strategise. [Interjections.]

Before I say thank you and sit down for now, let me just take this
opportunity to say that this morning at a quarter to six I met Prof Zhang
Wenkang, the Chinese health minister who is in our country with a
delegation of senior officials from his ministry. They will be in the
country as from today, and they will be going back to China on the 18th.
During his visit we shall be signing a memorandum of understanding between
our two countries on public health and medical science issues. The visit
will also strengthen ties between our two countries on expanding exchanges
in the field of public health, health care delivery and systems and
biomedical services.

The delegation will be visiting KwaZulu-Natal on Sunday and then they will
proceed to the Northern Province. Of course, they are in Gauteng today. I
thought I should share that information with the members. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Declaration of vote:

Mnr C ACKERMANN: Mevrou die Voorsitter, die Wes-Kaap steun met graagte
hierdie wetgewing. Ons wil aan die Minister sê dat daar by niemand en nie
een van die opposisiepartye 'n gedagte bestaan om enige vertragingstaktiek
ten opsigte van hierdie wetsontwerp deur te voer nie.

Die Nasionale Vergadering het 'n versoek gerig aan die Minister dat
getuienis wat wel na vore gekom het, in ag geneem moet word wanneer hierdie
wetsontwerp wet word. Derhalwe doen ons ook 'n ernstige beroep van die Wes-
Kaap se kant dat, indien die Minister verdere getuienis inwin wat kan
aanleiding gee tot beter wetgewing, sy wel aan hierdie getuienis gehoor
moet gee. Dit gaan oor 'n beter wet in die Wetboek. Dit gaan hoegenaamd nie
oor enige vertragingstaktiek nie.

Aangaande die kwessie van standaarde sal die Wes-Kaap graag wil sien dat
standaarde wel 'n rol speel wanneer hierdie raad tot stand kom. Dit is in
ons land se belang dat standaarde ingestel word wat pasiënte en siek
persone sal beskerm teen enige persone wat hierdie stelsel mag misbruik.

Laastens, ons in die Wes-Kaap loop nie oor nie. Ons weet ons gaan die
unistad wen en die Minister moet net daarvan kennis neem. [Gelag.]
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans declaration of vote follows.)

Mr C ACKERMANN: Madam Chairperson, the Western Cape gladly supports this
legislation. We want to tell the Minister that no one and none of the
opposition parties is thinking of using any delaying tactics with regard to
this Bill.

The National Assembly addressed a request to the Minister that evidence
which has indeed emerged should be taken into account when this Bill
becomes law. We therefore also earnestly appeal on the part of the Western
Cape that, if the Minister receives further evidence which could lead to
better legislation, she should pay attention to such evidence. The issue is
about having a better Act on the Statute Book. It has nothing whatsoever to
do with any delaying tactics.

With regard to the issue of standards, the Western Cape would like to see
standards indeed playing a role when this council is constituted. It is in
the interests of our country that standards be introduced which will
protect patients and the sick against any people who might abuse this
system.

Finally, we in the Western Cape are not crossing the floor. We know we are
going to win the unicity and the Minister should just take note of that.
[Laughter.] [Applause.]]

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

        AFRICAN RENAISSANCE AND INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION FUND BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I call on hon Minister Tshabalala-
Msimang in her Friday the 13th capacity as Minister of Foreign Affairs.

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: No, Madam Chairperson, I am still the Minister of
Health. I am standing in for my colleague the Minister of Foreign Affairs,
and I read this on her behalf.

The last century has seen Africa free itself from the shackles of
colonialism. It was a century that saw the continent produce great leaders
whose energy and dynamism was focused on channelling the people and
countries of the continent towards freedom and democracy.

The eminent African-American W E B du Bois pertinently prophesied in the
year 1900, at the First Pan African Conference in London, that the 20th
century would be the century of the colour line. One hundred years later,
as we stand at the dawn of the new millennium, African leaders have boldly
declared the 21st century the African century.

President Mbeki has successfully utilised various opportunities in recent
months, during bilateral visits and at regional and multilateral meetings,
to present an economic and social development agenda for Africa. It is a
comprehensive and far-reaching global agenda to address poverty and the
developmental needs of Africa. This package of measures is also designed to
address the complex challenges posed to the continent by globalisation. It
is incumbent upon us to support the President's call for the social and
economic regeneration of our continent. It is imperative that South Africa
should play a leading role in the creation of this new African world. This
is why I am today introducing the African Renaissance and International Co-
operation Fund Bill.

The introduction of this Bill is historic for three reasons. Firstly, for
the first time the concept of an African Renaissance is captured and
encapsulated in legislation in South Africa, and, for that matter, by a
legislature on the African continent. Secondly, the Bill introduces for the
first time a framework and basis for providing funds for the South African
Government to identify and fund, in a proactive way, projects and
programmes aimed at the promotion of democracy and good governance, the
prevention and resolution of conflict, socioeconomic development and
integration, and humanitarian assistance and human resources development in
Africa or any other area of the world that is deemed a priority.

Thirdly, the Bill introduces for the first time a mechanism through which
donor third-party funds could be channelled to recipients and/or joint
tripartite projects. The African Renaissance and International Co-operation
Fund Bill will provide for the establishment of the African Renaissance and
International Co-operation Fund for the purpose of enhancing international
co-operation with and on the African continent, and to confirm South
Africa's commitment to Africa.

The principal financial implication of the Bill will be the repeal and
disestablishment of the Economic Co-operation Promotion Loan Fund, once
that fund's debit balance has been cleared by either changing the current
outstanding loans, to the value of R80,355 million, into grants or writing
off the outstanding debt.

The Economic Co-operation Promotion Loan Fund, which we inherited from the
previous government, can be regarded as a legacy of apartheid for the fact
that it was used to buy friends during South Africa's period of isolation.
This fund was a bilaterally orientated fund that was used reactively after
receipt of formal government requests. This often placed South Africa in a
precarious position where, in order to avoid potential diplomatic
embarrassment, it had to respond to requests by other governments for
financial assistance. By comparison the new fund will be multilaterally
orientated and provide for proactive involvement in projects and programmes
involving organisations and parties other than the governments of
countries, although, of course, not excluding the governments of countries.

I conclude: As a country, and as a continent, we must work in concert to
achieve the objectives of the African Renaissance, thereby encouraging the
rebirth, revival and renewal of our continent. We must take practical
steps, in both our regional and our continental efforts, to gain support
and commitment from countries and institutions for the needs of all our
people. We are not pretending to be ``Big Brother'' or a donor country.
What we can do, and what this fund symbolises, is that we can become
involved where we can make a difference. [Applause.]

Mr M V MOOSA: Chairperson, I want to thank the hon the Minister of Health
for standing in very well for the Minister of Foreign Affairs today. I
congratulate her because she has done well. I must just say that in global
terms, South Africa is a net importer of aid, and that in African terms,
South Africa is a net exporter of aid. Let me make a simple example: If I
have a three-bedroomed house in Bishopscourt, I am poor, but if I have a
three-bedroomed house in Khayelitsha, I am rich. And I think that is the
principle upon which the African Renaissance and International Co-operation
Fund Bill was drafted, because the fact of the matter is that the African
continent is a net exporter of capital. From this continent, we export
capital more than we export anything else, because of the very serious and
severe international debt obligations that African countries have.
It has been very encouraging recently to note that China has decided to
write off some US $10 billion debt owed by poor African countries to China.
And I must say that western countries have not come forth with a similar
kind of gesture. They have been talking for the past year about writing off
some US $100 billion. [Interjections.] I am not listening to Mr Durr, he
usually do not have good things to say about this country anyway.
[Laughter.] He should be living in Europe.

The US and a number of other countries said over a year ago that they were
going to write off some US $100 billion debt. But they keep on talking
about it, they do not do it. I think that there is something to be learnt
from the east and countries that have socioeconomic policies that are
responsible and people-orientated such as China, and I hope that the
western countries are taking note of that.

Coming back to this particular Bill, although South Africa has its own
problems, its own poverty alleviation programmes and its own RDP, it
refuses to turn a blind eye and to be selfish, but acknowledges the fact
that in this subregion we are wealthy, and that our budget, no matter how
constrained it might be, would be able to contribute at least a little bit
into socioeconomic development in the subregion for the promotion of
democracy and the reduction of conflict. And in that context it is very
encouraging to see that we are actually getting down to finalising Bills
such as this one and moving them through the Houses of Parliament.

In our committee we have made some amendments which are probably going to
go back to the National Assembly for concurrence, which I am sure will not
be a problem. But the most important amendment we have made relates to the
fact that we felt that the fund was structured in such a way that it may
have created a loop for civil servants to disburse money out of the fund
without the approval of the Minister and the advisory committee that makes
recommendations to the Minister. It is was very badly drafted, and we
picked that up in our committee and fixed it. So we have brought about what
would probably be quite a significant amendment to the Bill. We have
communicated that to our counterparts in the National Assembly who see the
point, and we even spoke to the the Deputy Minister, Aziz Pahad, and the
advisors who agreed that that was a correct and necessary amendment. So we
have made that amendment.
We have also made an amendment to ensure that the fund falls within the
ambit of the Public Finance Management Act, which we thought was necessary
because there are a whole lot of safeguards and measures contained in that
law and that both the accrual of finance into and the disbursement of
finance from the fund are things that are done on the recommendation and
approval of the advisory committee and the Minister, in consultation with
the Minister of Finance. Those are few of the amendments we have made, and
our colleagues in the other House and the Ministry thought that they were
useful.

I would like to make a final small correction. The Minister mentioned that
we probably may have to write off some loans and grants make to African
countries under the other funds that are being incorporated into this fund.
She mentioned a figure of R80 000 million which will translate into R80
billion. Before the opposition parties jump up and down and get excited,
because they usually do with incorrect facts, that is only about R89
million. [Interjections.] These loans relate to a long period, about 8 to
10 years. The biggest loan, I think, is about R30 million, and they have
all gone into socioeconomic issues, and in some instances it probably would
make sense for us to write them off. With those few words I would like to
support the Bill on behalf of the ANC. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Declaration of vote:

Mr K D S DURR: Chairperson, we are not against all of the fine sentiments
which have been expressed by the Minister today, in fact, we are all for
them. But we have a few problems with the Bill, which is why we oppose it.
The one problem is that we think it is wrong for party political slogans to
describe legislation. Renaissance is an ANC slogan - that is fine.
[Interjections.] We do not think it should find itself into legislation.

I would also remind the House that the renaissance in Europe led to
revolution. [Interjections.] It was the reformation in Europe that saved
democracy and liberty as we understand it in this House today. So they must
be careful before they use eurocentric slogans which they know nothing
about.

The second thing I want to say is that although we agree with the changes
which were brought into the legislation - in fact, we initiated some of
them - we still do not think that this legislation will not be able to be
used partially to support particular political parties, and on those
grounds we will oppose this legislation.

Bill, subject to proposed amendments, agreed to in accordance with section
75 of the Constitution (African Christian Democratic Party dissenting).

The Council adjourned 11:09.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    Bill, as amended by National Council of Provinces, and rejected
         by National Assembly on 13 October 2000, referred to Mediation
         Committee in terms of Joint Rule 186(1)(b):


         Tourism Amendment Bill [B 50D - 99] (National Assembly - sec
         76(1)) - (Mediation Committee).

2.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government on 13 October
         2000 submitted a draft of the Redetermination of the Boundaries of
         Cross-boundary Municipalities Bill, 2000, as well as the
         memorandum explaining the objects of the proposed legislation, to
         the Speaker and the Chairperson in terms of Joint Rule 159. The
         draft has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Provincial
         and Local Government and the Select Committee on Local Government
         and Administration by the Speaker and the Chairperson,
         respectively, in accordance with Joint Rule 159(2).


     (2)    The following Bill was introduced in the National Assembly on 13
         October 2000 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Redetermination of the Boundaries of Cross-boundary
              Municipalities Bill [B 69 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75)
              - (Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government -
              National Assembly) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
              notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
              21635 of 5 October 2000.]

3.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The following papers were tabled and are now referred to the relevant
     committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Health and to the Select Committee on Social Services:


         Report of the Medical Bureau for Occupational Diseases for 1999-
         2000.


     (2)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry, the Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs,
         the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs and to the
         Select Committee on Economic Affairs for consideration and report.
         The committees must confer and the Portfolio Committee on Trade
         and Industry must report:


         (a)     Amendment Protocol on Trade in the Southern African
              Development Community (SADC), tabled in terms of section
              231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Amendment Protocol.


     (3)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Water Affairs and Forestry and to the Select Committee on Land and
         Environmental Affairs:


         Report and Financial Statements of the Trans-Caledon Tunnel
         Authority for 1999-2000.


     (4)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Minerals and Energy and to the Select Committee on Economic
         Affairs. The Report of the Auditor-General contained in the paper
         is referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration and report:


         Report and Financial Statements of the National Electricity
         Regulator for 1999-2000, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 1999-2000.


     (5)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts:


         Resolutions of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for 2000
         and replies thereto obtained by the National Treasury - Fifth,
         Sixth and Seventh Report, 2000.


     (6)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour and to the Select Committee on Labour and Public
         Enterprises:


         Report and Financial Statements of the National Productivity
         Institute for 1999-2000.


     (7)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and to the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry. It
         is also referred to the Select Committee on Finance and to the
         Select Committee on Economic Affairs:


         Memorandum on Vote No 32 - "Trade and Industry", Adjustments
         Estimate, 2000-2001.


     (8)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and to the Portfolio Committee on Housing. It is also
         referred to the Select Committee on Finance and to the Select
         Committee on Public Services:


         Memorandum on Vote No 15 - "Housing", Adjustments Estimate, 2000-
         2001.
     (9)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and to the Portfolio Committee on Education. It is also
         referred to the Select Committee on Finance and to the Select
         Committee on Education and Recreation:


         Memorandum on Vote No 8 - "Education", Adjustments Estimate, 2000-
         2001.


     (10)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and to the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy. It
         is also referred to the Select Committee on Finance and to the
         Select Committee on Economic Affairs:


         Memorandum on Vote No 21 - "Minerals and Energy", Adjustments
         Estimate, 2000-2001.


     (11)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and to the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs. It is also
         referred to the Select Committee on Finance and to the Select
         Committee on Social Services:


         Memorandum on Vote No 14 - "Home Affairs", Adjustments Estimate,
         2000-2001.


     (12)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and to the Select Committee on Finance:


         (a)     Memorandum on Vote No 1 - "The Presidency", Adjustments
              Estimate, 2000-2001.


         (b)     Memorandum on Vote No 2 - "Parliament", Adjustments
              Estimate, 2000-2001.


         (c)     Memorandum on Vote No 31 - "Statistics South Africa",
              Adjustments Estimate, 2000-2001.


         (d)     Memorandum on Vote No 36 - "National Treasury",
              Adjustments Estimate, 2000-2001.


         (e)     Memorandum on Adjustments Estimate for 2000-2001.


         (f)     Adjustments Estimate of Expenditure to be defrayed from
              the National Revenue Fund during the financial year ending 31
              March 2001 [RP 1-2000].


     (13)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and
         Constitutional Development. It is also referred to the Select
         Committee on Finance and to the Select Committee on Security and
         Constitutional Affairs:


         Memorandum on Vote No 18 - "Justice and Constitutional
         Development", Adjustments Estimate, 2000-2001.


     (14)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and to the Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises. It
         is also referred to the Select Committee on Finance and to the
         Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises:


         Memorandum on Vote No 23 - "Public Enterprises", Adjustments
         Estimate, 2000-2001.


     (15)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and to the Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation. It
         is also referred to the Select Committee on Finance and to the
         Select Committee on Education and Recreation:


         Memorandum on Vote No 29 - "Sport and Recreation", Adjustments
         Estimate, 2000-2001.


     (16)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and to the Portfolio Committee on Public Works. It is also
         referred to the Select Committee on Finance and to the Select
         Committee on Public Services:


         Memorandum on Vote No 26 - "Public Works", Adjustments Estimate,
         2000-2001.


     (17)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and to the Portfolio Committee on Transport. It is also
         referred to the Select Committee on Finance and to the Select
         Committee on Public Services:


         Memorandum on Vote No 33 - "Transport", Adjustments Estimate, 2000-
         2001.


     (18)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and to the Portfolio Committee on Arts, Culture, Science
         and Technology. It is also referred to the Select Committee on
         Finance and to the Select Committee on Education and Recreation:


         Memorandum on Vote No 4 - "Arts, Culture, Science and Technology",
         Adjustments Estimate, 2000-2001.


     (19)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and to the Portfolio Committee on Communications. It is
         also referred to the Select Committee on Finance and to the Select
         Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises:


         Memorandum on Vote No 5 - "Communications", Adjustments Estimate,
         2000-2001.


     (20)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and to the Portfolio Committee on Health. It is also
         referred to the Select Committee on Finance and to the Select
         Committee on Social Services:
         Memorandum on Vote No 13 - "Health", Adjustments Estimate, 2000-
         2001.


     (21)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and to the Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and
         Forestry. It is also referred to the Select Committee on Finance
         and to the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs:


         Memorandum on Vote No 34 - "Water Affairs and Forestry",
         Adjustments Estimate, 2000-2001.


     (22)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and to the Portfolio Committee on Labour. It is also
         referred to the Select Committee on Finance and to the Select
         Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises:


         Memorandum on Vote No 19 - "Labour", Adjustments Estimate, 2000-
         2001.
     (23)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and to the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land
         Affairs. It is also referred to the Select Committee on Finance
         and to the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs:


         Memorandums on


         (a)     Vote No 3 - "Agriculture", Adjustments Estimate, 2000-
              2001.


         (b)     Vote No 20 - "Land Affairs", Adjustments Estimate, 2000-
              2001.


     (24)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and to the Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services.
         It is also referred to the Select Committee on Finance and to the
         Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs:


         Memorandum on Vote No 6 - "Correctional Services", Adjustments
         Estimate, 2000-2001.


     (25)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and to the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local
         Government. It is also referred to the Select Committee on Finance
         and to the Select Committee on Local Government and
         Administration:


         Memorandum on Vote No 22 - "Provincial and Local Government",
         Adjustments Estimate, 2000-2001.


     (26)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and to the Portfolio Committee on Public Service and
         Administration. It is also referred to the Select Committee on
         Finance and to the Select Committee on Local Government and
         Administration:


         Memorandums on -


         (a)     Vote No 24 - "Public Service and Administration",
              Adjustments Estimate, 2000-2001.


         (b)     Vote No 25 - "Public Service Commission", Adjustments
              Estimate, 2000-2001.


         (c)     Vote No 27 - "South African Management Development
              Institute", Adjustments Estimate, 2000-2001.


     (27)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and to the Portfolio Committee on Welfare and Population
         Development. It is also referred to the Select Committee on
         Finance and to the Select Committee on Social Services:


         Memorandum on Vote No 35 - "Social Development", Adjustments
         Estimate, 2000-2001.


     (28)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and to the Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security. It
         is also referred to the Select Committee on Finance and to the
         Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs:


         Memorandums on -
         (a)     Vote No 17 - "Independent Complaints Directorate",
              Adjustments Estimate, 2000-2001.


         (b)     Vote No 28 - "South African Police Service", Adjustments
              Estimate, 2000-2001.


     (29)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and to the Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs. It is
         also referred to the Select Committee on Finance and to the Select
         Committee on Economic Affairs:


         Memorandum on Vote No 11 - "Foreign Affairs", Adjustments
         Estimate, 2000-2001.


     (30)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and to the Portfolio Committee on Defence. It is also
         referred to the Select Committee on Finance and to the Select
         Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs:


         Memorandum on Vote No 7 - "Defence", Adjustments Estimate, 2000-
         2001.

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:
     Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces:


     Bills passed by National Assembly on 13 October 2000 and transmitted
     for concurrence:


     (1)    Bills of Exchange Amendment Bill [B 47B - 2000] (National
         Assembly - sec 75) - (Select Committee on Finance - National
         Council of Provinces).


     (2)    South African Reserve Bank Amendment Bill [B 62 - 2000]
         (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Select Committee on Finance -
         National Council of Provinces).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development:


     (1)    Government Notice No R.849 published in Government Gazette No
          21499 dated 25 August 2000, Amendment of the Rules regulating the
          conduct of the proceedings of the several provincial and local
          divisions of the High Court of South Africa, made in terms of the
          Rules Board for Courts of Law, 1985.

2.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry:


     (1)    Government Notice No 683 published in Government Gazette No
         21357 dated 14 July 2000, Release of a part of the Berlin State
         Forest which is no longer required for forestry, made in terms of
         section 50(4) of the National Forests Act, 1998.


     (2)    Government Notice No 759 published in Government Gazette No
         21422 dated 28 July 2000, Prohibition on the making of fires in
         the open air, the destruction by burning ground cover, including
         slash and the execution of blockburns in the district of Letaba
         and Pietersburg, made in terms of the Forests Act, 1984.
     (3)    Government Notice No 843 published in Government Gazette No
         21483 dated 25 August 2000, Change of service area by the Amatola
         Water Board, made in terms of the Water Services Act, 1997.


     (4)    Government Notice No 869 published in Government Gazette No
         21520 dated 8 September 2000, Change of name of the Goudveld
         Water, made in terms of the Water Services Act, 1997.


     (5)    Government Notice No R.55 published in Government Gazette No
         21523 dated 8 September 2000, Commencement of section 7 of the
         National Forests Act, 1998.


     (6)    Government Notice No 894 published in Government Gazette No
         21544 dated 8 September 2000, Extension of the period for
         registration of water use in the Crocodile West and Marico Water
         Management Area, made in terms of the National Water Act, 1998.


     (7)    Government Notice No 895 published in Government Gazette No
         21544 dated 8 September 2000, Extension of the period for
         registration of water use in the Mvoti to Mzimkulu Water
         Management Area, made in terms of the National Water Act, 1998.
     (8)    Government Notice No 902 published in Government Gazette No
         21549 dated 15 September 2000, The transfer or disposal of water
         services works, made in terms of section 73(2)(a) of the Water
         Services Act, 1997.


     (9)    Government Notice No 905 published in Government Gazette No
         21549 dated 15 September 2000, Transformation of the Breede River
         Water Conservation Board, the Angora Irrigation Board, the Le
         Chasseurs and Goree Irrigation Board and the Robertson Irrigation
         Board - Division of Swellendam, Province of the Western Cape, into
         the Central Breede River Water User Association - Water Management
         Area No 18, Province of the Western Cape, made in terms of the
         National Water Act, 1998.


     (10)   Government Notice No 906 published in Government Gazette No
          21549 dated 15 September 2000, Transformation of the Goree
          Irrigation Board, division of Robertson, Province of the Western
          Cape, into the Goree Water User Association - Water Management
          Area No 18, Province of the Western Cape, made in terms of the
          National Water Act, 1998.


     (11)   Government Notice No 907 published in Government Gazette No
          21549 dated 15 September 2000, Transformation of the Marthinusvlei
          Irrigation Board, division of Robertson, Province of the Western
          Cape, into the Marthinusvlei Water User Association - Water
          Management Area No 18, Province of the Western Cape, made in terms
          of the National Water Act, 1998.


     (12)   Government Notice No 908 published in Government Gazette No
          21549 dated 15 September 2000, Transformation of the
          Agterkliphoogte Irrigation Board, division of Robertson, Province
          of the Western Cape, into the Agterkliphoogte Water User
          Association - Water Management Area No 18, Province of the Western
          Cape, made in terms of the National Water Act, 1998.


     (13)   Government Notice No 909 published in Government Gazette No
          21549 dated 15 September 2000, Transformation of the Uitnood
          Irrigation Board, division of Robertson, Province of the Western
          Cape, into the Uitnood Water User Association - Water Management
          Area No 18, Province of the Western Cape, made in terms of the
          National Water Act, 1998.


     (14)   Government Notice No 910 published in Government Gazette No
          21549 dated 15 September 2000, Transformation of the Willemnels
          Irrigation Board, division of Robertson, Province of the Western
          Cape, into the Willemnels Water User Association - Water
          Management Area No 18, Province of the Western Cape, made in terms
          of the National Water Act, 1998.


     (15)   Government Notice No 911 published in Government Gazette No
          21549 dated 15 September 2000, Transformation of the Lower Riet
          River, the Richie and the Scholtzburg Irrigation Boards into the
          Orange-Riet Water User Association, division of Jacobsdal,
          Koffiefontein and Fauresmith, Province of the Free State and
          divisions of Herbert and Kimberley, Province of the Northern Cape
          - Water Management Areas Nos 13 and 14, made in terms of the
          National Water Act, 1998.


     (16)   Government Notice No 916 published in Government Gazette No
          21549 dated 15 September 2000, Release of portions of Injaka
          Plantation which are no longer required for forestry, made in
          terms of section 50(4) of the National Forests Act, 1998.


      17) Government Notice No 3272 published in Government Gazette No
          21566 dated 22 September 2000, Code of Conduct for council
          members of the National Forests Advisory Council, made in terms
          of the National Forests Act, 1998.



