---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 27 January 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: JANUARY
month_slug: Jan
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2000-01-27
---

THURSDAY, 27 JANUARY 2000
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:06.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Mr N M RAJU: Madam Chair, I hereby give notice that I shall move at the
next sitting of the House:


  That the Council -


  (1) views with concern the unflattering results obtained in Mathematics
       and Science by matriculants in the recent matriculation examinations;
  (2) appreciates the fact that the national Minister of Education has
       recognised this and has appointed a special commissioner to
       investigate this area of concern; and


  (3) urges the Minister to -


       (a)  immediately carry out a survey of the professional
           qualifications of all teachers having the responsibility of
           teaching these all-important subjects in our schools; and


       (b)  set up a programme of action to upgrade the teachers'
           qualifications so that results in these subjects could improve
           dramatically, as the country's future needs, as we enter the
           technological era, require no less.

      CONGRATULATIONS TO CRICKET TEAM AND GOOD WISHES TO BAFANA BAFANA

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) congratulates the South African national cricket side on its hard-won
       victory last night at Newlands in the Western Cape; and


  (2) wishes Bafana Bafana well in their game tonight, 27 January 2000,
       against the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

  CONGRATULATIONS TO MARK SHUTTLEWORTH ON THE SALE OF HIS COMPUTER SOFTWARE
                                   COMPANY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M BHABHA: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -
  (1) congratulates Mark Shuttleworth on his entrepreneurial success, which
       culminated in the sale of his computer software company to the value
       of R3,5 billion;


  (2) notes -


       (a)  his decision to reward each of his 37 staff, including two
           cleaners and a gardener, with an amount of one million rand;


       (b)  his entrepreneurial talents and ingenuity;


       (c)  his commitment to South Africa and his faith in the future
           wellbeing of our economy by choosing to re-invest his earnings
           locally despite the many lucrative offers to invest abroad; and


       (d)  his statement that South Africans need not be despondent about
           their future in this country, as there are ample opportunities
           for entrepreneurs of all races to express their talents; and


  (3) resolves to request the Government of South Africa to continue
       providing our young entrepreneurs with the opportunities to express
       their talents.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                    DELAY IN ALLOCATION OF FISHING RIGHTS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs A M VERSVELD: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes with concern that -


       (a)  the Department of Environmental Affairs has not yet finalised
           the allocation of fishing rights in any of the species in the
           pelagic industry, which include sardines, anchovies, horse
           mackerel and maasbanker;


       (b)  fishermen in this industry have been unable to fish and earn an
           income for their families in the year 2000; and


       (c)  this lack of income impacts on the morale of parents and
           children of fishermen who cannot buy school uniforms or pay
           school fees at the beginning of the new school year; and


  (2) calls on the Minister, as a matter of urgency, to finalise the
       allocation of fishing rights by the end of January, at the latest, to
       avoid further adverse impact on the economy and the morale of people
       in the affected regions.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I would like to object to the
motion. We have not been given notice of the motion.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! There is an objection. The motion will
therefore be converted to notice of a motion.

                    ALLIANCE BETWEEN THE DP AND THE UCDP
                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr D D N MALOYI: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council notes -


  (1) that the alliance between the DP and UCDP, which the DP has described
       as one between like-minded parties, comes as no surprise;


  (2) that the DP associates with, or at least condones promoting
       leadership which is corrupt and supports the bantustan policy of the
       apartheid regime;


  (3) especially the DP's voluntary association with the leader of that
       party, who is a convicted criminal;


  (4) that this alliance is consistent with the DP's fork-tongued approach
       to its policy of clean government; and


  (5) that this move is consistent with the DP's opposition to the access
       to information, administrative justice and equality Bills which
       enshrine significant advances for the vast majority of disadvantaged
       people.

Mr L G LEVER: We object to the motion, Chairperson.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! There is an objection to the motion.
The motion will therefore become notice of a motion.

             RECONCILIATION BETWEEN SANDRA LAING AND HER MOTHER

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr N M RAJU: Madam Chair, I would like to move without notice:


  That the Council notes the following:


     Cry the beloved country!
     Some time last week, somewhere in Gauteng, in some part of our beloved
     Republic, a poignant moment unfolded.
     A mother and daughter embraced!
     A mother and daughter torn apart for some 31 years by the imperatives
     of an ideology that was shamelessly based on the pigment of one's skin.
     South Africa and South Africans held a collective breath as Sandra
     Laing and her mother Sannie hugged each other in a cathartic embrace.
     Let the milk of human kindness flow.
     Let all South Africans, not only mothers and daughters, fathers and
     sons, brothers and sisters, but fellow South Africans of whatever hue
     or political bent, hug each other in a national embrace of
     reconciliation as a first step towards inter-racial harmony.
     Let us be united in our resolve never again to surrender our blood,
     sweat, toil and tears in defence of a failed and fallen ideology.
     Never!

Mr M BHABHA: Madam Chair, the place where this reunion took place is Piet
Retief in Mpumalanga. It is a famous case that took place 35 years ago, and
the place is Mpumalanga, not Gauteng. I would like to amend that.

Mr N M RAJU: Madam Chair, with respect, the speaker has not followed what I
said here. I said:
  This poignant moment unfolded some place near Pretoria ...

I appreciate Mpumalanga is where the whole episode started.
[Interjections.] Pretoria is in Gauteng, is it not?

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Mr Raju, I am sure you will have no
objection to the factual amendment being effected. Chief Whip, do you have
an objection to the motion?

Mr M E SURTY: No, Chairperson, we fully support the sentiments that have
been expressed, even the sermonlike speech of the motion, but we do support
it wholeheartedly.

Mr M J BHENGU: Madam Chair, I am rising on a point of inquiry: Will Mr Raju
withdraw this motion, as he has done previously? [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Mr Raju, would you read the part that
makes reference to a province, so that we alert the staff to the place
where this occurs, in order for any necessary amendment to be effected.

Mr N M RAJU: Chair, this is how I phrased the sentence:


  Some time last week, somewhere in Gauteng, in some part of our beloved
  Republic, a poignant moment unfolded ...

[Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: The Chief Whip says that is sheer poetry. The
amendment, should it be necessary, will be effected. Is there any objection
to the substance of that motion? No objection.

Amendment agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

Motion, as amended, agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution, namely: That the Council notes the following:


     Cry the beloved country!
     Some time last week, somewhere in Mpumalanga, in some part of our
     beloved Republic, a poignant moment unfolded.
     A mother and daughter embraced!
     A mother and daughter torn apart for some 31 years by the imperatives
     of an ideology that was shamelessly based on the pigment of one's skin.
     South Africa and South Africans held a collective breath as Sandra
     Laing and her mother Sannie hugged each other in a cathartic embrace.
     Let the milk of human kindness flow.
     Let all South Africans, not only mothers and daughters, fathers and
     sons, brothers and sisters, but fellow South Africans of whatever hue
     or political bent, hug each other in a national embrace of
     reconciliation as a first step towards inter-racial harmony.
     Let us be united in our resolve never again to surrender our blood,
     sweat, toil and tears in defence of a failed and fallen ideology.
     Never!

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Are there any further motions without
notice?

Mr M E SURTY: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council notes -


     the synchronism and unison of motion by the ACDP and the DP after the
     motion by the hon member Mr Maloyi.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Is there any objection to that motion,
which I do not think was intended to be taken seriously? I would anticipate
that Mrs Versfeld would rise. She is in fact rising.

Mev A M VERSFELD: Mev die Voorsitter, ek opper 'n punt van orde. Ek sou
graag 'n vraag wou stel aan die agb Hoofsweep. In die verlede het niemand
van ons ooit 'n voorstel sonder kennisgewing met die Hoofsweep uitgeklaar
nie. Ek weet nie hoekom my mosie van die hand gewys word nie, want ons het
dit nog nooit vantevore gedoen nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[Mrs A M VERSFELD: Madam Chairperson, I am rising on a point of order. I
would like to put a question to the hon Chief Whip. In the past none of us
ever cleared a motion without notice with the Chief Whip. I do not know why
my motion is being refused, because we have never done this before.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, with respect, may I suggest
that Mrs Versfeld read the Rules. Any member is entitled to object to a
motion, and one of the grounds for objecting to a motion is that the
Council did not receive notice of it. If she peruses the Rules, she will be
aware of this. It is correct that there has been no such practice as
alluded to.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! The administrative arrangements between
Whips do not govern the manner in which the Council reaches its decisions.
We cannot hold the Council to the deliberations of the Whips. If there is
an objection here, the Council has to accept that. The Chair has to accept
that objection and act in terms of the Rules. There has been an objection;
I have to rule in terms of the Rules. I have done so.

   CONSIDERATION OF NOMINATIONS FOR APPOINTMENT TO CENTRAL DRUG AUTHORITY

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move the draft resolution in
my name on the Order Paper, as follows:
  That the Council requests the Select Committee on Social Services to
  consider the nominations received by the relevant Ministry for the
  appointment of persons to the Central Drug Authority, and to make
  recommendations in relation thereto to the Minister for Welfare and
  Population Development in accordance with section 2(3)(b) of the
  Prevention and Treatment of Drug Dependency Act, 1992 (Act No 20 of
  1992), the Committee, subject to the concurrence of the National
  Assembly, to confer with the Portfolio Committee on Welfare and
  Population Development of the National Assembly.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                   PROMOTION OF ACCESS TO INFORMATION BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! We welcome the Minister and the Deputy
Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development and call on the
Minister to address the Council.

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Madam Chairperson,
despite what is on the speakers' list, we have agreed that I will handle
the first Bill and that the Deputy Minister will handle the next one. If it
pleases you, we are requesting that we proceed in that way.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! We will accept that request. Proceed,
hon Minister.

The MINISTER: Madam Chair, the Promotion of Access to Information Bill is,
as has been observed in some newspapers, indeed a groundbreaking piece of
legislation. It is part of a trilogy of Bills that we have had to bring
before Parliament this week. The other two are the Promotion of
Administrative Justice Bill and the Promotion of Equality and Prevention of
Unfair Discrimination Bill which, to my understanding, comes before this
House tomorrow morning.

I am saying it is a groundbreaking piece of legislation because, as South
Africans, we are actually now going to have the right of access to
information in the hands of the state and in the hands of any person
described in legislation as, indeed, is required in the Constitution.
Like these other Bills, it has taken quite a long time for this Bill to
eventually come before Parliament for debate. I am not going to go into the
reasons why this has been the case, save to say that it is just as well
that this happened, because it afforded a whole lot of our people an
opportunity to participate in the discussion. That then compelled us to
overhaul even the thinking around the Bill in many respects.

I was asked by a member of Council just before we started whether it was
still possible for us to revisit one aspect of the Bill, which the hon
member suggested was the only thing that would prevent his party from
supporting the Bill. I said to the hon member that I did not think it was
possible any longer, because we were under time pressure.

The aspect that the hon member suggests separates us is, if I may put it in
a nutshell, the extension of the right of access to information in private
hands to the state. This issue has been debated on many occasions in
numerous forums. I tried to suggest to the hon member - and I want to
repeat this - that this is not a power that is being extended to the state.
The state, as has been observed by numerous people on numerous occasions,
has, indeed, all manner of power to have access to information in private
hands in many areas. One can think, for instance, of provisions in the
Criminal Procedure Act, Act 51 of 1977 as amended, that allow us - that is,
our police officers - to have access to information in private hands. One
can think of provisions, for instance, in the Income Tax Act and numerous
others, which similarly allow organs of state to have access to
information. So this is not a power, but a right. What is very interesting
about this right is that immediately any organ or agent of the state seeks
to utilise it, it then either reduces itself to the level of a requester
or, if members like, elevates itself to the level of a requester.
Therefore, for purposes of the law, the state is going to be treated as a
requester, like any other requester.

May I also say that it is interesting that nothing compels the possessor of
the information to give it to the agent of the state merely because the
state is requesting that information. Indeed, one may sit tight, sit back
and refuse to give that agent of the state that information, whereupon that
agent of the state would be entitled to go to a court of law and say: For
the following reasons, we need the information that this person is in
possession of, and he is refusing to give it to us. Now, those procedures
apply to any requester, but added to that is the requirement that the state
or an agent of the state should utilise them, not in defence of its own
rights, but in defence of the rights of the defenceless.

I suggested to the hon member of the Council that for instance we have a
difficult case, which causes us a lot of pain, a heart-rending case. It is
the case of ordinary people who went and sought employment in a mine some
time back. They worked in this mine and were exposed to conditions that led
to them suffering from asbestosis. Quite a large number of them are
beginning to die, we are told.

These people went all the way to the United Kingdom to sue the company for
which they were working, and as a result of which they were exposed to the
conditions that gave them asbestosis. They have come back, since they could
not sue there, primarily because the courts there said: ``Well, you can sue
because we have jurisdiction on the matter, but you cannot use our legal
aid.'' When they came back here, we then told them that our legal aid was
also unable to assist them. The hon member then said to me: ``But the
Minister could have easily used state resources.'' I said to him that,
according to the law, the offices of the state attorneys only represent the
state in litigation, and these people are not the state.

These people who I want to believe are illiterate or, at best semi-
literate, cannot exercise any of these rights. One can tell them until one
begins to froth at the mouth that they have these rights, but they will
say: ``How does one use these rights when one does not have the necessary
wherewithal - money, tjhelete, imali - to access the information in the
possession of this company, so that we can determine whether or not we have
a case against it. We want to believe that we suffer from asbestosis right
now because we were exposed to conditions that lead to asbestosis, as we
worked for this company.''

Now, somebody, somewhere must be able, for God's sake, to pick up the
cudgels on behalf of these people. And one can only do so, even under the
Constitution, when there is a right at stake. One cannot do it otherwise
with reference to information in the possession of a person other than, of
course, the state. With regard to the state, one can ask for and get any
information, except of course exempted categories of information which the
Bill grapples with.

I am telling members this long story only to say that there is indeed a
need for somebody to speak for those who cannot speak for themselves, and
if none of us can do so, at least the state must be in a position to use
its own resources and request information in cases of this nature.

Another example that has been given is of a company that pollutes a whole
stream. As a result, people are exposed to all sorts of conditions, as both
people and their cattle, sheep, etc, consume water from that stream.
Surely, somebody must be able to request the information regarding the
effluent system, etc, from that company. The poorest of the poor in the
rural areas do not have money to go to some lawyer and say ``Mr, Mrs or
Miss Lawyer, we are suffering from these conditions because we suspect that
there is pollution in the effluent from this company''.

Are we then to sit back and say: ``Well, nothing can be done''? We are
saying a health inspector ought to be able to request that information and
the health inspector being part of an organ of state, indeed would
otherwise be prevented from accessing this information. I do not think that
any one of us has an intention to abuse or misuse these rights, and as I
say, in any event, the right is completely ring-fenced. One cannot wake up
in the morning and say: ``I happen to be this Minister and I want that
information and therefore I am going to ring them and say I want it or
else.'' One cannot use it in that way. Indeed, it may be argued that one
could actually use a power somewhere in the law, but we are saying, if one
can use that power, why not extend the right?

If that is all that separates us from hon members, I would want to plead
with them to support this Bill so that we all, as it were, enter this new
era in which we fully respect the right of access to information, together
as parties. It would be a pity if some of the parties, purely on the basis
of this, distanced themselves from this Bill, because they would be sending
a completely wrong message to their own followers, who may indeed find
themselves in circumstances similar to the one that I have described with
regard to the case of the asbestosis sufferers.

This is not about us. Indeed, we who are literate, who even speak some of
these languages that were imposed upon us, and know our rights, can read
the Constitution, we can read the law, we can use them and so on. In some
instances we even have the wherewithal, or we have connections with friends
in the legal fraternity or whatever one may want to call it, and we can
access whatever information we want from the private sector. But we are
talking about the most indigent, for whom nobody speaks, when one looks at
the case of the asbestosis sufferers for instance.

So, for us there is a reality that must be grappled with, and we are saying
that it is a pity that we cannot help in those instances. For me, as a
Minister, to say to the people that the Attorney-General's resources could
not be used because the people were not part of the state and that we could
not provide them with legal aid because it was in a parlous state, was the
most painful thing to say to anyone when I knew the suffering.

I am saying that if only we had a right such as this one, we would have
been able to say to the company: ``For God's sake, give us this
information, and let it be appropriately evaluated. If indeed it leads to
the conclusion that the company is liable to pay damages to these people,
you might want to discuss a settlement.''
With these few words, I would like to thank you, Madam Chair, and all those
members of the House who made tremendous contributions by way of their own
resources, their own wisdom and their own time in order for this Bill to
reach us in this House today.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Before calling upon the next speaker, I
think I should also thank the chairperson of the committee that dealt with
this Bill, and all the chairpersons of the committees that dealt with the
Bills emanating from the Constitution, as well as the members of those
committees. I think exceptional work has been done. I think members have
shown exceptional commitment and that contribution should be noted.

Mr J L MAHLANGU: Madam Chairperson, Mr Minister, Deputy Minister and
colleagues, if I had things my way, after this elaborate introduction of
the subject matter today, I would have recommended that no other debate
takes place, and that the members of this Council consider voting in favour
of this important Bill. But, for obvious reasons, we have adopted the
approach that we will have this debate taking place. But if indeed we were
in a church, the sermon would have already been completed.
The Bill before this House seeks to give effect to the constitutional
right, as envisaged by section 32(1) of the Constitution, which seeks to
give effect to the right of access to information held by the state and any
information that is held by another person and that is required for the
exercise or protection of any right. I think the hon the Minister has
appropriately explained the scenario.

The exercise of these rights is subject to justifiable limitations, such as
reasonable protection of privacy, commercial confidentiality, and efficient
and good governance. It gives the constitutional obligation to the state of
promoting a human rights culture and social justice.

This Bill is in line with the constitutional requirements of our country as
well as the policy of this Government. I believe this Bill is indeed in the
interests of the citizens of our country. We, as ANC, continue to uphold
the Constitution as the supreme law of this country, and no structure of
Government is above the Constitution. That is why we will indeed support
this important piece of legislation.

By adopting and passing this Bill today, we shall have met our promise,
just in time, to give the citizens of our country the rights they demanded,
fought and died for. [Interjections.]

We had an extensive briefing on this very Bill in this House the day before
yesterday. I would therefore like to commend the presiding officers for the
constructive and creative way they provided for us to deal with these
constitutional Bills. I also want to thank the members of that panel, Mr
Lever, Mr Kent Durr and Mr Matthee, for the proactive and objective manner
in which they treated that presentation.

I do not think that members of this House need to be reminded that, prior
to the year 1994, the government of South Africa, amongst others, resulted
in a secretive, unresponsive and suppressive culture in public, as well as
in private spheres, which often led to serious human rights violations.
Suppression, silencing and banning of liberation movements was the order of
the day.

It did not end there. They went on to suppress and censor the press. The
government became the editors of various newspapers, as well as the
electronic media. Those amongst us today who claim to be upholders of human
rights were dead silent. The state-sponsored bodies supported it and
millions of rands were secretly moved into private bodies.

I would like to challenge any member in this House who could stand up and
defend the previous government. Some private bodies were given funds to
engage in research to develop chemicals, some of which were intended to
stop reproduction in the black community. [Interjections.] Only last year,
the UN attributed the scourge of the Aids virus in South Africa to a great
extent to the policies of apartheid. [Interjections.]

We all know that labour unions were refused the right to information which
had to do with their personnel issues. As we are talking today, Col De Kock
is in custody for having been a state tool to try to suppress those who
were vocal about this closed state.

It was the ANC that called for the inclusion, in the Constitution, of the
Bill of Rights, including the one that deals with the right to access to
information. No single party can claim to have opened up and afforded
citizens of this country their right to know, except the ANC.

We have included in this Bill the clause that compels Government to
disclose information to the public, even without the public asking for that
information. This never happened in the past. In the Constitution, as well
as in the Bill, the state is expected to respect, protect, promote and
fulfil all the rights in the Bill of Rights which is the cornerstone of
democracy.

It was quite interesting to observe the zeal and enthusiasm with which
opposition parties approached the section dealing with state information.
The question under discussion concerned information held by the state. It
was, however, a quite different situation when hon members discussed the
section concerning the right of access to information held by private
bodies.

When we proposed the inclusion of the state in the definition of a
requester, it was as if the sky was going to fall. I want to recommend to
hon members of this House to revisit the Constitution. In terms of the
Constitution, the state is not precluded from being a requester. The
inclusion of the state in this definition will help to ensure that the new
system regulating access to information will not be monopolised by the rich
and powerful to defend their interests, but will serve the interests of the
wider community, especially the interests of the weak and poor. The hon the
Minister has appropriately addressed the issue and gave several examples.

Requesters will be in a position to request records in any form, whether
written or recorded, and in the languages of their choice. We have provided
mandatory protection in areas dealing with defence, security, international
relations, commercial information, the safety of individuals and
structures, as well as in some other areas.

If a request is refused, the requester will have the opportunity to make an
internal appeal to the Minister of a department. In the event of the
failure of an internal appeal, the requester will have the right to go to
court to request the court to grant him or her access.

This indicates to us that this Bill does not create an all-powerful state,
as some people would want to believe. The hon the Minister has indicated
that the state, as a requester, will have to overcome all the hurdles
included in this Bill. The state will have to prove that it is in the
interests of the public that the requested information be given.

When we won the elections in 1994 and in 1999, we obtained a mandate which
said that the people of our country trusted us and had faith in us. It is
the role of Government to protect the interests of its citizens. The
possibility that some members of the opposition parties could be living in
areas such as Houghton, the northern suburbs of Johannesburg or in the
eastern suburbs of Pretoria, the western suburbs of Durban and possibly the
western suburbs of Cape Town, would make the understanding other people's
living conditions difficult for them.

The interests that this Bill attempts to protect, are those of people
living in areas such as Emangwaneni in KwaZulu-Natal - I am not sure
whether any member of the Opposition will know that place - Katsibane in
Mpumalanga, Ga-Masemola in the Northern Province, KwaVumazana in Gauteng,
Onseepkans in the Northern Cape, and some other places. It is in these
areas that I have mentioned that people live whose rights have been, and
continue to be, violated in one way or another by people in the private
sector.

The hon the Minister has made mention of toxic substances that are emitted
into the water. It is envisaged in this Bill that, in the event of
suspicion that people's lives could be negatively affected, a public body
such as a local government or health practitioner could request a record
which could reveal the existence of such substances. I think that no
sensible government would leave people's lives to chance. We, as
politicians as well as Government, have a responsibility to deal with those
issues.

I am told that a philosopher by the name of Confucius said: ``One can
forgive a child who is afraid of darkness, but one cannot forgive an adult
who is afraid of light''. [Laughter.] I should perhaps advise my colleagues
on the other side to reconsider their positions.

In conclusion, I would like to convey a word of appreciation to my co-
chairperson in the National Assembly, Adv Johnny de Lange, for his
resourcefulness and patience. My congratulations also go to members of the
ad hoc committee, the Department of Justice, organised local government,
organs of civil society and the media for the manner in which they
participated in the whole process leading to the adoption of this Bill.
From this side of the Table, the ANC, we would like to say that we support
the Bill wholeheartedly. [Applause.]

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister for Justice and
Constitutional Development, hon members, the Bill before us is an extension
of the Bill of Rights enshrined in our Constitution. The right of access to
any information, whether it is held by the state, any person or
institution, for the purpose of promoting transparency, accountability and
effective governance of the public as a whole, is a fundamental right in an
open and true democracy. We are aspiring to such a democracy, and the
provisions of this Bill will make us the envy of 80% of the world's
citizens.

The objects of this Bill are understandable when the justifiable
limitations aimed at reasonable protection of privacy, commercial
confidentiality and effective governance over a broad spectrum are taken
into account. This Bill also gives effect to the constitutional obligations
of the state, namely that of promoting a human rights culture and social
justice which is directed towards achieving transparency. This is needed
for the public interest. It will reveal to the public some evils of the
past which are still being practised today by some institutions, whether
public or private.

This Open Democracy Bill will promote a human rights culture and social
justice. Public bodies and Government bodies are no longer shielded. Access
to information from private bodies will be available upon compliance with
the three or four requirements in the Bill. Through voluntary and mandatory
mechanisms or through procedures, one can access records of public and
private bodies swiftly, inexpensively and effortlessly.

State departments and institutions, whether private or public, will be
exposed by the application of this law. It is not going to be received
favourably in some corners of our country. While two languages are
designated, my desire is that our indigenous languages will be used more
extensively than ever before.

Public bodies are also required to submit a description of records to the
Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development, which will, upon
publication in the Gazette, be automatically available without a person
having to request access in terms of the procedures laid down in the Bill.
I refer to clause 15 of the Bill. Corruption and misappropriation of funds
will be discovered early before it becomes a crisis on a broader scale.

Clause 9 of the Bill deals with the exclusion of any provision of the
legislation that prohibits or restricts the disclosure of a record of a
public or private body which is materially inconsistent with an object or
specific provision of the Bill. In other words, no one is going to be above
the law. No one is going to commit crime, fraud, or evil of whatever nature
and get away with it by withholding facts.

Although the Bill does not require records of certain Government bodies
such as the Cabinet and its committees, judicial functions and individual
members of Parliament, etc, they are required in other ways to display
transparency, and as we all know they are also not above the law when it
comes to transgression of the law. The IFP, despite some minor concerns,
supports the Bill. [Applause.]

Mr L G LEVER: Madam Chairperson, hon Minister and colleagues, the right of
access to information is one of the rights protected in the Bill of Rights.
Historically, bills of rights developed to protect the individual from the
all-powerful state. The starting point for a bill of rights is to protect
the rights and freedoms of the individual subjects of the state. This fact
is expressly recognised in our Constitution, section 7, subsection 2, which
reads:


  The state must respect, protect, promote and fulfil the rights in the
  Bill of Rights.

Despite this, the state, through this Bill, seeks to claim for itself one
of the rights enshrined in the Bill of Rights, namely, the right to seek
information, specifically from the private sector. This is being
accomplished by extending the definition of ``requester'' in the Bill to
include the state.

This approach is a perversion of the entire concept of a bill of rights.
What does this mean for the Bill of Rights? Is this the thin end of the
wedge for the Bill of Rights? Is this the precursor of an Orwellian future?
What does big brother have up his sleeve?

In the committee that considered this Bill the DP, on a number of
occasions, asked the governing party: What does the state want to do with
this power? Unfortunately, I do not have the time to discuss the answers
provided in this speech. However, every example that the governing party
used in their answer was less than satisfactory. Every example provided was
subject to the same retort that the state already has alternative means to
achieve that same result. In all instances the alternative means were more
desirable, especially where a prosecution may result.

I would like to just point out, with due respect to the hon the Minister,
that clause 50(2) of the Bill does not provide the right to the state to
request access only on behalf of others. It provides it in two instances;
on its own behalf, as well as on behalf of others. It is only when the
request is on behalf of others that it is qualified, in the sense that it
must also be in the public interest. What then does the governing party
really wish to achieve?

If I may just briefly - I do not have enough time - deal with the tragic
circumstances of the people who suffered asbestosis. They went to the UK to
institute their claim, according to the media, because they believed that
they would obtain greater damages there. This, with respect to the
Minister, is not a case of access to information, but of enforcing a legal
claim. It is not those unfortunate people's fault that the Legal Aid Board
has been maladministered and run into the ground. The remedy for those
poor, unfortunate people is to resuscitate the Legal Aid Board and run it
on a sound footing.

However, to get back to the question: What then does the governing party
really wish to achieve? Perhaps the clearest indication of the real
intention behind this provision appears in clause 9(c) of the Bill, which
reads:


  To give effect to the constitutional obligations of the state of
  promoting a human rights culture and social justice, by including public
  bodies in the definition of ``requester'' allowing them, amongst others,
  to access information from private bodies upon compliance with the four
  requirements in this Act, including an additional obligation for certain
  public bodies in certain instances to act in the public interest.

Clearly, social engineering is firmly on the agenda. The next question is:
How far can we legitimately allow this social engineering to go, bearing in
mind that every attempt at social engineering in the past century has
failed in spectacular fashion?

The flip side of the coin in allowing access to information is the right to
privacy. Every person, from natural persons to juristic persons, enjoys the
right to privacy.

Certain members of the ad hoc committee which considered this Bill
questioned whether a juristic person has a right to privacy. The Supreme
Court of Appeal has confirmed that a juristic person has such right, and
the right is also implicitly recognised by the Constitutional Court in the
certification judgment. I would be happy to provide any interested person
with the citations of both of those relevant judgments.

It is true, and I concede, that rights, even those enshrined in the
Constitution, are not absolute. Where the scope of a right, especially one
of those enshrined in the Constitution, is narrowed, this has to be clearly
justified. I do not believe that that is the case in this instance. The
state can only be said to be a bearer of rights in certain limited
instances, such as when the state contracts with an outside third party or
when the state is the owner of or has rights or interests in a certain
property.

In each instance, the law of contract or the law of property, as the case
may be, fully protects any rights that the state may have. The state
clearly has obligations to its citizens. It does not bear rights such as
those enshrined in the Constitution which are enforceable as against its
subjects.

Clearly, there is a clash of ideologies here. The ideology of the governing
party is to involve the state in every aspect of society and to centralise
control of our society in the hands of an executive government. Access to
information is central to achieving that goal, and this Bill is symptomatic
of that approach to government.

If I may briefly answer Mr Mahlangu, if one really wishes to see who the
elite are in this institution, perhaps one should stand at the entrance to
the parliamentary garage and see who drives what vehicle. That may be
instructive.

An HON MEMBER: What car do you drive?

Mr L G LEVER: A bakkie, if the hon member would like to know.
[Interjections.]

For these reasons, the DP cannot support this Bill.

An HON MEMBER: How many houses ... [Interjections.]

Mr L G LEVER: I do not own a house, to respond to the hon member who asked
that question. [Applause.]

Mntwana B Z ZULU: Mhlonishwa Sihlalo, mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe wezobuLungiswa
kanye neSekela lakho namalungu ahloniphekileyo, namuhla sivula isahluko
esisha ekubusweni kwezwe laseNingizimu Afrika. Kunezinto eziningi
ezingamaqiniso abantu kanye nemibuso yomhlaba engafisi ukuba zaziwe yizwe.

Lo Mthetho ukhuthaza ukuthi umuntu akwazi ukubona noma yini eyake yenzeka
kuleli zwe esiphila kulo. Ngalo Mthetho uKhongolose uthi akukho nelilodwa
itshe eliyoshiywa lihlezi phezu kwelinye, elingeke liguquke sibone sonke
ukuthi yini efihlwe ngaphansi kwalo. Ngakho-ke, amaqiniso mawavezwe obala.
Abantu mabawazi amalungelo abo. Abantu bafuna izithiyo nemigoqo ebibekwe
phambi kwabo isuswe. Abantu bafuna umthetho ubatshele lokho okungamalungelo
abo. (Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[Prince B Z Zulu: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister of Justice and his Deputy,
and hon members, today we open a new chapter in the governing of South
Africa. There are many truths that people and other governments do not want
to be divulged. This Bill encourages that any person should be able to see
anything that takes place in this country. Through this Bill, the ANC says
no stone should be left unturned.

Therefore the truths must be revealed. People should be made aware of their
rights. They want the removal of obstacles that hindered them. They expect
the law to tell them of their rights.]

The application of the Bill of Rights horizontally and vertically is a
highly controversial and heavily debated topic. First of all, it concerns
two questions. Firstly, who benefits from the rights that are contained in
the Bill of Rights? Secondly, who is bound by the rights that are in the
Bill of Rights, that is, which persons or institutions in society have
duties imposed on them by the Bill of Rights?

The second question also raises two further questions: What type of conduct
may be challenged for being inconsistent with the Bill of Rights, and what
type of law may be challenged for being inconsistent with the Bill of
Rights? The latter two questions relating to the duties imposed by the Bill
of Rights are both concerned with the extent to which the Bill of Rights
operates on the horizontal level.

The point of departure which is applicable to the Promotion of Access to
Information Bill is that, if the Bill of Rights prevents any form of law
from recognising conduct which conflicts with the Bill of Rights, then
private persons will not be able to seek the assistance of the courts to
undo the unconstitutional behaviour.

There are a number of categories of persons to whom the rights in the Bill
of Rights are accorded. Most of the rights are for the benefit of everyone.
Thus, section 11 provides that everyone has the right to life, while the
negatively phrased section 13 provides that no one may be subjected to
slavery, servitude or forced labour. Other rights are accorded to narrower
categories of beneficiaries.

A juristic person is entitled to the rights in the Bill of Rights to the
extent required by the nature of the rights and the nature of that juristic
person.

In the first certification judgment of the Chairperson of the
Constitutional Assembly, in the recertification of the Constitution of the
Republic of South Africa of 1996, an objection was raised against the
extension of the protection of the fundamental rights to juristic persons.
It was argued that constitutional principles contained in Schedule 4(1)C,
only permitted the Constitutional Assembly to confer rights to natural
persons, and by extending the rights to juristic persons, the rights of
natural persons are diminished.

The Constitutional Court responded as follows:


  We cannot accept the premise. Many universally accepted fundamental
  rights will be fully recognised only if accorded to juristic persons as
  well as natural persons.

Therefore, it is fallacious that some parties are voting against the Bill,
whereas the state will only have the right of access to information as is
required for the exercise or protection of any right of the individual -
the state being the sole guardian of every citizen. [Applause.]

Mr K D S DURR: Chairperson, I thank the Minister for his introduction.

I can reciprocate and say to him: Let us persuade each other, for that is
why we are here. I listened to his arguments on this issue which divides
us. Let me hasten to add that most of us in this room support,
overwhelmingly, most of the provisions of this Bill. We are proud of it,
and we think it is a good thing because it will empower the people. We also
think that it will make a better society and cause the Government to be
more accessible. Congratulations to him in that regard. We are enthusiastic
about that.

There is somewhere where we differ, and I ask the Minister to think again.
I am sure that the clause which divides us will be tested in court. When
the courts come along, they are going to read copies of Hansard and they
are going to follow the deliberations of our select committee. They are
going to see that that clause which divides us was brought in just before
we adjourned in December, that it is a far-reaching measure - whatever else
it may be - and that there was no consultation at all with the public in
that regard.

Whether it is desirable or not, we can argue, but it is certainly not
necessary for us to give effect to the relevant sections of the
Constitution. It is not imperative. Why then can we not excise it, and then
deliberate on it, consult and if the Minister is right and we are wrong,
then bring it as an amendment later?

I say this in all seriousness to the Minister. I am not trying to score
points off the Minister. If the Minister reads the Constitution, he will
see what my hon colleague argued so eloquently here earlier; section 7(1)
of the Constitution refers to ``the rights of all people''. Section 7(1)
states that the rights of the Bill of Rights make provision for human
beings, section 8(4) talks of juristic persons, and section 8(2) of natural
or juristic persons.

If one reads the certification judgment of the SA Law Report of 1996(4)
December (Part A), on page 790, it says, in its interpretation:


  What the drafters had in mind were those rights and freedoms recognised
  in open and democratic societies as being the inalienable entitlement of
  human beings.

It never was the intention that the state should be included.

I have to say to the Minister, and I say this with respect to him, that the
examples he raised - and may I congratulate him on raising examples because
when we pressed our colleagues for examples they were unable to give us any
other than to say that they were acting in the public interest - are not
very good examples. For instance, the first one is covered by the National
Environmental Management Act (Nema), and the second one is on asbestosis,
which my hon colleague answered for him. Let me say that asbestosis is
probably the best argued example on earth. There have been dozens of cases
in America, the United Kingdom and in this country. But, with regard to the
facts on asbestosis, there is little that needs to be found out. People
know what the facts on asbestosis are. The question is: What damages will
be awarded? Therefore, that was not a good example either.

We argue that even though the Minister is right and there is a
constitutional right for the state to be a requester, we should ask
ourselves, firstly, whether it is desirable and, secondly, whether it is
necessary, because the state has all of the powers, some of which the
Minister himself eloquently argued in his introduction. Therefore we are
saying that it is better for the state, where it requires specific rights,
to seek those specific rights in particular legislation, rather than to
come here with a shotgun right. In fact, this shotgun right is also
equivalent to a power. [Time expired.]

Mrs E N LUBIDLA: Madam Chair, Minister, Deputy Minister and hon members,
just after the discovery of diamonds, our people worked in the mines and
could buy cattle and other things. When they thought that they were a
little bit richer, they did not want to go back to the mines. It is alleged
- and it is our own people that told us this - that the water was poisoned
and their cattle died. It was said that it was rinderpest that had killed
their cattle, but that was not so. It was something man-made. Therefore, if
only this Bill had come earlier or in the last millennium, maybe it would
have helped our people find out the truth.

Also, in the last millennium, but during our time, on the other side of
Kgomotso, our people's cattle used to graze around a fountain or dam where
some farmers did not want the cattle to graze and drink water. As a result,
somebody poured poison in the water and our people's cattle died.

So if only this Bill had come a little earlier. But it is not too late, in
any case. As we are in a transformation phase of our history, where service
to our country and the people whom we represent should be of paramount
importance, the committee considered it necessary to preserve maximum
flexibility in order to provide for all conceivable eventualities, no
matter how unlikely these might be.

The ANC Government has adhered to our constitutional principles by
providing a right not found even in recent and progressive constitutions in
the world as a whole. Our Constitution has recognised the importance of
access to official information in the modern era. In order to have full and
informed debate, people must be able to have access to a larger quantity of
information that modern governments have at their disposal. In addition,
the Constitution provides for a right of access to information in private
hands, where that information relates to the exercise or protection of the
rights of the information seeker.

This provision recognises that information in private hands, such as in the
hands of employers, credit bureaux and other financial institutions can
considerably affect the rights of individuals. The provision also
recognises that in principle an individual should have access to such
information in order to ensure its accuracy, verify it or challenge
decisions made on the basis of that information. With regard to the access
right contained in the interim Constitution, in relation to information
held by the state, the Bill eliminates the provisions contained in the
interim Constitution that the information requested must be required for
the exercise or protection of the rights of the requester. Moreover, this
provision applied to private persons.

However, like section 33, section 32 - which is responsible for this debate
today - is bolstered by the enactment of national legislation to give
effect to this right. In so far as public information is concerned, this
legislation provides for reasonable measures to alleviate the
administrative and financial burden on the state. This means that the right
in section 32 had no effect until the enactment of the required
legislation, which we are proud to give effect to on this day.

The word ``rights'' could have three possible meanings here. It could mean
fundamental rights - that is, rights in the Bill of Rights. It could mean
private rights - that is, contractual or delictual rights against the state
or an organ of state. It could mean all private rights, including those
held against private citizens, whereby the state can exercise this right in
order to protect the fundamental rights of the individual. In this context,
I think even those who had problems with regard to the state having access
are now clear.
I would also like to elaborate on a few aspects of the Bill such as the
question and instances of payment of fees. This Bill provides that the
information officer of a public body to whom a request for access is made
must, by notice, require the requester to pay the prescribed fee, if any,
before further processing the request, if the search for a record of a
public body in respect of which a request ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr P A MATTHEE: Madam Chair, I want to start off by thanking the hon the
Minister for referring to the brief discussion that we had just before the
session started.

I want to make it clear right from the outset that we unfortunately cannot
support the Bill as it stands now, for the very reasons that I have given
to the Minister and because of the fact that the Government is included in
the definition of requester.

The Minister also referred to the question as to whether it would be
possible for this Council to refer this Bill back and indicated that
because of time constraints this would be difficult. However, I would
suggest that that certainly cannot be the case because we would then not be
able in this Council to fulfil our constitutional duty as it is set out in,
I think, section 68 of the Constitution. That would make this whole debate
irrelevant, because the passage of the Bill would be a foregone conclusion
as we would actually be obliged to simply support the Bill in spite of the
debate.

I want to thank the Minister again for pointing out the reasons for the
Government wanting this right. As I understood him - and maybe he can
actually confirm whether that is so - the only reason the Government wants
that right is so as to put itself in a position where it can act. I think
the words he used were, ``to act for or on behalf of the defenceless and
those people that are not in a position to actually exercise their
rights''. That is how I understood the Minister. That is the reason, and as
I understood it, the only reason the Government wants that right. I do not
know whether the Minister wants to confirm that.

I have, however, found the solution for the Minister. The solution to his
problem is actually in the Bill itself. I am so excited about it, because
it is right here. Could I refer the Minister to clause 83 of this Bill
where it says:
  (3) The Human Rights Commission may -


       (c)  if reasonably possible, on request, assist any person wishing to
           exercise a right contemplated in this Act;

Furthermore, I refer to subsection (5), where it says:


  If appropriate, and if financial and other resources are available, an
  official of a public body must ...

not ``may''


  ... afford the Human Rights Commission reasonable assistance for the
  effective performance of its functions in terms of this Act.

I also refer the hon the Minister to clause 85 where it says:


  Any expenditure in connection with the performance of the Human Rights
  Commission's functions in terms of this Act must be defrayed from moneys
  appropriated by Parliament to that commission for that purpose.
Here is the Minister's solution. Here is his answer. He does not need this
right if he wants to assist the defenceless and the people that he has
referred to. As the Minister has correctly pointed out, the Government
actually has specific rights in terms of the Criminal Procedures Act and in
terms of the tax laws and so on, for specific areas. But those are rights
limited to those specific areas.

It is not a general right. What is difficult to understand is that for
almost four years this Bill was worked on by many people, including the
best legal experts of our country. Hundreds of submissions were made. Many
workshops were held and many thousands of hours were spent on getting the
Bill ready for submission to Parliament.

Nowhere, as far as I know, was it ever contemplated that the Government
should also be the bearer of the rights in the Bill of Rights or of this
specific right - the right to information contained in clause 2 - until it
was brought up by our colleagues in the ANC within the last two months. The
question to which no answer has been given is why did the ANC wait for so
long to come up with this novel idea for which there is no precedent
anywhere in the world? I hope the Minister will be able to give us a reply
to that.
Section 7 of the Constitution makes a clear distinction between the rights
of the people on the one side, and the duty of the Government and the state
to actually respect those rights. I will not go into all the details,
because I do not have time to do that. If I could also say that to say it
is in the public interest does not really mean anything. In any democracy,
as I understand it, a government or government body should, in any event
and under all circumstances, act in the public interest. Is that not so?
But what is more, to say that it is in the public interest actually
broadens this right and does not limit it.

In section 32 it is stated that where one wants access to information of a
private body, one has to prove that it is to exercise a right. If a
government or public body wants to exercise that right in the public
interest - which, in any event, is in all instances, it does not have to
prove that it is in protection of a right. I wish to tell the Minister that
I really think that today we can make history here, because the solution is
there.

This Council cannot act as, and I hope it will never be, a rubber stamp of
the National Assembly. I really believe that we have a case here. In the
interests of the country, and of getting the support of everybody, so that
we can all buy into this, please, I plead with hon members that we should
refer it back to the other House. Time constraints can never be the only
reason that can keep us from enacting good legislation. [Applause.]

Mr T S SETONA: Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP, hon Minister
Comrade Penuell Maduna, hon Deputy Minister and hon members of the Council,
I take pleasure in being part of this debate this afternoon on this
important Bill, which represents yet another milestone in undoing the
legacy of the apartheid colonial order built over many decades.

The passing of this Bill is undoubtedly worth celebrating by millions of
men and women in the dusty streets of our townships and in the rural
villages of our country, for it entrenches the culture of transparency and
accountability in both public and private bodies.

We have had a lot of free lectures from members of the opposition on the
interpretation of the Constitution. We have also had lectures on the
interpretation of public interest. Mr Matthee, who has been a member of the
NP for many years, also wanted to give us such a lecture today. But the
unfortunate situation is that when the NP government declared a state of
emergency in 1985, thousands of young people in this country were forced
out of schools. When they were doing that, their only justification - which
was known all over the world - was the public interest.

Today we are passing this Bill, as the ANC, to enable the Government not to
be in a so-called powerful position, as it is alleged by the opposition,
but to exercise its right through prescribed procedures in the law, unlike
the manner in which it was done in the past.

It is worth reminding everyone in this House that after 2 June 1999 South
Africa will never be the same again. Our people, when voting for the ANC in
their millions on that chilly day, were declaring to all and sundry that
they would never accept being governed in the darkness again, where the
abuse of power and violation of human rights were the order of the day.

The Constitution, which is the cornerstone of our new democratic
dispensation, has undoubtedly provided for the right of access to
information held by the state, and any information that is held by another
person and that is required for the exercise or protection of any rights.

Unfortunately in South Africa, unlike after 1994, we have had so many
constitutions. There was a constitution based in Pretoria and the
constitutions of the ten former Bantustans. Today we have only one
Constitution, and there is something unique about it. The interpretation of
this Constitution is as multiple as the interests of our people in this
country.

I want to declare that as I entered this debate today, my version of the
interpretation of this Constitution was about nothing else but the
aspirations of the poorest of the poor in this country, the aspirations of
the most disadvantaged of the disadvantaged.

Section 8(4) of the Bill of Rights further entitles the juristic person to
the rights in the Bill, only to the extent required by the nature of the
rights and the nature of that juristic person. Who is the juristic person?
We need to hear that lecture. Maybe we could not understand it today. In my
own understanding, Government is also part of the juristic person. We
cannot interpret it otherwise.

It is no secret that our new democratic Government has inherited an
unresponsive, unaccountable and secretive bureaucracy, in both the public
and private bodies - a culture that has been entrenched for so many
decades.

Principal to the obligations and functions of the state is the protection
of the interests and rights of the citizens. In this regard the
Constitution further embraces human dignity, the achievement of equality
and the advancement of human rights and freedoms in its founding
provisions.

I want to say to the opposition this afternoon that talking about the
interests, equality and advancement of the dignity of an individual is
different from advancing that. This Bill is doing exactly that - to
advance, to deepen and to defend the interests of the defenceless majority
of the people of this country, those who are in the squatter camps, those
who are in the mountainous rural areas of our country. I believe that some
of us who are giving this generous lecture today about the interpretation
of the Bill were never there to experience the conditions of life of our
people in those communities.

This is a fair acknowledgement of socioeconomic and political disparities
within our country. For a long time, until today, only the few rich in this
country have been having unlimited access to information for the exercise
and protection of their rights, whilst the majority of the poorest of the
poor in the country generally, as indeed in my home town, had no access to
information to protect their rights, nor to resources to institute
litigation against either public or private bodies for the abuse of their
rights.

Of course, the generous lecture and the experiences of other countries that
have been cited today in this House are a manifestation of that disparity.
Our people do not know how this Bill may be interpreted in Australia or
Britain. What they know is that they must be protected. The only
institution that can protect their interests and aspirations is none other
than Government. The ANC dare not shirk from executing that mandate.

When 98% of the people of my home town, Botshabelo, a rural area in the
Free State, voted for the ANC on 2 June 1999, they did so confident that it
is the embodiment of their aspirations and the only hope for their better
future.

Quite clearly, it is an insult to our people to say that, in their
interests, the state cannot request information from any private body or an
individual for the protection of their rights. It is ridiculous to hear
from the opposition that, by so doing, we will be giving the state more
powers against the people, which may lead to abuse. Many people in this
country have died for this freedom. Many people in this country have fought
... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M MADLALA (Salga): Hon Chairperson of the NCOP, Deputy Chairperson,
Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development, hon members of the
NCOP and special delegates, the SA Local Government Association wishes to
extend its best wishes to the members of the House. We wish them all of the
best for the new millennium and the African century. May their work and
commitment to this institution bring them all joy and success, and growth,
and development of the NCOP as an institution that champions democracy,
accountability, transparency, the African renaissance and a better life for
all.

It is my pleasure and honour to be part of a debate on such an important
piece of legislation. Thanks go to the drafters of our Constitution, who
enabled us, organised local government, to participate in the debates at
the highest level of law-making in this country.

The four constitutionally required pieces of legislation, currently being
considered by both Houses of Parliament, have reaffirmed the validity, the
importance, the correctness and the essence of the constitutional provision
for the participation of organised local government in this House, the
NCOP. The more we consider the Bills within Salga's structures, the more we
are convinced that the Constitution could never have been more correct than
to provide for local government participation in the NCOP.

The Promotion of Access to Information Bill has a fundamental impact on us
as local government or as a sphere of government. The Constitution requires
that every person have access to the information held by the state. Local
government is part of the state and, therefore, is subject to this
constitutional provision and all the provisions of the Promotion of Access
to Information Bill.

When the Open Democracy Bill was published, we immediately put the Bill for
consideration within organised local government. Just to shed some light on
this for members, we have a system and structures that ensure that
municipalities throughout the associations at provincial level come
together and consider issues. Among others, it will be important
legislation such as this. The associations collated inputs from member
municipalities and consolidated them into provincial recommendations to the
national associations which then considered all views from provinces and
developed one position. This is the input that Salga made at the NCOP
committees. The system is not yet perfect and in future fewer and well-
capacitated municipalities will perfect the system.

The Open Democracy Bill was subjected to the above process. There are a
number of issues that we raised on this Bill. Among others, we expressed
our views on the need for an internal appeal mechanism. We made it clear,
however, that this view is subject to all spheres of government having such
a mechanism.
We have recommended that municipal councils should be given the discretion
to delegate the function of appeal to any of their functionaries, based on
the type and capacity of the municipalities. A municipality will have the
discretion to choose either the Speaker, the mayor or their deputies as the
relevant authority to deal with appeals.

We also raised a concern that metropolitan mayors and executive mayors will
have too many responsibilities for them to handle, including appeal
mechanisms. Therefore we advised that Speakers or a council is a preferred
option to deal with appeals. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M V MOOSA: Madam Chair, one needs to begin with this word ``social
engineering''. It has become such exciting coinage these days that one
needs to respond to it.

What is ``social engineering''? When the Romans imposed civilisation on the
barbarians and cannibals, that was social engineering. When Jesus Christ
and the Prophet Mohammed imposed value systems on the heathens, that was
social engineering. When the feudal lords imposed their system, that was
social engineering. When Napolean overthrew the feudal lords, that was
social engineering. When the colonialists came to Africa and took away the
land and the resources, that was social engineering. When the revolutions
of Africa ousted the colonialists, that was social engineering.

What are we talking about? What is this ``social engineering'' that the DP
loves to talk so much about? It happened when the apartheid government and
the colonialists took away the land rights and the dignity of our people
and socially engineered ad nauseum to the point where our people were left
with absolutely nothing. They engineered for over 300 years in this
country. The people of this country have taken power again. They have
imposed a state that belongs to them, and that state is expected to
socially engineer. That the DP will never understand.

Unfortunately, when Adv Lever says we need to look at the ideological
differences across this floor, that is what he is talking about - that,
ideologically, the ANC understands that when it was handed power by the
people of this country in 1994 and again in 1999, the people of this
country were saying to the ANC: ``Take power in this state and socially
engineer it so that we develop a harmonious society, a society that is
tolerant in its diversity and that belongs to all.''

Let us not throw around ``social engineering'' as if it were a simple word.
Based on that, the DP should therefore understand why it has not been given
power in 1994 and again in 1999 by the people of our country. They were not
given power because the people of this country know that the DP will only
support those who are powerful and those who are wealthy. The DP will
tirelessly argue for the interests of those who have and continue to have.
They have done that with a number of pieces of legislation, they have done
that in their election programmes and campaigns and they do that again here
today in this House.

What is this right of access to information that we are talking about, and
what is the right of the state that we are talking about that exists in
this Bill that allows it to further the aims and objects of transformation
in this country? What is that right? What is this fear that the DP talks
about - an Orwellian state - something that is really mysterious and
rickety. The DP speaks of a lot of terminology that makes it sound as
though it just does not understand it. It probably does not understand what
is going on in this country, and that transformation is taking place.

Simply put to the DP, the state in this country has a responsibility to
ensure that we balance the resources and the access to information that
everybody has to everybody else. Today, in the year 2000, multinational
corporations are sometimes larger than governments. Anglo-American and its
resources and its power probably extends much further than the power of the
South African state. For us to say that the state should not be able to
request of institutions as powerful as those information that will protect
the rights of the poor and the weak is ludicrous. The DP knows that. The DP
knows that it pursues an agenda that is the agenda of the wealthy and the
powerful.

When we speak about the right to access that has been granted to the state,
it is not just a willy-nilly right as it was in the apartheid days. This is
not the apartheid state.

This is not a state that will simply bulldoze and break down doors and
suddenly go and take information from companies. Maybe Mr Matthee should
try and understand this. That is not the kind of state we are. This Bill
speaks about the state making a request for information which, in any case,
it could do. The state has to apply to court to compel a company,
corporation or person to give information if they refuse to do so.

The court system in this country represents an independent institution in
our society and, hopefully, the DP respects its integrity. The courts will
decide. They can inquire what the problem is when the state has asked for
information and it seems as if it is needed for legitimate purposes.
Obviously, the state, in such a matter, would have to explain to the court
why it needs the information and why it regards that information as
legitimate in order to pursue a particular public interest. This is not a
willy-nilly right that has been written into this Bill.

The DP is misleading the public. They continue to mislead voters. However,
unfortunately they only mislead those who continue to blindly vote for
them, because the rest of South Africa knows not to listen when the DP
speaks. They are speaking about the interests of a few and they continue to
do so, as in this instance.

I want to say the following to Mr Durr, who speaks about a ``last-minute
thing'' that was slipped in by the ANC and which is sure to go to the
Constitutional Court. The hon member needs to know that lack of
consultation is not grounds for a constitutional challenge. A last-minute
discussion in a committee is not grounds for a constitutional challenge.
Thus far, none of the political parties who have spoken on this matter have
in sound, legal terms explained what their problem is with the right of the
state to request information.

There is no single piece of paper, or one statement that one has heard over
the past three months, that gives an indication that there is some legal
bearing in this position that is held by the opposition parties. There is
not! They are protecting the rights of the powerful. They are protecting
the rights of the wealthy. Let the country know that, and let the country,
in the next election, vote according to the decisions that these political
parties make on a day-to-day basis in this Parliament, because in this
Parliament we have serious business to do.

We are not simply letting off hot air through these discussions. The
discussions here are based on transformation programmes on the ground aimed
at giving a better life to all our people, delivering houses and delivering
water. These are simple things that the DP and its powerful supporters take
for granted. They take for granted the fact that they have fresh running
water in their taps. Fortunately supporters of the ANC, who happen to be
the majority in this country, do not take for granted the fact that there
is running water in the taps.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon member would you please take your
seat. Mr Durr, do you have a point of order?

Mr K D S DURR: Chairperson, just a sincere and brief question. Would the
hon member allow me to ask him a question?

Mr M V MOOSA: I am really not in the mood today to take questions from a
party that makes the kind of statements they make here. [Interjections.] I
will entertain the willy-nilly questions over tea, if Mr Durr would not
mind. [Interjections.]

Let us take one or two more ... [Interjections.]
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Order, hon member!

Mr M V MOOSA: Madam Chair, I am not answering questions.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Mr Matthee, would you please take your
seat?

Mr M V MOOSA: Madam Chair, thank you very much. I hope you will give me
some injury time. [Laughter.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I was not aware that you were injured!

Mr M V MOOSA: Madam Chair, the important aspect to understand here is the
notion of the state. What is the state? Mr Durr speaks of the Bill of
Rights and all the provisions that apply to individuals and human beings.
What is the state? Is it a machine? Is it some kind of an alien being? The
state constitutes men and women of this country who love this country and
who, on behalf of this country, want to pursue the ideals enshrined in the
Constitution.

Section 7 of the Constitution, and all the other clauses of the
Constitution, speak of these rights. When the state institutes those
rights, it does not institute those rights on behalf of a machine or an
alien being. It institutes those rights on behalf of people, of human
beings, of people who suffer out there. These are the basic notions in this
Bill that we need to capture in order to understand the ideological divide
across this floor today.

I also need to say to Mr Matthee that we are glad that he acknowledges that
the Human Rights Commission has such a huge role to play. It must continue
to play that role and, of course, the ANC supports that. That is the reason
why the ANC put these clauses in this Bill. That is the reason why the ANC
supports this Bill.

It is the ANC which drafted most of the clauses suggested here, but what
has that to do with the fact that the state is the people? The people shall
govern. This is something that we fought for for the entire duration of our
struggle against colonialism and apartheid, and today the people shall
govern.

When the state sets up a Human Rights Commission to pursue certain
provisions and certain aspects of a rights-based culture, that does not
mean that the state, in a commercial sense which has nothing to do with
rights, cannot pursue the rights of people. These are simple things of
which we do not seem to be able to convince one another! It has to do with
the ideological tenets that we all come from, the basis from which we work.
Having said these few words, I am sure the Minister will deal with this
matter further.

However, I want to say that the committee has done an excellent job. Both
Comrade Mahlangu and Comrade Johnny de Lange have worked tirelessly for a
piece of legislation that we believe will stand the test of time.
[Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I call upon the hon the Minister for
Justice and Constitutional Development to address the House. Mr Moosa has
woken up the members for you, Minister. [Laughter.]

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Madam Chair, I
also intended to say something about social engineering. I think that even
if we did not want to indulge in social engineering, it is unavoidable. We
inherited a society which was socially engineered in a totally wrong way
during colonialism and during apartheid. Any government, including a DP
government, would never last a second if it did not socially re-engineer
South Africa. For instance, if it is in terms of social engineering that we
have an obligation to use the resources of the state to extend
accessibility to electricity to beyond the 31% that had access to it in
1994, then so be it.

If it is in terms of social engineering that it is the right of every human
being to have access to potable, drinkable water, so be it. If it is in
terms of social engineering that anyone can say: ``For God's sake, human
beings are entitled to the bare minimum, a little roof over one's head,
which even the birds have in the form of nests, so be it. So, if it is in
terms of social engineering that we have a bounden duty to look into the
iniquitous way in which resources, opportunities, income and, therefore,
wealth, are distributed in this country, so be it.

We owe this to ourselves, particularly as the indigenous people of this
country who have struggled for change in this country. Had we not struggled
and sacrificed for change, for social engineering if one likes, I am afraid
the white minority in this country would still be clinging to power. That
is the truth. They did not just wake up on the morning of 2 February 1990
and say: ``Look, we have been wrong all this time. Abandon apartheid. Let
them have the vote.''

His political forebears - and this is recorded - were preachers and
advocates of the qualified franchise for blacks, but yesterday they howled
and said I was misleading the House. I want to repeat this. The issue of
the vote was not about whites, because even white women had already
attained the vote by the 1930s. The issue of the vote was about those who
were nonvoters, and for anybody from any party to have advocated a
qualified franchise without any basis whatsoever in logic and morality was
immoral in the extreme. And yet they preached this until the beginning of
the 1970s, it turns out. This is hate.

Now, those ardent liberals were advocates of the qualified franchise for
blacks. For God's sake, it was for blacks only. They never said they wanted
to take away the votes of whites who did not have property or a certain
level of education. The white hobo was a voter, and they were not
threatening the vote of the white hobo. They were saying, if it comes to
blacks, that merely because blacks were blacks, they must not vote unless
they have a certain level of education and or property.
We have socially re-engineered that and extended the vote to everyone who
has reached the age of 18 and is a South African citizen. We owe no one any
apology for that. I want to say that one of the things that we have
actually socially re-engineered is our thinking on human rights itself. In
today's world it is generally accepted that one cannot confine human rights
to the vertical relationship between the state and the individual, because
a lot of evil happens at the horizontal level. A lot of it happens there,
and if one does not pay attention to that evil, then, indeed, one had
better not talk about human rights at all.

What we are not being told by all speakers who are opposed to the extension
of the right of access to information in private hands to the state, when
it acts in defence or in the protection or in the exercise of rights of
ordinary people who cannot speak for themselves, is what it is that should
not be accessible.

However, what I want to say to those who are saying this is that it is
interesting that I, Penuell Maduna, pretending not to be a Minister for a
second, can access the same information. That is interesting, because if
one just looks at clause 51 and one relates that to the provisions of
section 38 of the Constitution, particularly 38(b), (c) and (d), anyone
could ask for this information. That is an interesting thing.

But what we are saying is that though we know the Human Rights Commission
can do a whole lot of these things and the state would say so, clearly, it
should be acknowledged that - and I am thankful to hon member Matthee for
pointing this out - we should look at clause 85 as well. Clause 85 tells us
that the moneys must be defrayed from moneys already appropriated by
Parliament for the work of the Human Rights Commission. Those of us who
know anything about the budget of the Human Rights Commission will admit
they do not have the kind of resources that it would have had to have if it
were to do this additional work.

Mr P A MATTHEE: We can give it to them!

The MINISTER: Well, he can give it to them if he has the money, but we as
Parliament have so far failed to give it to them, because we do not have
the money. We do not have an elastic purse.

What we are also saying is that it is interesting that the opposition are
saying, ``No, it is wrong for a public body to exercise this right.'' They
are not telling us why it is wrong. I listened carefully to all of them.
They were not prepared to say why. If one pretends for a second that one
does not speak on behalf of any public body, then it is fine for one to get
the information, but once one uses a public body, that status one has is
suddenly wrong.

I have actually given an example here of the state attorneys' resources
which we can use if, indeed, there is information that we can source in the
public interest. However, we are being told, ``No, no, no. Do not do
that.'' In case I gave anyone the impression that I said the case on
asbestosis turns on access to information, I did not mean that. I said that
one must look at a classic example of the defenceless.

No one in the state right now can take up the cudgels for those people.
They have been all over. They started with us here at the legal aid stage.
They started with us. It is not completely true that they wanted to sue
because they thought that they would get more money. They even wanted to
sue here, but they cannot sue here.
Now, I am saying that the state has resources, but I want to tell hon
members that it is not as easy as hon member Kent Durr suggests. I do not
think that the company has as much as admitted liability. I wish it had,
because then we would be saying: Look, what damages are you looking for?
Why do you not settle that question? It would be easier, but they have not
admitted liability. [Interjections.] They have not admitted liability, as
far as I know. Maybe the hon member has better and more recent information,
but they have not.

So, in order for them to be able to build a very good case against this
company, they will have to have access to information. In order for them to
do that - the hon member knows this for God's sake - even the most
literate, the most erudite who are not lawyers, would need lawyers to be
able to do that kind of work. Now, I am saying ...

Mr P A MATTHEE: I am sorry Madam Chair, but would the Minister be prepared
to take a serious question? [Interjections.]

The MINISTER: Let me tell the hon member that I take him very seriously. If
I want to take a question from him, it will not be now: I will take it when
I can offer him a good glass of dry, red wine or mampoer, not now.
[Laughter.]

We are not convinced that it is wrong for a public body, merely because it
is a public body, to ask for information which a nonpublic body can easily
ask for. I am trying to decipher the logic of that argument.
[Interjections.]

No, please! If anybody acting in the public interest, as the Constitution
says, can exercise any of these rights, including this one, then why can
the state or a public body not do the same thing? Why can it not? The hon
members would have to tell a better story. What is it that makes them think
that an ordinary, defenceless, most indigent person living in the remotest
corner of this country, must be prevented from having access to information
merely because they do not have the wherewithal? What is it?

I know of nothing that those ardent advocates of transparency are suddenly
saying must not be subjected to transparency.

Bafihla ntoni? [What are they hiding?] [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Bill be agreed to.

Division demanded.

Declaration of vote:

Mr P A MATTHEE: Madam Chair, we are very sorry that it is not possible for
us to support this Bill, because we would have dearly wanted to support it.
I have stated the reasons for that. What is more - I am very sorry, but
this specific question has not been answered and I want to refer the
Council to it again - in clause 83(5) it is clearly stated that the
Government can achieve what it wants to achieve. It actually puts an
obligation on an official of a public body to assist. It is actually there.
The Government does not need this right to help the defenceless. We also
want to help the defenceless.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon member, you are not making a
declaration. Is there any other party that wishes to make a declaration? We
shall then proceed to voting on the question.
The Council divided.


  AYES - 31: Permanent members: Bhabha, M; Bhengu, M J; Dlulane, B N;
  Fenyane, S L E; Kgware, D M; Lubidla, E N; Lucas, G A; Mahlangu, J L;
  Mahlangu, Q D; Majodina, P C P; Makoela, M I; Maloyi, P D N; Marais, A;
  Mkhaliphi, B J; Moatshe, P; Mokoena, M L; Moosa, M V; Mushwana, M L;
  Ndzanga, R A; Nkuna, C; Ntlabati, S N; Nyakane, R M; Qokweni, P G;
  Setona, T S; Sulliman, M A; Surty, M E; Thomson, B; Vilakazi, J N; Zulu,
  B Z.


  Tellers: Kolweni, Z S; Themba, M P.


  NOES - 15: Permanent members: Ackermann, C; Botha, C-S; Conroy, E A;
  Durr, K D S; Gouws, E C; Horne, J; Krumbock, G R; Lever, L G; Matthee, P
  A; Nel, P J C; Theron, J L; Tlhagale, J O; Witbooi, J


  Tellers: Van Niekerk, A E; Raju, N M.

Question agreed to.

Bill accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the
Constitution.
                  PROMOTION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUSTICE BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT:
Chairperson, colleagues and comrades, it is a real honour for me to be back
in this Chamber. Before I begin, I need to tell those who do not know that
it was here that I cut my political teeth, and that I had an immensely
enjoyable two years in this Chamber. It is very good to see the old faces,
and it is very good to be back here. Thank you very much for this
opportunity.

The right to administrative justice holds special relevance to South
Africans. The quest for administrative justice is the basic aspiration for
a reliable remedy against injustice caused by maladministration, abuse or
unfairness.

It is the first line of defence against malice, bad faith and corruption by
public bodies. It is a cardinal safeguard in the enforcement of
administrative accountability and the realisation of substantive
administrative justice.

The fact is that colonial and apartheid rule left a legacy of unparalleled,
arbitrary, unfair and grossly unreasonable administrative action, both by
government bodies and by powerful public institutions. Through legislation,
the pillage and plunder which dispossessed South Africans in the country of
their birth was justified. In the process, judicial review experienced its
darkest hour as the powers of the courts to pronounce on administrative
action were severely curtailed.

Our main challenge in the current legislative process was to devise a
framework in which public-sector bodies could be accountable for their
actions. In our new constitutional dispensation, the right to
administrative action has been elevated to the level of a fundamental
right. The lawmaking process, therefore, requires even greater
circumspection.

The control of public power must be subject to legal limitations. There
cannot be such a thing as absolute or unfettered administrative power. The
fact is, any power can be abused, and the Bill before us is an effective
measure to ensure public accountability.

The Promotion of Administrative Justice Bill sets out a detailed code of
fair administrative action. It determines, in the first place, the
substance of the right guaranteed in section 33 of the Constitution. The
Bill also advances the principle of fairness by imposing a duty on all
organs of state, statutory bodies and Public Service institutions to be
mindful of the application and execution of policies affecting the public.

The right to seek redress before a competent court or tribunal imposes a
positive duty on the public sector to observe the tenets of legality,
fairness and reasonableness in all their actions. Our Government is
committed to effective administrative mechanisms which will help South
Africans enforce their constitutional rights. The administrative apparatus
must serve the people.

Before I conclude, let me take this opportunity to thank the members of the
justice portfolio committees from both the National Assembly and the
National Council of Provinces, who sacrificed their holidays in order that
we could meet the constitutional deadline. I would also like to thank the
departmental officials, who also worked tirelessly in drafting the Bills
before us.
I place the Bill before the House for consideration. [Applause.]

Mr J L MAHLANGU: Hon Chairperson, Deputy Minister and hon members, it is
indeed an honour to address the Council on this particular Bill.

Today is a milestone in the course of administrative justice. In the past,
as the Deputy Minister has indicated, the state administration was called
upon to carry out the legal and institutional policies of a government set
on maintaining power through racial discrimination and domination.

Keeping the state in a semipermanent state of emergency ensured law and
order. The adoption of far-reaching legislative and administrative security
measures was the order of the day. All this was done in a legal system that
had no constitutional safeguards against government abuses and no
protection of fundamental human rights and liberties.

It is a fact that the history of administrative justice is rudimentary in
nature. It thus became abundantly clear that the responsibilities lay with
us.

The ANC Government knew that it had to embark on a radical restructuring of
social relations in the country. The goal of the South African Government
remains the same: to render an open, accountable and democratic government
which will be to the benefit of all South Africans. Our purpose is still to
undo the apartheid structures and to attempt to compensate for the
suffering experienced by the majority in the past. South African law was
lamentably inadequate. We came to realise that mechanisms would have to be
developed to hold the administration accountable to the public for its
actions.

The notion of democracy which forms the cornerstone of our Government
demands that there should be basic rights, protection and government
accountability to all in its sway. The subject of reform and administrative
justice is politically controversial, but we do not avoid it. The ANC has
already, in its working document on a Bill of Rights for the new South
Africa, proposed a right to judicial review. We ensured that executive
accountability was protected in section 33(1) and (2) of the Constitution.

We are committed to bringing about the necessary degree of administrative
justice, through the law, to the new South Africa. In terms of section
33(1) and (2) of the Constitution, everyone has the right to administrative
action that is lawful, reasonable and procedurally fair, and the right to
written reasons. This Bill is the personification of the provisions of the
Constitution. Section 33(3) requires that national legislation be enacted
to give effect to this right as set out in section 33(1) and (2), and that
provision be made for the review of administrative action by a court or a
tribunal.

The ANC is proud to say that it has fulfilled its constitutional mandate.
We have once again charted the way forward. It is a fact that for the
executive to reconstruct South Africa's social relations so as to
redistribute power and work equitably, it will have to be empowered. The
interaction between democratic theory and executive accountability is the
backdrop against which the content of this Bill must be seen.

Our main aim is to increase participation by members of society in the
public institutions of democracy. By enacting this Bill, we ensure that
public decision-making can be tested for rationality and for commitment to
the values entrenched in the Constitution. Marginalised and disempowered
communities such as rural women and the unemployed would be better
empowered to place their concerns on a public agenda because of this Bill.

In closing, I want to use the words of Judge P N Bhagwati at the
Breakwaters conference in 1993:


  Let us not forget that we are at the crossroads of history. We have to
  build this new law, a law which is not static, but dynamic, a law which
  draws its sustenance from the past, but looks out into the future, a law
  which is ready to march forward in the service of humanity.

I would like to convey, once more, my appreciation to the officials of the
Department of Justice, the officials who helped us to steer this boat
through from the legislature, as well as the members of the committee.
[Applause.]

Mr T S SETONA: Hon Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister, hon members, ladies
and gentlemen, the Bill before us seeks to lay a foundation for just
administrative action. It advances the principle of fairness by imposing a
duty on administrators to act fairly, efficiently and effectively. The
overarching goal is to simplify and better the everyday lives of our
people.

The definition of administrative action seems to be a concern to the DP.
Administrative action is defined as any decision taken or any failure to do
so by an organ of state or a natural or juristic person, which adversely
affects the rights of a person and has direct, external legal effect. It
gives effect to the right envisaged in section 33 of the Constitution. The
test ``external legal effect'' has been included to make sure that the
system is not too onerous on administrators. Maladministration weakens
rather than strengthens the administration.

Contrary to the belief of the DP the power of the Minister to designate
magistrates' courts to deal with this matter is not a foolish attempt by
the ANC to derail the process of democracy. This democracy is a result of
the blood of our people, who fought to realise this dream. It will always
be our foundation, and will guide our governance.

The logic behind the clause is simple. Administrative law has always been a
science of a complex nature, causing headaches to our learned colleagues on
the Bench. The successful implementation of the rights in this Bill depends
on them. With this provision, the magistrates will be given the necessary
training and skill to be able to deal with a very technical field of the
law. It is hoped that this procedure will lead to an understanding of the
law, which will give effect to the rights outlined in the Bill.

In order to ensure that good administration will be the end result, the
Minister's power emanates from the Constitution itself. The President and
the Minister of Justice have made these appointments on several occasions.
A good example is the appointment of Judge Heath. These designations and
appointments by the Minister are within the ambit of proper procedure. I do
not think that I have to remind to DP that these judges have been appointed
by the Public Service Commission through a transparent and open process.

The Bill also extends the competency of the magistrates' court to that of a
court of review. Magistrates' courts will now be accessible in terms of
both costs and proximity. The inclusion of ``reasonableness'' as a test,
and as a ground for reviewing all administrative acts, also seems to be
unacceptable to the DP. Our aim with this introduction is the development
of legal rights and remedies to meet the challenges of administration in
the 20th century. The test has been included to emphasise the urgency and a
need for a viable system of both empowerment and accountability in a future
South African executive.

The state of public administration demands this guidance, as it is
confronted with a host of problems in its day-to-day operation. It places a
duty on officials to correctly apply their minds. The DP argues that the
words ``materially and adversely'' as used in the Bill are
unconstitutional. The Constitution itself refers to the word ``adverse''.
The word ``material'' is used to ensure that the administration is not held
up with unnecessary claims and constant litigation. This will result in
poor administration, which is not the aim of this Bill. The aim is to make
the law as practical as possible.

For the first time there will be a measure of certainty in this branch of
our law. The provision of internal remedies to be exhausted is an attempt
to intervene in the creation of an enormously complicated and wide field of
inadequate remedies. These provisions provide a sound basis for practical
application. This Bill and its approach to empowerment and accountability
is a clear model of what is meant by democracy. The aim is the removal of
barriers preventing public access to administrative review, as well as the
generating of public awareness and education.

We have been charged with the responsibility of accelerating change,
strengthening the institutions of governance and enhancing the quality of
service delivery. We want to say to all who reject this Bill that the time
has come for the cornerstone of our democracy, the public interest, to be
revisited and advanced in pursuance of our constitutional mandate.

We, as the elected government, will not disappoint our people in their
expectations. This Bill is an irrefutable indication that the tide has
turned. It breaks new ground and brings hope to our people. [Applause.]

Mr M D DIKOKO (Salga): Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister of Justice, the
Minister in absentia, hon members of the NCOP and special delegates, maybe,
firstly, I should state who I am. My name is Matshediso David Dikoko, and
sometimes people confuse my name with that of Eugene De Kock. [Laughter.]
But fortunately some of those in my constituency call me Nandos to
emphasise the difference.

Let me commence by wishing the Chairperson as well as members of the NCOP
best wishes for the year 2000, which is the 21st century, the new
millennium and, most importantly, the African century. It is a privilege
for me to address this House on behalf of organised local government on
such an important piece of legislation as the Promotion of Administrative
Justice Bill.

I was not personally participating in the committee when the Bill was
considered owing to the fact that I was participating in the Promotion of
Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Bill. However, as part and
parcel of Salga, I think my colleague has stated the process which we
normally follow. I am part and parcel of the structure which considered
this Bill.

We, as Salga, support the Bill, in brief. The Bill will have a huge impact
on the daily activities of municipalities. For us, the definition of
administrative action is a matter of fundamental importance. We have
observed and participated with interest in this one particular matter. We
are satisfied with the definition as contained in the Bill.

The Bill could not have done better than to exclude the executive functions
of the municipality from the provision which defines certain functions as
administrative actions. As members know, municipalities take far-reaching
decisions such as the cutting of electricity, disaster management, and
zoning. The list is too long to go through. What I am trying to illustrate
is that if these issues were to be classified as administrative actions and
subject to the provisions of this Bill, we in local government could render
governance completely impossible.

We are, however, aware that the definition of an administrative action as
it stands will continue to be challenged in court, but we say we are
prepared to cross that bridge when we reach it. We have satisfied ourselves
that this Bill is sufficiently sensitised about local government issues. In
that light we say we are wholeheartedly in support of the Bill being
enacted.

Lastly, we wish to thank all members of both the National Assembly and the
NCOP who sacrificed their December vacation to process this Bill in order
to meet the deadline. We want to convey special thanks to the Minister, the
Deputy Minister, the chairperson, the hon Mr Mahlangu, Adv De Lange and
Councillors Madlala and Nyembezi, who participated in and contributed to
the deliberations on this Bill. [Applause.]

Mnr P A MATTHEE: Mnr die Voorsitter, administratiewe reg, miskien meer as
enige ander vertakking van die reg, gee lewe en betekenis aan
regeringsoptrede, en in die lig van hierdie wetsontwerp voor ons vandag kan
ek ook sê, aan 'n gebrek aan regeringsoptrede in sekere gevalle.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr P A MATTHEE: Mr Chairman, administrative justice, perhaps more so than
any other branch of justice, gives life and meaning to action by the
Government and, in the light of this Bill before us today, I may also say a
lack of action by Government in certain instances.]
By not only regulating the day-to-day affairs of the state, but also
defining that essential relationship between the state and the citizens as
well as other persons residing within its territory, it makes Government
concrete and real.

Terselfdertyd gee dit ook uiting aan die demokratiese waardestelsel wat ons
hele grondwetlike bestel onderlê. Administratiefreg moet effek gee aan die
doelstellings en ideale van die moderne demokrasie, naamlik deursigtigheid,
verantwoordelikheid, menswaardigheid, gelykheid, vryheid en deelname. In
hierdie verband is administratiewe geregtigheid die sleutel. Dit
veronderstel nie net 'n nakoming van reëls en prosedure nie, maar ook 'n
ingesteldheid wat te alle tye redelikheid en regverdigheid vooropstel.

Hierdie wetsontwerp het sy oorsprong in artikel 33 van ons Grondwet, wat
bepaal dat elkeen die reg het op administratiewe optrede wat aan drie
vereistes voldoen. In die eerste plek moet dit regmatig wees. Tweedens, dit
moet redelik wees. In die derde plek moet dit prosedureel billik wees. In
artikel 33(2) word ook bepaal dat elkeen wie se regte nadelig geraak is,
geregtig is op die verskaffing van skriftelike redes.

Ten spyte daarvan dat hierdie wetsontwerp onses insiens sekere van die
regte in die Grondwet verskraal, soos ek sal aandui indien die tyd dit
toelaat, is ons van mening dat hierdie wetsontwerp 'n baie belangrike en
broodnodige bydrae maak tot die uitbouing van 'n doeltreffende, deursigtige
en verantwoordelike demokrasie. Daarom sal ons in die Nuwe NP, ten spyte
van verskille en probleme met sekere van die klousules, die wetsontwerp
steun.

Ek wil ook graag van die geleentheid gebruik maak om die amptenare van die
Departement van Justisie met wie ons baie lang ure deurgebring het terwyl
baie ander vakansie gehou het, Advv De Lange en Labuschagne en ook die
adjunk-direkteurgeneraal, mnr Rutlin, hartlik bedank vir hul harde werk. Ek
dink nie ons besef altyd werklik hoe gelukkig ons is om regsgeleerdes van
hierdie kaliber, wat ook spesialis-wetsopstellers is, in ons Departement
van Justisie te hê nie. Ons moet hulle miskien baie meer prys en hulle
gelukkig hou waar hulle is. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[At the same time it also gives expression to the democratic system of
values that forms the basis of our entire constitutional dispensation.
Administrative justice must give effect to the objectives and ideals of the
modern democracy, namely transparency, responsibility, dignity, equality,
freedom and participation. In this respect administrative justice is the
key. This presupposes not only following rules and procedure, but also an
attitude that puts fairness and justness first at all times.

This Bill has its origin in section 33 of our Constitution, which provides
that everyone has the right to administrative action that complies with
three requirements. In the first instance it must be lawful. Secondly it
must be fair. In the third instance it must be procedurally fair. In
section 33(2) it is also provided that everyone whose rights are
detrimentally affected is entitled to being supplied with reasons in
writing.

In spite of the fact that this Bill in our view diminishes some of the
rights in the Constitution, as I shall indicate if time allows, we are of
the view that this Bill makes a very important and essential contribution
to the expansion of an effective, transparent and responsible democracy.
Therefore we in the New NP will, in spite of differences and problems in
respect of some of the clauses, support the Bill.

I would also like to take the opportunity to convey a heartfelt word of
thanks for their hard work to the officials of the Department of Justice,
with whom we spent many long hours while many others were on holiday,
Advocates De Lange and Labuschagne, and also the deputy director-general,
Mr Rutlin. I do not think that we always realise truly how fortunate we are
to have lawyers of this calibre who are also specialist legal draftsmen in
our Department of Justice. Perhaps we should praise them much more and keep
them content where they are. [Applause.]]

I would also like to thank our chairman, Mr Mahlangu, who did a very good
job, together with Mr De Lange of the National Assembly. He really did us
as the National Council of Provinces proud in that committee.

The Bill defines administrative action as a decision taken, or a failure to
take a decision, which adversely affects the rights of a person. This
incorporates the right to administrative justice contained in the interim
Constitution, but fails to appreciate the fact that the right in section
33(1) of the 1996 Constitution is, in certain respects, wider than that
contained in the interim Constitution.

The rights in the interim Constitution were only applicable to persons
whose rights, legitimate expectations or interests were adversely affected
by administrative action, while it is clearly spelt out in our present
Constitution that everyone has that right. The definition of administrative
action could therefore, because of this clear distinction between the
interim Constitution and the final Constitution, run the risk of being
unconstitutional.

The legislation contemplated in section 33(3) may not permit an overriding
threshold limitation on this right to lawful, reasonable and procedurally
fair administrative action. Unfortunately, we also do not agree with clause
3 of the Bill, which provides that the right to written reasons should be
limited where the right is ``materially and adversely'' affected. We are
saying that the right should be limited only where the right is
``adversely'' affected.

We also have a concern with regard to the departure from the test of
unreasonableness as provided for by the Constitution. This Bill introduces
a stricter test which could amount to a standard of gross unreasonableness,
which we believe was not the intention.

As I have said, there are a few problems that we still have, but we are
happy that we can support the Bill as a whole, and we really hope and trust
that this Bill will play an important role also in building up
administrative justice in our country. [Applause.]

Mr L G LEVER: Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister and colleagues, the
provision of just administrative action is central to the Government
fulfilling its obligations to its citizens. In terms of our constitution,
every one is entitled to administrative action which is lawful, reasonable
and procedurally fair. This ought to be the starting point for any
legislation governing administrative action.

The Bill before us fails at the first hurdle. The right to administrative
action is narrowed and qualified in the definitions. The right to just
administrative action is further qualified in clauses 3 and 4 of the Bill.
A citizen is always entitled to administrative action which is lawful,
reasonable and procedurally fair. There is no justification for qualifying
the right in the way this Bill seeks to do.

The Bill provides a definitive list of the grounds for judicial review. The
list excludes probably the most obvious ground for such review, and that is
an unreasonable administrative action. Instead, the test for judicial
review is set far higher. At present, the test that has to be satisfied for
judicial intervention under this Bill is that the administrative action is
so unreasonable that no reasonable person could have acted in that manner.
There is no justification for setting the threshold that high when it comes
to grounds for judicial review, especially if one has regard for the manner
in which the right is stated in section 33(1) of the Constitution. In terms
of section 33(1), every one has the right to administrative action that is
lawful, reasonable and procedurally fair.

At this juncture, I wish to point out to the Deputy Minister that the
chairman of the committee of the National Assembly said in the committee
that the test of gross unreasonableness was part of our common law, and
wanted to know why it should not be applied in this Bill. It was only once
the DP had pointed out the historic irony of such an approach that this was
abandoned by the governing party. On the positive side, the Bill provides
that a failure to make a decision is a ground for judicial review. This is
a welcome new approach.

However, another fundamental flaw in the Bill is that it provides that the
hon the Minister of Justice must designate specific magistrates to hear
cases involving administrative action after consultation with the
Magistrates Commission. Assuming that the hon the Minister never abuses his
position, this provision in the Bill is still an unhealthy one to have in a
democratic state, because it creates the impression that magistrates
presiding in cases involving administrative action are handpicked to favour
this administration. However misguided this impression might be, it will
still undermine the independence of the judiciary. Magistrates who preside
in such cases will be seen to be partial and the public at large will lose
confidence in the courts.

One assumes that people who have been appointed and elevated to preside as
judges and magistrates are suitably qualified to deal with any matters that
may be brought before them.

If this is not the case, then it is a subject for another debate. Leaving
such issues aside for the moment, if it is so clear that it is a matter of
training, it would have been prudent for the Bill to provide that on
completion of the prescribed course and on passing a prescribed exam, any
magistrate would be competent to preside in any matter involving
administrative action.

Due to the lack of foresight by providing that magistrates will be
designated by the Minister, however good the intentions of the Minister are
in giving effect to these provisions in the Bill, the negative perception
will remain. In the context of the debate on the Promotion of Equality and
Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Bill in the National Assembly, the hon
the Minister himself used the term ``Penuell's poodles'' with reference to
the judiciary. This was broadcast on the main SABC news bulletin, perhaps
somewhat out of context. Sadly, this does not help matters, but merely
reinforces the negative perception that the public already has in that
regard.

For the reasons set out in this brief address, the DP is unable to support
this Bill. We do not believe that it really gives effect to the citizens'
right to reasonable and procedurally lawful administrative action.

Mrs C NKUNA: Chairperson, Deputy Minister for Justice and Constitutional
Development, hon guests, members, ladies and gentlemen, the Bill before us
is a triumph for democracy - the democracy we died for, the democracy we
fought for, the democracy we struggled for. It shows that the Government of
the day believes that there must be a system to check on the abuse, misuse
and overuse of power by the authorities.

The object of the Bill is to promote an efficient administration and good
governance, and to create a culture of accountability, openness and
transparency in the exercise of public administration. The crux of the Bill
is the right to administrative action that is lawful, reasonable and
procedurally fair, as well as good reasons for such action, as contemplated
in section 33 of the Constitution.
Clause 1 contains a list of definitions, of which the most important,
surely, is that of administrative action. Administrative action means any
decision or failure thereof by an organ of state or a natural or juristic
person, the emphasis being on the function performed and not on the organ
performing it. The impact of this right to fair administrative action on
the lives of our people is immeasurable. It amounts to the implementation
of the restoration of human dignity, thus creating a better life for all.
The child on welfare waiting for payment to buy food will now have recourse
if procedure is not followed.

Clause 3 sets out the right to procedurally fair administrative action and
formulates clear guidelines for all administrative acts. It provides for
the steps that must be followed in order to give effect to the right
envisaged in the Bill. The Bill then introduces reasonableness as a ground
for review in all administrative actions. These provisions have the effect
of introducing certainty into the administrative system and the legal
sphere.

In terms of clause 5, a person has a right to reasons being furnished for
administrative actions or failure thereof. The Bill goes even further in
determining that reasons may be furnished automatically, without a request
from the aggrieved party.

Clause 6 specifies the grounds for judicial review of an administrative
action. In order to address the plight of the poor and of people in
inaccessible rural areas, magistrates' courts have been accorded judicial
review competency.

The ANC's commitment to open and accessible government once again shines
through in this provision. A classic example of that is a person in the
Northern Province who will now be able to exercise his or her rights,
because the court has the competency to review procedures.

Clause 7 sets out the procedure for review, and clause 7(3) provides that
the rules board must set up a procedure for judicial review. In terms of
clause 8, a court can grant specific orders in such review proceedings.
Section 9 deals with the time or periods that have been established.
Because of this, the Bill is more accessible in rural areas and
marginalised communities.

Clause 10 empowers the Minister to make regulations in certain
circumstances, some of which are mandatory. Of importance are the
regulations which can be made in regard to the procedures followed by
administrators. Clause 10(e) makes provision for the Minister to establish
a code of good administrative conduct for administrators. This in itself is
an aid to assist in the streamlining and standardisation of procedures.

The Bill is the key to better administration and service to our people. It
will bring about equality and equity, which are so long overdue. The Bill
is indeed a guideline for administrators on the manner in which their work
should be performed. [Applause.]

Mr K D S DURR: Chairperson, I would like to congratulate my hon colleague
who has just sat down on making an excellent contribution. I thank
immediately our Chairman for his really efficient, pleasant and helpful co-
operation in making a difficult job pleasant for us in the select
committee. He was a very able chairman who was, in turn, very ably assisted
by very talented officials, and we thank him very much, not only for the
work he did, but also for the attitude and the pleasantness he displayed.
We support the Bill to effect the right to administrative action that is
lawful, reasonable and procedurally fair and the right to be given written
reasons. We do not want to repeat all the arguments that have been given,
but may I say that we approached the Bill with some caution as Christian
democrats, because we believe we need to balance the desirability of
administrative justice with the equally essential ability of the Government
to govern effectively. That remains uppermost in our minds.

Without a good public service, which distinguishes us from many countries
in Africa, one cannot have delivery. We are mindful that the Government
already has a difficult task in many respects. The Public Service is
already overstretched, and having every decision or nondecision questioned
could add an additional burden to a task which is already very difficult.

Nevertheless, the ACDP strongly welcomes the new grounds of review, namely
that indecision or failure to take decisions are grounds for review,
because we know that that is often largely part of the frustration the
public feels when dealing with Government. However, all of us in this
House, including the Minister, have to learn and understand very well that
it sounds wonderful now - the words are wonderful - but the task ahead is a
very tough one for the Minister. There is a lot of work that has to be done
to implement these measures effectively. It is a burdensome and difficult
task and it will be costly.

When adverse complaints begin to flow, as indeed they will - and we hope
they will, because that is the intention of the Bill - and when they become
publicised, often with unavoidable attendant embarrassment to the
Government, then the whole thing, in the cold light of morning, will not
look as attractive as it does to us here today. Nevertheless, it is an
essential and important right which we are endorsing by this measure, and
we support it strongly.

We also had minor textual problems, but we have dealt with those in the
committee and I do not want to repeat them now. This is a Bill of which we
can be justifiably proud, but which will also place many demands upon the
Department of Justice, the courts and the Public Service in general, and it
brings much consequential work in creating a new culture in the Public
Service and setting up new procedures in order to give effect to the Bill.
We wish the Minister and the Deputy Minister well, and they should know
that they can rely on our support. We support the Bill. [Applause.]

Mr R M NYAKANE: Mr Chairperson, the Bill defines ``administrative action''
as any decision taken or failure to take a decision by an organ of state
when exercising a power in terms of the Constitution or a provincial
constitution, or exercising a public power or performing a public function
in terms of any other legislation.

The Bill will definitely bring relief to the masses on the ground in the
event that an act of an administrative organ constitutes a culpable
encroachment on the rights of the subject, which may result in loss to the
subject concerned. The affected persons will therefore have recourse to the
provisions of this Bill.

I wish to share with this Council the experience I had in the Public
Service. What I have observed - this is a fact and not just a theory or a
philosophy that I am arguing about - public servants who were summarily
demoted or discharged from the Public Service due to their party-political
passions. This was done without giving them a chance to be heard. I know of
a instance where ministerial functions were suspended in a public office
because those in charge were on leave or sick. Think of the cost and time
of people travelling from peripheral villages to the public offices.
Administrative justice is doomed under these circumstances.

I know of a situation where an official of an organ of the state used a
public office to enrich himself - this time it was not ``herself''. Hence
we came to learn, in the culture of public service practice, words such as
tjotjo or shaya manzi [to bribe]. What happens here is that some of the
public servants practise extortion, where a member of the public has to pay
a certain amount of money in order to get preference or a certain service.
This definitely does not promote public service.

The Bill will, undoubtedly, provide an effective instrument that will curb
the propensity for administrative injustice. After all, no man is
infallible. On the basis of these few arguments and, of course, taking into
account the time allocated to me, I wish to support this Bill on behalf of
the UDM. [Applause.]

Mr M E SURTY: Chairperson, Comrade Nkuna has indicated that we have
triumphed today. We celebrate because we have triumphed. What is this
celebration all about? It is a celebration of the fact that, for the first
time - not only in this country, but in the world - we have enshrined a
right to administrative justice in a Bill of Rights.

We celebrate, because today we are implementing a right which has never
been qualified as such before. I think that this celebration must be seen
against the decisions that were taken in the past; those arbitrary,
condescending, paternalistic, uncaring decisions which banished our people
to the wilderness, to desperate areas; those decisions that precluded us
from institutions of learning and from seeking gainful employment, those
decisions that generally prohibited us from advancing and improving our lot
as a people. This is our celebration as comrades and members of the
Council.

I have listened attentively to what the DP has said. It is not what they
said that is important; it is what they did not say. What they failed to
say is that this Bill, for the first time, codifies administrative law.
What they did not say is that this Bill brings administrative justice to
our people by locating it within the magistrates' courts. What they did not
say is that even if a decision of a magistrate is unfair, for any reason
whatsoever, even as a result of what they allege is manipulation, that
matter can be taken on review or on appeal to a higher court. What they did
not say is that, notwithstanding the provisions of this Bill, every citizen
has a right, in terms of the common law, to rely on the provisions of the
Constitution.

This legislation does not override the provisions of the Constitution. It
is this silence and lack of clarity on the part of the DP that seeks to
confuse the people. And the opportunities for the confusion could only
occur within a certain sector.

I think our people, by and large, have understood that the ANC has
contributed significantly to a caring democracy - a democracy which is
concerned about decisions that are taken, not only at national Government
level, not only at provincial government level, but in every sphere of
government. They are concerned about the decision about the allocation of a
stand and about roads that have to be tarred. This allows a person to seek
redress.

I think what the DP also seeks to do, and what it fails to speak about, is
the fact that the Constitution, our supreme law in this land, entitles the
Minister responsible for justice to appoint judges. What we are talking
about in this legislation is the designation of magistrates appointed not
by the Minister but by an independent magistrates' commission.

Obviously, the consequences would be that in order to effect or efficiently
administer a particular area of law, magistrates would have to be skilled.
The Minister would then be rightly entitled to appoint those competent and
skilled magistrates to do a particular task which is rather complex, and
which is new to this country. This is not spoken about.

This failure and silence to talk about the merits of a piece of legislation
which will significantly alter the lives of our people reflects an agenda
which is somewhat sinister on the part of the DP. I see there is a marked
difference, because if we have listened to what Mr Matthee was saying, we
will agree that he was speaking about the positive aspects of the
legislation, its achievements and measures that never existed previously in
this country.
It is rather surprising that this comes from a member who was previously in
a government that was oppressive and repressive. And yet we hear from a
member of a party which purports to be liberal a certain silence about the
positive aspects of this legislation. Its resistance and opposition to
support an instrument that is so important for the wellbeing of our
country, for our social justice and the promotion of our administrative
justice, smacks of arrogance and a lack of concern about the lot of people
in general.

There has also been talk about the fact that this Bill does not refer to
unreasonableness. Certainly, the test is in this Bill. When we say that if
an action is so unreasonable that it cannot be regarded as reasonable by an
ordinary person, we are talking about an objective reasonability test. In
other words, in the context of that particular action, a reasonable
presiding officer will have to judge if this action by this functionary is
so unreasonable that it cannot be regarded as reasonable. Now if that is
not a reasonability test, then I do not what it is.

In addition, the DP fails to mention that there is a list of other factors
which could be taken into account by the court such as whether there was
any undue malice, whether there was any prejudice, whether there was any
undue influence and whether there was a contravention of the law. But these
are somehow lost in this deafening silence on the part of the DP. What do
they seek? They seek a technical matter which they cannot support in law.

In law, the constitutionality of this Bill can be tested, and will be
tested. If it does limit the provisions of the Constitution, surely, the
courts could decide about it. Yet there is always the remedy of the
Constitutional Court.

What the DP fails to see further, is the fact that a person has a choice.
If he or she does not wish to go to the magistrates' court, then he or she
could go to the Supreme Court. One is not deprived of an alternate remedy
in terms of the common law, and this is what Mr Matthee tried to explain to
this particular House in our informal briefing. It has merit, and I
certainly believe that this, here, is a feeble attempt to abdicate one's
responsibility to transform society. It is what Mr Moosa spoke about - an
attempt to thwart social engineering for the benefit of our people.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Mr
Chairperson, my colleagues have argued the cases made for and against the
legislation that lies before us, and what I find so ironic is that when the
DP is confronted by the merest prospect of change and transformation, they
resort to innuendo and posturing.

The hon Lever refers to the committee Chairperson's proposal of the ``gross
unreasonableness'' test. The chairperson never proposed that. Just for the
record, Mr Lever's rendition of events is so far from the truth that it is
almost laughable, and it speaks of small-minded malice, which is really
quite sad.

The term ``gross unreasonableness'' was never proposed by our committee
chair. The term was submitted by a public contributor to the process and it
was inserted into one of the drafts as a possible option. It was equally
speedily dropped by the entire committee. Mr Lever knows this to be the
truth, as it was so revealed in the National Assembly yesterday. Shame on
you, sir.

To add insult to injury, the hon Lever makes reference to a quotation that
he admits is already out of context, and in so doing puts it even further
out of context. It is pure obfuscation. The real issue is that the DP is
not yet ready for change or transformation, and they should come to terms
with that. We do not need to.

We have brought to this House two pieces of important legislation today,
which are about change and transformation. The administrative justice Bill
is an important piece of legislation for all of us and for processes that
will affect many of us, and I have to call upon those who have decided not
to support the Bill to look to themselves as to why this cannot happen.
This is an important piece of legislation, which will form the basis of a
lot of the practices around this issue that will affect the lives of many,
and I must ask members to consider how important transformation is to the
lives of the many, not just the few.

I would like to thank this House for hearing me out today, the committee
that worked on this Bill and the departmental officials for their
contributions to this process. I think that we have put a very good piece
of legislation before this House, and we will test it by putting it to the
vote. [Applause.]
Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution
(Democratic Party dissenting).

The Council adjourned at 17:11.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Minister for Safety and Security on 19 January 2000
         submitted a draft of the Firearms Control Bill, 2000, and the
         memorandum explaining the objects of the proposed legislation, to
         the Speaker and the Chairperson in terms of Joint Rule 159. The
         draft has been referred by the Speaker and the Chairperson to the
         Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security and the Select
         Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, respectively, in
         accordance with Joint Rule 159(2).


     (2)    The Minister of Health on 24 January 2000 submitted a draft of
         the Chiropractors, Homeopaths and Allied Health Service
         Professions Amendment Bill, 2000, and the memorandum explaining
         the objects of the proposed legislation, to the Speaker and the
         Chairperson in terms of Joint Rule 159. The draft has been
         referred by the Speaker and the Chairperson to the Portfolio
         Committee on Health and the Select Committee on Social Services,
         respectively, in accordance with Joint Rule 159(2).

2.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The following paper was tabled and is now referred to the
         Portfolio Committee on Welfare and Population Development and to
         the Select Committe on Social Services:


         Report of the Department of Welfare and Population Development for
         1998-99 [RP 179-99].

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:


     (1)    The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to
         the relevant committees as mentioned below:


         (i)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee
                on Education and Recreation:


                (a)    Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
                    Statements of the University of the North West for
                    1997.


                (b)    Report of the Auditor-General on the Foundation for
                    Education, Science and Technology for 1997-98;


         (ii)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
                Economic Affairs:


                (a)    Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
                    Statements of the Council for Mineral Technology for
                    1998-99.


         (iii)   The following paper will be referred to the Select
                Committee on Social Services:


                (a)    Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
                    Statement of Vote 16 - Health for 1998-99.


         (iv)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
                Local Government and Administration:


                (a) Report of the Auditor-General on the Accounts of the
                    Rustenburg-Marico Regional Services Council for 1993-
                    94.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:
1.    The Minister of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology:


     (1)    Statutes of the International Centre for the Study of the
         Preservation and Restoration of Cultural Property (ICCROM), tabled
         in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (2)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Statutes of the International
         Centre for the Study of the Preservation and Restoration of
         Cultural Property (ICCROM).


     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Arts, Culture, Science and
     Technology in terms of Rule 308 and to the Select Committee on
     Education and Recreation.

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry:


     (1)    Report of the Board for Manufacturing Development for 1998.


     (2)    Report of the Board on Tariffs and Trade for 1998.


     (3)    Report of the Department of Trade and Industry for 1997-98.


     (4)    Report and Financial Statements of the Industrial Development
         Corporation of South Africa, Limited for 1998-99.


     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry and to the
     Select Committee on Economic Affairs.

3.    The Minister for Safety and Security:


     (1)    Regulation R 1550 - National Instruction 7/1999 regarding
         Domestic Violence published by the Department of Safety and
         Security in terms of section 18(3) of the Domestic Violence Act,
         1998.


     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security and to the
     Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs.


