---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 03 October 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2000-10-03
---

TUESDAY, 3 OCTOBER 2000
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:10.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                  ADMISSIBILITY OF QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

                                  (Ruling)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, before we proceed to the
questions on the Question Paper, I would like to table rulings that I wish
to make with respect to a number of matters that arise on the Question
Paper. I would like to ask hon members to listen to the rulings carefully.

The first ruling is with respect to questions on issues outside the line
function of a Ministry. Having carefully considered the Question Paper
before the House today, it has come to my attention that a number of
Ministries have been asked questions on the production of a language Bill
or policy. It is common knowledge that the Minister of Arts, Culture,
Science and Technology has been mandated by Government to carry out this
task. It is also common knowledge that questions are a form of ensuring
accountability on the part of a Ministry in respect of its area of
responsibilities.

The NCOP Rules, in so far as they relate to what questions can be asked of
a Minister, are silent. I therefore wish to invoke the provisions of NCOP
Rule 2 to make the following ruling: In terms of parliamentary practice, a
question to a Minister must, in principle, relate to a matter for which the
Minister is officially responsible. The Minister of Arts, Culture, Science
and Technology is officially responsible for matters of language policy. It
is therefore fitting for that Minister to be called to the House to answer
questions on that issue. In the event of the Minister, in his reply, citing
or referring to other Ministries, then those relevant Ministers may be
called to respond to questions in respect of the issues raised.

The following questions, as printed on the Question Paper of 3 October
2000, under the heading: ``Questions transferred for oral reply in
accordance with rule 239'' are therefore ruled to be out of order: question
1(3), question 2(3), question 3(3), question 4(3), question 5(3), and
questions 6, 7, 8, 9, 13 and 14 in their entirety.

A number of Ministers to whom these questions have been addressed are
present in the House. I will allow those Ministers who have prepared
responses to deliver them. Where, however, there are no responses, my
ruling is that those questions not be proceeded with, and consequently be
removed from the Question Paper.

The Secretary will then assist me by taking the necessary steps to get the
NCOP Rules amended accordingly.

Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Chairperson, may I address you on this issue?

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: You certainly may.
Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Chairperson, I would just like to know: Most of the
questions that you ruled upon now are questions that were put to various
Ministers during the months of April and May. Is there a specific reason
why the ruling is being done today, and has not been made beforehand, so
that we could have had more time to really deal sensibly with it?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, the questions appear on the
Question Paper for today. They have not hitherto appeared on the Question
Paper for responses.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: The questions appear on today's Question
Paper. They have not appeared previously at a sitting of the House at which
I could make the ruling. [Interjections.] Not at a sitting.

Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Chairperson, I do not have the records with me, but
questions for written reply do appear on the Question Paper of this House,
and these questions were on the Question Paper in April and May already. So
they have appeared while we have had sittings in this House.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I am making a ruling, Mr Van Niekerk, with
respect to questions that appear on the Question Paper of 3 October 2000 as
questions for oral reply.

I must perhaps indicate some support for the query raised by Mr Van Niekerk
by indicating my concern at the large number of questions that are
transmitted for oral reply when they have been tabled for written response.
I think we would ask members of the executive to really use the time
available for responding to questions for written reply so that they are
answered timeously, and are not placed on the Question Paper in the fashion
in which we have had them appear on this Question Paper.

With that aspect of your concern I certainly do concur, Mr Van Niekerk.
However, the opportunity to rule does arise today. I take that opportunity
and make a ruling.

We then come to a second aspect that I would like to rule on. As previously
indicated in the ruling I read a few moments ago, questions to Ministers
should relate to the public affairs with which they are officially charged.
In the same manner that a Parliament cannot bind another, so the next
Parliament should not be expected to take responsibility for the previous
Parliament. Consequently, Ministers cannot be called to respond to
questions referring to issues which emanated within the term of a previous
executive office holder.

In this regard, the following questions, in so far as they relate to issues
emanating prior to June 1999, are, in my view, out of order: question
1(1)(b) on page 14, question 6(1) on page 15, question 15 on page 17 and
question 1(1) on page 19. As previously indicated in my earlier ruling, I
will allow those Ministers who have prepared responses to these questions
to deliver them.

Where there are no responses, my ruling is that these questions not be
proceeded with, and consequently be removed from the Question Paper.

I will also be requesting the Secretary to the NCOP to assist the Rules
Committee in arriving at rules that will help us avoid this practice of
Ministers responding to questions relating to a former era of Parliament.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION
Mr K D S DURR: Madam Chair, I hereby give notice that at the next sitting
of the Council I shall move:


  That the Council -


  (1) takes note that the annual number of notified malaria cases and
       deaths has risen dramatically in the past decade, from 4 693 cases
       and 19 deaths in 1991, to 10Â 289 cases and 12 deaths in 1994, to 51
       535 cases and 402 deaths in 1999; and


  (2) therefore requests the Minister of Health to take urgent note and to
       institute an inquiry with a view to taking decisive action.

                      POLITICAL SITUATION IN PALESTINE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M I MAKOELA: Madam Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes with grave concern the deterioration in the political situation
       in Palestine;


  (2) condemns in particular the recent killing and wounding by the Israeli
       army of scores of Palestinian civilians; and


  (3) urges all parties in the area to comply with and implement the
       agreements reached between them and to co-operate in the search for a
       comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the region.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Is there any objection to the motion?

Mr K D S DURR: I object, Madam Chair.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! There has been an objection. The motion
will therefore become notice of a motion.

        INCIDENCE OF TAXI VIOLENCE ON ROAD BETWEEN UMTATA AND IDUTYWA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr B WILLEM: Madam Chair, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes with shock and horror the incident which occurred at the Mtentu
       cuttings on the road between Umtata and Idutywa in the Eastern Cape
       yesterday;


  (2) further notes that five people, travelling in a taxi, were killed and
       seven injured when people in a car, overtaking the taxi, opened fire
       on the taxi, causing it to leave the road and overturn;


  (3) also notes that countless motions have been moved in the Council
       lamenting the frequent and tragic taxi-related violence in South
       Africa;


  (4) urges the community to support and co-operate with the Department of
       Safety and Security in the investigation in order to bring the
       perpetrators to justice;


  (5) expresses its deep sympathy with the victims and their families; and


  (6) expresses the hope that the perpetrators of this and other violent
       crimes will speedily be arrested and made to realise that those who
       do the crime must do the time.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

  REFLECTION ON SOUTH AFRICA'S PARTICIPATION IN THE OLYMPIC GAMES IN SYDNEY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr N M RAJU: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes that the South African contingent of athletes who had
       participated in the recently completed Olympic Games in Sydney had
       performed generally not so successfully as all South Africans would
       have liked;


  (2) requests the National Olympic Council of South Africa, under the
       stewardship of Mr Sam Ramsamy to -


       (a)  undertake a serious audit of its state of affairs;


       (b)  offer a more plausible explanation than shortage of funds for
           the disappointing turn of events in Sydney; and


       (c)  ensure that its future plans of action do not fall short of what
           South Africans expect of their sportsmen and sportswomen
           participating in international events such as the Olympic Games;


  (3) believes that it is high time that Nocsa concerns itself with
       selections on merit rather than allow extraneous factors to influence
       selection of participants; and


  (4) further believes that the South African public is mature enough to
       feel national pride even when such team selections based on merit are
       monochrome.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Is there any objection to the motion?

Mr M V MOOSA: Yes, Chairperson.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! There is an objection. In the light of
the objection the motion will not be proceeded with. It will become notice
of a motion.

   CALL FOR COMPENSATION OF FARMERS AFFECTED BY OUTBREAK OF FOOT-AND-MOUTH
                                   DISEASE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes the recent outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease in the district
       of Camperdown in KwaZulu-Natal;
  (2) acknowledges the serious economic consequences of this disease for
       the South African economy and, in particular, for the farming
       community of KwaZulu-Natal and certain areas of Mpumalanga;


  (3) further acknowledges efforts by the Department of Agriculture to
       combat this dreadful disease, involving the putting down of thousands
       of animals; and


  (4) calls on the Government quickly to take the necessary steps to
       compensate the affected farmers for the loss of livestock and the
       suspension of farming activities.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

  MASS-PRODUCED ARTEFACTS AND HANDICRAFTS FLOODING THE SOUTH AFRICAN MARKET

                             (Draft Resolution)

Rev M CHABAKU: Madam Chairperson, I move without notice:
  That the Council -


  (1) notes with great dismay the flooding of our country with objects of
       art from other countries purporting to be South African handicrafts,
       thus hoodwinking tourists from within the country and beyond the
       borders;


  (2) further notes that the mass-produced artefacts and handicrafts
       eclipse and thwart the production and sale of South African products;
       and


  (3) expresses the opinion that efforts should be made to support and
       display truly indigenous and innovative products made by us, owned by
       us and for ourselves.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Is there any objection to the motion?

Mr M V MOOSA: Chairperson, I would like to suggest an amendment, that the
following paragraph be added after paragraph (3):


  ``(4)    calls on the Minister of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology
           to intensify a `Buy South Africa' campaign.''

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Is there any objection to that
addition? There is none.

Motion, as amended, agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution, namely:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes with great dismay the flooding of our country with objects of
       art from other countries purporting to be South African handicrafts,
       thus hoodwinking tourists from within the country and beyond the
       borders;


  (2) further notes that the mass-produced artefacts and handicrafts
       eclipse and thwart the production and sale of South African products;


  (3) expresses the opinion that efforts should be made to support and
       display truly indigenous and innovative products made by us, owned by
       us and for ourselves; and


  (4) calls on the Minister of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology to
       intensify a "Buy South Africa" campaign.

                DEATH THREAT TO PREMIER OF THE NORTHERN CAPE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) takes note of the death threat received by the Premier of the
       Northern Cape;


  (2) acknowledges the risk public figures run while conducting their daily
       tasks; and


  (3) condemns the ever increasing wave of crime in the country.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                            FLOODS IN BANGLADESH

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr L SUKA: Madam Chair, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes the catastrophic floods that hit Bangladesh, killing hundreds
       of people and leaving millions more homeless;


  (2) further notes that Bangladesh is a developing country with limited
       resources;


  (3) expresses its deep concern over the impact of the floods on further
       economic and social development in the country;


  (4) wishes to extend its deepest sympathy to the people and government of
       Bangladesh in these trying times; and


  (5) calls on the international community to rush to the assistance of
       Bangladesh and to provide assistance in efforts to alleviate the
       human tragedy that has unfolded in that country.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                       PRECEDENCE TO ORDERS OF THE DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That precedence be given to Orders No 3 and 4.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

  PROCEDURE TO BE FOLLOWED IN RESPECT OF QUESTIONS TO PRESIDENT AND DEPUTY
                                  PRESIDENT

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move the motion printed in my
name on the Order Paper, as follows:


  That the Council, on the recommendation of the Rules Committee of the
  National Council of Provinces, resolves that the procedure to be followed
  in respect of Questions to the President and the Deputy President be as
  follows:


  (1) No questions should be put to the President.


  (2) The Deputy President should on every alternate occasion when
       Questions are scheduled for plenary be available to answer questions
       put to him.

Declarations of vote:

Mnr C ACKERMANN: Mevrou die Voorsitter, die Wes-Kaap maak ernstig beswaar
teen hierdie besluit dat geen vrae aan die President van die RSA in hierdie
Raad toegelaat sal word nie. Trouens, daar was versoeke dat 'n meer
buigsame en verbruikersvriendelike proses van vrae aan die President
ingestel moet word, byvoorbeeld dat die President drie of vier keer per
jaar in die Nasionale Raad van Provinsies vrae sal beantwoord. Ook dit was
onaanvaarbaar. Al die opposisiepartye - die VCDP, die ACDP, die IVP, die
Nuwe NP en die DP - het hulle ook geruime tyd beywer om hierdie besluit in
die veelpartyswepeforum te voorkom.

Die Wes-Kaap se teenkanting word ook verder duideliker in die lig van die
volgende redes. Eerstens druis die besluit in teen die gees van die
Grondwet, wat in artikel 92(2) voorsiening maak dat lede van die Kabinet,
met inbegrip van die President, afsonderlik en gesamentlik teenoor die
Parlement aanspreeklik is. In artikel 42(1) word dit uitdruklik bepaal dat
die Parlement uit beide die Nasionale Vergadering en die Nasionale Raad van
Provinsies bestaan. Derhalwe sal 'n standpunt van die Konstitusionele Hof
oor hierdie aangeleentheid uiters interessant wees.

Tweedens, in die lig van persepsies wat reeds bestaan en verder versterk
word in 'n verslag wat oor die Nasionale Raad van Provinsies verskyn het
waarin hierdie Raad se doeltreffendheid en provinsiale inspraak
bevraagteken word, is dit 'n verdere slag vir die voortbestaan van die
genoemde Raad. Voorts plaas dit die ANC se toegewydheid jeens die Grondwet
verder onder die soeklig en versterk dit sienings dat die ANC eerder meer
sentralisering van regeringsbesluite wil teweeg bring deur die Grondwet te
interpreteer en te buig deur gewone wetgewing en parlementÃªre reÃ«ls.

Derdens plaas hierdie besluit om geen vrae aan die President toe te laat
nie 'n denkwyse van die ANC om die magte van provinsies af te skaal tot
administratiewe uitvoerende strukture en eerder die magte aan plaaslike
regering te versterk en te kontroleer deur regulasies en
interowerheidstoekennings weer op die voorgrond.

Vierdens is dit onaanvaarbaar dat die President tyd kan vind om vrae op
Cosatu se jaarlikse kongresse te beantwoord terwyl 'n Huis van die
Parlement ondergeskik gestel word. Dit skyn ook dat die President se
voortdurende buitelandse reise 'n ernstige impak het op sy beskikbaarheid
vir die parlementÃªre program.

In die lig van bogenoemde kon die Wes-Kaap nie anders nie as om teen
hierdie besluit te stem, wat daarop neerkom dat die ANC se
verkiesingsbeloftes van meer deursigtigheid en groter aanspreeklikheid
teenoor die kiesers van die RSA in die sand uitloop. (Translation of
Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr C ACKERMANN: Madam Chairperson, the Western Cape takes serious
exception to this decision that questions to the President will not be
allowed in this Council. In fact, there were requests for the
implementation of a more flexible and user-friendly questions procedure,
for instance that three or four times per year the President would answer
questions in the National Council of Provinces. This was also unacceptable.
All the opposition parties - the UCDP, the ACDP, the IFP, the New NP and
the DP - have been striving for a considerable period of time to avoid this
decision in the multiparty whips' forum.

The Western Cape's resistance furthermore also becomes clearer in the light
of the following reasons. Firstly, this decision contravenes the spirit of
the Constitution, which provides in section 92(2) that members of the
Cabinet, including the President, are individually and collectively
accountable to Parliament. Section 42(1) categorically stipulates that
Parliament consists of both the National Assembly and the National Council
of Provinces. The position of the Constitutional Court on this matter would
therefore be extremely interesting.

Secondly, in the light of perceptions which already prevail and are further
amplified in a report that has been published on the National Council of
Provinces, in which this Council's efficiency and provincial standing are
questioned, this is a further blow to the continued existence of said
Council. Furthermore, this places the ANC's loyalty towards the
Constitution under the spotlight and it reinforces the view that the ANC
would rather bring about more centralised decision-taking by Government by
interpreting and bending the Constitution by way of ordinary legislation
and parliamentary rules.

Thirdly, this decision not to allow questions to the President once again
brings to the fore a school of thought of the ANC of scaling down
provincial powers to administrative executive structures and of rather
reinforcing the powers of local government and controlling them by way of
regulations and intergovernmental allocations.

Fourthly, it is unacceptable that the President can find the time to answer
questions at Cosatu's annual congresses, while one of the Houses of
Parliament is rendered subordinate. It would also appear that the
President's continual overseas trips are having a serious impact on his
availability for the parliamentary programme.

In the light of the abovementioned, the Western Cape has had no option but
to vote against this decision, which boils down to the ANC's election
promises of more transparency and greater accountability towards the
electorate of the RSA running out into the sand.]

Mr M V MOOSA: Madam Chair, the position of Gauteng is that accountability
is not only in the form of Question Time. Parliament has a number of other
mechanisms of accounting. If the President of the Republic of South Africa
does not answer questions in the National Council of Provinces, that does
not mean, therefore, that he does not subject himself to the accountability
that goes with his office, or that he does not subject himself, in one way
or the other, to being accountable to the electorate of this country.

There have been a number of occasions, dealt with in terms of our Rules
book, such as matters of public importance, the Presidential Budget
debates, etc, when neither the province that objects now, nor other
provinces, have taken the opportunity to place such matters on the Order
Paper in order to engage the President on such matters. If they have not
utilised those mechanisms, it does not therefore mean that the Presidency
does not regard itself as accountable to this House.

I must say that from the side of Gauteng we believe that there are a number
of other mechanisms in our Rules book that would continue to allow us to
engage the President as and when necessary, and we are fully satisfied that
this motion is in order.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon member, do you wish to raise a
point of order?

Mr L G LEVER: Yes, Madam Chair. With due respect to my colleague from
Gauteng, that was not a declaration of Gauteng's vote. It was a reply to
the declaration of vote made for the Western Cape.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon member, with due respect, you
cannot determine what is Gauteng's declaration. The hon member indicated to
me that he was tabling on behalf of Gauteng. I have to accept the bona
fides of that, unless you have information available to you which could
contradict that. I am afraid you are not raising a point of order.

Mr L G LEVER: Well, I can only go by what is said in the Chamber, Madam
Chair.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution (Western
Cape dissenting and KwaZulu-Natal abstaining).

                  LOCAL GOVERNMENT: MUNICIPAL SYSTEMS BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Madam Chairperson, hon
members I very much appreciate the honour of introducing to the House this
important Bill, the Local Government: Municipal Systems Bill. Together with
the Local Government: Municipal Structures Amendment Bill, this Bill was
recently adopted by the National Assembly. Should it receive the
concurrence of the NCOP, then we shall firmly get on to the road to
modernising the way our local communities are governed.

The two Bills I have referred to seek to shape the new local government
dispensation and to influence its efficacy. The process of modernising
local government itself predates the formal adoption of our country's
Constitution. The step we are taking today concludes the trajectory of
local government reforms which has been unfolding under the aegis of the
Local Government Transition Act.

More importantly, it also consolidates the role of local government as a
full partner in the governance and transformation of the country. Since its
promulgation, the Local Government: Municipal Structures Act has provided
us with the legislative base for democratising the structure of government
and the substance of local democracy. As we have said before, successive
colonial and apartheid regimes introduced systems of local government which
marginalised urban black communities as well as traditional rural
communities. Our people in these communities have for many years felt the
downdraught of this exclusion. The persisting conditions of
underdevelopment in these black areas speak to the urgency with which we
must be seen to be moving forward towards establishing new municipal
entities. The establishment of new municipal entities, which will come by
way of elections, will put to an end the decades-old marginalisation of
black people.

This is the context within which we should look at the recently concluded
demarcation of municipal boundaries. Whereas traditional rural communities
were condemned to remain islands of poverty with no meaningful prospects of
development, the demarcation process allows them to form part of larger
municipalities and to more effectively achieve the economies of scale. Only
in this way can the population densities be better managed and the need for
services such as markets and transport nodes be adequately addressed.

When traditional leaders indicated to the Government that they were not
happy with some of the proposed boundaries which affect areas under their
jurisdiction, President Mbeki asked the Municipal Demarcation Board to once
more apply its mind to the concerns of traditional leaders. I wish to take
this opportunity to express my heartfelt thanks both to the Municipal
Demarcation Board and to individual traditional leaders who co-operated in
order to find an amicable way of resolving this matter. In the process the
board changed the outer boundaries of more than 20 municipalities to ensure
that traditional leaders' areas are aligned and fall within a single
jurisdiction. Thanks to this co-operation, the issue of the redemarcation
of municipal boundaries before the forthcoming elections has been brought
to a close.

The marginalisation we talk about had a political as well as a
socioeconomic base. Given this, it is inevitable that there will be a
battle between new and old visions of local government. The Local
Government: Municipal Systems Bill seeks to provide a framework for
bringing the citizens into an active relationship with government. If we
are to succeed in re-engaging the public, then we must understand the
extent to which they were excluded and alienated. We must also understand
the methods and mechanisms which were used to achieve that exclusion and
alienation. When we reflect on this history of the institution in
governance, we cannot ignore the fact that some amongst our traditional
leaders took positions which merited unpopularity. We point this out not as
a basis to deny them a role in the continuing democratisation of our
country, but with a view to inviting them to co-operate with the project of
transforming our country.

Government, as hon members know, has said time without number that our
disposition is towards enhancing the role of the institution of traditional
leadership in matters of governance. We have created the National House of
Traditional Leaders and provincial houses of traditional leaders, and
levels of traditional leaders' representation in structures of local
government have been increased. All these steps bear testimony to our
intention to enhance the status of the institution of traditional
leadership, a status denied them by successive colonial and apartheid
regimes.

The National Assembly, as well as the NCOP, have also passed legislation
which empowers provinces to fashion their own policies in ways which
facilitate co-operation between local government and the institution of
traditional leadership. This much was pointed out both in eyeball-to-
eyeball discussions with traditional leaders and in the President's letter
to traditional leaders. It bears emphasising that whilst some of these
matters can be discussed and resolved between Government and the
traditional leaders, others are matters which do not lend themselves to
being dealt with by way of executive discretion. The legislative bodies of
our country will have to be given the opportunity to pronounce themselves
on some of these issues.

It will therefore be understood why Government is unfolding a White Paper
process and a legislative process which go to the heart of this question of
the role, powers and functions of traditional leaders. In this regard we
put forward a timeframe which is eminently reasonable, given the immensity
of the task involved in rationalising more than 1 500 pieces of old-order
legislation which bear on the institution of traditional leaders. Looking
at it this way, it ought to be easy for anyone who cares to listen to
understand that it would be wrong to insist on making full and final
resolution of these matters a condition for holding the forthcoming local
government elections.

Even as we agreed to postpone the announcement of the election date, we did
emphasise that the fact that we were postponing the announcement of the
election date should not be read to mean that we were unmindful of the
urgency involved in the matter. From the point of view of Government, we
have done everything we need to do in order to create the necessary
conditions for the holding of the elections. The Municipal Demarcation
Board and the Independent Electoral Commission have also done a commendable
job in this regard.

The elections themselves represent a moment of hope which our people have
fought for. Nobody has the right to postpone that moment of hope. We concur
with the overwhelming call for the need to urgently proclaim the date of
the elections, and we promise to do so soon enough. As a matter of fact, we
are ready to announce the election date this week. The technical committee
established by Government and traditional leaders must understand that it
does not have the luxury of time. They must put us in a position to
announce this election date and announce it this week, because that is our
intention. [Applause.]

Ms C BOTHA: Madam Chair, hon Minister, members, I would have thought it was
the Government that had it in its power to decide when the election should
take place, and not that they were the hostage of any other faction. I want
to tell the hon the Minister that the local government portfolio committee
reported to Parliament that the ability of a municipality to appropriately
implement the provisions of this Bill would depend crucially on issues of
capacity, resources and funding, as well as on the political will of public
representatives in all three spheres of government.

These are issues which were extremely problematic during the period of
transition, as can be deduced from the precarious state in which
municipalities now find themselves. Some of these issues can be resolved by
legislation, but capacity and political will, which have been glaringly
absent during the transitional phase of local government, remain the
challenge on which this legislation may flourish or flounder.

The DP believes in small government, but government that delivers. The ANC,
on the other hand, has chosen to create bigger municipalities, centralising
decisions in the hands of political functionaries, some of whom, it is
said, may even be deployed from Cabinet. It is quite clear, as in the case
of appointed premiers, that the ANC does not trust the ordinary local
communities, whom they claim to champion in this Bill. Their basic
reasoning is flawed. Local government should be run by local leaders who
are elected by a local community. While so much emphasis in the Local
Government: Municipal Systems Bill is on the idea of community
participation, even to the extent of considering it central to the Bill,
this would immediately be contradicted by the imposition of outsiders as
councillors. Why should a community be involved in municipal affairs if
merely to give credence to an imposed leadership? So much for community
participation!

Another precept of this Bill which enforces the centralist tendency is the
multitude of Ministerial guidelines and regulations, something which is
becoming a frighteningly regular feature of ANC legislation, which gives
sweeping powers to the Minister to interfere in the day-to-day affairs of
municipalities. Added to this is the new power division developing between
district councillors and provincial government, with funds and services
finding direct routes to district councils and by-passing provinces, as
well as the increasing role of Salga. This was alluded to by the present
Minister in a previous appearance in this House, and is seemingly part of a
grand scheme not yet fully revealed to this Council but perhaps linked to
the report commissioned on intergovernmental relations.

The Bill proposes that organised local government must seek to develop
common approaches for local government as a distinct sphere, while the
Constitution states that national and provincial governments must support
and strengthen the capacity of municipalities to manage their own affairs.
This provision of the Municipal Systems Bill does not empower local
government, but prescribes and inhibits its role. Chapter 8, which deals
with municipal service providers, illustrates a clear trade-off of
competing interests. On the one hand, we have the Minister's dilemma. He is
convinced that adequate municipal services cannot be supplied to the
majority of citizens unless agreements are negotiated with the private
sector, CBOs and NGOs.

Cosatu knows that if privatisation gains momentum its membership will fall.
It takes no genius to see who had the final say in the drafting of chapter
8, if we look at the stringent conditions which municipalities have to
consider before they can look at private-sector partnerships. One must
contrast this with the rebuffed submissions of traditional leaders,
reputedly the preferred form of representation of at least 15 million South
Africans. The Demarcation Board decimated the boundaries of traditional
rural communities without so much as a by-your-leave. Now the whole country
is being held to ransom because the Government could not coerce the
traditional leaders into line with the 10% additional council seat
allocation. So much for community participation!

While the DP truly admires the broad sweep of good intentions underlying
the Bill, the philosophy of developmental government, public participation,
integrated development plans, performance management, service delivery, and
all those good things, it cannot support the way in which they are supposed
to be brought about. The authority and control are suspect. Sadly, the poor
and disadvantaged may once again become the victims of another transitional
failure, probably to the tune of more billions of rand if we do not let
common sense and good clean government take control of delivery. The DP
cannot support this Bill. [Applause.]

Mr M MADLALA (Salga): Chairperson, Chairperson of the NCOP Madam Naledi
Pandor in absentia, Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP Lawrence Mushwana in
absentia, Minister for Provincial and Local Government Mr Sydney Mufamadi,
members of the Council, ladies and gentlemen, I greet you all. This is a
significant plenary meeting for local government. It signifies the closure
of the local government interim phase and opens a new chapter for a
permanent feature of local government in South Africa.

We planned together in the preinterim phase, we implemented together in the
interim phase, and we shall consolidate together in the final phase of
local government. I must also indicate that this has not been without
challenges for both politicians and officials within local government. The
Local Government: Municipal Systems Bill defines a municipality as
consisting of ``the political structures and administration of the
municipality; and the community of the municipality.'' The emphasis here is
on the community of the municipality.

The emphasis throughout this Bill is on community participation, that is,
government with the people. It therefore changes the classic definition of
democracy to ``government of the people by the people and with the
people,'' and no more, ``for the people''. To us this is the fulfilment of
one of the historic documents in South Africa, the Freedom Charter, which
states that the people shall govern.

While local government in South Africa is a creature of the South African
Constitution, the Municipal Systems Bill provides the legal nature, rights
and duties of municipalities. Read together with the Municipal Structures
Act, the Municipal Systems Bill provides clarity on municipal powers and
functions. It encourages community participation as part of the
developmental role of local government. The proposed integrated development
planning programmes bear testimony to this.

The Municipal Systems Bill requires municipalities to set up their own
performance management system, to provide for alternative delivery
mechanisms and to form municipal services partnerships. Municipalities will
be obliged to apply credit control measures to communities who do not pay
for services rendered. The plight of indigent residents will, of course, be
considered favourably, but indigent residents will still have to pay for
services consumed.

Finally, the Bill deals with the codes of conduct for councillors and for
municipal staff members. It also provides for provincial interventions when
all is said and done, eg when municipal assistance and capacity is
provided, but a municipality still fails to execute its duties in terms of
section 156 of the South African Constitution.

Public administration at local government level will be simplified by this
legislation, the South African Constitution, and other pieces of
legislation such as the Local Government: Municipal Demarcation Act, the
Local Government: Municipal Structures Act, the Municipal Finance
Management Bill, the Promotion of Access to Information Act, the
Administration of Justice Act, etc.

Extensive consultation in the process of formulating this legislation took
place with various stakeholders submitting inputs. We could, without doubt,
say that we, as organised local government, have complied with the
provisions of section 154(2) of the Constitution. In this regard we want to
thank the chairpersons of the portfolio committee and the select committee,
Mr Carrim and Mr Bhabha respectively.

Salga supports the present version of the Bill and that it be enacted and
promulgated.

Referring to what the DP has said regarding Salga, I recommend that they
read their Constitution very carefully, especially section 163, which deals
with the manner in which Salga has to be consulted on matters regarding
local government. This is also emphasised in section 154(2) of the
Constitution. I will not elaborate on these points. [Applause.]

Ms N D NTWANAMBI: Chairperson, this new law will ensure that one's vote is
one's voice, something which the majority of the people of our country were
prepared to die for.

The apartheid government made sure that participation at local level was
for a certain few communities. One of the main rallying cries of the
struggle against apartheid was for the people to have a say in decisions
that affected their daily lives.

Whilst I will be speaking on public participation, one cannot divorce that
from accountability. For a change things will be simplified to a language
that all will understand. Linking this to the Local Government: Municipal
Structures Act, councillors have a constitutional duty to inform and work
with their constituencies.

Notice of ordinary or special council meetings should be put in all
newsletters or communications of the council. The simplified meaning of the
entire Bill is that a municipality is accountable to the public it serves.
The transformation process in the local government sphere since the dawn of
freedom has addressed the challenge to enhance and deepen democracy at the
level closest to the people.

In preparing for the final phase of local government transition, the new
vision of developmental government has been developed and largely
implemented through legislation such as the Local Government: Municipal
Demarcation Act and the Local Government: Municipal Structures Act.

Also included in this Bill will be the municipalities' role in service
delivery, poverty eradication and the improvement of social and economic
conditions of our public, especially the disadvantaged communities. Because
of this ANC Government, accountability and transparency now exist. One now
even hears from parties who, in the past, said nothing. Now they have the
guts to say this Bill is unacceptable.

The Constitution recognises that participation, among other things, is
critical for ensuring sustainable democratic and developmental local
government. Section 152 of the Constitution states the objectives of local
governments. As this is also covered in Chapter 4 of this Bill, it is a non-
negotiable mandate of municipalities. It compels municipalities to develop
a culture of formal representative government with a system of
participatory governance.

This Bill, through community participation, will ensure and instil
responsibility in the citizenry as communities will be actively involved in
the budget preparation processes that will take their needs and priorities
on board. Communities will be engaged through the process of integrated
development plans and will also be involved in monitoring municipalities
through the process of performance management systems. There will also be
strategic decision-makers who need to become involved in service delivery.
No other party can be more democratic than the ANC. Those who say that this
will be an extra burden on the cash-strapped municipalities are not telling
the truth. They have to consider that municipalities will be reduced and
clustered to become financially viable.

We all know that communities are not homogeneous. They are made up of
different groups, some of which are more organised and have better access
to resources than others. It is therefore important to note that the poor
and disadvantaged are not excluded.

Most municipal councils throughout the country do experience serious
financial constraints due to nonpayment for services and poor
administration. If communities are active participants in the affairs of
the municipalities, this problem will be easily dealt with and the
municipalities will thus be able to effectively implement credit control
and collection policies.

The Bill also introduces the concept of customer care and management with
regard to credit control and debt collection. This system aims to create
positive and reciprocal relationships between persons liable for these
payments and the municipality.

It further directs municipal councils to adopt, maintain and implement
credit control and debt collection. This will correct the practice
currently employed of introducing credit control and debt collection
haphazardly and without proper policies.

Municipal councils will also be able to identify those people who can
afford to pay, but do not pay, for services rendered by making provision
for indigent debtors and also be able to differentiate between different
categories of ratepayers or users of services.

In conclusion, the White Paper on Local Government states that local
government has a critical role to play in consolidating our new democracy,
and it is up to each councillor, each official and each citizen to make
their contribution in the area where they live and work. The Bill is one of
the most important and critical building blocks that facilitate and promote
democratic and developmental local governments.

Finally, on behalf of the ANC in the Western Cape, I want to say that we
have been waiting for this kind of governance and that we therefore support
the Bill. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, the Local Government: Municipal Systems Bill
is a testimony to our Government's commitment to improve the quality of
life in all communities by promoting strong, effective and accountable
local government.

It is the culmination of a long process which started in 1993 with the
establishment of the Local Government Negotiating Forum. The mission of
this forum was to contribute to the bringing about of a democratic,
nonracial, nonsexist and financially viable local government system.

In July 1993 the forum resolved that the transition to nonracial local
government would be implemented in three phases. The first was the
preinterim phase, in which all existing local authorities would be replaced
by nominated transitional, local and metropolitan councils. The second
phase was the interim phase in which elections would be held for
transitional councils. In the third and final phase, a final constitutional
model for local government would be implemented.

The Local Government: Municipal Systems Bill represents the final phase in
this process. It builds on the strong foundation that has already been laid
by the White Paper on Local Government as well as the Local Government
Transition Act, the Local Government: Municipal Structures Act, the Local
Government: Municipal Demarcation Act and other legislation dealing with
the transformation of local government.

Municipal government is all about the delivery of service. As the tier of
government that is closest to our people, the municipalities have the
responsibility of putting into practice the Government's development plans.
While municipal councils in some areas have made significant progress in
addressing backlogs and extending services, we continue to be confronted
with infrastructural disparities and inequalities in many others, caused by
a variety of factors including competition among different municipalities.

An example of this is the tussle between the Cape Town City Council and the
Cape Metropolitan Council over the spending of funds designated for
infrastructural development in the poor areas.

As much as a third of these funds remain unused because of a lack of
consensus on where they should be spent. Without proper guidelines on
municipal planning and intermunicipal co-operation, situations like this
will continue to arise. This clearly indicates the inadequacy of the
existing municipal institutional framework.

This is why the Local Government: Municipal Systems Bill is such an
important piece of legislation. It will require municipalities to adopt
integrated development plans, which must be aligned with, and complement
the development plans and strategies of other affected municipalities.

A municipality's integrated development plan must set out the overall
strategy for achieving its developmental objectives and include the
municipality's strategies for mobilising resources and capacity and for
transforming its service delivery mechanisms. As part of its integrated
development planning process, a municipality should consider which services
could best be provided directly by itself, and which services could best be
provided by forming partnerships with the public sector, private sector or
NGOs.

It is these municipal service partnerships that I now want to address. The
Department of Provincial and Local Government has estimated our municipal
infrastructure and service backlog to be about R50 billion. Furthermore, it
is feared that if we are to address these backlogs through public-sector
resources alone, many communities may only receive services in the year
2065.

In addition, we are also confronted with the reality that many
municipalities lack the necessary capacity and finances to improve and
extend the delivery of services to the communities they serve. This is
particularly true of municipalities in rural areas. These things are
happening at a time when the demand for basic services continues to outpace
the available Government finances.

All of these factors point to one very important issue, and that is that
municipalities will have to look for innovative ways of providing and
accelerating the delivery of basic services. Public-private partnerships
are one such innovation. This combination brings together the respective
talents of each to deliver what has traditionally been considered a
Government activity. Public-private partnerships will enable municipal
governments to meet the demands for public services, while using less of
their own scarce resources and still maintaining, or even improving, the
quality of services offered.

Although I accept that there are many benefits to be gained from public-
private partnerships, I still believe that Government should retain the
responsibility of ensuring that the wider public interest is safeguarded.
This can be done by setting and monitoring safety, quality and performance
standards for privatised services, and by enforcing those standards.
[Applause.]

Mnr J HORNE: Mevrou die Voorsitter, agb Minister en lede van die Huis,
graag wil ek 'n paar aspekte en implikasies van die betrokke wetgewing
bespreek. In die eerste plek dien dit vermeld te word dat dit die
portefeuljekomitee van die Nasionale Vergadering weke geneem het om diÃ©
wetgewing deur te werk, maar die gekose komitee van diÃ© Huis het slegs een
uur daarvoor gekry.
Alhoewel dit artikel 75-wetgewing is, ontstaan die vraag op sigself of dit
die Huis se funksie is om maar net kennis te neem en daarna 'n stempel op
te sit ter bekragtiging. Dit sal jammer wees as die NRP slegs 'n nabootser
en 'n slaafse meeloper is van die Nasionale Vergadering. [Tussenwerpsels.]
[Applous.] Die uiteinde daarvan sal wees dat die NRP dan gesien kan word as
'n administratiewe liggaam wat slegs dien as 'n rubberstempel, of ``a
bloody nuisance'', soos beskryf in 'n artikel oor die NRP in 'n
naweekkoerant verlede week.

In die tweede plek gee die Grondwet in artikels 40 en 41 volwaardige status
aan plaaslike regering as 'n sfeer van regering. Tog is hierdie wetgewing
nie juis 'n erkenning van daardie grondwetlike status nie, soos blyk uit
die voorskriftelikheid met die skep van meganismes om plaaslike regering te
reguleer. Agt hoofstukke van die wetsontwerp gee magte aan die Minister.
Die verlede het egter bewys dat diktatoriale magte diktators skep.

Die wetsontwerp lÃª sterk klem op gemeenskapsbetrokkenheid, en dit word
verwelkom dat die gemeenskap aan boord geneem word, gesien in die lig van
deelnemende regering. Wanneer die gemeenskap egter dieselfde status kry as
'n politieke struktuur, maar uitgesluit word van regsaanspreeklikheid,
ontstaan daar vrae wat roep om beantwoord te word.

Ten slotte, alles is darem nie negatief nie. Daar is baie goeie dinge in
die betrokke wetgewing wat dividende kan lewer indien dit reg bestuur word,
soos die privatisering van dienste waar dit moontlik is, asook
geÃ¯ntegreerde ontwikkelingsbeplanning wat langtermynvoordele kan inhou.

Ook die verskaffing van basiese dienste en die betaling daarvoor is 'n stap
in die regte rigting, maar dit sal 'n proses wees om hierdie wetgewing
beslag te laat kry.

In die lig daarvan kan die Nuwe NP nie daarvoor stem nie. (Translation of
Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr J HORNE: Madam Chair, hon Minister and members of the Council, I would
like to discuss a few aspects and implications of the relevant legislation.
Firstly, it should be mentioned that it took the portfolio committee of the
National Assembly weeks to work through this legislation, whereas the
select committee of this Council was given only one hour to do so.

Although we are dealing with section 75 legislation, the question arises as
to whether it is the function of the Council simply to take cognisance of
legislation and then to rubber-stamp it. It would be a pity if the NCOP
were merely to copy and follow slavishly in the footsteps of the National
Assembly. [Interjections.] This would result in the NCOP's being seen as an
administrative body which merely serves as a rubber stamp, or a ``bloody
nuisance'', as described in an article on the NCOP in a weekend newspaper
last week.

Secondly, sections 40 and 41 of the Constitution accord full status to
local government as a sphere of government. Even so, this legislation is
not actually an acknowledgement of that constitutional status, as is
apparent from the prescriptiveness in the creation of mechanisms to
regulate local government. Eight chapters of the Bill grant powers to the
Minister. However, the past has proved that dictatorial powers create
dictators.

The Bill places strong emphasis on community involvement, and we welcome
the fact that the community is being taken on board in view of
participatory governance. However, when the community is accorded the same
status as a political structure, but is excluded from legal accountability,
questions arise which need to be answered.

In conclusion, not everything is negative. There are many good things in
the relevant legislation which could yield good returns if correctly
managed, such as the privatisation of services where possible, as well as
integrated development planning which could have long-term benefits.

The provision of basic services and payment for such services are also a
step in the right direction, but it will involve an entire process to give
substance to this legislation.

In view of this, the New NP cannot vote for this legislation.]

Mrs R A NDZANGA: Madam Chair, the Local Government: Municipal Systems Bill
is the third piece of legislation to give effect to the White Paper on
Local Government, the first two being the Local Government: Municipal
Demarcation Act and the Local Government: Municipal Structures Act. While
the first two Acts deal with the institutional and jurisdictional aspects
of the local government transformation process, the Local Government:
Municipal Systems Bill seeks to establish the basic principles and
mechanisms to give effect to our collective vision of development
government through the notion of performance management. Its focus is
therefore primarily on the internal system and administration of the
municipalities.

This Bill has been drafted on the basis of a detailed investigation into
the current capacity problems of local government, and the analysis of
existing approaches and innovations to service delivery in local
government. This Bill describes the core processes or elements that are
essential to realising a truly developmental government system. These
include performance management and reporting, resource allocation and
organisational change.

This Bill is mandatory only to the extent that fundamental elements of
public-sector reform, socioeconomic development, delivery of basic services
and public reporting, and monitoring and accountability need to be applied
uniformly on a countrywide basis. The system of uniformity on a countrywide
basis with regard to performance management, amongst other things, will
promote municipalities to operate within the framework which the Government
draws up and will allow all citizens in our country to be treated in the
same way.

There has been some contrary views by the opposition parties with regard to
the performance management system. They allege that this system is like any
other tool, and that the municipality may wish to use another tool. This
Bill is trying to provide a uniform system so as to establish which
municipalities are experiencing problems, and to offer help if the need
arises.

The apartheid policies of forced removals and the Group Areas Act left a
big scar in the way our towns are divided and unintegrated. Facilities were
for many years provided in a way that disadvantaged black people in our
townships and benefited whites in the suburbs. The Local Government:
Municipal Structures Amendment Bill is going to change those environmental
injustices of the past.

For instance, we have a huge dairy farm near Soweto. Senior citizens in my
area always ask me questions about that dairy. They want to know who
benefits from the milk that is produced at that dairy; they want to know
who gets the milk; they want to know who feeds those fat cows - it is
Soweto. The cows are in Soweto, but we do not get the milk. All that is
going to change. We do not have a single dairy in Soweto. The people who
have been, and still are, benefiting from that dairy are the whites in the
white suburbs. This is going to change.

This system is to clarify the nature Ã¿.Ã¿.Ã¿. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M I MAKOELA: Chairperson, the more things change, the more they remain
the same. This is true about parties such as the DP and the New NP, which
daily profess to have shed and relinquished their old and discredited
discriminatory practices, but reveal their true colours whenever
transformatory legislation, which seeks to redress the injustices and
inequality of the past, comes before this House.

The White Paper on Local Government identifies integrated development
planning as a key tool for promoting and realising developmental local
government. Fundamentally, an integrated development plan represents a
process through which municipalities establish strategic frameworks and
development plans for the short, medium and long term. This planning system
is a new and radical departure from the racially based planning programmes
of the past dispensation, which were imposed on our communities without
consultation, and at times with force, such as the discredited black local
authorities which were forced upon our people during the 1980s.

Unlike in the past, the new approach encourages democracy, transparency and
accountability by forcing municipalities to subject their development plans
to public participation and evaluation. The prevailing problem has always
been the uncertainty as to the precise status of integrated development
plans at local government level.

At the moment there are various planning-related processes and documents
that have some legal status and meaning at the local government level.
These include structure plans, town planning schemes and land development
objectives. Therefore, if integrated development plans are meant to be the
most important output of the integrated development planning process, then
it needs to be given an unambiguous status in law.

The relationship between integrated development plans and other existing
documents then needs to be clarified. This is precisely what is intended by
the Local Government: Municipal Systems Bill in regard to this subject.

In terms of the Bill, municipalities are legally required to adopt a
single, inclusive and strategic plan for the development of the
municipality. Integrated development plans are therefore elevated to the
status of the principal strategic plan of a municipality. An integrated
development planning approach has many benefits. The following are some of
the important benefits.

It enables municipalities to align and direct their financial and
institutional resources towards agreed policy objectives and programmes. It
is a vital tool to ensure the integration of local government activities
with other spheres of development planning at provincial and national
levels by serving as a basis for communication and interaction.

It serves as a basis for engagement between local government and citizens
at local level, and with various stakeholders and interested groups. When I
say ``citizens at local level'', I am also a citizen at local level, as
opposed to what Ms Botha has said here, namely that we are not citizens at
local level - that we take decisions and therefore are not at local level.

It enables municipalities to weigh up their obligations and systematically
prioritise programmes and resource allocations. In the context of great
inequalities, an integrated development plan serves as a framework for
municipalities to prioritise their actions around meeting urgent needs,
while maintaining the overall economic municipal and social infrastructure
already in place.

It assists local government to focus on the environmental sustainability of
their delivery and development strategies, because sustainable development
is development that delivers basic social and economic services to all,
without threatening the viability of the ecological and community systems
upon which these services depend. Therefore, integrated development
planning will assist local government to develop a holistic strategy for
poverty alleviation. [Applause.]

Mr M I KLAAS (Gauteng): Chairperson, the Minister for Provincial and Local
Government, hon members, despite the political changes ushered in by the
1995 local elections, the legacy of apartheid remains embedded in many
municipalities. Many are still traditional, rule-driven bureaucracies which
are not used to servicing the public in a responsible manner.

Financial management systems are often weak in many municipalities.
Apartheid employment regulations are often still in place, creating a
degree of inflexibility in the system. Many municipalities remain
untransformed and locked in old, inefficient ways of working.

It is the White Paper on Local Government which aims to establish a system
of local governance in which municipalities play an increasingly important
role in service delivery, eradicating poverty and improving the social and
economic conditions of our people.

We see this Local Government: Municipal Systems Bill as a very important
piece of legislation in that it seeks to establish the basic principles and
mechanisms to give effect to a collectivisation of developmental
government. It focuses primarily on the establishment of internal systems
and the administration of municipalities. This legislation will put in
place new processes and will create new institutions with new principles
and support mechanisms that will enable local government transformation to
take place.

Clause 4(2) of the Bill should be amended to include the following
addition:


  (k) treat communities, residents and ratepayers with dignity and respect.



Item 2 of Schedule 2, the Code of Conduct for Municipal Staff Members,
should be amended to include the following addition:


  (f) treat communities, residents and ratepayers with dignity and respect.

In Gauteng we expressed concerns regarding the incorrect tagging of the
Bill as a section 75 Bill, instead of a section 76 Bill. The correct
tagging of the Bill would have afforded us an opportunity to conduct proper
consultation and a process of public hearings with local governments in the
province in order to determine the practicality of the systems that are
being put in place.

Our opinion is that the crucial provincial oversight role as reflected in
Chapter 7 of the Constitution, particularly section 155(6), was overlooked
in the tagging process. Although the Bill was classified as important at
provincial level, we only deliberated and gave input on the basis of
section 75 legislation, which was unsatisfactory. We support the principle
of the Bill and the detail of the proposed amendments. [Applause.]

Mr M BHABHA: Chairperson, after having heard the speakers both from my
party and from the opposition benches, I believe that it would be
appropriate to give an historical perspective to the course we are now
embarking upon. But, before I attempt to do that, I wish to commence on a
personal note. The very political and administrative regime that the Local
Government: Municipal Systems Bill now seeks to replace has had a very real
and profound effect on every individual sitting here today.

While some amongst us so articulately argued the reasons for not supporting
the Bill, the sceptical but very accurate words of Bertrand Russell kept
ringing in my ears. He said:


  We have, in fact, two kinds of morality side by side; one which we preach
  but do not practise, and another which we practise but seldom preach.

These words ring so true because my recollection of events that charted my
young life is littered with such ambiguities.

The mass removal of residents from Pageview in Johannesburg to Lenasia was
conducted with the assistance of the then Johannesburg City Council. Need
we remind ourselves who, in fact, was in control of that council at the
time? Yes, members have guessed it, the predecessor of the DP, the PFP. The
hon Adv Lever, who I hope is here - oh, he is not listening - must know
that what made it so much more painful was the fact that while that very
party made such eloquent protestations in the press, its supporters happily
bought up the properties that were expropriated. But then, who are we to
argue, for they are all all honourable people?

Is it not the experiences of Cato Manor that we seek to redress with this
Bill? Yet I see in our midst the hon Mr Raju, who claims to have the
interests of the people of Cato Manor at heart, vote against it. But who am
I to argue? Who am I to question conscience, because they are all all-
honourable people?

There is one thing I would like to share with the hon Ackermann. Honestly,
if there was one redeeming feature I did find in the old NP, it was the
fact that there was no pretence in what they did. They were honest about
their intentions and they implemented their policies, no matter how
diabolical they were.

I would like to tell the hon Botha that this issue is not about race, as we
are so often accused of saying, nor is it about maintaining a burden of
guilt over the heads of the privileged of the past. It is about extracting
a collective responsibility for the past so that we can build a better
future.

In April 1994 a reading of the election manifestos of the respective
political parties made me pregnant with hope that indeed we had at long
last turned over a new leaf. I believed that the collective responsibility
we sought would lead to reconstruction. Instead, every transformation Bill
that has come to this House has been met with resistance. No, the
resistance does not now come in the form of crude and robust remarks. It is
now dressed in a different form, embellished with questions of efficacy and
clothed in technical and intellectual diversions. But, ever so often, the
slip under the dress shows, whether it is the thumb in the coffee or the
reference to a boy in the Chamber, it is the same thing. [Interjections.] I
mean reference to a Minister or a Deputy Minister as a boy in the National
Assembly. We have not been reading the press, have we? Deep down we know
the real reason for opposing the Bill. It is to maintain a system that at
least the NP was honest about.

The hon Ackermann would remember a definition of a PFP member that used to
be bandied about in years gone by, which said that a PFP member was one
that voted for the Progs but prayed like hell that the NP would win. How
else could one get land so cheap? I ask members what has changed. But, then
again, who are we to question? They are all all-honourable people.

Now to the business at hand. The forthcoming local government elections
bring to a close one of the few transitional measures that are still with
us, from the era of the Kempton Park negotiations. The sunset clause that
maintained certain political assurances finally comes to a close. What
confronts us now is a challenge that is succinctly captured in the
Constitution. It mandates local government to provide democratic and
accountable government for local communities, ensure the provision of
services to communities in a sustainable manner, promote social and
economic development and encourage the involvement of communities and
community organisations in the matters of local government.

The series of Acts and Bills that followed the passing of the White Paper
establishes the basis for a new developmental local government system,
which is committed to working with citizens, groups and communities to
create sustainable human settlements which provide for a decent quality of
life and meet the social, economic and material needs of communities in a
holistic way.
While the Local Government: Municipal Structures Act defines the political
structures of new local government models, the Local Government: Municipal
Systems Bill restructures the internal systems of municipalities. The core
of this Bill is contained in three key chapters. These are the chapters
that deal with community participation, public-private partnerships and the
relationship between the administration and the councillors.

Speakers have already discussed these areas quite extensively, but I would
like to discuss the latter somewhat further. The past five years has shown
us that there has been a somewhat awkward relationship between the
administration and the councillors, largely because these areas of
operation are not clearly defined in the system that has evolved from the
British system. We found that councillors felt hamstrung in implementing
policy and placing a transformation agenda on the table. In many instances
they felt that their work was an unnecessary appendage. The credibility of
councillors lay in question in many instances. I, for one, can cite a
number of examples in which the quality of services still continues to be
disparate, despite the policy of the council. The creation of performance
contracts and key performance indicators that must be met seek to address
some of the inadequacies of the past. We hope to have a greater degree of
accountability as a result.

This House has been involved in a number of interventions in terms of
section 139. Members will remember that what was particularly frustrating
was to approve an intervention in a town when the patient was already in
the intensive care unit. We constantly appealed for an early warning
system. I am pleased to inform members that those early warning systems
have now been created. For example, if an integrated development plan has
not been submitted to the MEC by a council either timeously or at all, the
NCOP has to be duly informed by the MEC. There would also be a link between
the Auditor-General's office and the NCOP. A report by the Auditor-General
on the state of affairs in the municipalities of a province must be tabled
with the NCOP.

I believe that perhaps a restructuring of the administration of this House
may have to be considered to accommodate the important role this House will
play in this regard. I agree with the member from the provincial
legislature Mr Klaas about the tagging. Clearly the tagging committee is
viewing local government as a function of provincial government and not as
a sphere of government. Consequently legislation like this one is being
tagged as section 75 legislation when there is no doubt of the impact of
the legislation in provinces. I would urge the presiding officers to take
the matter up in the appropriate forum. If an amendment to the Constitution
is required, so be it. But, clearly, the intention of the Constitution is
not being honoured by Bills of this nature being tagged as section 75
legislation.

Finally, I would like to thank the members of my committee for enduring
long hours, sometimes up to 16 hours, on the trot to consider this Bill. I
would also like to express my thanks to Jackie Manche, Fanie Louw, whom I
can see sitting up in the gallery, and to Dr Bouwer, who persevered
throughout our constant interrogation. I must also extend a special word of
thanks to my counterpart, Mr Yunus Carrim, who, in his inimitable way
ensured that we did not stray from the task. Although I do not think the
Minister has a say in the salaries of his staff, he is surrounded by a team
that has a work ethic like no other. [Laughter.] I think I should tell him
that.

Let us fasten our seatbelts and usher in the new system. We may just enjoy
the ride, provided local government gets its fair share of funding. I hope
the hon Ms Mahlangu will take note of what I am saying. It will be a long
one and we may not achieve everything at once, but if we are armed with the
will I am certain that we will reap the harvest of the efforts of many.
[Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, let me take
this opportunity to thank all hon members who participated in this debate.
I note that the hon speaker from the DP specifically said that the DP did
not support the Bill. I suppose it is their democratic right not to support
democratic legislation. [Laughter.] [Interjections.]

The hon member proceeded to say that the DP did not support the Bill
because Government advocates the establishment of big municipalities. What
we know is that the DP, by its various names, was not in the least
concerned about the exclusion of people of my type from benefiting from the
revenue base which they help to generate. We go to Johannesburg, work there
and generate a lot of revenue, but it should not follow us to Soweto, and
that is what they mean by the necessity of keeping municipalities small.

The hon member went on to decry the fact that Government did not coerce, as
she put it, traditional leaders to accept the forthcoming local government
elections. Indeed, the word ``coerce'' does not exist in our political
vocabulary. [Laughter.] She also talked about positions taken by the
Government which amount to imposing leaders on communities. It takes the
unique genius that she is to see what the rest of us do not see, namely the
imposition of leaders through democratic elections.

The hon Mr Horne from the New NP complained about what he called the
dictatorial powers conferred on the Minister by the Bill. I guess he joined
the New NP a bit too late. Perhaps this was because, for a long time, its
ranks were not open to him and me. [Laughter.] [Interjections.] They did
not tell him about this progressive literature which they banned, which if
he had had access to it, he would have known something about the necessity
of managing the creative tension that exists between local discretion and
national unity. But I suppose he can only blame his own party and not me
for that. [Laughter.]
I want to repeat what I said earlier in case the hon member Ms Botha did
not understand what I said. The responsibility of announcing the local
government election date lies with Government, and Government intends to
make that announcement this week. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution
(Democratic Party and New National Party dissenting).

            LOCAL GOVERNMENT: MUNICIPAL STRUCTURES AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! As there is no speakers' list,
I will put the question that the Bill be agreed to. In accordance with Rule
63, I shall first allow political parties the opportunity to make their
declarations of vote, if they so wish.

Mr C ACKERMANN: Chairperson, on a point of order: The Bill has not been
introduced. We do not know which Bill you are referring to now. We have
just voted on the Local Government: Municipal Systems Bill. You have
declared the Local Government: Municipal Systems Bill passed, but you have
not put the Local Government: Municipal Structures Amendment Bill yet. So
we do not know what is under discussion.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! The Order was actually read
out by the Secretary, and it was read out loudly and clearly.

Declarations of vote:

Mr A MARAIS: Chairperson, when the committee considered the Bill yesterday,
we made two further amendments to the Bill, and we will be forwarding those
amendments to the National Assembly. The amending Bill is an intermediary
measure, a carry-through device that will ensure continuity and stability.
It is aimed at facilitating and finalising the demarcation process and the
impending local government elections.

Further, modernisation, as the Minister has alluded to, is inevitable.
Based on this, the ANC will continue to work tirelessly to ensure that
traditionalism is preserved as a symbol of unity and legitimacy.

Flowing from this, together with traditional leaders, we will transform
ruling monarchies into modern reigning monarchies. What remains is for this
House to start chasing the targets set in this and other local government
transformation legislation, in collaboration with other spheres of
government.

Finally, it is incumbent upon this House to operationalise the principles
of section 41 of our Constitution. The ANC supports the Bill.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Is there any other political
party that wishes to make a declaration?

Mr C ACKERMANN: Chairperson, I am sorry, but there is some confusion in the
Chamber. An amendment is being put while the Minister has not yet
introduced the Bill. Everything seems a little confused. I therefore call
on you for some order in connection with what is on the Table. The Local
Government: Municipal Structures Amendment Bill is on the Table, while
another Bill is being approved. The Minister should have made an
introductory speech. I therefore call on the Minister to say something
about the Local Government: Municipal Structures Amendment Bill, because it
seems to me the hon member has suggested some amendments. [Interjections.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, on a point of order: If Mr
Ackermann had consulted with his Whips - and I also indicated this to him
in a meeting yesterday - he would have been aware of the fact that there
were not going to be statements or debate on this particular matter. This
is by consensus by all political parties in this House. I think it is
proper that, in future, Mr Ackermann should consult with his Whip, unless
there are difficulties of a personal nature between him and Mr Van Niekerk.

Mr C ACKERMANN: Chairperson, I do not think the Chief Whip knows what is
going on in this debate. If he will concentrate on the debate, he will know
what is going on. I know exactly what is going on in the debate, but the
Chief Whip does not know what is going on in the debate.

Die Nuwe NP sal hierdie wetgewing aanvaar, maar ons wil ons teleurstelling
uitspreek oor die feit dat die ANC nie gehoor gegee het aan versoeke van
tradisionele leiers om op 'n meer aanvaarbare wyse wesenlike inspraak in
plaaslike owerhede in hul eie gebied te hÃª nie. Die erkenning van die
Minister se departement in die media dat hy nie die vrese van tradisionele
leiers bevredigend gehanteer het nie, is 'n duidelike bewys dat die ANC nie
die belange van tradisionele leiers op die hart dra nie.

Die Regering erken dat hy reeds geruime tyd van tradisionele leiers se
ontevredenheid bewus was en die vraag ontstaan dus waarom daar nou eers
dringend en spoedeisend gereageer word. Dis niks anders nie as 'n bewys van
'n vrot en onsimpatieke Regering en 'n poging om tradisionele leiers 'n rat
voor die oÃ« te draai met lippediens.

Die Nuwe NP het destyds 'n beroep op die Regering gedoen om die
geÃ¯dentifiseerde en wettige tradisionele leiers se gebiede as plaaslike
owerhede af te baken eerder as om dit te versnipper. Die Nuwe NP het verder
ook 'n beroep op die Regering gedoen om tradisionele leiers inspraak en
stemreg in plaaslike rade sowel as in hierdie Raad te gee.

Deur sy halstarrigheid het die ANC weer eens bewys dat hy 'n party is net
vir sommige ``comrades'' en elite arbeidsleiers. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[The New NP will accept this legislation, but we want to express our
disappointment about the fact that the ANC has not responded to requests of
traditional leaders to have a material say in local governments in their
own areas in a more acceptable way. The admission of the Minister's
department in the media that he has not dealt with the fears of traditional
leaders in a satisfactory way clearly proves that the ANC does not have the
interests of traditional leaders at heart.

The Government admits that it has been aware of the dissatisfaction of
traditional leaders for some time now, and the question therefore arises as
to why only now it is treating this as a matter of the utmost urgency. All
this proves is that the Government is useless and unsympathetic and is
trying to mislead the traditional leaders by paying lip service to this
matter.

The New NP appealed to the Government at that stage to demarcate the areas
of identified and legitimate traditional leaders as local authorities
rather than fragmenting them. The New NP also requested the Government to
give traditional leaders a say and a vote in local councils as well as in
this Council.

The ANC's stubbornness has once again proved that it is a party only for
certain comrades and elite labour leaders.]

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson and the Council, the IFP supports the Local
Government: Municipal Systems Bill, but not the Local Government: Municipal
Structures Amendment Bill because the traditional leaders are still
negotiating this Bill. Therefore the IFP cannot support the Local
Government: Municipal Structures Amendment Bill, but only the Local
Government: Municipal Systems Bill.

Me C BOTHA: Mnr die Voorsitter, agb Minister en lede, die DP steun die
wysigings soos aangebring aan die Wysigingswetsontwerp op Plaaslike
Regering: Munisipale Strukture en aangesien daar 'n bietjie verwarring is,
wil ek sÃª ons steun al die genoemde wysigings wat die afgelope maand voor
ons gedien het.
Die wysigings verwyder die onsekerheid en verwarring met betrekking tot die
interpretasie van die toepaslike onderafdelings van die Wet soos in sy
huidige vorm en veral met verwysing na die allerbelangrike wysiging van
artikel 84 van Wet 117 van 1998, naamlik die duidelike omskrywing van die
funksies en bevoegdhede van distriksmunisipaliteite.

Daar is ook nou duidelikheid oor die fokus van geÃ¯ntegreerde
ontwikkelingsprogramme deurdat die oorhoofse beplanning duidelik in die
distriksmunisipaliteit gesetel is. Die wysiging van artikel 81 van Wet 117
maak voorsiening vir 20% verteenwoordiging vir tradisionele leiers in
munisipale rade waar hulle voorheen op slegs 10% verteenwoordiging geregtig
was.

Die DP sien met groot belangstelling daarna uit om te hoor watter wysigings
volgende aan die wetgewing oor munisipale strukture aangebring sal moet
word nÃ¡ vandeesweek se samesprekings tussen die Regering en die
tradisionele leiers.

Die DP steun intussen die huidige wysigings. (Translation of Afrikaans
speech follows.)
[Ms C BOTHA: Mr Chairman, hon Minister and members, the DP supports the
amendments to the Local Government: Municipal Structures Amendment Bill,
and since there is some confusion, I want to say that we support all the
relevant amendments that we have dealt with over the past month.

The amendments eliminate the uncertainty and confusion with regard to the
interpretation of the applicable subsections of the Act in its present
form, and particularly with reference to the vital amendment of section 84
of Act 117 of 1998, namely the clear definition of the functions and powers
of district municipalities.

There is now also clarity on the focus of integrated development programmes
because overhead planning clearly vests in the district municipality. The
amendment of section 81 of Act 117 provides for 20% representation for
traditional leaders in municipal councils whereas they were formally
entitled to only 10% representation.

The DP is waiting with bated breath to hear what further amendments will
have to be effected to the legislation on municipal structures after this
week's discussions between the Government and the traditional leaders.
In the meantime the DP supports the present amendments.]

Bill, subject to proposed amendments, agreed to in accordance with section
75 of the Constitution (Inkatha Freedom Party dissenting).

                           TOURISM AMENDMENT BILL

               (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon.)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, may I ask for a very short
adjournment. The hon the Minister is on his way. We had inconvenienced the
Minister as a result of giving preference to the previous orders, with the
result that he just had to deal with some matters of an urgent nature, but
he is on his way. That is the indication that we have received.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! On the directive of the Chief
Whip of the Council we will adjourn for five minutes.

Business suspended at 16:40 and resumed at 16:43.

The MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Chairperson, may I
apologise for not being here on time. It is simply because of the change in
the schedule. I am sorry about that. I should have been here.

What we have before us here is the Tourism Amendment Bill, which
essentially deals with the regulation of the tour guiding system. Before I
speak on the Bill itself, may I just say, as an introductory remark, that
the quality of the tour guides that we have in this country, or that any
country has, impacts substantially on the growth, or otherwise, of the
tourism industry.

Large numbers of international visitors, particularly, depend on tour
guides in order to be able to experience the country in an adequate and
full manner so to speak. I therefore, think that we should not
underestimate the value and importance of tour guides to the tourism
industry and to the economy as a whole.

This is an area, I must say, which not everybody easily considers as a
career option. We are hoping that with the introduction of this particular
Bill we will be able to take a number of steps in order to ensure that
particularly people from disadvantaged communities, young people and
schoolchildren, will begin to consider this as a serious career option, as
it is considered in various other parts of the world.

This Bill seeks to lay the foundation for developing a socially,
environmentally and culturally responsible tourist guiding sector, and will
enable the removal of historical barriers to entry into the tourism
industry, while at the same time developing a guiding sector that will
enhance the international competitiveness of our tourism offering. The Bill
constitutes a bold step towards transformation of the tourism industry in
line with the White Paper on tourism. This object informs the regulatory
framework review that we are conducting in parallel with this legislative
process. It is these regulations that will help us measure the success of
the law we want to enact.

We have now placed on the agenda of all players in the tourism industry the
question of industry transformation in the form of a framework document
which is being finalised by my department. The underlying principles of
that policy framework are the creation of opportunities for access,
entrepreneurial development, and employment for the disadvantaged persons
and communities. The frontier of delivery on this promise cannot be pushed
out any further, as those whom we hope will benefit through this Bill
remain on the periphery of the tourism industry and its benefits as we
speak.

While the Bill focuses primarily on tourist guiding, the impact thereof
goes far beyond this sector of the tourism industry. In essence the Bill
has much relevance to our efforts to create jobs, increase tourism to South
Africa and position the country as a competitive destination. It is
therefore in this context that we seek the NCOP's approval of this Bill.

The Bill further seeks to ensure quality tourism experiences for visitors
and travellers in South Africa. To this end, the Bill locates tourist guide
training and qualification within the new paradigm established by the
Skills Development Act, and the South African Qualifications Authority Act
under the custodianship of the Tourism and Hospitality Education and
Training Authority, the so-called Theta.

This will contribute significantly to the quality of guiding services in
the country, and lower barriers to entry, as the new training regime will
recognise indigenous knowledge, as well as previous learning and
experience. You will recall that we have just sent a group of 40 protÃ©gÃ©s
to Germany for intensive training in the field of tour guiding, which was
made easy by the Theta's involvement.

Transferring the oversight function to the Department of Environmental
Affairs and Tourism, and decentralising the administration of the guide
registration function to provinces, will ensure accessibility to tourist
guiding and allow for better marketing of South Africa as a tourism
destination. A decentralised system brings the means of entering the
industry closer to the people, and ensures a better dissemination of
information about tourist guiding.

Also, speedy implementation of the new system will enhance Satour's ability
to focus on its core function, that is the marketing of South Africa as a
prime tourism destination. We thus need to put the new system into
operation as soon as possible by moving speedily on the approval of the
Tourism Amendment Bill.

I am sure hon members will agree that we are now not only going to be able
to effectively discourage illegal and fly-by-night tour guides, but that we
will create a window of opportunity to provide support to those who need it
most. Further, the Bill will serve as an important instrument in moving the
industry as a whole in the right direction, creating a firm basis for the
performance of the function by the appropriate actors with specific targets
on focused areas.

A number of provinces during our discussions, particularly in the Minmec,
have raised the question of finances, and whether this will place an undue
burden on provinces as far as financial implications are concerned. May I
just say here that Satour has indicated that to the extent that it would
have budgeted for the tour guiding function, which is currently with
Satour, those funds would be transferred to the department, whereafter the
department would be able to transfer those on a pro rata basis.

That, of course, would be for the remainder of this particular financial
year. I am not certain whether these would be substantial amounts as such.
The important thing about locating this function with either the national
department or the provincial departments - in this case it is located both
with national and provincial departments - would be for all of us to apply
our minds to finding a way in which the industry can pay for itself.

The tour guiding system services the industry, and in most countries of the
world this is a function that pays for itself. For example, a registration
fee for tour guides would be a source of income which could be used for
this particular purpose. Secondly, those enterprises within the industry
that need to interact with tour guides and provinces themselves may need to
find a way in which they themselves register so as to make sure that
sufficient funds do come in.

This is an area which all provinces would certainly, in their own
interests, have to promote and attend to in as rigorous a manner as
possible. At the end of the day, a tour guide tends to be province-
specific. If one wants well-trained, highly knowledgeable tour guides, one
cannot simply rely on people that have a general knowledge of locations in
South Africa, but would rather seek out people who have a specific, in-
depth knowledge about particular provinces. I think those provinces that
have adequate and better tour guides will, at the end of the day, make
themselves more competitive as well. [Applause.]

Rev P MOATSHE: Chairperson, hon Minister, special delegates, permanent
delegates, members of the select committee, the Tourism Amendment Bill has
its origin in the White Paper on tourism and, more specifically, in the
tourist guide policy which was prepared and issued by the Department of
Environmental Affairs and Tourism in 1999. It seeks to regulate the tourist
guide profession by requiring the registration of tourist guides, and that
these guides abide by a code of conduct and ethics.

To understand the purpose of this Bill, it is important to bear in mind
that the tourist guide is the most intimate point of contact with foreign
and domestic tourists. The tourist guide's conduct will therefore, to a
large extent, determine whether a tourist returns or not.

Furthermore, given the expansion of the tourism industry, caused by its
transformation, it is likely that the demand for tourist guides will
continue to rise. It is essential, therefore, that the Government puts in
place a mechanism through which it can monitor the quality of service
provided by the growing number of tourist guides.

The Bill envisages a critical role for provinces in this process. This is
necessary, given the critically important role played by provinces in the
development and promotion of the tourism industry in South Africa. It gives
the MEC responsible for tourism in each province the power to appoint an
officer in the province to act as a provincial registrar of tourist guides.

The provincial registrar will be responsible for the registration of all
tourist guides in the province and the maintenance of a register for this
purpose; the issuing of registration certificates and badges to tourist
guides who have complied with the registration procedure; the promotion and
development of the tourist guiding sector in the respective provinces;
dealing with complaints; the withdrawal of the registration of tourist
guides who have become disqualified to act as tourist guides; and the
exercise of disciplinary powers in respect of tourist guides.

The provision made in the Bill for the participation of provincial
governments in the registration of tourist guides and in the preparation of
a code of conduct and ethics with which all tourist guides must comply,
should therefore be welcomed.

The competence referred to in the proposed new section 21A(2) includes not
only qualifications, but also unit standards. Subsection (3) deals with
exclusions. No one who has failed to go through a validation programme will
be registered as a guide. The validation is specifically aimed at people
who are currently acting as guides. They will have two years in which to go
through the process.

Registration will only have to be renewed every two years. There will be a
fee involved, as the Minister has said, on renewal. However, one will not
necessarily be tested again. The initial validation test would essentially
be a once-off thing to move people from the old system into the new one. In
the new system, when one renews registration, what will be required is
proof of what one has been doing in the intervening years in terms of tours
and training.

The proposed section 21(B) deals with competence, and refers to the South
African Qualifications Authority Act, which falls outside the department's
jurisdiction. Linking tourist guiding with the above Act ensures that there
will be nationally recognised qualifications so that people can receive
credit for the training they have gone through.

It also enables tour operators who train guides to access funds from the
skills levy. If their trainees go through a programme that is registered on
the National Qualifications Framework, this will encourage operators to
take on guides as learners or apprentices.

With these words we support this Bill. We hope that it will, indeed, bring
about transformation, and that those disadvantaged tour guides who were not
skilled as such, but skilled in their line of action, will also be given an
opportunity to participate in the entire industry. [Applause.]

Mev A M VERSVELD: Mnr die Voorsitter, die DP is 'n voorstaander van die
devolusie van mag, en daarom sal ons hierdie wetgewing steun, want dit
beteken dat toerisme nader gebring word aan die mense en gemeenskappe wat
voorheen nie deel was van hierdie bedryf nie. Sodoende kan sekere streke se
kultuurhistoriese aspekte maksimaal ontwikkel en benut word.

Daar is egter 'n bekommernis by ons, en dit is die feit dat die funksie
afgewentel word sonder die nodige finansiering. Ek het nou geluister na wat
die Minister sÃª, maar ek sal aan die einde van my toespraak daarna verwys.
Die vraag ontstaan nou watter proses gevolg word om seker te maak dat die
provinsies die kapasiteit - wat ook beteken finansiering - en die mannekrag
het om hierdie wetgewing, wat alle goeie doel voor oÃ« het, in werking te
stel.

Hierdie gaping kan slegs gevul word met 'n oorgangsfasiliteit wat saam met
die wetgewing in werking gestel word om die provinsies by te staan. Die
finansiering indien enige - ek verneem nou dat Satoer 'n bydrae gaan maak -
blyk slegs in die aanvangstadium te wees, met die verskoning dat dit 'n
geld-genererende funksie is. Terselfdertyd is hierdie funksie egter ook
ontwikkelend van aard aangesien dit gekoppel is om ekonomiese groei te
stimuleer, vaardighede en entrepreneurskap te ontwikkel en die breÃ«
gemeenskap te betrek. Om te kan ontwikkel, benodig 'n mens fondse - soos
die spreekwoord lui, ``money makes money.''

Aangesien Satoer nou sy eintlike funksie kan verrig om Suid-Afrika beter in
die buiteland te bemark en sy funksie van die registrasie van toergidse na
die provinsies kan afwentel, behoort daar ook meer fondse beskikbaar te
wees, en nie net in die aanvangstadium van Satoer se rojale begroting nie.
Satoer behoort te kapitaliseer op wat reeds bereik is. Dit gaan nie net oor
die besteding van geld nie, maar ook oor die beste aanwending van geld.

Ek kan vir agb lede 'n voorbeeld gee. In 1998 is die MTN Whale Route
bekroon met British Airways se Tourism Destination for Tomorrow Award, wat
'n baie gesogte toekenning is. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Mrs A M VERSVELD: Mr Chairperson, the DP is in favour of the devolution of
power, and for that reason we shall support this legislation, because it
means that tourism will be brought closer to the people and communities who
were previously not part of this industry. In this way it will be possible
for the cultural-history aspects of certain regions to be developed and
utilised to the maximum.

However, we are worried about the fact that the function is being devolved
without the necessary financing. I have listened to what the Minister has
said, but I shall refer to this at the end of my speech. The question now
arises as to what process is being followed to ensure that the provinces
have the capacity - which also means financing - and the manpower to
implement this legislation, which has good objectives.

The gap can only be bridged by means of a transitional facility which is
implemented together with the legislation to assist the provinces. The
financing, if any - I have been informed that Satour is going to make a
contribution - is apparently being provided only in the initial stage, the
excuse being that this is a money-generating function. However, this
function is simultaneously also of a developmental nature as it is linked
to the stimulation of economic growth, the development of skills and
private enterprise and the involvement of the general community. In order
to be able to develop one needs funds - as the saying goes, ``money makes
money''.
Since Satour can now perform its actual function of a better marketing
South Africa more successfully abroad and can devolve its function of
registering tour guides to the provinces, more funds should also be
available, and not only in the initial stage of Satour's lavish budget.
Satour ought to capitalise on what has already been achieved. What is at
issue is not the spending of money, but the best utilisation of money.

I can give hon members an example. In 1998 the MTN Whale Route received
British Airways' Tourism for Tomorrow Award, which is a very prestigious
award.]

Whale watching is the fastest-growing ecotourism product in the world. In
1999, 7 million people went out on boat-based whale watching and 3 million
on land-based whale watching.

Dit bring ons by 'n totaal van 10 miljoen mense. [This brings us to a total
of 10 million people.]

We have the best land-based whale watching in the world at Hermanus. Satour
has not risen to the occasion because nothing spectacular has happened, if
we compare this award with the case of a little town named Kaikoura in New
Zealand, which won this award two or three years ago. In this small town of
indigenous Maori fishermen, their hotels have increased from none to four
and their businesses have increased from three to thirty. Today this town
is on an internationally recognised whale watching destination, thanks to
the support of the New Zealand tourism authorities.

As dit daar gedoen kan word, kan Satoer dit ook hier vir ons doen met al
die fondse wat hulle beskikbaar het.

Ten slotte wil ek net sÃª dit is teleurstellend dat ons politici in die
gekose komitee so min standpunt ingeneem het vir hulle provinsies, ook
veral as ek luister na wat die Minister gesÃª het, naamlik dat daar by al
die provinsies die vrees was om hierdie wetgewing in werking te stel sonder
die nodige fondse, want sover my kennis strek, is dit net die Wes-Kaap wat
daarteen beswaar gemaak het. Die provinsies is tog sekerlik die rede waarom
ons in die Nasionale Raad van Provinsies is, en ek wil die Minister versoek
om asseblief weer te kyk na die finansiering van provinsies. (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[If this can be done there, Satour can do the same for us here with all the
funds they have at their disposal.

In conclusion, I just want to say is that it is disappointing that our
politicians in the select committee did not make much of a stand for their
provinces, especially in view of what the Minister has said, namely that
all the provinces were afraid to implement this legislation without the
necessary funds, because as far as I know, only the Western Cape objected
to it. Surely the provinces are the reason why we are members of the
National Council of Provinces, and I want to request the Minister please to
take another look at the financing of provinces.]

Mr K PANDAY (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, the Tourism Amendment Bill seeks
to amend the Tourism Act so as to introduce a radically redesigned tourist
guiding system for South Africa. I will be speaking not on the technical
nature of the Bill, but on the spirit of the Bill.

In the conclusion of the document outlining the tourist guiding policy, the
following is stated, and I quote:


  The Bill goes a long way in ensuring that tourism becomes a big industry
  that benefits all South Africans especially the previously excluded and
  disadvantaged people.

Tour guides, who are given prominence in the Bill, have to become
professionally qualified with the knowledge of areas which have been
neglected in the dark years of apartheid. The KwaZulu-Natal province wants
to experience an unprecedented boom in the tourism industry. Having read an
article in last weekend's Sunday Times, I am more than excited and I share
the sentiment that KwaZulu-Natal has the potential of becoming a tourist
Mecca. I could safely say that this also holds true for the rest of South
Africa.

Tourism KZN is focusing its attention on the Emakhosini Valley near Ulundi,
better known as the Valley of the Kings, described by the distinguished
author and humanitarian Alan Paton as the most beautiful part of South
Africa. It is in this area that the great King Shaka was born and it is
here that his father, Senzangakhona, lies buried. Many other noteworthy
Zulu leaders who contributed to the richness of the Zulu nation and its
heritage, such as the amakhosi Zulu, lie buried in this valley.
Since royalty is invariably a drawcard, publicity campaigns capitalise on
this by working with the Zulu royal house and by using the slogan, ``Wozani
- our Kingdom calls.'' Mr Robbie Naidoo, the corporate affairs manager of
tourism in KZN, says, and I quote: ``Unfortunately, we have an image
problem overseas. South Africa came out tops as a holiday destination.'' Mr
Naidoo also mentions that we are totally out of depth with service
delivery. In KZN the Service Excellence Campaign is being initiated, in
which service providers are being asked to go the extra mile. The rest of
South Africa should follow suit.

In South Africa we have a proud history, despite the workings of the
monstrous government of the past, in that our cultures and traditions are
steeped in richness, but this is not tapped to its optimum. We have a very
lucrative challenge on our hands. Tourism contributes almost R7 billion to
the KZN provincial budget each year and one foreign visitor creates eight
jobs nationally. KwaZulu-Natal gets 30% of international tourists and 42%
of the domestic market, so the potential for growth is immense.

The British used the Cape as a halfway house to India. Without any doubt I
say KwaZulu-Natal offers a permanent house to all visitors from throughout
the world. KwaZulu-Natal supports the Tourism Amendment Bill. [Applause.]

Mrs T Z SEBEKEDI (North West): Chairperson, I commend the department for
this piece of legislation, which will contribute to the development of an
internationally competitive tourism industry in South Africa. The Minister
has correctly said that there are provinces that had problems with this
Bill because of its financial implications, and the North West is one of
those provinces. Even if the Minister has allayed our fears, I would still
like to voice them in this House, because I am still not satisfied. We have
a lot of previously disadvantaged people whom we will have to train to see
to it that this project becomes viable.

I hope that when the Minister says that those funds from Satour will be
divided accordingly, he means it, or else we should be told or encouraged
to see how we should access funds other than those from Satour that the
Minister is referring to.

It is correctly said in this Bill that this function was run by Satour and
is now being devolved to provinces, and we have this saying that funds
should always follow functions. I am worried that the funds we will need
will not be only for tourist guides, but also for the staff in the
registrar's office. The Minister may be getting the staff from Satour, but
where will we in the province be getting the staff from? We still have that
doubt, and we are still not satisfied that this Bill will address this
issue that is so close to our hearts.

We would like to promote tourist guides from our far-flung rural areas,
because our people know everything about our rich history of the Anglo-Boer
War, but because they are not trained as tourist guides they cannot explain
it to the tourists properly. We want to take this seriously, but we need
more funds for this to be successful. We support this Bill. [Applause.]

Mr J P GELDERBLOM (Western Cape): Chairperson, the province regards tourist
guiding as a facet of tourism with a potential to contribute to greater
community involvement and economic growth. We believe that tourist guiding
has an ability to draw previously marginalised communities into the
mainstream of the tourism industry. Devolving the tourist guide functions
to provinces should not be viewed as a separate aspect, but should be
integrated within broader economic and human resource development
strategies. It is important for national Government to carefully examine
practical and factual issues connected with the devolving of the tourist
guiding functions.

The Western Cape strongly supports the main aim of the Bill, which is to
redesign the tourist guide system in South Africa in order to develop
opportunities to experience and promote pride in the cultural resources,
histories and voices of the people of South Africa, and believes that this
will result in the development of opportunities for all people to
experience the wealth, assets and attractions of tourism. The Western Cape
takes cognisance of the enabling element within the Bill, which is the most
important aspect and which relates to broadening access to and entry into
the tourism industry.

The Bill proposes that tourist guide functions be devolved to provinces. It
calls for the provincial Minister responsible for tourism to designate an
officer to act as provincial registrar of tourist guides. The officer
concerned would be responsible for registering provincial guides, setting
up standards and monitoring complaints. The status quo reflects that more
than 40% of registered tourist guides are from the Western Cape, which is
equal to 2 499 guides. To renew licences, an amount of R60 is paid
annually. The current figures indicate that the province stands a chance of
generating R149 940 per annum in undertaking the function.

Since the highest number of tourist guides are concentrated in the Western
Cape, the province will have to appoint a provincial registrar and an
administration officer to effectively undertake the function. The existing
system which is currently used by Satour would be transferred to provinces
and there would be a need to purchase new computer hardware to execute the
function. Undertaking the function would mean additional administrative
functions for the province, which might sometimes involve the handling of
appeals.

Ons het ook bekommernisse. Die wetsontwerp maak nie voorsiening vir
oorgangsmaatreÃ«ls ten opsigte van die oordrag van die funksies na
provinsies nie. Dit maak nie voorsiening vir die registrasie van seisoenale
gidse nie, waarvan die meeste in die Wes-Kaap gebaseer is. Daar is tans
geen duidelikheid oor die huidige kostes deur Satoer oorgedra aan die
provinsies nie, en ek glo daarna sal gekyk moet word.

Die Wes-Kaap het ook 'n probleem met die afwenteling van die funksie, maar
nie met die gepaardgaande oordrag van sodanige fondse nie. Dit is voorheen
ook al hier genoem, en ek glo fondse moet die funksie volg wanneer dit
afgewentel word. Die aangeleentheid was ook al, soos agb lede weet, in die
Minmec ter sprake. 'n Voorstel gebaseer op bogenoemde is aan die
departement gedoen om langtermynoplossings te ondersoek en provinsiale en
mediumtermyn-bestedingsraamwerktoekennings aan te pas om moontlik die
funksies te akkommodeer.

Die Wes-Kaap begryp die belang van toerismeleiding in die sektor. Die Wes-
Kaap verwelkom die voorgestelde aanbevelings aangesien dit die provinsie in
staat sal stel om 'n provinsiale toergidsontwikkelingsprogram te vestig om
toergidse op te lei en te registreer in ooreenstemming met nasionale
toergidsregulasies. Die Wes-Kaap glo dat die aangeleentheid ten opsigte van
die fondse wel nog verder opgeklaar moet word. Dit moet gedoen word voordat
die wetsontwerp goedgekeur word, en moet gekommunikeer word aan alle
provinsies wat hierby 'n belang het.
Ek wil afsluit deur namens die provinsie te sÃª dit was lekker om die
Minister weer hier in die Huis te sien. Ons weet as hy nog Minister vir
Provinsiale en Plaaslike Regering was, sou die verkiesingsdatum teen
hierdie tyd seker al klaar aangekondig gewees het! [Tussenwerpsels.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[We also have some concerns. The Bill does not make provision for interim
measures with regard to the transfer of functions to provinces. It does not
make provision for the registration of seasonal guides, most of whom are
based in the Western Cape. There is no clarity at present about the current
costs transferred by Satour to the provinces, and I believe that must be
attended to.

The Western Cape also has a problem with the devolution of the function,
but not with the accompanying transfer of such funds. This has been
mentioned here before, and I believe that funds should follow the function
once it has been devolved. As hon members know, this matter has already
been discussed at Minmec. A proposal based on the above-mentioned has been
made to the department to investigate long-term solutions and to adjust
provincial and medium-term expenditure framework allocations to possibly
accommodate the functions.

The Western Cape comprehends the importance of tourism leadership in the
sector. The Western Cape welcomes the proposed recommendations since this
will enable the province to establish a provincial tour guide development
programme to train and register tour guides in accordance with national
tour guide regulations. The Western Cape believes that the matter with
regard to the funds does require further clarification. This should be done
before the Bill is approved and must be communicated to all provinces
having an interest in this matter.

I would like to conclude by saying, on behalf of the province, that it was
good to see the hon the Minister here in the House again. We know that if
he were still Minister for Provincial and Local Government, the election
date would by this time already have been announced! [Interjections.]]

Dr E A CONROY: Mnr die Voorsitter, Minister Moosa en kollegas, die
toerismebedryf is die belangrikste sleutel tot die ekonomiese en
maatskaplike ontwikkeling van verskeie provinsies in Suid-Afrika. As die
rol wat toerisme in die opheffing van Suid-Afrika kan speel nog nie tot ons
deurgedring het nie, sal ons baie vinnig moet wakkerskrik. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Dr E A CONROY: Mr Chairperson, Minister Moosa and colleagues, the tourism
industry is the most important key to the economic and social development
of various provinces in South Africa. If the role that tourism can play in
the upliftment of South Africa has not yet filtered through to us, we will
have to wake up very quickly.]

It seems, however, that the South African tourism industry and its
regulating bodies are very much aware of the actual and potential value
that tourism has for this country, otherwise we would not have debated a
very important piece of legislation today which is designed to regulate and
control the tourist guiding system.

The Bill is designed to develop a socially, environmentally and culturally
responsible tourism sector which, in turn, must contribute to the
development of an internationally competitive tourism industry in South
Africa. The end result of this Bill should and must be that tourist guides
will be qualified, that they will have the necessary competence and that
they will underwrite and comply with a code of conduct and ethics. The New
NP therefore supports this Bill.

Daar is egter 'n ander faktor wat ook tot die aantreklikheid van ons
toerismebedryf kan bydra of daaraan kan afbreuk doen. Dit is naamlik die
netheid en skoonheid van die omgewing waarin die toeris hom bevind. Ek haal
die volgende aan uit gister se briewekolom in 'n Afrikaanse dagblad:


  Die afgelope 20 jaar is Kaapstad ons gunsteling vakansieplek. Dit was
  altyd 'n vreugde om deur die Tuine te stap, maar wat 'n teleurstelling
  vanjaar! Die pragtige wandellaan is vuil, vol papiere, plastieksakke en
  gemors. Die pragtige Tuine is oorgroei met onkruid en van blomme is daar
  skaars sprake. Op pad na ons hotel het 'n buitelandse toeristegroep ons
  tegemoet gestap. Die gids het vol entoesiasme die pragtige geboue
  uitgewys, maar ek kon die afkeer op een van die mense se gesigte sien toe
  hy na die verwaarlosing om hom staar, en ek het skaam gekry.

Ons moet besef dat 'n uiterste poging aangewend moet word en dat
topprioriteitstatus daaraan geheg moet word om ons land en die omgewing
skoon, netjies en aantreklik te hou, anders is ons net besig om 'n reeds
bestaande bate te verwaarloos en te verinneweer. Kaapstad, Pretoria, Durban
en Johannesburg hoef nie miljoene te bestee om nuwe toeriste-aantreklikhede
te skep nie; hulle hoef slegs wat ons reeds in oorvloed het in stand te hou
en vir die toeris aantreklik en aangenaam te maak. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Die Minister van Omgewingsake en Toerisme se planne om Suid-Afrika se
sogenaamde nuwe nasionale blom, naamlik die plastieksak, met wortel en tak
uit te roei kan daarom ook net met entoesiasme gesteun word.
[Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[However, there is another factor which could also either contribute to the
appeal of our tourism industry or could be detrimental to it. This is the
neatness and beauty of the environment in which the tourist finds himself.
I quote the following from a letters column in an Afrikaans newspaper of
yesterday:


  Die afgelope 20 jaar is Kaapstad ons gunsteling vakansieplek. Dit was
  altyd 'n vreugde om deur die Tuine te stap, maar wat 'n teleurstelling
  vanjaar! Die pragtige wandellaan is vuil, vol papiere, plastieksakke en
  gemors. Die pragtige Tuine is oorgroei met onkruid en van blomme is daar
  skaars sprake. Op pad na ons hotel het 'n buitelandse toeristegroep ons
  tegemoet gestap. Die gids het vol entoesiasme die pragtige geboue
  uitgewys, maar ek kon die afkeer op een van die mense se gesigte sien toe
  hy na die verwaarlosing om hom staar, en ek het skaam gekry.

We have to realise that an extreme effort must be made, and that top
priority status must be attached to keeping our country and environment
clean, neat and attractive, otherwise we are only neglecting and ruining an
already existing asset. Cape Town, Pretoria, Durban and Johannesburg do not
have to spend millions to create new tourist attractions; they only have to
maintain what we already have in abundance to make these places attractive
and pleasant for the tourist. [Interjections.]

The plans of the hon the Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism to
eradicate the new national flower, namely the plastic bag, can therefore be
supported with enthusiasm. [Interjections.]]

Chief M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, the good thing you may do is a drop in the
ocean, but the ocean would be less if that drop were missing. That is why
when tourists visit any country they want to know and see places of
interest, or places of national importance. They want to know the history
of each and every place they are taken to.

This Bill creates a climate conducive to tourist guides being formally
recognised by the Government. They are the people who are expected to
market our country to tourists, people who are not going to distort the
history of this country. As members are aware, people and rubber bands have
one thing in common - they must be stretched to be effective. [Laughter.]

It is therefore imperative to have tourist guides who will effectively put
our country on the map. We have had tourist guides before, some trained
others not, some registered others not, some, regardless of their
knowledge, capability, capacity and skill, not properly graded, whilst
others were graded Why? It was simply because of the colour of their skin.
As Government we are saying: If things go wrong, do not go with them.
Hence, with this piece of legislation all criteria used to sideline or
disadvantage tourist guides will cease to exist. If one does not want one's
dream to come true, it is easy; one just has to oversleep. [Laughter.]

There will now be a National Registrar of Tourist Guides who will maintain
a central database of all tourist guides. The National Registrar of Tourist
Guides will also hear appeals lodged by tourist guides.

This Bill also establishes provincial registrars of tourist guides. These
officials will register all tourist guides in their respective provinces
and take all the necessary steps to ensure the smooth running of this
industry. It is pleasing to know that companies or institutions which are
involved in tourism will, from now on, be closely monitored.

There are some companies and institutions that deliberately do not want
tourists to know the true facts about our country. They do not take
tourists to places of national importance situated in rural areas and they
rarely use tourist guides from disadvantaged communities. They use people
who know very little about our country.

To give a practical example, we met tourists from Brussels who told us that
when they first visited our country in 1990, they were told that the only
thing they could learn about the Northern Province was witchcraft. The
guides could not tell them about the Soutpansberg, where one gets natural
salt. They could not tell them about TshipiseTsha Shagole in the far north,
where one finds not only warm water, but natural hot water, from the
fountain. Neither could they tell them about Maphukubje or the Chuene, nor
the Debegeni Falls and many other places of interest. The only things the
tourist guides could tell those tourists about the Northern Province was
how people in that province excelled in witchcraft. [Laughter.]

Hence, as Government, we are saying that a team will outperform a group of
dishonest individuals every time. Those same tourists were also told that
the only things one could learn about some rural areas in KwaZulu-Natal
were political violence and faction fighting. They could not tell them
about the Isandlwana battlefields or about Kwadukuza, where Shaka's grave
is.
Life is not a dress rehearsal. It is not the sugar that makes the tea
sweet, but the stirring. [Laughter.]

This industry will now be well co-ordinated, regulated, and monitored.
Tourist guides will now be trained, registered and recognised for who they
are. It will also be expected of them to adhere to the code of conduct
drawn up by the National Registrar of Tourist Guides. If it is found that a
particular tourist guide has violated any of the regulations in this Act,
corrective measures or disciplinary action will be taken against him or
her.

This will be done to protect the image and integrity of this country and to
make sure that our tourists are well looked after and protected. It will
now be an offence for anyone to act as a tourist guide if he or she is not
registered.

I would like to thank the hon the Minister and his department for coming up
with this excellent piece of legislation. I want to say to the hon the
Minister that he is one of the few leaders who lead by example. No matter
what the size of the bottle, the cream will always come to the top.
[Laughter.] [Applause.] The hon the Minister is one of those wise leaders
who inspires and motivates rather than intimidates and manipulates. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Mrs S WEINBERG (Gauteng): Chairperson, hon Minister, members, the economy
is often characterised as an engine, and I would like to characterise
tourism as a motive force in that engine.

Economic statistics have it that tourism constitutes approximately 10% of
the world's economy and about 6% of South Africa's. Some 66% of all foreign
visitors stop over in Gauteng province. The value of this market is
estimated at over R6 billion per year and the domestic tourism market
further contributes approximately R30 billion per year.

If one returns to the characterisation of the engine and examines more
closely the tourism component, one will see that currently the major part
of this economic activity remains in the formal sector.

For instance, Gauteng achieved 51% of the country's share of tourism and
leisure investment between 1994 and 1998 and 16% of the growth in hotel
accommodation. This is all very wonderful and great for the economy at
large. However, how does this affect our people? What is the impact on the
poorest of the poor? What is the impact on the previously disadvantaged
communities and individuals? Yes, the economy at large does have a trickle-
down impact on these communities, but the Tourism Amendment Bill will have
a direct impact on these individuals and communities.

To return again to the engine analogy, if the economy is the engine and
tourism the motive force, then tourist guides are an indispensible cog in
that engine, albeit a small cog with the ability to gear up the engine to
stronger and stronger power. Bringing the regulation of tourist guides down
to the provincial level allows a more hands-on transformation of the
industry.

The Gauteng tourism authority has already appointed a registrar of tourist
guides, in terms of our own legislation, who started work this month. Of
course, we shall apply to the Minister now that we know that funds are
available.

We will be able to control recruitment, training and marketing of tourist
guides from previously disadvantaged areas. For instance, last week we
launched a tourist route in Alexandra township, arguably one of the most
disadvantaged areas in our province, particularly as it is found cheek by
jowl with arguably one of the richest areas in our province, Sandton.

We also presented certificates to 12 newly qualified tourist guides in
Alex. To take these 12 individuals as an example of what is possible, they
are able to describe the microeconomy of Alex and Sandton and to show
tourists a well-researched route which includes the house where former
President Mandela lived when he first came to Johannesburg.

By bringing tourists into Alex, these SA tourist guides will encourage the
spending of tourist dollars there. Already there are people opening
restaurants and backpackers' venues and other people are working hard at
developing crafts such as pottery and beadwork so as to encourage the same
spending.

Obviously this has a direct economic benefit to the people of Alex. This in
turn will have an effect on the morale of the residents, to such an extent
that crime will decrease and pride will grow in their environment so that
people will start to clean up the streets and the plastic bags and Alex
will become a better place in which to live.

I am saying that not only does tourism gear up the economy, but this
legislation, the Tourism Amendment Bill, will go a long way towards the
social transformation of our country. We will move away from apartheid
divisions, where blacks remain in their townships and whites stay in
wealthy suburbs and never the twain shall meet.

The Tourism Amendment Bill will encourage internal tourism, in terms of
which tour guides will take groups of people, whether they be groups of
adults, groups of elderly people, church groups, social clubs, or scholars
in groups from schools, and show them life on the other side of the line.

I would like to emphasise the nation-building potential of such exercises.
People will come to understand the other side of life in South Africa, and
contribute to a mutual understanding. Hence will come a reduction in the
fear of one another, and from there will flow a willingness to work
together for the betterment of all the people of the land.

Gauteng supports this Bill. [Applause.]
Rev M CHABAKU: Hon Chairperson, hon Ministers, special delegates and hon
members of this Council, the Free State legislature has approved the
proposed amendments which define both provincial and national registrars,
as required by section 21(1) of Act 72 of 1993, as amended by section 1 of
Act 105 of 1996. The province approves the registration of tourist guides
nationally after competence for registration has been effected. The Bill
recognises the awarding of certificates after a person's knowledge has been
adequately assessed.

Even before the NP came into power in 1948, we had racial and sexist
imbalances, which are now compensated for in this Bill, and potential is
provided for growth and development for these individuals in terms of the
objectives of the said Bill. The codes of conduct and ethics required for
the efficiency of tourist guides will apply to all related to the task, as
they seek to inform, guide and protect tourists in terms of accepted
standards.

The tourist guide is also protected by the Bill, just as much as the
tourist, should the Bill be contravened, be it by the tourist guide or the
tourist. The tourist guide is free to seek an adviser's assistance when
complaints are lodged against him or her or even when against the tourist.

We commend the Minister for tabling guidelines on how complaints need to be
lodged and given attendance. The same goes for the reviews of appeals and
disputes. The purpose of the proposed amendment is to secure a smooth
execution of the tasks assigned to the mutual benefit of the tourist, the
tourist guide and the stakeholders. This seeks to reduce the need for
summary dismissals and seeks to retain cordial working relationships to
enhance the tourist industry. It is recommended that women of all age
groups be especially encouraged to be recruited to ensure that women can
obtain equal opportunity of employment, operation and promotion, just as we
seek to provide the ethnic balances displayed in our demographics.

We propose that special encouragement be given to intercity and
interprovince ventures, and also to our neighbouring independent countries,
rather than always looking overseas.

The Free State, therefore, recommends and approves this Bill as presented
to hon members by the Minister. ``Haak, Vrystaat!'' [Go, Free State!]
[Applause.]
Ms B THOMSON: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, the tourism
industry has always been one of the greatest assets of our country, more
especially of KwaZulu-Natal. With the transformation of the industry, and
the realisation of the immense tourism potential of previously neglected
areas, tourism is set to play an even greater role in the economic
development of our province.

For this reason it is imperative that any legislation dealing with tourism
should ensure an adequate role for the provincial government and for local
government. We, therefore, welcome the devolution of certain powers to the
MEC for tourism in the provinces in terms of this Bill.

The powers given to the MEC will enable the provincial government to
properly regulate the appointment and registration of tourist guides. These
powers are very important, because tourist guides play an important role in
the tourist industry. They are the ones who interact most closely with the
tourist, and, in many cases, they determine the quality of assistance
provided to both foreign and local tourists. If they treat tourists in an
unsatisfactory manner this may reflect negatively on the province's tourism
industry, and may prevent tourists from going to that particular province.
The MEC will play an important role, because he or she will have a direct
say in the preparation and publication of a code of conduct and in the
ethics with which all registered tourist guides will have to comply.

There is one aspect of the Bill, though, that we think could have been
elaborated upon more, that is, the role of local government in this
process. Members are aware that in terms of the Constitution, local
government also has a say in local tourism matters. The Bill does not
specify any role for local government, and this may cause some problems in
the implementation of the Bill later on. However, this is not an
insurmountable problem, as the provincial tourism authorities have, as a
matter of course, taken on board the views of local government in all
tourism matters affecting the province.

The ANC in KwaZulu-Natal wishes to register its support for the Tourism
Amendment Bill, because it will bring about much greater organisation to
the tourism industry, and will ensure that the level of service provided to
the tourist will compare favourably to international tourism standards.
[Applause.]
The MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Chairperson, may I, at
the outset, thank all the members who participated in the debate for their
valuable comments, generally, that have been made. Let me also express my
gratitude to Rev Moatshe and his committee for the manner in which this
Bill was processed, and for bringing to our attention some of the feelings
of the provinces on this matter.

A number of speakers have spoken about matters that do not relate directly
to the Bill. I will also then take the liberty of going with the flow and
speaking about matters that have nothing to do with the Bill. However, I
will come back to that in a moment.

I want to just reply to some of the matters that were raised. I think the
hon Versveld is quite off the mark on the question of whale watching and
the interests of Satour in this particular area. I think frankly that she
is quite wrong.

One of the important steps that we have taken recently is to market
ourselves in terms of wildlife not just as a Big Five destination, but as a
Big Six destination, because South Africa is one of the few places in the
world where you can engage in land-based whale-watching. Walker Bay and
most of the Southern Cape, right up to the Eastern Cape, provide land-based
whale-watching opportunities, which is quite unique.

That is one of the reasons why, if the hon Versveld had been in
communication with members of her own party, she would have known that Mr
Colin Eglin, a member of the National Assembly, has been rather active in
promoting the declaration of a whale sanctuary in Walker Bay. This is
something which I have taken up. We have jointly visited the area, etc.
Maybe the hon Versveld is not in tune with all those developments and she
was just speaking out of ignorance. So I should try not to be too harsh on
her.

I think a number of speakers, including the hon Sebekedi, usefully raised
the question of whether this was an unfunded mandate, and how provinces
were going to deal with this particular matter.

Let me just say something on this matter. In the first place, one must
understand that the kind of system we have, the kind of intergovernmental
financial system regulated by the Constitution, really does not make it
possible for me or for anybody to give an assurance to this House that over
the years provinces will, somehow, get money from the fiscus for this sort
of matter. It is not possible to do that kind of thing because, when
Parliament allocates money to provinces, it does not say how provinces
should use that money. Provinces adopt their own budgets in their
provincial legislatures, and it is the right of the provincial legislature
to do so. Nobody can take that right away.

Of course, one can say that among the factors that are taken into account,
tourism development should be one. But one should remember that it is the
Constitution that stipulates the criteria that the Financial and Fiscal
Commission, the national Treasury and Parliament have to take into account
when voting and deciding on the Budget as such. So it is not such an easy
matter to simply give an assurance on and say this is what is going to
happen.

The second point I would like to make is that it is not as though the
national Government or anybody has, even now, been budgeting huge sums of
money which it is now going to save and not use because the function is
going to provinces. That is not the case. This has really been a very, very
low-budget activity.

Nonetheless, I have said that perhaps provinces may incur some start-up
costs, firstly, and that is something we should look at. It is not going to
be easy, but I will, particularly as a result of this debate, personally
engage in consultations with Satour to see how we can assist provinces with
their start-up costs, because there will be some start-up costs before the
revenue starts coming in through the registration of tour guides and such
things. That may help to some extent.

The third point I would like to make is again one that the hon Sebekedi
made, an important point about training. That is, who is going to pay for
the training of tour guides? This is an important area. Now here the
Tourism and Hospitality Education and Training Authority, which is a
recognised statutory body as such, is the body responsible for training,
and it is a national institution. It is responsible for training because it
sets the standards and qualification and makes sure that there is proper
career pathing for tour guides. The qualifications Act also comes into play
here.
That body has prioritised training in the tourism industry, not just tour
guiding. The Business Trust has voted an amount of R80 million towards
learnerships and training programmes to be administered by the Theta.
Through the training levy, the Department of Labour has added R30 million
to that. So there is an amount of R110 million, I think, if I am right - I
am not always so sure of the figures, but the chief director is nodding -
which will be used over three years for training in the tourism sector.
This is a substantial amount of money. It is one of the most ambitious
education and training and learnership programmes that we are going to be
embarking upon.

We want to use a part of this amount in upgrading the skills of existing
tour guides because, as the hon Mokoena said, some tour guides actually do
not know what it is that they are going to talk about. Some people have
been trained to say that there are four provinces in South Africa, the Cape
of Good Hope and Transvaal and so on, those sorts of things. They read in
the newspapers that there are now nine provinces, but they have not been
trained with regard to why there are nine provinces, what the provinces
are, that provinces have elected legislatures, how a premier gets elected,
what the political parties are, etc. Even existing tour guides need some
amount of refresher training, which we hope to provide, as well as training
for new guides.

Again, the hon Mokoena has said that some people may know a lot about a
certain area, but may not have a BA degree as such, and are able to tell
one much more than anybody with a BA degree from Wits University would
about a particular area, indigenous plants, uses of plants, and such
things. Those people may only require some additional training to become
registered tour guides because, already, the essence is there.

So those funds will be used, and I can tell hon members that they are
substantial funds. We do not expect provinces to dip into their own budgets
for that sort of training. So we will make sure that we follow that up and
we will be committed to it. I will ask the department to look into and
ensure that the Theta also covers the training of tour guides. I think that
is what I could say in response here.

The hon Conroy has raised the question of litter, which, as hon members
know, is a matter that continues to be of concern to me personally, and, I
think, to all of us. It is a very serious problem. I was in Singapore last
week on some official business. I do not know if the hon MEC Jomo Khasu
knows about this matter, but if one takes chewing gum in one's bag into
Singapore, one can get arrested. They do not allow the chewing of chewing
gum because people stick the gum under the table and under the chair when
nobody is looking. [Interjections.]

We do not want to be as harsh as that, but, certainly, I think that this is
a matter we must attend to. Singapore is a very clean city, one does not
see any cigarette butts, paper or anything in the street that messes it up.
So it is possible to clean things up, even in our own country.

Let us take, for instance, Messina. Messina was one of the dirtiest towns
in the whole country. Now it is one of the cleanest towns in the whole
country. The mayor of the town personally took it upon himself and said
that if there was one thing he was going to do, he was going to clean up
that town. He has cleaned it up and has received recognition throughout the
country for having cleaned up the town. The town is so important because
large numbers of visitors come into the country through Beit Bridge and the
first thing they saw was rubbish heaps. Now the mayor has cleaned up the
town.
If one takes a town such as Douglas in the Northern Cape, which is, again,
a very small town, the people there had a huge gathering at a sports
stadium where they decided that they were going to stop the use of plastic
bags there. They did it on their own, they did not wait for legislation or
anything.

If one goes to a shop in Douglas one will not get a plastic bag. The
publicity association went to all the shopkeepers, asking for their co-
operation. They went to schools to speak to schoolchildren about why
plastic bags are bad, what that means, etc, so that everybody understood,
through a process of education and in a real grass-roots way. So it is
possible to do these sorts of things.

This is a matter that I raised with the Chief Whip of the NCOP, but perhaps
I raised it too informally. Maybe I should formally request the NCOP to
assist us with this antilitter work. I really think that the NCOP can help
us. I am not sure how, but I think if hon members here think about it, I am
sure this House will give valuable suggestions. The hon members say we
should start here. The important question is: What is the waste management
system in the parliamentary precincts? Does Parliament separate its waste?
Does it send glass and paper, at least, for recycling, or does it just dump
them there?

More importantly, I think we should involve the provinces and local
governments, because without provinces and local governments we are not
going to get anywhere. Hon members may want to organise a special debate or
work out some sort of programme of action, but I would really urge them to
assist us in this regard.

The hon Dr Conroy spoke about the plastic bag issue. We have now received
comments on the draft regulations. The period for the comments is over and
the department is now digesting all of the comments that have been
received. Once we have considered all the comments we will finalise and
publish the final regulations as such, and I hope to be able to do it by
early next year.

It is not going to be easy, because there are people who, for their own
selfish reasons, would want to oppose our prohibition on plastic bags, and
they have said all sorts of things. Some of these people have said that a
lot of people will lose their jobs, but hon members should know that these
plastic bags, these throwaway carrier bags, are not really made in a labour-
intensive process. They are made by machines, just by the tens of
thousands, so it is not very labour-intensive.

If we do not use the plastic bags, then whatever other packaging we use
will create more jobs. Already we have people who are sewing cloth bags,
like here in the Cape where the Methodist women have come together and are
now running a project. It is creating some employment for people and
alternative sorts of jobs.

Then they have asked what about those people, particularly poor women, who
are using the plastic bags to make artefacts, things like hats and mats. I
think that is an easy problem to solve. All we need to do is supply
plastic, probably in an easier way in the form of rolls of plastic. That is
something that can be done for people to do that sort of thing. One does
not need plastic bags. One needs to find a way of supplying the plastic,
new clean plastic, to do that sort of thing, because in any case it is
quite a hassle for people to be using plastic bags.

Some of the retail outlets, I have no doubt, will also try to oppose this
sort of thing. However, I am pleased that although it is not a matter
directly related to this Bill, hon members have used the opportunity to
once again restate their support, and I think we need to do that kind of
thing. One of the big retail outlets said to me that in terms of their
customer base they are in direct contact with so many million people on an
annual basis, so many million people go through their retail outlets
throughout the country, and that they can speak to all these people about
the disadvantages of prohibiting plastic bags, so lots of people are going
to oppose me. So one can see the veiled sort of threat that comes in.
However, I hope we will follow that up at some point in time.

We continue to develop new and more exciting tourism products, and let me
just say to hon members here that in a few weeks' time we will be having
what I think is called a coastal week - we have so many special weeks. It
will be a very exciting week concerning the management of the coast.
[Interjections.] It might be called maritime or marine week. Part of what
we are going to be doing is cleaning up areas of the coast, which also
happened during the cleanup week that we had. However, during that week we
will also be launching a very exciting tourism product, because we have
looked at one of the competitive advantages that we have in tourism, for us
to enjoy and for the world to enjoy, namely the various hiking trails that
we have around the country. We have also looked at how other countries
market their hiking trails.

We have a 3 000 km coastline and we will be launching, during that week, in
a few weeks' time, a hiking trail that starts at Kosi Bay and ends at the
Orange River mouth, covering the 3 000 km coastline. It will be quite a
unique hiking trail worldwide as it passes two oceans, the Indian Ocean and
the Atlantic Ocean, taking one through very diverse ecological areas
throughout its length. We already have a team of volunteers who will start
off by hiking that entire trail. It is not the sort of thing which
everybody would do, but I know people like my chairperson of the select
committee, Rev Moatshe, who is a keen hiker. I am sure that pretty soon he
will take the initiative of leading a team of prominent citizens on that
particular hike. Once again, thank you very much for the debate.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Thank you, hon
Minister. Maybe, with your permission, I should just call three or four
people to order who were chewing Chappies in this Chamber, so that we start
from here and implement this immediately. [Laughter.] I saw them.
[Interjections.] Name them? No, I will pardon them for today.

Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                              MEAT SAFETY BILL

               (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon.)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order!

Just before we proceed, can I ask all of you just to check on your
cellphones to see if they are indeed off. Let us make sure our cellphones
are off.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Mr Chairman, it is a
pleasure to commend to the Council the Meat Safety Bill which is before the
House. I do regard this as quite an important Bill. The factors which
normally drive agricultural policy in most of the countries of the world,
and specifically in South Africa, are all present in this Bill before us,
and perhaps one could look at them to get the broader context within which
this Bill is functioning.

Firstly, in a country like South Africa we have a special driving factor
and that is, of course, transformation and with it land reform, and
transformational aspects are present in this Bill. The second factor which
drives agricultural policy and legislation like this is, of course,
internal budgetary pressures. Agricultural budgets all over the world, and
even more so in South Africa, are under extreme budgetary pressure at the
moment. The third factor I would like to mention is the challenges of
growth in all sectors of agriculture, and also in this regard this Bill, we
hope, will be positive for agricultural growth.

Another factor is the influence of agricultural globalism, with reference
to the commitments and rules which we have under the World Trade
Organisation. That is of extreme importance with regard to meat production,
because of the sanitary and phytosanitary measures in that regard.
Let me just mention the one that we all know about, and that is the factor
of pressure from farming sectors and communities and their lobbies which
have an influence on agricultural policy. But the one which is of the
utmost importance, which perhaps is the basic driving force of this Bill
before us, is the growing pressure from consumer groups and environmental
groups over, firstly, the safety of food and, secondly, the sustainability
of present agricultural patterns. That is the one which I would like to
address in most of what I am going to say this evening.

What we have in this Bill is a group of measures which seek to promote meat
safety and the safety of animal products. Of course, animal products are
those obtained from the carcass, other than the meat, as defined in the
Bill. The measures are there to establish and maintain essential national
standards with regard to meat and other animal products and to regulate the
importation and exportation, and to establish meat safety schemes.

We believe that the main object of the Bill, which is why this Bill comes
before members as a section 76 Bill, is to protect consumers in so far as
the consumption of meat is concerned. That is why it is called the Meat
Safety Bill. In order to accomplish this, the Bill also seeks to establish
and maintain essential national standards in respect of abattoirs. Consumer
protection is a functional area of concurrent national and provincial
legislative competence, as listed in Schedule 4 of the Constitution, as
members know. That is why we deal with it in terms of the procedure
described by section 76. Abattoirs, as hon members know, are listed in
Schedule 5 of the Constitution.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Members,
please converse softly.

The DEPUTY MINISTER: Chairperson, with regard especially to the
international standards that have to be maintained and the general common
economic market in South Africa, we have to maintain essential national
standards, and that is why we are here before the members.

Consumer protection is the main aim, as I was saying. In terms of section
27 of the Constitution of South Africa, everyone has the right to have
access to ``sufficient food''. ``Sufficient food'' is definitely more than
enough food, because it includes enough food. However, ``sufficient food''
also has a qualitative aspect to it. Mostly that is about the objects for
which the food is being used, and that is for human health. In that regard,
we have a constitutional imperative to see to it, from the side of the
state, that this right to safe food is being exercised. Throughout much of
the world, an increasing number of consumers and most governments are
becoming aware of food quality and safety issues, and are realising the
need to be selective about the foods people eat. It is now common for
consumers to demand that governments take legislative action to ensure that
only safe food of acceptable quality is sold, and that the risk of food-
borne health hazards is minimised.

In other words, no one can deny that food is a very important item on
political agendas all over the world. It is there - an entity on the
political agendas. In fact, governments are extremely conscious of the
political consequences which they may expect if they fail to heed
consumers' concerns regarding the food they eat. In other words,
universally, there is an acknowledgement of the right that people have of
expecting that the food they eat is safe, and is of a good quality and
suitable for consumption. In actual fact, in terms of the United Nations
guidelines of 1985 on consumer protection, governments should take into
account the needs of all consumers for food security.

We all know how bad it becomes when something goes wrong with food. For
example, I have recently had experience of this because I was involved in
the decision on whether to lift the ban on imports of British beef to South
Africa. If one thinks about what happened in Britain, where almost 90
people died and millions of pounds worth of cattle had to be destroyed,
people all over the world are asking the question: What goes into the
animal whose meat we are going to eat?

I must say that with the recent incidence of foot-and-mouth disease, which
we are still experiencing, there were some averments which cannot be proven
because it is extremely difficult to do so. But there were some deductions
made to the effect that foot-and-mouth disease occurred in this country in
KwaZulu-Natal because of some swill, that is, products left over from food
and other refuse which came from ships and was fed to pigs. Whether that is
true or not, the point of concern is this: Something was perhaps eaten by
the pigs. People are very concerned, because this creates the public fear
of whether they are really safe from what goes into the animals whose meat
they are going to eat.

I must say I am convinced that in South Africa we must look at this
position carefully. It does not help to say that we are a developing
country, therefore we can let go. That is actually a racist statement
because one is then saying that only people who are rich can afford safe
food, by ensuring that they buy from an important place. I think we have a
duty to look after the safety of all our people's food, especially meat.
The main thing is that we have to investigate what is happening. We have to
look at, for example, growth hormones. They are not allowed in Europe and
there is a big battle going on about them in America. Some antibiotics are
used quite explicitly for accelerated growth and to prevent diseases.

Members will see, in the fine print of the Bill, that we talk about
residues when we discuss meat safety. Those residues actually refer to what
is left over. For example, if one has given medicine to an animal, the
residue can be tested, and that will also play a role in the Bill.

In general, this whole subject of meat safety is only part of food health.
I can tell the hon delegates that in South Africa we have to work towards a
general national food safety agency. Regarding a food safety agency, we
have mechanisms at present and this issue is being dealt with by the
Department of Health and the Department of Agriculture. I must say there is
good co-operation between the two departments. However, if one really wants
to see that nothing goes wrong - and things can go terribly wrong if they
go wrong, for example, are we really sure that milk is safe in this country
and can our municipalities handle this - then we must start looking at the
matter.

I am saying that, pertaining to consumers' concerns regarding food and in
this case meat safety, we think we can do something in close co-operation
with provinces because this is an intergovernmental system. The provinces
will implement the necessary steps through the very good system of
intergovernmental relations created by this Bill. I think that we are going
to have a system in which the consumers' concerns will be addressed.

What has happened in the world is that more and more information about food-
related matters has become available. There was a time when people were
only concerned about the visibles, such as whether food is underweight,
whether the contents are correct, size variations, misleading labelling and
poor quality. But now the consumers are concerned about the invisibles: the
health hazards that cannot be seen, smelt or tasted, such as micro-
organisms, pesticide residues, environmental contaminants and food
additives.

Both nationally and internationally there is growing pressure on
governments to protect all our communities from poor-quality and hazardous
foods. I think that what this Meat Safety Bill is going to do is to make it
impossible for people who live in impoverished areas to be mistreated
through some hazardous meat being off-loaded in their areas. I feel very
strongly about this. There is no way that people can regard some areas as
places where one can get rid of meat in an uncontrolled fashion.

When we embarked on the deregulation of agriculture in South Africa, it
went very quickly. Some people have the impression that the deregulation of
the market is now a situation of lawlessness. That is a completely wrong
impression. We must send the message that that is not going to happen in
South Africa. There is no way that the state's role and duty of care for
controlling what must be controlled, regulating what must be regulated,
will not be done. It is true that we are under budgetary constraints. But
the day that one cannot export ostrich meat any more because one does not
have enough veterinarians to check every ostrich that is slaughtered, one
will be losing money by not putting money there. Sometimes one must spend
money to make money. That is the way we are going to do it. We must build a
lot.

We are not going to allow people to bring in things, for example swill from
a ship, where one must have a permit from the Department of Agriculture and
when such an item should have been destroyed in terms of environmental
legislation. We are not going to allow that type of a thing. I want to send
a strong message about that. The state is going to do its duty, as far as
we are capable of doing it. We are going to strengthen veterinary science
and veterinary practices in this country. We have to do that. We cannot
allow things to just go down.

Because it is late in the evening, I will, perhaps, go into more detail
about the Bill after the members have spoken and given an indication of
what areas of the Bill are of special concern to them. [Applause.]

Rev P MOATSHE: Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister, special delegates from
provinces and hon members, two years ago, Cape Town meat merchants were at
the centre of a health row after imported kangaroo meat, which had been
blamed for a number of cases of bacterial disease in Australia, had gone on
sale in the city. Last year, about 500 children who were due to take part
in the opening of the All Africa Games in Johannesburg fell ill with food
poisoning. Doctors blamed the food poisoning on bad meat that was served at
afternoon rehearsals. Last month, some farmers in KwaZulu-Natal were faced
with serious problems when foot-and-mouth disease was identified among
their livestock.

On 8 April 1993 the European Union banned imports of livestock, meat, milk
and dairy products from 18 Central and Eastern European countries after
cases of foot-and-mouth disease were reported in northern Italy. The
Italians claimed that the disease was found in cattle shipped from the
former Soviet Union through either Slovenia or Croatia. Under European law,
if proof exists that a country has livestock that is infected with foot-and-
mouth disease, import barriers can legally keep those animals from
spreading their disease to the importing countries. These are just some of
the reported incidents that show the risks to which consumers are exposed
if there are no proper checks of the quality of meat products available for
public consumption.

Since many people afflicted with food-borne illnesses assume that they have
flu and do not visit the doctor, cases of meat-related illnesses tend to be
underreported. The available information on such illnesses therefore
represents only a fraction of the total number that occur. The fact that
meat-related illnesses are underreported does not mean that the problem is
not serious. Although estimates as to the prevalence and growth of
illnesses attributable to unsafe meat in South Africa are difficult to
assess, we cannot deny the fact that it is a reality. It is a reality
experienced mostly by poor and marginalised people with lowered immunity
due to HIV/Aids, pregnant women and their foetuses, young children, the
elderly, the homeless, farmworkers and others of low socioeconomic status.
The effects suffered by these marginalised groups can range from relatively
minor discomfort to more serious symptoms and manifestations such as fever,
diarrhoea, dehydration and even death.

In addition to the human suffering caused by unsafe meat and food-borne
diseases, substantial economic costs are involved. They affect both tourism
and trade. Already, some countries have placed a ban on the import of South
African meat products after the recent outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease
in KwaZulu-Natal. This places an enormous financial burden on farmers who
breed livestock for export purposes. It also reduces state income which is
derived from the export of those meat products. It further places an
enormous burden on the country's health care system through increased
hospitalisation costs. This does not even take into account the total
social and medical burden placed on society by the chronic and often
lifelong consequences of unsafe meat and food-borne illnesses.

Our own system for identifying and preventing illnesses resulting from
unsafe meat is found in the Abattoir Hygiene Act. This Act proved to be
inadequate to properly identify, track and prevent meat-related illnesses
and to prevent future cases from occurring. Its primary focus was on
measures aimed at promoting the hygienic slaughter of animals in abattoirs,
with very little emphasis on the safety of the end products leaving the
abattoirs and destined for public consumption.

This approach is primitive, compared to the international trends which are
aimed at making sure that best management practices are used through every
step of meat processing, from inspection of livestock before slaughter,
right to the end product leaving the processing plant.

The international approach is based on the hazard analysis and critical
control points standards which were developed by the American space agency,
Nasa, to ensure the safety of food prepared for astronauts.

Its focus is on ensuring that food contamination risks are avoided in the
processing plant and that those steps are documented. It requires meat
processors to examine their procedures, determine which procedures have the
potential to contaminate meat, and then explain in detail how they avoid
contamination at those points.

The Meat Safety Bill seeks to achieve a similar objective. It envisages the
appointment of a national executive officer who will be entrusted with the
monitoring of essential national standards which will apply to all
abattoirs.

These national standards provide for, among others things, the keeping of
records relating to the examination and inspection of animals prior to and
after slaughter; the fact that meat may only be removed from abattoirs if
it is duly marked and the method of removal poses no risk to the public;
the detection and monitoring of any specified substances and residues in
meat products, in accordance with prescribed methods; and the fact that the
abattoir must be managed in accordance with a prescribed hygiene management
and evaluation system.

I respectfully submit that the Meat Safety Bill will bring our own
practices in line with the international approach and will ensure that our
people enjoy a healthy way of life. For this reason, the ANC wishes to add
its voice in support of this Bill. [Applause.]

Ms B N DLULANE: Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister and hon members, the ANC
in the province of the Eastern Cape unconditionally supports this
monumental piece of legislation which seeks to resolve disparities between
meat safety standards for urban and more affluent areas with expensive
abattoirs, on the one hand, and those for rural and poor communities in
which such facilities do not exist, on the other hand.

The current Act, the Abattoir Hygiene Act of 1992, has a rigid and
selective approach which makes access to service difficult for the majority
and impossible for the rural communities of South Africa.

The Bill wants to do away with considerations of cost as a determining
factor in obtaining safe meat, cost which was used as a tool to compromise
poorer communities in their health and wellbeing because they could not
afford to pay for these services.

The injustice of the past made us ignorant with regard to meat inspection,
more especially in rural areas.

Babesakuthi abantu basezilalini xa kuxhelwe inkomo okanye igusha
bakuthabathe oko ngathi baqinisekile ukuba loo nyama ayinazintsholongwane,
bayitye. Kodwa eyona nto yayiba ngumnqa kukuba babesakuthi xa inkomo okanye
igusha ithe yazifela, indlela ababeyivavanya ngayo ukuba ilungele ukutyiwa
yayikukuba bathabathe igaqa lenyama baliphosele inja. Ibiya kuthi ke ukuba
loo nja ithe ayafa baqiniseke ukuba inyama leyo ingatyiwa. Kodwa ke ukuba
ithe inja leyo yafa, babesazi ukuba basengozini. (Translation of Xhosa
paragraph follows.)

[In the rural villages, when a cow or sheep was slaughtered, it used to be
assumed that its hygienic status was good, that is, it was safe for people
to eat the meat. But what is amazing is that if that animal's cause of
death was unknown, to ensure that it was safe for human consumption, a
piece would be thrown to a dog. If the dog did not drop dead, people would
be sure that it was safe for them to eat the meat. But if the dog died,
they would know that to eat the meat would be a risk and, therefore, pose
danger to their lives.]

This Bill addresses the imbalance of expensive abattoirs by shifting the
focus to the safety of the end product, rather than costly structures which
are only accessible to deeper pockets. All consumers, urban and rural, rich
and poor, will benefit in view of the fact that meat for consumption could
affect human and animal health.
One of the measures introduced by this Bill, which is welcomed by our rural
communities, is that an opportunity will exist for abattoirs to be set up
as small businesses, and will be able to provide a more user-friendly
system. Most of the big abattoirs are in metropolitan areas, which results
in a serious shortage of proper slaughtering facilities in rural areas.

Undoubtedly, this accommodates the needs of our diverse society and
stimulates a collective commitment to establish a culture of hygiene and
meat safety awareness, as the Bill is trying to establish a meat safety
concept rather than just abattoir hygiene, as is currently the case.

One of the important principles proposed in the Bill is the provision for
the assignment to agencies and nongovernmental organisations of meat
inspection services. The advantage of using agencies outside Government is
that the state will be able to perform its statutory functions by
harnessing capacity in the meat industry for the implementation of
legislation, without having to expand the public services, and it will also
help to prevent the utilisation of scarce resources within the state to
deliver services that can be delivered just as efficiently by
nongovernmental organisations.

Due to the lack of formally qualified persons and the fact that meat
inspectors are not available throughout the country, especially in rural
areas, this Bill makes provision for duly qualified and authorised persons
to perform functions in terms of this Bill.

This could be utilised as an opportunity to train persons with the
necessary potential to perform such functions, especially in areas with
shortages of qualified persons. [Applause.]

Mr M J KHASU (North West): Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister and the House,
thank you for the warm welcome.

Allow me to add that the introduction of the Meat Safety Bill is yet
another development in the extension of opportunities for the broader South
African community to understand the importance and implications of their
actions in the handling of food in general, and meat in particular.

The existing legislation, in the form of the Abattoir Hygiene Act of 1992,
restricts itself to measures which could never have allowed the general
populace to develop a culture of optimal hygienic standards in the handling
of meat.

The fact that we have become international participants in the global trade
market requires vigilance of the kind that will not make it difficult for
us to answer questions which may arise as a result of meat which might be
contaminated, either inside the country or coming from outside the borders
of our country. Incidents of animal sickness and failure or success in
handling these can make or break the country's international trade
opportunities.

We have numerous examples of animal sicknesses which would have a direct or
indirect association with the subject of our discussion today. Mad cow
disease in Britain is one recent case in point. In our own country, as we
are speaking today, the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease has caused a
panic, both locally and internationally.

Despite the informed and professional advice that the disease did not or
would not be transmitted between animals and human beings, our local
traders and consumers did not believe us. Measures such as quarantine and
even the culling of animals in affected areas did not allay the anxieties
of some of our neighbours in the region. We are, however, happy that the
situation in KwaZulu-Natal was successfully contained and did not spill
over into other areas of the province, or other provinces for that matter.

We are already enjoying the dividends of our measures with Namibia's
lifting of the bans on our export of meat and meat products so affected. We
must thank the provincial department under MEC Singh for their tireless
work, the national department for their guidance and leadership and the
farmers who sacrificed their animals to save the nation. The implications
of not handling, or of being perceived not to be handling, one's food or
food products safely go beyond trade matters. As a meat safety ban
suggests, health risks can become real if appropriate precautionary
measures are ignored.

The existing legislation's narrow focus on abattoirs and its costly
insistence on infrastructure of a certain type do not necessarily translate
into concomitant health outcomes. The introduction of this legislation is
not just about animals, but also about the prevention of meat-related
diseases among humans, thus contributing to the overall health system of
our country.

This Bill has wide-ranging and positive implications for environmental
management and protection. The appointment, purpose and choice of
provincial executive officers are testimony to this, in that these persons
will be knowledgeable in public health matters. This will come in handy in
the hygienic management of establishments, animals and the environment. It
also addresses the handling of animal wastes in a new way, in a completely
different way from the current legislation. Certain hardships experienced
under the current arrangements are addressed by this Bill. Some of the
hardships and possible solutions in this Bill are, firstly, the
introduction of schemes for the promotion of communal slaughter facilities,
and secondly, the granting of exemptions by the Minister to abattoirs and
slaughter facilities and to categories and groups of persons and owners.

In conclusion, and coming to the specifics about the North West province's
concerns, I wish to report that the province has no substantive or
principled objection to the Bill save for the detail around clause 23,
which assigns or delegates powers to the provincial executive officers.
According to the province, more detail should have been given with regard
to assignment of powers to members of the executive council in a province
for the latter to have necessary powers over the executive officers. We
trust that that clarity will either be made or will emerge in the end, or
that provision will be made to cater for the concern in other ways. This is
intended to tighten ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Hon MEC, you
have less than a minute to complete your speech.

Mr M J KHASU: I was going to speak for less than five seconds more.
[Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Do so, hon
MEC.

Mr M J KHASU: This is intended to strengthen the principle of
accountability on the part of the provincial executive.

All in all, consumer protection as a human right is extended to cover food,
or meat specifically, in the introduction of this legislation. Our duty of
care as a state is thus advanced. The benefits deriving from this Bill are
indeed enormous. This places its desirability beyond question and deserves
support. The North West province supports the passing of this Bill.
[Applause.]

Me A ROSSOUW: Mnr die Voorsitter, dit is vir my 'n besondere voorreg om
vandag aan hierdie debat te kan deelneem, juis in die tyd dat ons so bewus
geword het van bek-en-klou-seer, en ek wil graag ook namens ons hier in die
Wes-Kaap die agb Adjunkminister en minister Didiza bedank vir die
wonderlike wyse waarop hulle die aansien van Suid-Afrika in die landbou
spesifiek bevorder het met die wyse waarop hulle hierdie hele bek-en-klou-
seeraangeleentheid gehanteer het.

Ons glo dit sal binnekort heeltemal onder beheer wees, maar ons harte gaan
uit na daardie boere wat geweldige skade gely het, en dit het 'n mens se
hart geroer om te sien hoe hulle werklik gehuil het toe hulle moes toesien
dat hulle vee geslag word. Ons wil die Adjunkminister en die departement en
elke veearts bedank wat daar hulle bydrae gelewer het.

Die Adjunkminister het weer eens in sy toespraak die belangrikheid daarvan
genoem dat ons genoeg veeartse in Suid-Afrika moet hÃª, want daar was
alreeds kommer dat ons staatsveeartse besig is om minder te word, en ons
wil hom bedank daarvoor dat hy en die Ministerie die belangrikheid daarvan
insien, want in 'n landbouland soos Suid-Afrika kan ons dit nie bekostig om
nie genoeg veeartse te hÃª nie. Ons wil hom bedank daarvoor.

Vleis, hetsy dit rooivleis, wildsvleis, witvleis of enige ander tipe vleis
soos konyne, perde, of wat ook al is, is vir ons 'n belangrike bron van
voedsel in Suid-Afrika. Vleis is egter ook 'n draer van siektes soos ons
nou in menige toespraak gehoor het, en dit kan ernstige siektes aan die
mensdom oordra. Die ondersoek van slagdiere voor en tydens ons slagproses
is gevolglik noodsaaklik om te verseker dat slegs gesonde diere geslag
word, en wel op 'n menslike wyse, sodat die vleis en ander vleisprodukte
heilsaam sal wees vir die publiek en sonder besoedeling aan hulle voorsien
sal word.

Daarom is dit van die uiterste belang dat daar 'n higiÃ«nestandaard en
riglyne om dit te handhaaf aan 'n slagfasiliteit en die personeel gestel
word wat tydens die slagting en verwerking van die produkte diens doen. Dit
is ook noodsaaklik dat riglyne in wetgewing vervat moet word ten opsigte
van die geboue en toerusting wat in hierdie slagproses gebruik word.

Die Wes-Kaap beskik tans oor 98 geregistreerde abattoirs wat gegradeer is
volgens die aantal diere wat per dag geslag kan word. Hierdie abattoirs is
ongelooflik duur en hoogs gesofistikeerd, en is opgerig volgens Wet 121 van
1992. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Ms A ROSSOUW: Mr Chairman, it is an exceptional privilege for me to take
part in this debate today, precisely at the time that we have become so
aware of foot-and-mouth disease, and I would also, on behalf of us here in
the Western Cape, like to thank the hon the Deputy Minister and Minister
Didiza for the wonderful manner in which they specifically promoted the
prestige of South Africa in agriculture with the way in which they handled
this entire foot-and-mouth disease issue.

We believe that it will shortly be completely under control, but our hearts
go out to those farmers who suffered tremendous losses, and it moved one to
see them actually crying when they had to watch their cattle being
slaughtered. We want to thank the Deputy Minister and the department and
each and every veterinary surgeon who made a contribution there.

The Deputy Minister once again in his speech mentioned the importance of
our having an adequate number of veterinary surgeons in South Africa,
because there has already been concern that our state veterinary surgeons
are declining in number, and we want to thank him and the Ministry for
realising the importance of this, because in an agricultural country like
South Africa we cannot afford not to have enough veterinary surgeons. We
want to thank him for that.

Meat, whether it is red meat, game, white meat or any other kind of meat
such as rabbits, horses, or whatever, is an important source of food in
South Africa. Meat is also a carrier of diseases, however, as we have now
heard in many a speech, and it can transmit serious diseases to humans.
Examination of slaughter animals before and during the slaughtering process
is therefore essential to ensure that only healthy animals are slaughtered,
and in fact in a humane manner, so that the meat and other products would
be beneficial to the public and provided to them free of contamination.

That is why it is extremely important that slaughtering facilities and the
personnel who are on duty during the slaughtering process should be subject
to a standard of hygiene, and the guidelines to maintain it, during
slaughtering and processing of the products. It is also essential that
guidelines in respect of the buildings and equipment used in the
slaughtering process should be entrenched in legislation.

The Western Cape at present has 98 registered abattoirs that are graded
according to the number of animals that can be slaughtered per day. These
abattoirs are unbelievably expensive and highly sophisticated, and erected
in terms of Act 121 of 1992.]

The cost of these facilities and the management expected to be in place can
only be achieved by larger municipalities. Animals for slaughter have to be
transported long distances, which creates stress situations and the loss of
meat due to injuries. This Bill aims to rectify these shortcomings by
supporting a more holistic approach to meat safety. The affordability of
meat hygiene services is addressed, bringing more entrepreneurs into the
meat production chain. It also seeks to accommodate the needs of our
diverse society and to stimulate a collective commitment to establishing a
culture of hygiene and meat safety awareness.

Daar is 'n toenemende neiging om vee op plase te slag en die vleis dan per
voorafbestelling aan dorpenaars te voorsien. Die slagting vind plaas sonder
enige inspeksie van diere vooraf of die inspeksie van vleis om
siektetoestande op te spoor. Die slagting vind ook plaas in fasiliteite wat
nie noodwendig beskik oor die noodsaaklike geriewe van skoon water en
vloerspasie om besoedeling te voorkom nie. Dikwels is daar ook 'n gebrek
aan verkoeling van hierdie geslagte karkasse.

Die vervoer van vleis is heel dikwels ook sonder verkoeling. As boervrou
sal ek nooit die eerste prentjie van my buurvrou op die plaas vergeet nie
waar sy sommer daar onder die peperboom die vel van die skaap staan en
afknie het. Dit is 'n gebruik wat miskien meer dikwels nog op ons plase
voorkom. Om hierdie ongesonde toestande die hoof te bied, asook dieselfde
wantoestande van slagtings wat ook meer dikwels in ons informele
woongebiede rondom ons groot stede geskied, is dit van die allergrootste
belang dat ons kleiner abattoirs moet wettig om voorsiening te maak vir die
nodige inspeksie en hierdie voorligtingsdiens. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[There is an increasing tendency to slaughter cattle on farms and to
provide the people living in towns with meat that has been previously
ordered. The slaughter takes place without any prior inspection of the
animals or the meat to detect diseases in the meat. The slaughtering also
takes place in conditions that do not necessarily have the required
facilities of clean water and floor space to prevent contamination. There
is often a lack of refrigeration of these slaughtered carcasses.

The transportation of meat very often also takes place without
refrigeration. As a farming woman I will never forget the first picture of
my neighbour on the farm, where she simply stood under the pepper tree,
skinning the sheep. This is a custom that one perhaps still often
encounters on our farms. To eliminate these unhealthy conditions, as well
as similar slaughtering conditions that more often occur in our informal
settlements around our large cities, it is of the utmost importance that we
should legalise smaller abattoirs to provide for the necessary inspection
and this extension service.]

The main objects of this Bill are to provide ways and means for the
supplying of disease-free and healthy meat and meat products to all levels
of the population, to protect personnel working on the facilities against
bodily harm and infections, and to provide for the humane handling and
slaughter of animals, as well as providing for minimum standards of quality
and wholesomeness of fresh raw meat, processed meat and meat products for
one's own use and for sale to the public. But very important is also the
training of abattoir owners and the managers and personnel of facilities,
and all aspects of the maintenance of hygiene standards before, during and
after the slaughter process. The Bill proposes to create a wider scope of
responsibilities attached to the concept of meat safety, rather than just
abattoir hygiene.

Die titel van hierdie wetsontwerp verwys daarom na die veiligheid van vleis
teenoor die bestaande konsep van abattoirhigiÃ«ne. Veilige vleis sal dus
almal in die produksieketting se verantwoordelikheid word en nie net die
personeel van abattoirs s'n nie.

'n Belangrike klemverskuiwing in die wetsontwerp teenoor die bestaande
wetgewing is die voorsiening om private instansies te kan magtig om deel te
hÃª aan die vleisinspeksieproses. Dit sal die staat in staat stel om sonder
ekstra personeel op sy diensstaat 'n meer volledige diens te lewer.
Beamptes kan dus die belangrike moniteringswerk en wetstoepassing meer
doeltreffend uitvoer sonder bykomstige indiensneming van personeel.

Daar sal nie 'n uitbreiding van personeel of finansiÃ«le implikasies vir die
provinsies wees nie aangesien die huidige infrastruktuur wel voldoende is.
Daar word egter voorsien dat daar 'n toename in beamptes nodig sal wees
namate die aantal geregistreerde fasiliteite toeneem.

Die Wetsontwerp op die Veiligheid van Vleis maak voorsiening daarvoor om
die beskikbaarheid van gesonde en heilsame vleis en vleisprodukte uit te
brei na 'n baie groter deel van ons gemeenskap. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[The title of this Bill for that reason makes reference to the safety of
meat as opposed to the existing concept of abattoir hygiene. Safe meat will
therefore become the responsibility of everyone in the production chain and
not only that of the abattoir personnel.

An important shift in emphasis in the Bill, in contrast to the existing
legislation, is the provision of empowering private institutions to take
part in the inspection process. This will enable the state to render a more
complete service without extra personnel on its staff establishment.
Officials can therefore perform the important monitoring work and law
enforcement more effectively, without employing additional personnel.

There will be no expansion of staff or financial implications for the
provinces as the present infrastructure is in fact adequate. It is
expected, however, that an increase in officials will be required as the
number of registered facilities increases.

The Meat Safety Bill provides for the extension of the availability of
healthy and wholesome meat and meat products to a much larger section of
our community.]

This Bill aims to do away with considerations of cost as a determining
factor in obtaining safe meat. Proper meat-handling practices and the
existence of hygiene awareness among all levels of the community are of
cardinal importance for meat safety - not the consideration of cost. Safe
meat must no longer be out of the reach of poorer people because of the
lack of money.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Orde!

Jammer, dame, u tyd is verstreke. Tot volgende keer. [Order! Sorry, lady,
your time has expired. Until next time.]

Ms A ROSSOUW (Western Cape): Baie dankie, mnr die Voorsitter, en die Wes-
Kaap steun graag die wetsontwerp. [Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, and
the Western Cape takes pleasure in supporting this Bill.

Me E C GOUWS: Mnr die Voorsitter en Minister, ek stem saam met biskop Tutu;
ons het 'n wonderlike land met 'n wonderlike reÃ«nboognasie. Ons het 'n nuwe
demokrasie en daarom het ons definitief aanpassings nodig, ook in die
Wetboek. Daar is nog ander verskille. Sommige van ons is baie, baie arm.
Sommige woon in stede en groot getalle woon op die platteland, waar daar
klaargekom moet word met die minimum geriewe, en dit verg groot ontberings.

Hierdie wetgewing waaroor dit vandag gaan, is nodig om 'n regstelling te
maak. Die klem word verskuif van vorm na inhoud, en ons steun dit
heelhartig. In die verlede was daar baie klem op die oprigting van
indrukwekkende, duur strukture vir die slag van diere. Hierdie wetsontwerp
fokus meer op die prosesse wat ons nodig het om veilige vleis aan ons mense
te verskaf. Dit is 'n absolute noodsaaklikheid in ons land met sy diverse
gemeenskappe.

Baie probeer om hulle karige inkomste aan te vul deur onder meer die slag
en verkoop van vleis aan die publiek, soms met verreikende
gesondheidsgevolge. Ons in die DP wil hierdie entrepreneurs al die
geleenthede gee wat hulle lewenstandaarde kan verbeter. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)
[Ms E C GOUWS: Mr Chairperson and Minister, I agree with Bishop Tutu; we
have a wonderful country with a wonderful rainbow nation. We have a new
democracy and we therefore definitely need adjustments, also on the Statute
Book. There are also other differences. Many of us are very, very poor.
Some live in cities and large numbers live in the rural areas, where one
must make do with the minimum facilities, and this leads to a great deal of
hardship.

This legislation which is at issue today is necessary to bring about a
correction. The emphasis is shifting from form to content, and we support
this wholeheartedly. In the past there was a great deal of emphasis on the
erection of impressive, expensive structures for the slaughtering of
animals. This Bill focuses more on the processes which we need to provide
safe meat to our people. This is absolutely essential in our country with
its diverse communities.

Many try to supplement their meagre income, inter alia, by slaughtering and
selling meat to the public, sometimes with far-reaching health
consequences. We in the DP want to give these entrepreneurs all the
opportunities which could improve their living standards.]

There is a clause in the Bill in terms of which, in the view of the
Minister, an exemption may be granted in respect of certain areas, grades
of abattoirs, owners or persons, in respect of certain kinds of animals,
requiring only that the relevant MEC must be consulted.

The DP rejects this clause, and thinks it is a sweetheart clause for an all-
too-powerful Government. It is of no consequences while the incumbent
Minister or MECs are honourable and honest, but disastrous when the reverse
proves to be the case. Bills and laws must protect us, not from the honest,
but from the dishonest.

We all agree to the provisions in the Bill that must ensure public health.
We are horrified at the thought that a disaster may befall us such as that
in the UK, where insufficient control was exercised on the composition of
animal feed. This led to the shameful outbreak of mad cow disease -
shameful because animal feed containing diseased carcasses was fed to the
animals. It is strongly suspected that the consumption of this product can
lead to a fatal disease in human beings.

The crucial issue in the MCD saga was the lack of oversight and control.
This will be the crucial issue in this and other laws. The mere publication
of an Act does nothing to enforce it. The Government loves the phrases
``capacity'' and ``capacity-building''. The absence of both of these was
what led to the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease in KwaZulu-Natal. It now
seems quite clear that the almost total breakdown of oversight and control
over whatever happens to come from ships in harbours is what caused this
outbreak.

The fact that we had legislation in place requiring the controlled
destruction of such potentially dangerous products did not ensure that it
was adhered to.

Ons in die DP is bekommerd oor die uitvoerbaarheid en die wil by die
Regering om hierdie wetsontwerp te kan toepas. Ons sÃª weer, in die Wetboek
het dit meriete, maar gaan ons sien dat dit toegepas word? Ons kan nie
dobbel met ons mense se gesondheid en die skrikwekkende finansiÃ«le
implikasies wat dit vir die land kan inhou nie. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[We in the DP are concerned about the practicability and the will of the
Government to be able to implement this Bill. We say once again, on the
Statute Book it has merit, but are we going to see it implemented? We
cannot gamble with our people's health and the alarming financial
implications which this could have for the country.]

Mr P I MALEFANE (Gauteng): Chairperson, Deputy Minister and members, as
Gauteng we support the principles and details of the Bill. We see the Bill
as an important instrument in providing a holistic approach with regard to
meat safety.

In Gauteng, we recently commissioned research pertaining to illegal
slaughtering, which seems to be a problem as far as meat hygiene and safety
are concerned. Our definition of illegal slaughtering basically refers to
the slaughtering of an animal or animals outside the confines of an area
designated for such a purpose, and where the process does not comply with
stipulations regarding slaughtering as required by law.

Illegal slaughtering puts at variance the interests of environmentalists,
health officials, animal rights groups, traditional healers, hunters and
ordinary citizens at large, which are consequently at stake.

Speaking of illegal slaughtering immediately evokes in one's mind issues
related to poaching and the illegal trade in animal parts. The two
represent a form of senseless slaughtering of animals.

Conservationists recently voiced concern over the illegal trade in rhino
horns and ivory, as it led to the poaching of animals. Their contention was
that this would result in the extinction of rare species and have long-term
negative effects on the tourism industry as well as our economy. A
moratorium was therefore agreed upon by neighbouring countries. Such trade
should be considered illegal, since it leads to the gruesome treatment of
animals.

Our research was therefore premised on the understanding that illegal
slaughtering is still against the law. The location of abattoirs is still a
contentious matter that has effects on the health and safety of
communities.

The research revealed the concerns precipitated by illegal slaughtering,
which has implications for the environment, health and the humane treatment
of animals. These are some of the scenarios we wish to present.

In 1995 in Vereeniging, where residents experienced a scene of illegal
slaughtering at a funeral, they were disgusted by the manner in which the
animal was being killed, claiming that it was being beaten and hacked with
clubs and axes. The SPCA arrived but had no stun gun to render the animal
unconscious. The police were then called, but they refused to shoot the
animal because in their opinion such a matter was culturally sensitive.
Fortunately an old man passing by came to their rescue and killed the
animal.

In 1994 a black family had just moved into what was formerly a white
neighbourhood. It was immediately after the first democratic elections.
They had to slaughter a cow for their cultural feast, but their white
neighbours were up in arms against the slaughtering. The family concerned
stated vociferously that this was a cultural practice and they were not
going to stop it simply because they had moved into a previously white
suburb. Police had to be called in to intervene and finally the local
authority managed to settle the dispute.

With regard to a farmer who was slaughtering some of his cattle in his back
yard to sell in the nearby informal settlement, we found that almost half
of the residents had to be treated for unstoppable diarrhoea. Medical
reports indicated that they were suffering from food poisoning.

Our support of the Bill is therefore based on it providing a framework to
deal with the challenges of illegal slaughtering. The Bill does not
prohibit slaughtering for cultural purposes nor restrict slaughtering
outside abattoirs. However, it promotes safety through hygienic standards
with regard to the end product of the slaughtered animal.

The last crucial point is that this Bill seeks to achieve the promotion of
good management practices and the application of hazard analysis at
critical control points at slaughter facilities in line with international
trends.

As a province we are in the process of putting in place an abattoir rating
scheme that will complement this Bill once it is law in order to ensure
that those complying with the requirements of the law are incentivised and
those in contravention are punished. This will make the law implementable,
and not just a paper tiger.

Ha ke hle ke di pome, ke di etse mohatla' kgwiti morena. Etswe le kgomo ha
e nye boloko kaofela. [Ditlatse.] [I will stop here, because one cannot say
it all. [Applause.]]

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister of Agriculture Prof D C
du Toit, hon MECs and colleagues, it is a pity that I am speaking in the
place of a member who, due to sudden changes that occurred in the
scheduling of the Speakers' list, could not make himself available for this
debate.

With regard to this important debate, I wish to stress the following, which
must be strictly observed within the parameters of the Meat Safety Bill.
Firstly, strict rules at all points of entry should be stipulated in order
to avoid contaminated meat at all costs. Secondly, foot and mouth disease
is a serious threat to the farming industry, hence safety measures have
been taken by almost all farmers to combat the spread of the disease.

At the same time, huge losses of stock are affecting farmers seriously, as
they will have a very negative impact on food supplies and the export
system.

Thina, KwaZulu-Natali, siyakuncoma ukuthi lo mthetho ozokwalusa ukuphathwa
kwamadela uyawahlonipha amalungelo amasiko kanye nezinkolo zabantu.
Njengokuthi nje, ukuhlabela imishado, imisebenzi yamasiko nezinkolo
ezahlukene akuzukuphazanyiswa yilo mthetho.

Abantu bomdabu bayakwazi ukuzicwaningela inyama engalungile. Useshilo
omunye umkhulumi wathi iqatha belithathwa linikezwe isilwane, kungaba yinja
nom yikati, kubonakale ukuthi akufi yini. Abantu bomdabu bayakwazi
ukuzicwaningela inyama engalungile ngaphandle nje-ke uma bephethwe
yindlala. Ukudla ingcuba - isilwane esizifele - kuyingozi. Kodwa-ke, umuntu
olambile uzama ngakho konke ukuze abone ukuthi iyabulala yini noma cha.
Kuthiwa: An empty stomach knows no law. [Isisu esilambile asazi mthetho.]
Ingcuba-ke idliwa kanjalo. Yikho beyicwaninga baze bayinike izinja
namakati. Basuke befuna ukubona ukuthi bangalandela yini nabo bayidle.
[Ubuwelewele.]

Thina, KwaZulu-Natali, siyawuncoma lo mthetho osezithebeni. [Ihlombe.]
(Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[We in KwaZulu-Natal appreciate the fact that the Bill on the
administration of butcheries respects traditions and people's beliefs. For
instance, the culture of slaughtering a beast on a wedding day and
slaughtering a beast for religious purposes will not be affected by this
Bill.

Africans can identify unhealthy meat. One speaker has said that a piece of
meat was given to an animal, it could be a dog or a cat, so as to see that
it did not die. Africans can identify unhealthy meat except if they are
hungry. Eating the meat of an animal that has died of natural diseases is
dangerous. But a starving person tries all possible means to see if it
kills or not. The saying goes: ``An empty stomach knows no law.'' That is
why people eat the meat of an animal that has been killed by natural
diseases, and that is why they check it first by giving it to cats and
dogs. They want to see if it safe for them to eat it. [Interjections.]

[We in KwaZulu-Natal applaud this Bill. [Applause.]]

Mr R M NYAKANE: Mr Chairperson, the UDM supports this Bill because the aims
and objectives will enable meat consumers to access disease-free meat and
meat products which will be safe and healthy for human consumption.
Consumers will therefore be afforded the opportunity to enjoy their right
to health, which is a basic fundamental right in terms of section 27 of the
Constitution.

There are, however, a few observations I wish to share with the Minister
and the House. As already mentioned, the provisions of clause 7 are the
most important in the Bill. I wish to share the same sentiments with hon
members.

However, I wish to submit to this House that the current appalling
unsanitary conditions under which slaughtering and meat handling take place
at funerals and church conferences are condoned in terms of clause of
section 7(2)(a). The categories of meat consumers mentioned under clause
7(2)(a) are equally susceptible to bovine parasites such as tapeworms. The
crux of the matter is that people should consume disease-free meat
regardless of whether it has been bought over the counter or slaughtered
for funeral or wedding purposes.

Slaughtering or handling of meat carcasses must be subjected to the same
hygienic practices. Furthermore, my understanding is that abattoirs are
graded from A to F. This Bill will succeed in the enforcement of stringent
hygienic practices at abattoirs registered according to grades A and B,
which are appropriate to metropolitan needs. Grade D and E would be
appropriate to rural conditions because of the lower number of beasts
slaughtered per day.

The need for the establishment of the slaughter poles for grades D and E
cannot be over emphasised given the hygiene of slaughtering practices in
the villages. Slaughter poles can be established at strategic locations to
serve a number of villages. This will undoubtedly promote hygiene
awareness. Veterinary technicians can carry out meat inspections and
monitor hygiene practices at these abattoirs or slaughter poles.

Lastly, the Bill advocates the use of agencies outside the sphere of
government to handle the task of meat inspection and the monitoring of
sanitary conditions within slaughtering premises. This move is welcomed on
the bases of the reasons mentioned in this Bill.
May I, however, warn that this process or arrangement must not culminate in
a situation where the abattoir and assignee agents clinch a business deal
or venture ultimately prejudicing the people's right to have access to
healthy meat. Otherwise, the UDM supports this Bill. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Ek stel die agb mnr A
E van Niekerk aan die woord. [I see the hon Mr A E van Niekerk.]

Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. You, have just
become my brother in Afrikaans.

Listening to this debate it seems to me that there is a perception
somewhere that this Bill is the miracle. I get the impression that this
Bill is going to solve the problems of people who have to test meat in
order to see whether it is poisonous or not, and that it is even going to
address racism, since the hon the Deputy Minister referred to racism in
certain practices. But this Bill is no instant cure at all.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Like all Bills.

Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: The hon Deputy Minister is so right, and therefore it
is very important to bring this into perspective. What is it all about?

Die eerste persepsie wat ons moet regstel is dat alle private
slagfasiliteite onhigiÃ«nies is. Dis mos nie waar nie. Alle slagtings op
plase of in agterplase is mos nie onhigiÃ«nies nie. Die ketting van daar af
vorentoe is gewoonlik egter waar die probleem kom, en waar mense vleis nie
higiÃ«nies hanteer nie.

Dit raak mos nou 'n onbegonne taak vir 'n regering om die higiÃ«ne van vleis
van 'n slagting af tot drie, vier, vyf dae of hoe lank ook al daarna te
hanteer en die verantwoordelikheid te neem.

Dit moet dus afgeskaal word tot daar waar daar verantwoordelikheid geneem
kan word.

Dan is daar twee aspekte waarna ons moet kyk. Hierdie twee aspekte is die
lewendige dier en die dier nadat hy geslag is. Sekere siektes kan 'n mens
waarneem voordat die dier geslag is, en daarom moet daar mense beskikbaar
wees wat vooraf inspeksies doen.

'n Mens kan baie maklik sekere siektes waarneem daar waar die dier op die
hoef staan; wanneer hy koorsig is, wanneer hy moeg is, wanneer hy lyk soos
party van ons kollegas vanmiddag laat hier! Dit kan 'n mens van die
uiterlike houding - ek wil amper sÃª in die lyftaal - van die dier reeds
waarneem. Dit is egter net die een gedeelte. Dit is ook die maklike
gedeelte, maar daarna moet gekyk word.

Dan is daar egter sekere siektes wat alleenlik geÃ¯dentifiseer kan word
nadat die dier geslag is. Daarna moet ook gekyk word. 'n Mens kan
byvoorbeeld kyk of die limfkliere vol TB-kieme is. Dit kan 'n mens nie sien
in die lewendige dier nie, maar as jy hom oopsny, kan jy daardie kaasagtige
sweer sien wat daar sit, en dan weet jy wat dit is. Masels, daardie
lintwurmeiers wat tussen die vesels van die vleis is, kan 'n mens nie aan
'n dier sien as hy net daar staan nie. 'n Mens moet hom oopmaak en jy moet
daardie weefsel sny. Daardie TB en masels kan 'n nadelige effek op die mens
hÃª as hy dit inkry.

Daar is ander problematiese siektes wat 'n mens nie op die hoef kan sien
nie en wat jy ook nie kan sien as jy 'n dier geslag het nie, maar wat jy
alleenlik deur bloedtoetse van die dier kan waarneem. Dit is dinge soos
brusellose wat uiteindelik maltakoors by die mens veroorsaak. Dit kan
alleenlik deur bloedtoetse van die dier agtergekom word, en daarom is daar
programme in plek wat dit juis identifiseer, die diere doodmaak en die
mense vergoed - amper soos met die bek-en-klou-seerepidemie wat ons nou het
en waar dit gedoen is omdat dit die enigste manier was.

Hierdie proses was goed in plek hier in ons land, sodat brusellose- en TB-
geaffekteerde melkbeeste en teeldiere byna in totaliteit onder beheer was.
Nou het die agb Adjunkminister se departement, lyk dit my, se geld opgeraak
of hulle het stoom verloor en daardie program is nie meer in plek soos dit
was nie. Ek wil vandag 'n beroep op die agb Adjunkminister doen dat daardie
program weer in oÃ«nskou geneem word sodat dit hierdie wetgewing kan
ondersteun en ons daarmee kan help.

Ons het net twee bekommernisse, en dit is baie kort, mnr die Voorsitter. Ek
sien u wil my draadjie kortknip. Moenie!

AGB LEDE: Knip hom! Knip hom! [Tussenwerpsels.]

Mnr A E VAN NIEKERK: Daardie agb lede verwys nou seker na kortknip, en nie
na die diereboerdery se tipe knip nie! [Gelag.]

Die bekommernis wat ons het, is of die departement die onderbou het. Ons is
oortuig daarvan hy het nie die onderbou om hierdie wetsontwerp rÃªrig in
werking te stel nie, maar ons is oortuig daarvan dat hierdie die begin is
en dat dit deel van 'n proses is.

Die ADJUNKVOORSITTER VAN DIE NRP (Mnr M L Mushwana): Dankie, mnr Van
Niekerk. Ongelukkig mÃ³Ã©t ek u nou knip! [Gelag.] (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[The first perception we must correct is that all private slaughtering
facilities are unhygienic. Of course this is not true. Not all slaughtering
on farms or in backyards is unhygienic. However, the problem normally
arises somewhere along the chain from that point onwards, and where people
handle the meat in an unhygienic manner.

It surely now becomes an impossible task for a government to deal with and
to take responsibility for the hygiene of meat from the point of slaughter
for three, four, five days, or however long afterwards. It must therefore
be scaled down to a point where responsibility can be taken.

Then there are two aspects which we must look at. These two aspects are the
live animal and the animal once it has been slaughtered. There are certain
diseases which one can observe before the animal is slaughtered, and for
that reason people should be available to do inspections beforehand.

One can easily observe certain diseases merely by looking at the live
animal; when it is feverish, when it is tired, when it looks like some of
our colleagues here late this afternoon! One can already observe this in
the animal from the external attitude - I am almost tempted to say in the
body language. However, that is only one aspect. It is also the easy
aspect, but we must look at it.

However, there are certain diseases which can only be identified once the
animal has been slaughtered. These must also be looked at. For example, one
can see whether the lymphatic glands are full of TB germs. One cannot
observe it in the live animal, but once you dissect it, one can see that
caseous abscess which is there, and then one knows what it is. Measles,
those tapeworm eggs which are between the fibres of the meat, cannot be
observed in an animal when it is simply standing there. One has to open it
up and cut that fibre. That TB and measles can have a detrimental effect on
humans if they are ingested.

There are other problematic illnesses which one cannot observe in a live
animal and which one can also not see once one has slaughtered an animal,
but which can only be observed by way of blood tests of the animal. These
are things like brucellosis, which eventually leads to Malta fever in
humans. This can only be identified by testing the blood of the animal and
there are therefore programmes in place precisely to identify it, kill the
animals and compensate the people - almost like the foot-and-mouth epidemic
which we have now and where this was done because it was the only option.

This process was firmly established here in our country, so that
brucellosis and TB-affected dairy cattle and breeding animals were
virtually entirely under control. It now seems to me that the hon the
Deputy Minister's department has run out of money or has lost steam and
that programme is no longer in place as used to be the case. Today I would
like to appeal to the hon the Deputy Minister that that programme should
once again be considered so that it can support this legislation and can
help us in that regard.

We have only two concerns, and this is very brief, Mr Chairperson. I see
that you want to cut me short. Do not!

HON MEMBERS: Cut him short! Cut him short! [Interjections.]

Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Those hon members are now surely referring to cutting
short, and not to the type of cutting involved in animal farming!
[Laughter.]

The concern we have is whether the department has the substructure. We are
convinced that it does not have the substructure really to implement this
Bill, but we are convinced that this is the beginning and that it is part
of a process.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Thank you, Mr Van
Niekerk. Unfortunately I have to cut you short now! [Laughter.]]

Dr H E MATIME (Northern Province): Chairperson, the province of peace, that
is, the Northern Province, supports this Bill. Whether our peacefulness is
due to witchcraft or not is a separate debate which we can embark upon
later. [Laughter.] On the Meat Safety Bill, this country has finally got a
Bill for Africans in Africa by Africans themselves.

The Northern Province deeply appreciates that section of the Bill which
accommodates cultural and religious slaughter. That is why we say that
finally we have a Bill in Africa for Africans by Africans themselves. This
Bill is a source of hope for our province, and we hope that the
implementation of clauses 2 to 5, the logistics thereof, will not produce a
bureaucracy parallel to the administration. We are hoping, but we know it
may not happen.

We are also hoping that the various categories of abattoirs referred to by
the speakers before me, including the slaughter pole, will also be given
the recognition they deserve. This inclusion of all types of abattoirs -
slaughter poles and others - in our view as a province will, we hope, also
enable all the citizens of this country to participate in the meat
industry, because the laws that prevailed before kept them outside.

We also hope, regarding slaughter for research purposes, that that function
will be devolved. We hope the protocol approval for that function will be
devolved to the research institutions or the administration units or to
ethics committees, because we think that is where the function belongs.

Concerning the training, since there is also a clause on training, we also
hope that the exact outcome of the training will be specified in accordance
with the SA Qualifications Authority, so that communities can know exactly
at what level the graduates of that training will be functioning.

Last, but not least, regarding Schedule 1, we feel that the broad principle
needs to be specified, because the varieties peculiar to certain places may
not be adequately addressed in the list. [Applause.]

Moruti M CHABAKU: Monnasetilo, fa nako e ne e le teng, ke ne ke tla bua ka
Setswana le Sesotho. Mme jaanong gonne re le makgabe a dipapetla, ke tla
dirisa tÅ¡homi gore ke oke tse di kwa godimo fela, mme tse dingwe ke di
tlogele di le jalo. (Translation of Tswana paragraph follows.)

[Rev M CHABAKU: Chairperson, if I had enough time, I would address the
House in Setswana and Sesotho. But, because I am in a hurry, I shall use
English to touch on the main points, and leave the rest for some other
time.]

Aangesien die tyd beperk is, sal ek maar in die Engelse taal praat. [Since
time is limited, I shall resort to speaking in the English language.]

Mr Chairperson, Deputy Minister, who is, after all, a Free Stater, special
delegates, hon councillors of this House, for whom I have great admiration,
allow me to express the reflections of the Free State province, as this
Bill affects the greater part of the agricultural economy of the province
on which much of life depends, especially at subsistence level.

Great concern has been expressed at the approval of a certified abattoir
for economic purposes. While we commend the Bill for excluding slaughter
for cultural and religious purposes, there needs to be adequate provision
for slaughter and sale for economic purposes by many who have been deprived
and denied of such economic ventures by past racist and sexist policies.
Simply put, the Bill says that slaughtering is legal for religious and
cultural purposes, but not for making an income, unless it is done at
certified abattoirs, which are at present very few and far between. With
the Free State being declared one of the very poor provinces, the poor and
marginalised will be barred from off-street sales.

Very few cities do have an abattoir nearby. Obviously, abattoirs will also
demand a fee for the slaughtering service. Provision has to be made to
build extra abattoir facilities where health and safety precautions can be
made available and can be effected.

It would be shocking if the truth were revealed about how many abattoirs
belong to people of Caucasian background, as compared to the number owned
by people of indigenous African background. Yet the latter form the bulk of
those who buy and sell meat products. They are also the ones who maintain
their subsistence level of living by buying and selling offal, e mala le
mogodu, not of their own choice, but as a way to make ends meet.

We commend the Minister for tightening the loopholes in the definitions
enshrined in clause (1)(i) to (xxv). We would like to see opportunities
made available for the underprivileged through the erection and maintenance
of abattoirs in rural areas and even urban areas where carnivorous demands
are very acute.

The bulk of buyers and sellers of offal are very poor women and widows.
Provision should also be made to encourage pupils to train in the running
and owning of abattoirs in order to enhance the safety of meat and other
products, be they for home consumption, export or even importation, or for
human or animal consumption.

We should curb the increasing importation of subsidised meat products that
are cheaper to purchase and of inferior quality, thus undercutting and
killing our own domestic production of especially lamb, chicken and cold
meats. What guarantees do we really have that their sources of origin
uphold similar or better standards?

We commend the fact that the Bill will enhance the health and safety
standards laid down for exports. The proposed control of imports and
exports is laudable. Persons doing on-the-spot inspections should reflect
the demographics of our motherland and their numbers should be increased to
this end. We want the number of inspectors representing our own people to
increase in order to compare numerically with the population in relation to
the ethnic groups that make up our beloved South Africa.

Right now very few veterinarians are of indigenous origin. The statistics
are bleak. Equal opportunities of employment, operation and ownership,
especially for women and the youth, should be encouraged, and we should
ensure that regulations are complied with and that penalties are effected.

Regarding the regulations, concerns have been expressed over clause
22(1)(d), according to which fees have to be charged for the examination of
an animal, meat or an animal product. The fees are often prohibitive and
restrictive. Very often people do not have the means to transport the said
animal or products for inspection, nor can they afford the travel expenses
to go to an inspector where the animal or products may be presented for
inspection.

This tends to have unavoidable racial implications because of the past of
our motherland.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Mme Moruti, nako e
fedile. [Order! Reverend, your time has expired.] [Laughter.]

Rev M CHABAKU: One minute. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Ke maswabi, Mme
Moruti. [Order! I am sorry, Reverend.]

Rev M CHABAKU: The overall response to the Meat Safety Bill is approval and
commendations to the Minister.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! Order! Order,
hon member.

Rev M CHABAKU: Amen! [Laughter.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Amen!

Chief M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, once again a piece of legislation aimed at
bettering the lives of our people is being tabled in this Chamber. It is
now up to us to rise above our petty differences and face this challenge.
Let us do it, because we can. Successful people do what failures do not
like to do: Do it, because you can.

What is this Meat Safety Bill? There are some people who are unaware that
they are buying the meat of stolen animals. [Laughter.] [Interjections.]
Animals are slaughtered in unauthorised places. It is a fact. In some
provinces there are many bush abattoirs, unauthorised abattoirs.
[Laughter.]

People sell unhygienic meat at our pension paypoints. When opening those
containers of meat, one is met by a swarm or massed choir of flies,
competing or fighting to have their share. [Laughter.] Hence this
legislation. Let us, as hon members of this House, please join the Minister
and the department. Let us do it, because we can.

After this exercise of debating the Bill that we are engaged in, it will be
illegal for people to slaughter animals in any place other than an
abattoir. Facilities in those abattoirs should meet the required standards.
The abattoirs will be categorised accordingly.

Abattoirs or slaughter facilities have to be registered. This is necessary
to monitor activities in all abattoirs or slaughter facilities. The idea is
noble. Hon members, let us do it, because we can.

The Meat Safety Bill enables the Minister to designate an officer of the
department who, as we all know, is supposed to be a veterinarian. The NEO,
or national executive officer, can also delegate the same powers to any
officer in the department. These are the people who are going to handle
registration applications for abattoirs. Of course the export and import of
meat will now be closely monitored.

The inspection of slaughter facilities will be done unannounced. Officers
can search premises at any time. Licenses, as we have heard, or the
registration certificates of those who contravene any section of the Bill,
will be withdrawn. These are not punitive measures, but corrective ones to
create opportunities to better the lives of our people.

As hon members are all aware, opportunity is missed by most people because
it is dressed in overalls and looks like work. [Laughter.] Hon members, let
us do it, because we can. While it is laudable enough to leave footprints
on the sands of time, it is important to ensure that they all point in a
commendable direction.

Let me deal with some concerns. Will this legislation not make the rich
richer and the poor poorer? Are we not indirectly enriching abattoir
owners? How many of our people from the disadvantaged communities own well-
equipped abattoirs? It is not yet clear who will be monitoring the NEO.
What will the relationship between the NEO and the DG be? Who reports to
whom? I think here we will need the support of our Minister. There is a
saying that people who live in glass houses should make sure that they are
fully dressed. [Laughter.]

When one looks at clause 7(2), under exemptions, we have got every reason
to celebrate. It allows people to slaughter animals anywhere if it is for
their own consumption or for cultural purposes. I can relate a similar
unfortunate incident like the one described by Malefane. An artist from the
Northern Province, commonly known as Penny Penny, bought a house in Kempton
Park and invited his family and friends to come and celebrate.

He slaughtered a cow and wanted to perform some rituals. Unfortunately this
did not go down well with some of the neighbours in that suburb. Within a
few minutes his yard was full of police and members of the SPCA. He was
instructed to tell everybody to leave and to stop partying. He was told
that the laws of this country did not allow people to slaughter animals in
the suburbs. When he protested, he and his mother were badly beaten up.

He was taken to the nearest police station, where he spent the whole night.
[Interjections.] Let us dilute this blood to make sure that it is not that
much thicker than water, because this kind of behaviour makes us sick.
[Interjections.] To some people slaughtering for cultural purposes and
performing of rituals are seen as barbaric. What nonsense!

Having said that, as mature politicians let us not look back in anger, nor
look forward with fear. But, let us look around us with anticipation. With
this legislation we are singing hallelujahs and we are thanking God.

There is no speed limit in the pursuit of excellence. Ride on! [Laughter.]
In the confrontation between the river and the rock, the river always wins,
not through strength, but by perseverance.

The ANC in my province mandated me to say that we support this Bill. I
think hon members can also do it, because we can. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Thank you, KgoÅ¡i. I noticed that
the hon members were enjoying your speech so I gave you one minute extra. I
will not do it again. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Chairperson, it is
difficult to talk after having heard these brilliant rhetoricians speaking
in this House today. Honesty, they simply made good speeches. Everything
that I could have said has been said by all the delegates here. There was
excellent preparation. I do not know whether it is our delegates who are so
good, or whether it is the work done in the provinces that is so good.
Perhaps it is both. It must be both. [Interjections.] Nonetheless, I extend
my compliments on this wonderful debate.

I think all the aspects have been covered. I will only react to very few
things, because of the hour of the day. Dr Matime said something very
important. She said this was a Bill for Africans, made by Africans. I want
to take my cue from there and ask what the heart of the matter is. Why will
this Bill work or not work? What is the ground for this type of thing?

This type of legislation on meat and on food comes from very ancient times.
There is evidence of Assyrian tablets which prescribed rules for coping
with dishonest practices in the sale of food. The correct weights and
measures were prescribed. There are Egyptian scrolls which prescribe rules
for labelling. These are very old things. However, if one looks at the
history of this matter, one sees that at the heart of all these measures
was the need to control corrupt practices and reckless profiteering. That
is the answer to what Ms Gouws, who has now left us, argued and criticised
us about. The real problem, the problem of food health, is closely
connected to reckless profiteering or not, and to honesty.

One will only get a system that really guarantees safe food in a country
where people are honest. In Switzerland, a Swiss person who gets to a red
robot at three o'clock in the morning will not walk over the street, even
though there is no car in sight for seven miles. This is because he is
complying with the law. So what one is really doing in a law like this is
coping with dishonest practices, because that is the African point members
have made.

Although I can tell hon members about Assyrian history, about the laws that
were made in the Middle Ages in Europe to make beer pure and to make food
pure, or to make cheese healthy, people were slaughtering in Africa all
this time and living quite happily. [Interjections.] But why was that. It
was because in African traditional communities there was a social bonding
and social ruling about how one did this type of thing. People could trust
one another. The same went for the old farming communities. One knew that
one could eat a certain farmer's meat, but that one should not eat meat at
another person's farm, because he always got his meat somewhere in the
bush, or whatever. [Interjections.]

That is the point that has been made here. Hon members know what I mean.

Daardie agb lid weet tog waarvan ek praat. [Gelag.]

Mnr A E VAN NIEKERK: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek weet nie so goed soos die
Adjunkminister nie!

Die ADJUNKMINISTER: Daar is sekere Van Niekerks by wie se plaas jy nooit
vleis moes geÃ«et het nie! [Gelag.] Daar was darem goeies ook. By die Du
Toits kon jy Ã¡ltyd vleis geÃ«et het! [Gelag.] (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[That hon member knows what I am talking about. [Laughter.]

Mr A E VAN NIEKERK: Mr Chairperson, I do not know as well as the Deputy
Minister does!

The DEPUTY MINISTER: There are certain Van Niekerks on whose farm one was
well advised never to eat meat! [Laughter.] There were good ones too. One
could always eat meat on the Du Toits' farm! [Laughter.]]

The point is this: Colonialism and modern industrial society destroyed that
traditional decency of working with food. We now sit with our current
situation. I think the word that must go out is that the success of this
depends on the people. That is where hon members were quite correct. There
are laws against murder and theft, but people have been stealing and
murdering one another all the time. A law does not right a wrong
immediately, or by itself. The success of the law will be in the way people
accept and develop these practices and devil a decent society. In the end,
that is one's best guarantee against a problem like unsafe food.

I believe the way the provinces are going to implement this will tell us
how successful it will be. We must look at standards and norms and at
exercising these functions at a national level. I think we can only succeed
if there is real co-operation between the national and provincial levels. I
must tell Rev Chabaku that the person who is heading the KwaZulu-Natal foot-
and-mouth centre is Dr Moganjane. She is a woman and a veterinarian, and
she is running that show. This shows that there can be more women
veterinarians developed in this country, because I know that women care for
animals and they care for food. They also have a natural talent, I have
seen, for working in leadership positions in Natal, and I can only
compliment the women veterinarians who have been involved in this matter.

Could I just comment on the specific question regarding the relationship
between the national executive officer and the director-general. I do not
think there will be any problem at all. This is a general practice, for
example, in terms of the Animal Diseases Act. All these years we have had a
veterinarian who was appointed the director of animal diseases, running
that type of show, who had specific statutory powers.

The Minister makes the appointment and, of course, works very closely with
the director-general. This person, the national executive officer, also has
a line function, which is not going to be separate from the department.
However, if there are any problems, I am sure then the Minister will sit
with a political problem which she will have to sort out in that type of
situation. However, that was a good point, I must say.

Regarding the poor getting poorer by reason of this legislation, I think
there are opportunities created here. Rev Chabaku reported the Free State
position, which was not accepted in the legislation, which was that for
economic purposes slaughtering should have been allowed.

It is the same as in slaughtering for commercial purposes. The moment one
does that, the situation becomes uncontrollable and one cannot say where
one should stop. And for practical purposes that has been recognised. We
have been asked by emerging businesspersons who are starting up abattoirs
themselves to set the correct standards. They have been more prominent in
asking for that than anybody else.

So I think opportunities are being created and, at the same time, the
cultural and religious sides are being protected. But I think the basic
problem is reckless profiteering. Communities must look after their own
affairs. They must not allow themselves to be dictated to, regardless of
the level at which they function. They must not allow themselves to be
victims of corrupt practices.

I thank the House for a brilliant debate, and I commend the Bill to the
NCOP. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M L Mushwana): Order! I take this
opportunity to thank the Minister for engaging the House in a lively debate
and for leading the passage of this important piece of legislation.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF JOINT MONITORING COMMITTEE ON IMPROVEMENT OF
    QUALITY OF LIFE AND STATUS OF CHILDREN, YOUTH AND DISABLED PERSONS -
                          NATIONAL YOUTH COMMISSION

Order disposed of without debate.
Report adopted in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

    CONSIDERATION OF SECOND REPORT OF THE RULES COMMITTEE OF THE NATIONAL
                            COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 19:36.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                        WEDNESDAY, 20 SEPTEMBER 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 20 September 2000 found
         that the South African Boxing Bill [B 58 - 2000] includes
         provisions to which the procedure in section 75 of the
         Constitution applies as well as provisions to which the procedure
         in section 76 of the Constitution applies. Therefore, the Bill is
         classified in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) as a mixed section 75/76
         Bill.


        Since there is no procedure whereby Parliament can pass such a
         mixed Bill, the Bill is out of order.


     (2)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 20 September 2000 in terms
         of Joint Rule 161, classified the following Bills as money Bills:


         (i)     Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 60 - 2000] (National
                 Assembly - sec 77) - (Portfolio Committee on Finance -
                 National Assembly).


         (ii)    Council for Medical Schemes Levies Bill [B 61 - 2000]
                  (National Assembly - sec 77) - (Portfolio Committee on
                  Health - National Assembly).
TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     Special Review by the Auditor-General of the Selection Process of
     Strategic Defence Packages for the Acquisition of Armaments at the
     Department of Defence [RP 161-2000].

2.    The Minister of Finance:


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Corporation for Public
         Deposits for 1999-2000.


     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Development Bank of
         Southern Africa for 1999-2000.

3.    The Minister of Transport:


     (a)    Report of the Regulating Committee for the Airports Company and
         Air Traffic and Navigation Services Companies for 1999-2000.


     (b)    Report of the Regulating Committee for the Airports Company and
         Air Traffic and Navigation Services Companies: Approach to the
         2001/2 - 2005/6 Permissions.

4.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development:


     (a)    Government Notice No R.501 published in Government Gazette No
         21204 dated 19 May 2000, Amendment of the Rules of the
         Magistrates' Courts made in terms of the Rules Board for Courts of
         Law Act, 1985 (Act No 107 of 1985).


     (b)    Government Notice No R.502 published in Government Gazette No
         21204 dated 19 May 2000, Amendment of the rules regulating the
         conduct of the proceedings of the several Provincial and Local
         Divisions of the High Court of South Africa, made in terms of the
         Rules Board for Courts of Law Act, 1985 (Act No 107 of 1985).


     (c)    Proclamation No R.38 published in Government Gazette No 21353
         dated 7 July 2000, Referral of matters to existing Special
         Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal, made in terms of the
         Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act
         No 74 of 1996).


     (d)    Proclamation No R.44 published in Government Gazette No 21410
         dated 28 July 2000, Commencement of the Justice Laws
         Rationalisation Act, 1996 (Act No 18 of 1996).


     (e)    Proclamation No R.52 published in Government Gazette No 21529
         dated 1 September 2000, Commencement of sections 1 to 5 and 10 of
         the Judicial Matters Second Amendment Act, 1998 (Act No 122 of
         1998).


     (f)    Proclamation No R.53 published in Government Gazette No 21529
         dated 1 September 2000, Commencement of section 2 of the Sheriffs
         Amendment Act, 1998 (Act No 74 of 1998).


     (g)    Proclamation No R.54 published in Government Gazette No 21529
         dated 1 September 2000, Commencement of sections 1, 2, 3, 4(2), 5,
         6, 29 (with the exception of subsection (2)), 32, 33, and 34(1) of
         the Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination
         Act, 2000 (Act No 4 of 2000).


     (h)    Government Notice No R.850 published in Government Gazette No
         21504 dated 1 September 2000, Amendment of Regulations made in
         terms of the Prevention of Organised Crime Act, 1998 (Act No 121
         of 1998).


     (i)    Government Notice No R.865 published in Government Gazette No
         21519 dated 1 September 2000, Determination of amounts and
         exclusion of employees for the purposes of section 98A of the
         Insolvency Act, 1936 (Act No 24 of 1936).


     (j)    Government Notice No R.874 published in Government Gazette No
         21517 dated 1 September 2000, Establishment of Equality Review
         Committee and appointment of members thereof, made in terms of the
         Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act,
         2000 (Act No 4 of 2000).

National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Safety and Security:


     (a)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Republic of Chile on Co-operation and
         Mutual Assistance in the Prevention of Drug Abuse and Combating
         the Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances,
         tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (b)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Argentine Republic on Co-operation and
         Mutual Assistance in the Field of Combating the Production of and
         Illicit Traffic in Narcotics and Psychotropic Substances, the
         Improper Use of Drugs and related matters, tabled in terms of
         section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

                         THURSDAY, 21 SEPTEMBER 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


       The Speaker of the National Assembly and the Chairperson of the
       National Council of Provinces withdrew their decision of 1 September
       2000 establishing an ad hoc joint committee on the General
       Intelligence Law Amendment Bill [B 36 - 2000].


       The Minister of Health on 29 August 2000 submitted a draft of the
       Chiropractors, Homeopaths and Allied Health Service Professions
       Second Amendment Bill, 2000, as well as the memorandum explaining
       the objects of the proposed legislation, to the Speaker and the
       Chairperson in terms of Joint Rule 159. The draft has been referred
       to the Portfolio Committee on Health and the Select Committee on
       Social Services by the Speaker and the Chairperson, respectively, in
       accordance with Joint Rule 159(2).


       The following Bills were introduced in the National Assembly on 21
       September 2000 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
       classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


       (i)  South African Reserve Bank Amendment Bill [B 62 - 2000]
              (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on
              Finance - National Assembly) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
              prior notice of its introduction published in Government
              Gazette No 21513 of 29 August 2000.]


       (ii) Judicial Matters Amendment Bill [B 63 - 2000] (National
              Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Justice and
              Constitutional Development - National Assembly) [Explanatory
              summary of Bill and prior notice of its introduction
              published in Government Gazette No 21492 of 22 August 2000.]
       (iii)     South African Rail Commuter Corporation Limited Financial
              Arrangements Bill [B 64 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75)
              - (Portfolio Committee on Finance - National Assembly)
              [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
              introduction published in Government Gazette No 21547 of 29
              August 2000.]


       (iv) African Renaissance and International Co-operation Fund Bill [B
              65 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio
              Committee on Finance - National Assembly) [Explanatory
              summary of Bill and prior notice of its introduction
              published in Government Gazette No 21514 of 29 August 2000.]

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:


     Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces:


     Bills passed by National Assembly on 20 September 2000 and 21Â September
     2000 and transmitted for concurrence:


     (1)    Cross-Border Insolvency Bill [B 4B - 2000] (National    Assembly
         - sec 75) - (Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
         Affairs - National Council of Provinces).


     Bills passed by National Assembly on 21 September 2000 and transmitted
     for concurrence:


     (1)    Local Government: Municipal Systems Bill [B 27 - 2000] (National
         Assembly - sec 75) - (Select Committee on Local Government and
         Administration - National Council of Provinces).


     (2)    Local Government: Municipal Structures Amendment Bill [B 51 -
         2000] (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Select Committee on Local
         Government and Administration - National Council of Provinces).

Papers:

1.    The Chairperson:
     The following papers were tabled on 20 September 2000 and are now
     referred to the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
     Affairs:


     (a)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Republic of Chile on Co-operation and
         Mutual Assistance in the Prevention of Drug Abuse and Combating
         the Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances,
         tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (b)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Argentine Republic on Co-operation and
         Mutual Assistance in the Field of Combating the Production of and
         Illicit Traffic in Narcotics and Psychotropic Substances, the
         Improper Use of Drugs and related matters, tabled in terms of
         section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:
Papers:

1.    The Minister of Education:


     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Qualifications
     Authority for 1999-2000, including Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for 1999-2000.


     Referred to the Portfolio Committe on Education. The Report of the
     Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the South African
     Qualifications Authority for 1999-2000 is referred to the Standing
     Committee on Public Accounts.

2.    The Minister of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology:


     Report on the National Advisory Council on Innovation for 1999.


     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Arts, Culture, Science and
     Technology and to the Select Committee on Education and Recreation.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Economic Affairs on the Competition
     Second Amendment Bill [B 41B - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75),
     dated 19 September 2000:


         The Select Committee on Economic Affairs, having considered the
         subject of the Competition Second Amendment Bill [B 41B - 2000]
         (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it, reports the Bill
         with proposed amendments, as follows:


                                  CLAUSE 1


         1. On page 3, from line 21, to omit ", (b) or (c)" and to
              substitute "or (b)".


         2. On page 3, in line 56, to omit "81(1)" and to substitute
              "82(1)".

                          FRIDAY, 22 SEPTEMBER 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     (1)    On 22 September 2000 the following Bill, at the request of the
         Minister of Health, was introduced in the National Council of
         Provinces by the Select Committee on Social Services. It has been
         referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification
         in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     Chiropractors, Homeopaths and Allied Health Service
              Professions Second Amendment Bill [B 66 - 2000] (National
              Council of Provinces - sec 76) - (Select Committee on Social
              Services - National Council of Provinces) [Explanatory
              summary of Bill and prior notice of its introduction
              published in Government Gazette No 21483 of 25 August 2000.]

                         TUESDAY, 26 SEPTEMBER 2000

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Labour:


     Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for Conciliation,
     Mediation and Arbitration for 1998-99, including Report of the Auditor-
     General on the Financial Statements for 1998-99.

2.    The Minister of Health:


     (a)    Government Notice No R.650 published in the Government Gazette
         No 21313 dated 30 June 2000, Amendment of Regulations made in
         terms of the Medical Schemes Act, 1998.


     (b)    Government Notice No R.755 published in the Government Gazette
         No 21399 dated 28 July 2000, Amendment of Regulations relating to
         milk and diary products made in terms of the Foodstuffs, Cosmetics
         and Disinfectants Act, 1972.


     (c)    Government Notice No R.837 published in the Government Gazette
         No 21486 dated 25 August 2000, Amendment of Regulations relating
         to milk and diary products made in terms of the Foodstuffs,
         Cosmetics and Disinfectants Act, 1972.


     (d)    Government Notice No 757 published in the Government Gazette No
         21409 dated 28 July 2000, Notice of ratification of Protocol on
         Health in Southern African Development Community (SADC).


     (e)    Government Notice No R.836 published in the Government Gazette
         No 21486 dated 25 August 2000, Amendment of regulations regarding
         maximum limits for pesticide residues made in terms of the
         Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and Disinfectants Act, 1972.


     (f)    Government Notice No 838 published in the Government Gazette No
         21483 dated 25 August 2000, Explanatory summary on Chiropractors,
         Homeopaths and Allied Health Service Professions Amendment Bill,
         2000 published for comment.


     (g)    Government Notice No R.872 published in the Government Gazette
         No 21533 dated 8 September 2000, Regulations regarding the use of
         names which may not be used made in terms of the Medical, Dental
         and Supplementary Health Service Professions Act, 1974.


     (h)    Government Notice No R.872 published in the Government Gazette
         No 21533 dated 8 September 2000, Regulations on flouridating water
         supplies made in terms of the Health Laws Amendment Act, 1977.


     (i)    Government Notice No R.921 published in the Government Gazette
         No 21552 dated 15 September 2000, Regulations regarding fees to be
         paid to the South African Nursing Council made in terms of the
         Nursing Act, 1978.


     (j)    Government Notice No R.925 published in the Government Gazette
         No 21552 dated 15 September 2000, Regulations defining scope of
         profession of emergency care made in terms of the Medical, Dental
         and Supplementary Health Service Professions Act, 1974.


     (k)    Government Notice No R.943 published in the Government Gazette
         No 21569 dated 22 September 2000, Regulations made in terms of the
         Medical Schemes Act, 1998.


     (l)    Government Notice No 942 published in the Government Gazette No
         21569 dated 22 September 2000, Explanatory summary of the Mental
         Health Care Bill, 2001 published for comment.


     (m) Government Notice No 876 published in the Government Gazette No
         21535 dated 4 September 2000, Publication of the Chiropractors,
         Homeopaths and Allied Health Service professions Amendment Act,
         2000 (Act No 6 of 2000).

                        WEDNESDAY, 27 SEPTEMBER 2000

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:


1.    The Minister of Finance:


       Government Notice No R.896 published in the Government Gazette No
       21545 dated 8 September 2000, Amendment of Prescribed Fees made in
       terms of section 36 of the Pension Funds Act, 1956 (Act No 24 of
       1956).


2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry:


       Report and Financial Statements of the Support Programme for
       Industrial Innovation for 1999-2000.

                         THURSDAY, 28 SEPTEMBER 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:
    The following member has been appointed to serve on the Committee
     mentioned, viz:


     Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence:


     Pillay, S R

TABLINGS:

National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Chairperson, as Chairperson of the Rules Committee of the
     National Council of Provinces, presents the Second Report of the Rules
     Committee of the National Council of Provinces, dated 19 September
     2000, as follows:

2.    The Rules Committee of the National Council of Provinces, having
     considered proposals for the amendment of the Rules of the National
     Council of Provinces, recommends the following amendments to the Rules:
     1.     Rule 121:  Subcommittees


          To amend Rule 121(1)(b) by the deletion of the words in bold
          brackets and the addition of the words underlined, and to insert a
          new subparagraph (h):


          121.    (1)  The Rules Committee has the following subcommittees:


                 (a)   The Subcommittee on the Council Budget [and Support
                       for Members];


                 (b)   the Subcommittee on Review of the Council Rules [and
                       Parliamentary Privileges];


                 (c)   â¦â¦â¦â¦.


                 (f)   the Subcommittee on Parliamentary Powers and
                       Privileges.


                 (g)   the Subcommittee on Support for Council Members
                 (h)   any other subcommittee appointed in terms of rule
                       118(1)(f)


     2.     Heading:   "Subcommittee on the Council Budget and Support for
        Members"


         To amend the heading by the deletion of the words in bold
         brackets:


         "Subcommittee on the Council Budget [and Support for Members]"




     3.     To insert a heading:    "Subcommittee on Support for Members of
         the Council"


     4.     Rule 125B: Chairperson


        To insert Rule 125B as follows:


        125B:    (1)   The Rules Committee appoints one of the members of
                        the Subcommittee as the chairperson of the
                        Subcommittee.


                  (2)  If the chairperson is not available the remaining
                         members must elect another member to act as
                         chairperson.


     5.     Rule 125D: Decisions


        To insert Rule 125D as follows:


        125D:    (1)   A question before the Subcommittee is decided by
                         consensus.


               (2)     If consensus cannot be reached all views in the
                         Subcommittee must be reported to the Rules
                         Committee.


     6.     Heading:   "Subcommittee on Review of the Council Rules and
                    Parliamentary Privileges"


          To amend the heading by the deletion of the words in bold
          brackets:


          "Subcommittee on Review of the Council Rules [and Parliamentary
          Privileges]"


     7.     To insert a heading:   "Subcommittee on Parliamentary Powers and
         Privileges"


     8.     Rule 129B: Chairperson


        To insert Rule 129B as follows:


        129B:    (1)   The Chairperson of the Council is the chairperson of
                        the Subcommittee.


               (2)     If the chairperson is not available the remaining
                         members must elect another member to act as
                         chairperson.


     9.     Rule 129C: Functions and Powers


        To insert Rule 129C as follows:


        129C:    The Subcommittee may -


               (a)     review existing legislation, the common law and
                       practices relating to parliamentary powers and
                       privileges;


               (b)     make recommendations to the Rules Committee to
                       transform the existing law and practice on
                       parliamentary powers and privileges; and


               (c)     perform any other function, and exercise any other
                       power assigned to it by the Rules Committee.


     10.    Rule 129D: Decisions


        To insert Rule 129D as follows:


        129D:    (1)   A question before the Subcommittee is decided by
                       consensus.


               (2)     If consensus cannot be reached all views in the
                       Subcommittee must be reported to the Rules Committee.






     G N M PANDOR
     CHAIRPERSON: RULES COMMITTEE
     NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
     19 September 2000


     Report to be considered.

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs on
     the Meat Safety Bill [B 29B - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 76), dated
     19 September 2000:


         The Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs, having
         considered the subject of the Meat Safety Bill [B 29B - 2000]
         (National Assembly - sec 76), referred to it, reports the Bill
         with amendments [B 29C - 2000].

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs on
     the Tourism Amendment Bill [B 50B - 99] (National Assembly - sec 76),
     dated 19 September 2000:


         The Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs, having
         considered the subject of the Tourism Amendment Bill [B 50B - 99]
         (National Assembly - sec 76), referred to it, reports the Bill
         with amendments [B 50C - 99].

                          FRIDAY, 29 SEPTEMBER 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:

    (a)     The South African Boxing Bill [B 58 - 2000], introduced by the
          Minister of Sport and Recreation on 23 August 2000 and found to be
          out of order by the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) (see
          Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, p 741), was removed
          from the Order Paper and referred back to the Minister on 28
          September 2000.

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:


     Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces:


     Bill passed by National Assembly on 28 September 2000 and transmitted
     for concurrence:


     (a)    Institution of Legal Proceedings against Organs of State Bill [B
         65B - 99] (introduced as Limitation of Legal Proceedings against
         Government Institutions Bill [B 65 - 99] (National Assembly - sec
         75)) - (Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs -
         National Council of Provinces).

2.    The Chairperson:


     Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces:


     Bill passed by National Assembly on 29 September 2000 and transmitted
     for concurrence:


     (a)    Council for the Built Environment Bill [B 16B - 2000] (National
         Assembly - sec 75) - (Select Committee on Public Services -
         National Council of Provinces).


     (b)    Architectural Profession Bill [B 17B - 2000] (National Assembly
         - sec 75) - (Select Committee on Public Services - National
         Council of Provinces).


     (c)    Landscape Architectural Profession Bill [B 18B - 2000] (National
         Assembly - sec 75) - (Select Committee on Public Services -
         National Council of Provinces).


     (d)    Engineering Profession Bill [B 19B - 2000] (National Assembly -
         sec 75) - (Select Committee on Public Services - National Council
         of Provinces).


     (e)    Property Valuers Profession Bill [B 20B - 2000] (National
         Assembly - sec 75) - (Select Committee on Public Services -
         National Council of Provinces).


     (f)    Project and Construction Management Professions Bill [B 21B -
         2000] (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Select Committee on Public
         Services - National Council of Provinces).


     (g)    Quantity Surveying Profession Bill [B 22B - 2000] (National
         Assembly - sec 75) - (Select Committee on Public Services -
         National Council of Provinces).

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Local Government and Administration
     on the Local Government: Municipal Systems Bill [B 27B - 2000]
     (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 22 September 2000:


         The Select Committee on Local Government and Administration,
         having considered the subject of the Local Government: Municipal
         Systems Bill [B 27B - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred
         to it, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.

                           MONDAY, 2 OCTOBER 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     The following papers were tabled and are now referred to the relevant
     committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Defence and to the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
         Affairs. It is also referred to the Standing Committee on Public
         Accounts for consideration and report:


         Special Review by the Auditor-General of the Selection Process of
         Strategic Defence Packages for the Acquisition of Armaments at the
         Department of Defence [RP 161-2000].


     (2)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and to the Select Committee on Finance:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Corporation for
              Public Deposits for 1999-2000.


         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Development Bank of
              Southern Africa for 1999-2000.


         (c)     Government Notice No R.896 published in the Government
              Gazette No 21545 dated 8 September 2000, Amendment of
              Prescribed Fees made in terms of section 36 of the Pension
              Funds Act, 1956 (Act No 24 of 1956).


     (3)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Transport and to the Select Committee on Public Services:


         (a)     Report of the Regulating Committee for the Airports
              Company and Air Traffic and Navigation Services Companies for
              1999-2000.


         (b)     Report of the Regulating Committee for the Airports
              Company and Air Traffic and Navigation Services Companies:
              Approach to the 2001/2 - 2005/6 Permissions.


     (4)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development and to the Select Security
         and Constitutional Affairs:


         (a)     Government Notice No R.501 published in the Government
              Gazette No 21204 dated 19 May 2000, Amendment of the Rules of
              the Magistrates' Courts made in terms of the Rules Board for
              Courts of Law Act, 1985 (Act No 107 of 1985).


         (b)     Government Notice No R.502 published in the Government
              Gazette No 21204 dated 19 May 2000, Amendment of the rules
              regulating the conduct of the proceedings of the several
              Provincial and Local Divisions of the High Court of South
              Africa, made in terms of the Rules Board for Courts of Law
              Act, 1985 (Act No 107 of 1985).


         (c)     Proclamation No R.38 published in the Government Gazette
              No 21353 dated 7 July 2000, Referral of matters to existing
              Special Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal, made in terms
              of the Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act,
              1996 (Act No 74 of 1996).


         (d)     Proclamation No R.44 published in the Government Gazette
              No 21410 dated 28 July 2000, Commencement of the Justice Laws
              Rationalisation Act, 1996 (Act No 18 of 1996).


         (e)     Proclamation No R.52 published in the Government Gazette
              No 21529 dated 1 September 2000, Commencement of sections 1 to
              5 and 10 of the Judicial Matters Second Amendment Act, 1998
              (Act No 122 of 1998).


         (f)     Proclamation No R.53 published in the Government Gazette
              No 21529 dated 1 September 2000, Commencement of section 2 of
              the Sheriffs Amendment Act, 1998 (Act No 74 of 1998).


         (g)     Proclamation No R.54 published in the Government Gazette
              No 21529 dated 1 September 2000, Commencement of sections 1,
              2, 3, 4(2), 5, 6, 29 (with the exception of subsection (2)),
              32, 33, and 34(1) of the Promotion of Equality and Prevention
              of Unfair Discrimination Act, 2000 (Act No 4 of 2000).


         (h)     Government Notice No R.850 published in the Government
              Gazette No 21504 dated 1 September 2000, Amendment of
              Regulations made in terms of the Prevention of Organised Crime
              Act, 1998 (Act No 121 of 1998).


         (i)     Government Notice No R.865 published in the Government
              Gazette No 21519 dated 1 September 2000, Determination of
              amounts and exclusion of employees for the purposes of section
              98A of the Insolvency Act, 1936 (Act No 24 of 1936).


         (j)     Government Notice No R.874 published in the Government
              Gazette No 21517 dated 1 September 2000, Establishment of
              Equality Review Committee and appointment of members thereof,
              made in terms of the Promotion of Equality and Prevention of
              Unfair Discrimination Act, 2000 (Act No 4 of 2000).


     (5)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour and to the Select Committee on Labour and Public
         Enterprises. The Report of the Auditor-General is referred to the
         Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration and
         report:


         Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for
         Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration for 1998-99, including
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 1998-
         99.


     (6)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Health and to the Select Committee on Social Services:


         (a)     Government Notice No R.650 published in the Government
              Gazette No 21313 dated 30 June 2000, Amendment of Regulations
              made in terms of the Medical Schemes Act, 1998.


         (b)     Government Notice No R.755 published in the Government
              Gazette No 21399 dated 28 July 2000, Amendment of Regulations
              relating to milk and dairy products made in terms of the
              Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and Disinfectants Act, 1972.


         (c)     Government Notice No R.837 published in the Government
              Gazette No 21486 dated 25 August 2000, Amendment of
              Regulations relating to milk and dairy products made in terms
              of the Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and Disinfectants Act, 1972.


         (d)     Government Notice No 757 published in the Government
              Gazette No 21409 dated 28 July 2000, Notice of ratification of
              Protocol on Health in Southern African Development Community
              (SADC).


         (e)     Government Notice No R.836 published in the Government
              Gazette No 21486 dated 25 August 2000, Amendment of
              regulations regarding maximum limits for pesticide residues
              made in terms of the Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and Disinfectants
              Act, 1972.
         (f)     Government Notice No 838 published in the Government
              Gazette No 21483 dated 25 August 2000, Explanatory summary on
              Chiropractors, Homeopaths and Allied Health Service
              Professions Amendment Bill, 2000 published for comment.


         (g)     Government Notice No R.872 published in the Government
              Gazette No 21533 dated 8 September 2000, Regulations regarding
              the use of names which may not be used made in terms of the
              Medical, Dental and Supplementary Health Service Professions
              Act, 1974.


         (h)     Government Notice No R.872 published in the Government
              Gazette No 21533 dated 8 September 2000, Regulations on
              flouridating water supplies made in terms of the Health Laws
              Amendment Act, 1977.


         (i)     Government Notice No R.921 published in the Government
              Gazette No 21552 dated 15 September 2000, Regulations
              regarding fees to be paid to the South African Nursing Council
              made in terms of the Nursing Act, 1978.


         (j)     Government Notice No R.925 published in the Government
              Gazette No 21552 dated 15 September 2000, Regulations defining
              scope of profession of emergency care made in terms of the
              Medical, Dental and Supplementary Health Service Professions
              Act, 1974.


         (k)     Government Notice No R.943 published in the Government
              Gazette No 21569 dated 22 September 2000, Regulations made in
              terms of the Medical Schemes Act, 1998.


         (l)     Government Notice No 942 published in the Government
              Gazette No 21569 dated 22 September 2000, Explanatory summary
              of the Mental Health Care Bill, 2001 published for comment.


         (m) Government Notice No 876 published in the Government Gazette
              No 21535 dated 4 September 2000, Publication of the
              Chiropractors, Homeopaths and Allied Health Service
              Professions Amendment Act, 2000 (Act No 6 of 2000).


     (7)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry and to the Select Committee on Economic
         Affairs:


         Report and Financial Statements of the Support Programme for
         Industrial Innovation for 1999-2000.

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:

    The following members have been appointed to serve on the Committee
     mentioned, viz:


     Ad hoc Committee on General Intelligence Law Amendment Bill:


     Bhengu, M J       IFP         KwaZulu-Natal
    Dlulane, B N ANC   Eastern Cape
     Kolweni, Z S ANC  North West
     Lubidla, E   ANC  Northern Cape
     Mahlangu, J L     ANC   Mpumalanga
    Matthee, P A New NP     KwaZulu-Natal
    Nkuna, C     ANC   Northern Province
    Setona, T    ANC        Free State
     Theron, J L  DP   Gauteng

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Education:


     (1)    Government Notice No 777 published in the Government Gazette No
         21444 dated 11 August 2000, The date on which TEFSA ceases its
         functions made in terms of the National Student Financial Aid
         Scheme Act, 1999 (Act No 56 of 1999).


     (2)    Government Notice No 789 published in the Government Gazette No
         21438 dated 11 August 2000, Approval that the pilot project Travel
         and Tourism Standard Grade, Grade 10 - 12 becomes a fully fledged
         instructional offering, made in terms of the National Education
         Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996).


     (3)    Government Notice No R.848 published in the Government Gazette
         No 21501 dated 1 September 2000, Correction notice to Government
         Gazette No 21192 dated 18 May 2000, made in terms of the National
         Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996).


     (4)    Government Notice No 3102 published in the Government Gazette No
         21539 dated 6 September 2000, Call for public comment on draft
         document - The National Policy Framework on Whole-school
         Evaluation, made in terms of the National Education Policy Act,
         1996 (Act No 27 of 1996).

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Local Government and Administration
     on the Local Government: Municipal Structures Amendment Bill [B 51B -
     2000] (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 2 October 2000:


     The Select Committee on Local Government and Administration, having
     considered the subject of the Local Government: Municipal Structures
     Amendment Bill [B 51B - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to
     it, reports the Bill with proposed amendments, as follows:


                                  CLAUSE 11


         1.  On page 12, after line 15, to add the following subsection:


                 (6) A district municipality or a metropolitan municipality
              may levy and claim a regional services levy and a regional
              establishment levy referred to in section 12(1)(a) of the
              Regional Services Councils Act, 1985, or section 16(1)(a) of
              the KwaZulu and Natal Joint Services Act, 1990.


                                  CLAUSE 15
         Clause rejected.


                                 NEW CLAUSE


         1. That the following be a new Clause:


              Transitional application of section 14 of Act 117 of 1998


                15. For purposes of the transition -
              (a) section 14(2)(b) of the Structures Act must be regarded as
                  permitting the regulation of any legal, practical and
                  other consequences of the disestablishment of an existing
                  municipality, to be effected by way of an amendment to
                  the section 12 notice disestablishing the existing
                  municipality, provided the notice is amended before the
                  date on which the disestablishment of the existing
                  municipality takes effect; and
              (b) section 14(5) of the Structures Act must be regarded to
                  read as follows:
                    "(5)(a) The MEC for local government in a province, by
                  notice in the  Provincial Gazette, may make provision for
                  transitional measures to facilitate the disestablishment
                  of an existing municipality and the establishment of a
                  new municipality.
                  (b)  The measures contemplated in paragraph (a)   may
                       include measures -
                       (i)   establishing a committee to advise the MEC on
                             any matter affecting the transition; or
                       (ii)  in relation to the existing municipality,
                             restricting or regulating the -
                             (aa) alterations to the staff establishment;
                             (bb) appointment of staff or the filling of
                                    vacancies;
                             (cc) upgrading of posts or promotions;
                             (dd) increases in salaries or wages;
                             (ee) disposal or acquisition of assets;
                             (ff) conclusion of contracts with a duration
                                    longer than one year or the renewal of
                                    such contracts; or
                             (gg) use of reserve capital.
                  (c)  The MEC must consult the existing municipality
                       before publishing the notice contemplated in
                       paragraph (a).".

                           TUESDAY, 3 OCTOBER 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson:


     Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces:


     Bills passed by National Assembly on 3 October 2000 and transmitted for
     concurrence:


     (a)    Council for Medical Schemes Levies Bill [B 61 - 2000] (National
         Assembly - sec 77) - (Select Committee on Social Services, the
         Committee to confer with the Select Committee on Finance -
         National Council of Provinces).


     (b)    Higher Education Amendment Bill [B 55B - 2000] (National
         Assembly - sec 75) - (Select Committee on Education and Recreation
         - National Council of Provinces).



TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

(1)   The Minister of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology:


     (1)    Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the event
         of Armed Conflict (the Hague Convention) with regulations for the
         execution and the coverence resolutions, 14 May 1954, tabled in
         terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (2)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention.

2.    The Minister for Welfare and Population Development:


     National Report on Social Development for 1995-2000.

3.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development:


     (1)    Rome Statutes of the International Court of Justice, tabled in
         terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (2)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Rome Statutes.


     (3)    Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and
         Political Rights, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
         Constitution, 1996.


     (4) Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and
         Political Rights, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
         Constitution, 1996.


     (5) Explanatory Memorandum to the protocols.


     (6)    Extradition Treaty between the Government of the Republic of
         South Africa and the Government of the United States of America,
         tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (7)    Treaty between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the United States of America on Mutual Legal
         Assistance in Criminal Matters, tabled in terms of section 231(2)
         of the Constitution, 1996.


     (8)    Explanatory Memorandum to the treaties.


COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Finance Bill [B 40 -
     2000] (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 3 October 2000:


         The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the subject of
         the Finance Bill [B 40 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75),
         referred to it, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Banks Amendment Bill
     [B 56B - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 3 October 2000:


         The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the subject of
         the Banks Amendment Bill [B 56B - 2000] (National Assembly - sec
         75), referred to it, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.


         The Committee notes with concern that the principle Act (the Banks
         Act, 1990) and the Banks Amendment Bill [B 56B - 2000] are gender-
         insensitive, and recommends that the National Treasury correct
         this within 12 months of the adoption of this Report by the
         Council.
3.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the RSA/Nigeria Double
     Taxation Agreement, dated 3 October 2000:


         The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the request for
         approval by Parliament of the Agreement between the Government of
         the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Federal
         Republic of Nigeria for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the
         Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income and
         on Capital Gains, referred to it, recommends that the Council, in
         terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said
         Agreement.


     Report to be considered.

4.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the RSA/China Double
     Taxation Agreement, dated 3 October 2000:


         The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the request for
         approval by Parliament of the Agreement between the Government of
         the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the People's
         Republic of China for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the
         Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income,
         referred to it, recommends that the Council, in terms of section
         231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said Agreement.


     Report to be considered.


