---
title: 'National Assembly - 14 June 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2000-06-14
---

WEDNESDAY, 14 JUNE 2000
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 11:01.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                        TIME FOR DECLARATIONS OF VOTE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr G Q M DOIDGE: Madam Speaker, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the Majority
Party, I move the draft resolution printed in his name on the Order Paper,
as follows:


  That, notwithstanding Rule 81, the time for a declaration of vote today
  shall not exceed two minutes.
Agreed to.

                        COMMEMORATION OF 16 JUNE 1976

                          (Subject for Discussion)

The SPEAKER: Order! Before calling on the hon the Minister to address the
House, I just want to note that the absence of members from this House is
in no way reflective of our desire to commemorate this day. As all members
are aware, there have been problems in trying to travel to Parliament.
Perhaps we are, as MPs, experiencing some of the other problems that most
of our constituents face regularly. I now call upon Minister Pahad to
address the House. [Applause.]

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: Madam Speaker, may I also, on behalf of my
Cabinet colleagues, tender their apologies because they are sitting in a
meeting of the Cabinet right now.

I think it is most appropriate that Parliament continues to mark Youth Day,
which, as we all know, we shall celebrate on Friday. In doing this, it is
also timeous that we take stock and think about the role of the youth in
our nation and our world, and gain inspiration for all of us to build a
better future.

The date 16 June 2000 marks the 24th anniversary of a day which was
exceedingly bloody, but in some respects also beautiful. It was a day on
which many thousands of young people marched to declare war on apartheid,
language bigotry and minority rule. They put their nation first, before
their own pleasures and pastimes, and they risked the bullets with at times
nothing but their bare hands to defend themselves.

There are some who are members of Parliament who were in the forefront of
that particular struggle. With this sacrifice in mind, in two days' time we
shall be celebrating the theme ``Youth action towards the African century''
- a theme dedicated to young people who shall make their future an African
century.

It is also necessary, I think, in reflecting upon 16 June 1976, to state
briefly the profound impact that the Soweto and connected uprisings had on
the entire liberation struggle. For example, it galvanised, energised and
brought into the ANC's people's army, uMkhonto weSizwe, a very great number
of young people. These young people not only added quantitatively to the
people's army, but also, in many serious respects, qualitatively. From
amongst these young people a number are no longer with us. We will recall
that in the heinous raids on Matola in Lesotho, and in Botswana, a number
of our people who were killed were of the 1976 generation.

At the same time, from the 1976 generation we produced some of our best
quality cadres. Today many of them occupy very important positions in the
public, as well as the private sector. But it also behoves us to ask
ourselves: What is it that led to these young people agreeing to make the
sacrifices that they were ready to make? What is it that we need to do
today to fire our young people with that same kind of enthusiasm to
sacrifice in the national interest?

As is well known, a host of activities will take place and have started
already during this month. There will be a week focusing on youth against
crime, an ongoing HIV/Aids awareness campaign, a wreath-laying ceremony at
the Hector Petersen Memorial and a national youth rally, which will be held
on 16 June in Durban. An important event that will take place on that day
will be a joint conference between the ANC Youth League and the Afrikaner
Jeugliga. Both leagues have reached consensus on the fact that there is a
shared commitment to building a new, united, nonracial, nonsexist,
prosperous South Africa.

Let me add that, in the interactions between these two youth leagues, what
the ANC Youth League has found from the NP Youth League is a very positive
approach to South Africa. I might add that it will get the same response
from young Jewish people, because a survey done by the Jewish Board of
Deputies, found a very optimistic approach to South Africa.

It is as well for us to remember that we are sitting in this democratic
Parliament in a free South Africa because there were many millions of
people throughout the world who were prepared to make sacrifices and give
of their time in order for us to liberate South Africa. In what was one of
the most powerful solidarity movements that we have ever seen in the
history of the world, there were young people of all colours and creeds,
men and women, who took to the streets, gave up their time, attended
meetings, and fought so that their governments would come and be a part of
the broad anti-apartheid movement.

Therefore, it is necessary for us today also to pay due homage to those
many millions of young people who gave their all so that we could be in a
democratic South Africa. Those members who are young enough to remember
1968 will recall, if they were in Europe and the USA, the tremendous
struggles put up, especially by students, against the then French
Government, the Vietnam War, and archaic educational systems which stifled
the creativity and initiative of students. The revolution, insofar as it
was a revolution that occurred within the education systems in many parts
of Europe, was a direct consequence of those 1968 student revolts.

I should add that those of us who were in the ANC Youth League and were
students at that time are quite proud that we were part of that great
struggle, including President Mbeki. One of the interesting things about
our own history in South Africa is that, if one takes the ANC from the time
it was founded in 1912, one will find that there were always young people
in the leadership of the ANC.

In more recent times, President Mbeki, Deputy President Jacob Zuma, and the
late Chris Hani were three of the people who, when they were elected onto
the national executive committee of the ANC, were still between the ages of
33 and 35. They were not put there because of their age. They were put
there because it was recognised that they could and would play a
fundamental role in our revolutionary struggle and in the future, and I
think this has proved to be correct.

Today, as we in Parliament mark this wonderful Youth Day, let us make an
appeal to all political parties not to party-politicise this matter. Let us
appeal to all the youth of all the racial and ethnic groups of South Africa
and say to them that this is not a Youth Day only for black youth. This is
a Youth Day for all of us, because this is the day on which the youth
should say to themselves that they are now in a new, democratic South
Africa. The past will not be forgotten, but learning from the past,
together we are going to build that most beautiful of countries, a
democratic, nonracial, nonsexist and prosperous South Africa. [Applause.]

Ms H I BOGOPANE: Madam Speaker, Minister Pahad, members of the House, I
have been tremendously distressed by the renewed calls in the printed and
electronic media about the appropriateness of Youth Day in the new
millennium. These calls are then followed by pictures of drunk young men
shouting insults at their female peers and their mothers and their
President, as if to justify calls that Youth Day be condemned to the
dustbins of the past.

Reactive forces within the opposition party appear to be behind some of the
mischievous and insulting questions raised as to whether the time has not
come to let bygones be bygones, and put the past behind us and look to the
future by closing the chapter on the 16 June uprising that no longer has
any relevance to today's youth. These calls come - needless to say - from
the very same reactionaries who today are sitting comfortably in the
opposition benches, and who were, in fact, the masters of the madness and
evil that triumphed when police opened fire on unarmed children on that
fateful day of 16 June 1976. This is a day to be shared and remembered, not
only by South Africa, but by the international community as a whole.

Children and young people were killed, abducted, raped, tortured, poisoned
and imprisoned for long periods without trial, and harassed mercilessly for
their actions and beliefs. Limbs were broken, joints crushed, heads smashed
and eyes gouged out. Many young people lived in fear, often on the run for
months at a time. Many were forced to flee this country.

I want to state today that the pictures of drunk youths disgracing
themselves and the nation, are precisely why we cannot allow our youth ever
to forget the sacrifices that our children and our young people made in
1976 in the name of justice, peace, freedom and equality. The time has come
for us to honour the young men and women who sacrificed their limbs, their
lives and their sanity so that we could be free as a nation, be given back
our dignity as a people and be reunited with the people of our continent of
Africa. We owe it to those heroes to ensure that our youth of today
internalise the fact that our youth counts, that they can and should make a
difference, that they are central to the development and prosperity of
South Africa, and that they are key role-players in the African century -
leaders of tomorrow.

We also owe it to our country to ensure that no one is marginalised in the
process, that we not only respect the diversity in our nation but that we,
in fact, thrive on it. We need to do this by ensuring that all young
people, irrespective of how poor or rich they are, whether they live in
suburbs, townships, informal settlements, on farms or in rural villages,
whether they are disabled or non-disabled, whether they are black or white,
whether they are Muslim or Christian, can contribute equally to the
development and transformation of our society, as they did in 1976 and
continue to do to date.

We also need to acknowledge that the only way we can ensure that they have
access to equal participation is if we ensure that we level the playing
fields by removing barriers to participation and if we find ways of using
our diversity to contribute to the same vision of the African century -
that of an Africa united against conflict and war, against poverty, against
corruption, against exploitation and against HIV and Aids; as an Africa
proud of who we are, of our achievements and the rich history of our
humanity, an Africa that is ready to take its rightful place in the global
village. We are and we will.

However, we can only achieve this if we are provided with new opportunities
to regain our sense of direction, respect for ourselves and other people,
by being introduced to our roots, by being brought into contact with our
youth leaders of the 16 June uprising, and by being provided with
opportunities and tools for development and improvement. Thus far we are on
the right road. It is, indeed, an achievable dream.

Even more importantly, we need to renew and strengthen our efforts to
ensure that our youth reach adulthood and realise their dreams, by ensuring
that they know how to protect themselves against contracting HIV and Aids.
Thus far we are on the right track. We will win. We are on the right track
in terms of youth development. Never have we been free as we have been in
the past six years as young people in this country. Allow me to quote what
our President said during the launch of the partnership against HIV and
Aids. He said:


  HIV and Aids is not someone else's problem. It is my problem, it is your
  problem. By allowing it to spread, we face the danger that half of our
  youth will not reach adulthood. Their education will be wasted and the
  economy will shrink. There will be a large number of sick people, who the
  healthy will not be able to maintain. Our dreams as people will be
  shattered.
The young people of this country are saying that the same energy and the
same fighting spirit we had in 1976, when we contributed to the liberation
of this country, are being redirected against HIV and Aids. It is a battle
that we as young people are prepared to fight, and we will win.

Youth Day is about honouring the memories of South Africa, of those young
people that have fallen in the name of justice, peace and freedom. Youth
Day is about celebrating the abilities and contributions that the youth
made and are making to the transformation and reconstruction of South
Africa. However, Youth Day is also about reminding ourselves that we need
to ensure that we create an enabling environment within which our youth
and, in particular, youth with disabilities, are able to participate and
contribute to the transformation of society by enabling them to play a
central role in this process.

As young people in this country, we promise our President our support. He
can count on us. We will be there to transform South Africa. [Applause.]

Mr M L DA CAMARA: Madam Speaker and hon members, the DP joins the country
in celebrating our Youth Day. On the eve of 16 June, we, as Parliament,
should use this opportunity to reflect on the state of our youth. There is
undoubtedly much to celebrate. The sacrifices made by young South Africans
in 1976 and throughout the apartheid era have borne fruit. The slogan of
``liberation now, education later’’, has been replaced by cries of
``education now’’.

The days of our young men and women fighting in wars they could neither
understand nor support are now over. It is an indisputable fact that
throughout our recent history, young people have played an important role
in establishing a stable, democratic South Africa. The fact that there are
many of those young people sitting in this House today - perhaps not so
young any more, but still as vociferous - bears testimony to that.

It is therefore reasonable for our youth to expect that such a stable
political climate should bode well for their future. It is thus unfortunate
that this sound political platform has not translated into social and
economic opportunities. [Interjections.] It is with sadness that we must
also realise that too many young South Africans have little to celebrate
this Friday. The achievements of the past are beginning to wear thin, as
many young people contemplate the future with far too many obstacles.

Whilst we must celebrate the fact that more young people have access to
education, we must also accept that the quality of that education in many
instances leaves much to be desired. We must also accept that particularly
rural young people have to walk far too far to get to their schools -
schools which have inadequate facilities, whose teachers are poorly
qualified and in classrooms that are far too overcrowded. We must accept
that those who overcome these hardships must still reckon with the fact
that only one in ten of them will get a job or manage to further their
studies.

We must celebrate the fact that our youth have a new political freedom, but
we must also realise that this freedom is tempered by fear. We must realise
that on the Cape Flats our youth continue to be lured into gangs of
violence and drugs. We must realise that young female people in our country
are being raped at schools and at tertiary institutions and face a wave of
indiscriminate violence. We must also realise that too many young people
themselves are becoming perpetrators of violence and crime.

We must celebrate the fact that young entrepreneurs are slowly starting to
emerge. However, we need to accept that the rate of unemployment among the
youth is far too high. We must also accept that conditions are not
conducive for young people to start their own businesses and that only 30%
of graduates will find employment within five years of their graduation. We
must celebrate all that is good and positive, but we must not forget to
accept these harsh realities. We must never accept these realities as an
excuse for complacency. On the contrary, it must be by accepting these
facts and understanding them better that we as a nation can find solutions
and paths to a better, brighter future.

If we succeed as a nation, then the Government can no longer afford to
shirk its responsibilities to the youth. The Youth Commission has failed.
The Government must, as a matter of urgency, put in place far-reaching
programmes to address the issues of unemployment, crime and HIV/Aids,
amongst the youth. On 16 June the DP will celebrate the potential of our
youth. We will celebrate the fact that the South African opportunities
society is possible and within our grasp if we try. We will celebrate the
courage of our youth in the past and congratulate them on their
achievements, despite great difficulties.

But the DP will also not forget that there is much to be done. We will not
forget that there are many for whom there is little cause to celebrate on
16 June. We will not forget that today some boy has walked many miles to
get to his overcrowded classroom, that some girl has been raped and that
too many others sit at home unemployed, feeling hopeless. On 16 June the DP
will celebrate, knowing that our future is in good hands, because the
future of the youth will determine the future of South Africa. The DP is
determined to stand by our youth and to fight that good fight, to invest in
the potential of those good young people of our country. [Interjections.]
This is a fight we must and will win and for that we celebrate. [Applause.]

Rev K M ZONDI: Madam Speaker, the events of 16 June 1976 have gone down in
the annals of history as some of the most momentous and significant events
in our struggle to liberate South Africa. South Africa was never the same
after the brave and heroic uprising of the students in Soweto, who could no
longer put up with the unacceptable conditions under which they had to
receive education. The date of 16 June 1976 was a tragic moment for black
South Africa, as many young and peacefully demonstrating students were mown
down by trigger-happy police of the apartheid state. They unleashed an
unjustifiable amount of violence against some unarmed, innocent children.

One would have thought that if the Sharpeville incident in the 1960s had
been a mistake, a repeat of that mistake would not be allowed to occur in
Soweto in the mid-1970s. But it was not to be. So, it turned out that
Sharpeville had not, after all, been a mistake, but a deliberate policy of
state repression through the merciless unleashing of violence against
anyone who dared to defy apartheid laws. This gave South Africa the
notorious legacy of state repression which was maintained by violence at
all costs. Indeed, scores of young people lost their lives and, thus, paid
the supreme price for the eventual liberation of their country and its
oppressed majority.

The enforcement of Bantu education, with compulsory instruction in
Afrikaans, was the immediate cause of the uprisings. However, there was no
shadow of doubt as to what the real cause of the problem was. The wider
application of apartheid was at the real root of the problem. The young
people who took to the streets of Soweto were part of the oppressed black
majority, and, as such, were part of the black community which had for
decades been at the receiving end of racial discrimination in its various
forms, be it trusteeship, segregation, the native reserves policy, separate
development, Bantu homelands, urban black councils or, simply, apartheid.

The date of 16 June 1976 has gone down in history as an event that changed
the face of liberation politics in South Africa for good. It put young
people in the forefront of the struggle for liberation, once and for all,
in a manner that had not been seen before in this country. From then on,
the participation of black youth in the struggle for liberation was
heightened to unprecedented levels. The repressive state, on the other
hand, stepped up its conscription of white youth to join the SA Defence
Force to alarming proportions. Apartheid had thus succeeded in polarising
blacks against whites, using the notion of the so-called ``swart gevaar'',
and thus the foundations of what later crystallised into a total onslaught
strategy had been firmly laid.

The rest of what the black youth did in the struggle for liberation from
1976 onwards is now history. Maybe, within the limitations of time we have
available for this debate, it will suffice to say that scores of young
people skipped the country to join the then banned liberation movements;
others remained within the country to join the underground forces and many
more remained within the country to pursue the struggle in various ways,
above board.

Young people became the very hallmark of the struggle to liberate and
democratise this country. They shed their sweat, tears and blood in the
quest to see their country free. Therefore, it is very fitting that this
democratic Parliament of a liberated South Africa should set aside time to
pay tribute to all sections of the youth of our country who, in various
ways, have contributed to the struggle to free South Africa from the
shackles of racism and apartheid.

Today we remember all those young people who laid down their lives in the
pursuit of the struggle to liberate this country. We salute them! They paid
the supreme price for freedom. We are where we are as a result of their
contribution to a broad and multifaceted struggle for freedom. The least we
can do for them is to keep them in our fond memories. The best monument we
can build to their memory is to ensure that the values they fought for
forever remain the hallmark of society in our liberated South Africa. The
best tribute we can give to our youth today is to ensure that we tackle the
many challenges they are still facing in our country that detract from
their hopes and dreams.

We must face head-on the various challenges of poverty and deprivation, in
which many of them live. The best tribute and gift we can give to our youth
and to those who laid down their lives is to ensure that never again will
our society produce the circumstances under which those young people who
died in 1976 grew up. Never again should we allow our society to decline to
such a level that it would be necessary for any young people to have to lay
down their lives for freedom in our country. [Applause.]

Mr C M MORKEL: Madam Speaker, Minister in the Presidency and colleagues in
youth development, yesterday I asked some colleagues from other parties who
are members of the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of
Life and Status of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons whether they would
participate in today's debate. Some of them said no and said that they were
too old. I laughed because I beg to differ. Youth is not merely that
category of citizenry between the ages of 16 and 35. Youth is much more.
Youth is about the spirit of one's soul, whether one is 16 or 60.

Discrimination, therefore, on the basis of age is a human rights abuse and
cannot be tolerated. We are therefore all young and youthful as long as our
spirit allows us to be. Similarly, we face varying degrees of challenges
that remain relative to each other as individuals and as sectors of
development.

Yesterday we heard the President allude to some of these challenges facing
his administration. Mr Mbeki referred to the twin challenges of
globalisation and localisation. After all the blood, sweat and tears shed
by the generations of youth since 16 June 1976 have begun to dry, the
President's statement begs the question: Have the youth of South Africa
become empowered enough to compete amongst the leaders in the global
village or are we becoming the village idiots? Are the youth of our local
communities empowered enough to deal with the challenges that will face the
next generation of South Africans who are born out of communities still
segregated by race and class? Ultimately, did we all, in our own way,
struggle in vain? These are the questions that we need to ask ourselves.

Unfortunately, as a rule, the majority of youth from all South Africa's
varying communities are still not empowered enough, in terms of the demands
of the global village, to participate fully in social, political and
economic activities as citizens utilising the same opportunities.
Similarly, as a rule, the majority of youth from previously disadvantaged
communities are not empowered enough to participate on an equal footing
utilising the same benefits bequeathed to the majority of youth from
previously advantaged communities.

These being the rules, the youth from previously advantaged communities are
nevertheless facing the challenge of becoming the disadvantaged of the
future, unless employment rates grow rapidly enough to avoid the
transformation process that takes from the rich to give to the poor. These
being the rules, the youth from previously disadvantaged communities are
nevertheless facing the challenge of remaining disadvantaged, unless the
culture of hope that any transformation process would inspire is not
confused with the culture of entitlement. Too much of the time, the typical
Afro-pessimism, entrenched by the neocolonialism espoused by the likes of
the DP earlier today, has limited the opportunities for South African and
African youth who too often are portrayed as having a culture of
entitlement. My brothers and sisters simply have unsatisfied basic needs.

Rightly or wrongly, the youth have a right to be angry - angry because of
slow or no delivery. We all face another election, when it will, once
again, be so easy to play the race card in short-sighted efforts to make
political gains, at a time and period when our nation-building demands a
much higher level of statehood. The low level of debate during the
discussion of the President's Vote yesterday was overshadowed by too much
of a deliberate low liberal discourse. Sadly, it was ill-concealed racism.
It did not even attempt to resemble political showmanship. It was pure
gutter politics. Rightly, the youth should be angrier.

An HON MEMBER: Are you angry?

Mr C M MORKEL: I am angry!

An HON MEMBER: Good, be angry!

Mr C M MORKEL: Some leaders are leading some of our youth into the abyss,
that is why I am angry. They are leading them into a place of exile from
which it will be difficult to return, knowing that they have been denied
such a wonderful opportunity to share the benefits of their privilege with
so many young people who share the same biology, regardless of ideology.
Similarly, some leaders skew the past to cloud, instead of inform, our
vision of the future. It is short-sighted. [Interjections.] Thank you!
Youth who follow these leaders will travel the world in search of greater
material wealth, whilst yearning for the spiritual wealth that they can
only receive by giving.

We always supported the principle of having a statutory youth structure to
channel the energy of youth into an integrated growth and development
strategy. But the National Youth Commission, unfortunately, is undermining
the energy with administrative and managerial challenges, as confirmed by
the Minister yesterday. The admission yesterday reiterates two consecutive
years of warning by the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the
commission.

We cannot be on course if the initiatives to facilitate youth development
are continuously frustrated by a breakdown in the relationship between
national, provincial and even local spheres of governance. The recent
amendment to the National Youth Commission Act is an admission that the
structure of the commission was far too bloated and that the relationship
with provinces needed to be strengthened. Yet, a bloated structure needs
more than the abolition of posts, especially when those posts are integral
to the strengthening of the relationship between the commission, the
provinces and local areas of governance. [Interjections.] [Time expired.]

Mr S J MOHAI: Madam Speaker, hon Minister and colleagues, I am speaking
today on this debate about 16 June, a day declared by the ANC Government as
national Youth Day. I am doing so in the fitting memory of young men and
women who laid down their lives at the hands of apartheid security forces
on that fateful day 24 years ago - 16 June 1976.

There is great cause for this House to celebrate the courageous and death-
defying resilience of the successive generations of young people of this
country to end white minority rule. The 1976 youth uprisings marked the
maturation of revolutionary consciousness and an organisation of the
generation of young people against the tyranny of apartheid. Indeed, it was
a turning point when the youth declared: enough is enough.

Accordingly, the struggle of youth against the gutter apartheid education
was inseparably leading to the struggle for the liberation of this country,
led by the people's movement, the ANC. Therefore, our quest to define and
construct a new society that knows no colour, gender, religious and class
prejudice, cannot be realised without the youth being the constituent
ingredient of that construction.

The history of South Africa never remained the same after 16 June 1976. The
reign of terror unleashed by the NP-led apartheid regime, together with
their brothers who gave themselves different names, was met by the
consolidation of popular resistance against the apartheid regime, marked by
the mushrooming of student organisations and civic structures all over the
country.

The education system for black children became a terrain of fierce
contestation between the apartheid and democratic forces. The schools
became war zones between security forces and the youth. Students had to
learn under the barrel of the gun and many died at the hands of the
apartheid security forces. Today, we are told by our colleagues in the
opposition about the collapse of the education system, youth indulging in
crime, lack of skills that pervade the lives of millions of youth in this
country and massive unemployment, particularly relating to the youth. All
they are saying is that the ANC-led Government lacks the vision to address
the plight of young people in this country.

Any attempt to teach the ANC about how it should be the custodian of the
aspirations of young people is tantamount to teaching the Pope about
Catholicism. Fifteen years back, in 1985, the late former president of the
ANC, Comrade Oliver Tambo, at the height of the mass incarceration of the
youth and the disruption of township schools by security forces, had this
to say:


  A nation that does not value its youth deserves no future.

Six years after the ascendance of the ANC to political office, our country
has witnessed the creation of a single nonracial education system; free and
compulsory education; the introduction of the National Student Financial
Aid Scheme in the tertiary education sector; the transformation of the
curriculum to provide for outcomes-based education, in response to the
changing needs of society; the restructuring of further education and
training, to address the backlogs in the education system; the restoration
of the culture of learning in schools; and addressing the problem of
overcrowding without refusing children access to schools. These are but a
few highlights of the achievements of the ANC-led Government in the
education sector in six years. These are achievements which the NP and its
allies could not record in more than four decades.

There has never been a moment that the nation has had hope in its future as
it has today. We concede that there are challenges, but every step that the
ANC-led Government takes translates problems into solutions. With the
renewal of the democratic mandate of the ANC by the overwhelming majority
of this country on 2 June 1999, the people were reconfirming their
confidence that, despite problems and hiccups, their future is secure under
the leadership of the ANC.

In partnership with our people, we are not going to be distracted by the
noises of the DP and its allies. [Interjections.] The manner of proceeding
of the ANC in addressing the aspirations of the youth is not limited to the
provision of services and opportunities to a passive youth populace: The
ANC-led Government has created mechanisms to integrate the youth in the
overall process of governance through, amongst others, the creation of the
National Youth Commission, which by its very nature is the voice of the
youth in shaping the future of this country.

There is no doubt that in the history of this country, it is only the ANC
that has accorded the youth a rightful place in society. The very
considerable proportion of the youth within the ANC representatives in this
Chamber and other legislatures is one touchstone of the ANC's embodiment of
the youth's aspirations. This is not by accident, but a conscious strategy
to build a corps of future leaders who will carry on the legacy of not
being intimidated by the complex challenges of constructing a new society.

In conclusion, allow me to dedicate my speech to Comrade Solomon Mahlangu,
Siphiwe Mthimkhulu, Sipho Muzi, Hector Petersen, and many others who were
deprived of the opportunity of being part of building this new South
Africa. To them I say that there is no better and more fitting way of
honouring them than using Parliament as a popular tribute of our people to
bring about a better life for all. We are on course. [Applause.]

Ms O N MNDENDE: Chairperson, we salute our young heroes who, on 16 June
1976, sacrificed themselves and stood up against the unjust and cruel
actions of the apartheid government. The date of 16 June should have a dual
purpose whereby all South Africans, irrespective of colour, give respect to
and honour the youth and those fallen heroes whose innocent blood was spilt
by the inhuman powers of the past government. That government killed
innocent children who were able to separate good food from poison, the
poison being Bantu education.

We salute those heroes who made it possible that today there should be no
discrimination: we all know that there was discrimination even in the use
of toilets. Before getting into a toilet, one had to look for a sign
indicating which race was to use it, because it would be written either
``slegs blankes'' or ``Nie-blankes'', which meant ``Whites only'' or ``Non-
whites''. Today we have an education system that caters for all and not an
education system that aims at creating an identity crisis and confusion in
certain racial groups.

June 16 should also be the day when those who were involved in those
atrocities of killing innocent children, because one language was made more
powerful than the indigenous languages of the people, should be reminded
that their system caused us to lose our loved ones. The name of Hector
Petersen should be a constant reminder that some souls should still have
been alive today. To those who were involved, 16 June should be the day of
appeasement and the day on which they take a vow that never again will
there be discrimination.

Bekumele ukuba bathi: ``Uxolo, siyazisola. Asinqweneli ukuba inkohlakalo
enje ingaze iphinde ibe khona eluntwini jikelele.'' [They were supposed to
be saying: ``Sorry, we accept the blame. We do not wish to have such
cruelty again in society at large.'']

On that historic day the South African youth who loved their country, and
who formed the majority of the underprivileged, stood up and said:

``Unotshe! Asisokuze siyamkele into yokuba sithi sihleli sinikwa ixibhiya
kakade, ixibhiya yemfundo ekuthiwa yiBantu Education, siphinde sinyanzelwe
ngolwimi lwesiBhulu, lwimi olo ilolwabacinezeli. Ngaphezulu, akukho nento
esinokuthi siyenze xa sinokuthi siphume siye kuphangela ngaphandle,
ngaphandle kokuphangelela oobaas.'' (Translation of Xhosa paragraph
follows.)

[Over our dead bodies! We will never accept, over and above the poor
quality of education called Bantu education, to have Afrikaans, the
language of the oppressor, imposed on us. In addition there is nothing we
can do with it, if we go out to work outside, other than to work for the
`baas'.]

It is also strange that, today, in our new democracy in which there are 11
official languages, including Afrikaans, there are still those who complain
about Afrikaans not getting the recognition that they want. It clearly
shows that those who need a volkstaat do not regret anything or that their
guilty conscience is dead. Because, to them, Afrikaans should still be
superior.

Ifika ibe ngumnqa ke kuthi into yokuba aba bantu bafuna ukuba sibuyele
kundalashe ibe ngabo nabakhalazela ukungalingani, ngelo xesha iilwimi
zazingalingani kwangaphambili. Namhlanje iilwini ziyalingana. Xa sukuba
sicula uNkosi sikelela iAfrika, iAfrika leyo edibanisa zonke izizwe,
edibanisa zonke iilwimi, ubani ufumanisa into yokuba kwa aba bantu abafuni
kumcula uNkosi sikelela iAfrika. Into abayiculayo ngu`Die Stem' yedwa.
Ingaba ke bethu le mini ithetha ntoni kubo namhlanje?

Lilonke, uRhulumente kufuneka asebenzise imali ukuze abumbe ulutsha oluza
kuthi luzingce ngengomso lalo, oluza kuthi ludibane, lube yinto enye,
lukwazi ukwakha uMzantsi Afrika omtsha, lukwazi nokuphuhlisa.

Okokugqibela, into endiyicelayo kuRhulumente yeyokuba kufuneka sithi
namhlanje siyazi into yokuba ulutsha lwasezilalini nalo luyangcamla kuyo le
nto. [Laphela ixesha.] [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[It surprises us that the people who want us to return to the old order are
the ones who are complaining about the unequal status of languages. Yet
previously languages did not have equal status. Today languages do have
equal status. When we sing Nkosi sikelel' iAfrika, the Africa that unites
all nations, that combines all languages, one finds that these very people
do not want to sing Nkosi sikelel' iAfrika. What they sing is `Die Stem'
only. I wonder then what this day means to them.

On the whole the Government must use the money to develop young people who
will be proud of their future, who are going to be united, become one, in
order to build a new South Africa and advance development.

Lastly, what I ask of the Government is that today we must say that we know
that the youth from the rural areas, too, are having a taste of this. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]]

Adv Z L MADASA: Madam Speaker, the ACDP supports the commemoration of 16
June 1976 as a very important day. I, myself, have recollections of that
day, even though I was not sure of what was going on. But I knew that there
was a problem with Afrikaans and the Boers. A friend of mine, Xolile Musi I
recall, was the first victim in Langa. We could not bury him, because when
we went to bury him next to the Langa station, the police came and fired
tear-gas at us; and even his family could not participate in his burial. I
recall that his friends from Harlem Boys' boxing club were the only people
who were able to bury him. It was a very sad occasion.

Having said this, I want to appeal to the Minister, whom I understand is
involved with policy in the President's Office, that I, personally, feel
that there is a vacuum in terms of guidelines for the behaviour of the
youth. I say this because, when I was at UWC between 1989 and 1994, we
never had a single examination disruption, despite the fact that that
institution was at the forefront of the liberation struggle. The reason for
that was the able leadership, at that time, of the UDF in the Western Cape.
Whenever there were attempted disruptions at UWC, they would come and tell
the students that part of the struggle was education. That is the message
that the youth of today do not understand, because they were babies at that
time. They do not have an idea of what happened. And so, I feel that there
is a vacuum in that regard.

Therefore, I think that the Ministry has to examine all the laws that are
passed, even by this House, and ask itself what would be the possible
negative impact on the youth of whatever law is passed in this House. For
example, there are already laws that have impacted negatively on the youth.
Members know that there are a host of them that the ACDP is against. Those
are laws that relate to the relegation of Christian religious tradition to
nothing. We need to bring back that culture in schools as well, because
religion has been completely removed from schools. As a result there is a
vacuum of discipline. I believe that these are the issues that we need to
address.

Having said so, I think this is a very important day that we must continue
to commemorate. [Applause.]

Dr P W A MULDER: Mevrou die Speaker, Jeugdag gaan oor die jeug en die jeug
van enige land is die toekoms van daardie land, en daarom is dit ook
belangrik om te kyk na die jeug om 'n voorspelling te kan maak oor hoe die
toekoms van daardie land gaan lyk. Daarom vind ek dit tog jammer dat die
klem in hierdie debat baie meer op die verlede val as op die toekoms. Ek sê
nie dat 'n mens die verlede kan vergeet nie, of dat 'n mens nie daaruit
moet leer nie, maar ek meen die balans moet gehou word. Ons behoort meer
oor die toekoms te praat. Ek glo dat enige jeug sonder drome en sonder
dissipline geen toekoms het nie. Dit geld vir alle lande. 'n Mens kan maar
gaan kyk waar jy ookal deur die wêreld reis. Dissipline en drome is wat van
die jeug 'n sukses maak.

As ek by die Afrikaanse jeug kom, dan sien ek hulle worstel tans met
presies wat hulle rol is en wat hulle plek vorentoe in Suid-Afrika is.
Hulle probeer bepaal waar hulle moet inpas. Ek is jammer om te sê die
boodskap wat hulle kry, is dat daar nie op die oomblik plek vir hulle is om
in die toekoms in te pas nie. Al wat hulle van 1976 weet, is wat hulle in
die geskiedenisboeke leer. Agb lede moet hulle somme gaan maak om te gaan
kyk; die jongmense wat in 1985 tot 1986 gebore is, gaan die kiesers wees
wat 18 jaar oud is in 2004. Ons werk met 'n totaal nuwe geslag wat klaar
die goed waaroor ons praat as verlede ervaar. Hulle vra: ``Waarom is
regstellende optrede ook tans op ons van toepassing?'' Dan word daar
verduidelik: ``Ja, maar julle is ook bevoordeel,'' en so meer. Dan vra
hulle: ``Gaan regstellende aksie vir ewig van toepassing wees of is daar 'n
afsnydatum waarná ons gelyk kan meeding?'' Dan sê minister Kader Asmal by
die RGN dat daar geen afsnydatum moet wees nie. Dit moet onbeperk
voortgaan. Dan sê die Afrikanerjeug: ``Watter droom is daar vir my verder
in hierdie land, as ek hom nie kan kry daarmee saam nie?''
Dieselfde Minister sê in Alexandra die volgende. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER: Madam Speaker, Youth Day is about the youth and any
country's youth is the future of that country, which is why it is important
to look at the youth in order to predict what the future of that country is
going to be like. That is why I am sorry that the emphasis in this debate
is much more on the past than on the future. I am not saying that one can
forget about the past, or that one should not learn from it, but I feel
that a balance must be struck. We should talk more about the future. I
believe that any youth without dreams and without discipline will have no
future. This applies to all countries. One only has to take a look wherever
one travels through the world. Discipline and dreams are the elements that
make a success of the youth.

When it comes to the Afrikaans youth, I see that they are at present
struggling with precisely what their role and their place in South Africa
will be in the future. They are trying to determine where they must fit in.
I am sorry to say that the message they are receiving is that right now
there is no room for them to tie in with the future. Whatever they know
about 1976 is what they have learnt from the history books. Hon members
must do a few calculations to understand; the young people who were born in
1985 and 1986 will be voters who are 18 years old in 2004. We are dealing
with a totally new generation which already experiences the issues that we
are discussing as the past. They are asking:``Why does affirmative action
also apply to us right now?'' The explanation then comes:``Yes, but you
were also advantaged,'' and so on. They then ask:``Will affirmative action
apply forever or is there a cutoff date after which we can compete as
equals?'' Then Minister Kader Asmal said at the HSRC that there should not
be a cutoff date. It must carry on indefinitely. The Afrikaner youth are
now saying: ``What dreams are there left for me in this country, if I
cannot have them along with it?''

The same Minister said the following in Alexandra.]

This he said to the black youth, and members know what happened in Alex. He
said: ``We are no longer slaves, we have to revolt and make use of all
instruments of democracy to achieve our goals.'' Then he spoke on
discipline. And that is the problem, as far as I can see, on the other side
- discipline from that side with our dreams on the other side.

Die geslag van 1976 het ons ``die verlore geslag'' genoem. Dit is 'n
hartseernaam. Kom ons waak daarteen sodat ons nie weer begin om 'n verlore
geslag aan beide kante, as 'n mens dan so wil praat, te skep in hierdie
stadium nie. Dan is daar nie drome vir hulle nie. Dan is daar nie
dissipline vir hulle nie. Dan is daar nie 'n toekoms vir Suid-Afrika wat
hulle betref nie. Kom ek sluit af uit die Bybel. Ek wil tog Efesiërs 6:1
vir agb lede aanhaal, wat lui:


  Kinders, wees as gelowiges aan julle ouers gehoorsaam, want dit is wat
  die wet van God vereis.

Dissipline, dus. En Efesiërs 6:4:


  Vaders, moenie julle kinders so behandel dat hulle opstandig word nie,
  maar maak hulle groot met tug en vermaning soos die Here dit wil.

Kom ons hoop ons kry die resep reg en met 'n gesonde jeug gaan ons die
toekoms binne, anders is daar nie vir een van ons 'n toekoms nie.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)
[We called the 1974 generation the ``lost generation''. That is a sad name.
Let us at this stage guard against creating another lost generation on both
sides, if I may put it like that, because then there will be no dreams for
them, there will be no discipline for them, and there will be no future in
South Africa as far as they are concerned. I want to conclude by quoting
from the Bible. I would like to quote Ephesians 6:1 to hon members, which
reads:


  Children, obey your parents in the Lord, for this is right.

Discipline, in other words. And Ephesians 6:4:


  And you, fathers, do not provoke your children to wrath, but bring them
  up in the training and admonition of the Lord.

Let us hope we can succeed with the recipe and enter the future with a
sound youth, otherwise there will not be a future for any of us.]

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Madam Speaker, I align myself with the sentiments
expressed by the Minister on the approach to 16 June, that it should be a
national event and that we should therefore approach it in unison.

The youth of our country took to the streets to fight against the apartheid
government's implementation of the Bantu Education Act. This Act meant that
the majority of South Africans were provided with an inferior education
that would not enable them to rise above certain forms of labour. Hundreds
of people were killed in the ensuing clashes with the police.

The youth and leadership involved in the 1976 riots had a vision to
liberate South Africa and, indeed, today, we are able to celebrate their
achievements. We owe it to our fallen young heroes and heroines to take
this process forward by restoring the culture of teaching and learning,
obedience to the authorities and respect for our elders in building our
communities.

Youth were motivated by a strong desire to break down the walls of
oppression and to build a new nation completely different to the existing,
unjust system. The role youth played in the democratisation of South Africa
cannot be underestimated. They fought for quality education and a better
life, and if their immediate expectations are not realised, there exists a
real threat to every institution they fought for, and the institutions are
at risk of being questioned as not having been responsive to their needs.

As leaders, we should endeavour to provide things which will make life
meaningful to them by, amongst others, providing recreational facilities
and educational opportunities. Furthermore, the immediate challenge facing
today's youth is to carry forward the spirit of togetherness in building
our communities and in advancing youth programmes of action; and to
continue to fight, this time through education, in order to better their
lives.

The role the youth played in the democratisation process is acknowledged
and recognised. They now have the responsibility to rebuild our highly
polarised society into a just society where every citizen, young and old,
poor and rich, and urban and rural can live peacefully in a society free
from hunger, slavery of some sort, illiteracy, disease, crime and human
hatred.

In most cases, the way our youth behave leaves much to be desired. Lack of
respect for elders, defiance of authority and drunkenness in public are
some of the things that disgrace us as a nation. But there are youth who
serve as role models to our youth, and we urge them to continue to be a
beacon of hope to those youth who have not lost hope. [Time expired.]

Mr S D MONTSITSI: Madam Speaker, I am grateful for this opportunity which
comes courtesy of the youth of the ANC.

I have said before in this House that South Africa has a youth to be proud
of. When their country needed them most, they responded en masse, as true
patriots, to the clarion call to push the frontiers of apartheid to its
limits. In the process, they paid the supreme price.

The Soweto Students Congress was an organisational formation of students.
There were two representatives from each school. The two representatives
were representing the interests of those schools in that particular meeting
of the council of the SRCs. We also had another section of the students who
had left the country, trained and come back. The problem was that, as the
SRC, we could not work jointly with those students, because they already
were MK cadres and we, as students, had to stick to issues of students.
The most important thing was that, as we planned our own campaigns as
students, we would, for instance, institute a campaign for parents to
support us and not go to work. This armed wing was led by Paul Langa.
Incidentally, he served 20 years on Robben Island for the activities of
what we called ``the suicide squad'' at that time.

The students organised protests, firstly against Afrikaans as a medium of
instruction and, secondly, against Bantu education in general as a
discriminatory school system. The students at that time had their own
council meetings, and they were able to take decisions which bound them as
a student body. However, the aims and objectives of the students at that
point in time were also to fight for their demands for free and compulsory
education, one education department for the whole of South Africa, and the
abolition of apartheid as a discriminatory political system.

The demand for the release of political prisoners and the unbanning of
organisations was yet another issue. This campaign that began in Soweto was
carried through the length and breadth of the country, across all black
townships. The death toll of 500 to 600 casualties during the unrest is
still under dispute, bearing in mind that many young people disappeared
without trace.

In 1976 I attended the funeral of Jackie Malebane at Doornkop cemetery in
Soweto. He was a student at Turfloop University and died after being pushed
from the four-storey building of the campus by the police. As we entered
the cemetery, singing and chanting, the riot squad faced us with rifles
ready. Without any provocation, they suddenly opened fire. A female student
in front of me was hit in the chest. As she fell backwards, she landed on
my feet. There was a gaping wound in her chest. She gasped for breath.
Blood was oozing from her mouth, her nose and her ears. Her body was
twitching as she kicked and kicked. Her eyes were wide open. As she finally
lay still, I came to my senses and I started to run. With the sound of
bullets whistling past my head, I scaled a two-metre wall and landed,
unscathed, on the other side. To this day I do not know how I did it.

I will never forget the look in those eyes. They were probably saying
something to me and to hon members. Probably what they were asking was:
``Was it all in vain?'' I have a response to the question in those eyes, 24
years later. This is the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa. This
is what we were fighting for. [Applause.] This is a copy of the South
African Schools Act that we passed in 1996. This is what we were fighting
for. [Applause.]

On behalf of the generation of 1976 I wish to say the following to the
students and youth of today. The struggle for a better and progressive
education system has been fought and won. Their deaths and the sacrifices
they made have led to us attaining our freedom. The Student Representative
Councils and other rights that they fought for, for which they went to
prison and received banning orders, are now entrenched in our Constitution
and in the South African Schools Act. They should unleash their talents and
fly high.

Therefore, our concept of a student leader and hero are these young people
who will ensure that our education system produces engineers, economists,
medical scientists, who will discover the Aids vaccine, doctors, lawyers,
political revolutionaries, who will defend our young democracy and build a
South Africa that can stand alongside other great nations.

We appeal in particular to the Minister of Safety and Security, Comrade
Steve Tshwete, and the Minister of Justice, Comrade Penuell Maduna, that we
should assure our youth today that never again will they be subjected to
detention without trial, to torture in detention and to being targets for
trigger-happy police to practise on. In short, never again should our
beautiful country be at war with itself. [Applause.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Speaker, the PAC of Azania salutes all the youth of
our country on this 24th anniversary of the Soweto uprising. This uprising
was extraordinary. It involved the youth of this country, inspired by the
lofty ideas of Black Consciousness and Africanism, in which the real soul
of the African finds solace and true identity. Steve Biko and others, like
Onkgopotse Tiro, provided critical leadership to this unparalleled uprising
in the world by school children.

The other leader who played a role in the Soweto uprising was Zephania
Mothopeng, who was sentenced to 30 years' imprisonment by the apartheid
regime for this uprising. Sentencing this PAC leader in a secret trial in
Bethal, Justice Curlewis said:


  You, Mothopeng, acted to sow seeds of anarchy and revolution. The riots
  you engineered and predicted eventually took place in Soweto on June 16
  and Kagiso the next day.

The youth of this country were protesting against a barbaric education
system, which was intended to destroy Africans psychologically and
subordinate them to an inferior position in human society.

Of course, it is a shame that on this day some young people who abandoned
their education to swell the ranks of the armed struggle for liberation are
sitting in the jails of South Africa as criminals, because the African
struggle has been criminalised through the so-called TRC. The youth of this
country must now be offered the opportunity of rising to the stars. The
best must be invested in the African youth. No young person should fail to
acquire an education merely because he or she cannot afford it. We need a
government which will give free education for 20 years to all students in
universities and technikons whose parents are poor.

The PAC wants the youth of this country to be equipped with knowledge that
will enable them to shoulder the tremendous task of rebuilding the broken
walls of Africa and its destroyed shrines. Our youth must receive education
which enables them to be in charge of their cultural and psychological
direction. This education must reinforce the Afrocentric view of the world
and preserve African epistemology. Education is not for personal
aggrandisement or comfort. [Time expired.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, 16 June 1976 proves to us that South Africa
was blessed with young people whose powerful souls were guilty of a crime
under the apartheid regime and that crime was a passion for freedom.

The intention of the innocent, harmless march was to have a mass gathering
of Soweto pupils at Orlando Stadium to express the battle against the
system of inferior education and unjust political practice. It took
ordinary people on an extraordinary day to sacrifice their lives to rewrite
history for future generations in South Africa. Not a single student had a
preconceived idea that the white police establishment would play a happy
war game against unarmed school children by firing live ammunition, with
the intention to kill.
The determination of the white government to account for its savage
political stance by means of the bullet, did not destroy the passion of the
youth to persevere in order to accomplish the virtue of democracy. June 16
gave birth to the violent reaction against black councillors and policemen
who refused to resign from their jobs.

The Soweto Students' Representative Council was spontaneously elected as
the main voice to represent most townships. The boycotting of exams became
the norm in the majority of schools for approximately two decades. This
noble, self-sacrificing, political action was against those who believed
that half a loaf is better than no bread at all. They were, in fact,
advocating that an inferior system of education was better than none at
all. This resulted in further self-destruction which is obviously still
evident in the new, democratic South Africa. The side effects are the
millions of historically disadvantaged youth who are still illiterate and
unemployed. For most, the last resort is crime.

The self-respecting action against the forceful implementation of the
oppressors' language, Afrikaans, was, in essence, correct. The lost
generation - the youth with an historical conscience - had the guts and
integrity to set the record straight for the world. They showed that
political, social and economic control can never be achieved without mental
control. The spiteful efforts to control the African culture and language
in order to destroy our self-determination was an unconditional failure.
The African languages are not only powerful tools for communication, but
they systematically reinforce the innate desire to learn and to know, and
they encourage the internalisation of behaviour which can be expressed in
the development of technology and science. Undoubtedly, the youth who were
part of the freedom struggle proved to us that culture and language are
essential ingredients ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mnr C AUCAMP: Mevrou die Speaker, ek wil op 'n persoonlike noot begin. Die
hoogtepunt in my bediening as predikant oor 'n tydperk van 22 jaar was
ongetwyfeld toe ek op my 45ste verjaardag vyf jaar gelede my eerste
kleinkind, klein Caspertjie, kon doop. By dié geleentheid was die teks uit
Psalm 90, 'n gebed van Moses in daardie moeilike tyd in die woestyn. Hy
sluit die psalm af met die gebed: ``Laat U heerlikheid wees oor ons
kinders.'' Die plek van ons kinders was daardie tyd reeds so belangrik vir
almal van ons.

Daarom wil ek vandag met agb lede praat - en nie die debat verpolitiseer
soos vandag hier gebeur het nie - oor die reg om kind te wees. Het ons
kinders nog werklik die reg om kind te wees? Wat behels dit? Dit behels 'n
sorgvrye bestaan as kind in 'n veilige omgewing. Een van die profete bid
ook dat ons kinders weer op die pleine moet kan speel in veiligheid en
sorgvryheid. Ons trek ons kinders te veel in die grootmense se stryd en
vetes en struggles in.

Te veel van die toesprake vandag gaan ook daaroor; 'n politieke debat oor
die struggle, en nie 'n debat oor kindwees en ons jeug nie. Moet die saak
nie bietjie omgekeer word nie, want ons vergeet van kindwees. 'n Kind het
die reg op geleenthede, op opvoeding en onderwys en oop geleenthede. Ek wil
vir agb lede sê dat die Afrikanerjeug wat niks van apartheid weet nie, nie
verstaan waarom hulle nog steeds gestraf moet word nie.

'n Kind het die reg op 'n identiteit, op kultuur en godsdiens en
taaloordrag van sy ouerhuis, ook in die skool waarheen hy gestuur word,
want hy kom nie as vreemdeling of wêreldburger in hierdie wêreld aan nie.
Dit is baie belangrik dat 'n kind die reg het op twee ouers wat bymekaar
bly in die huwelik. Hoeveel gebroke gesinne is daar nie vandag in Suid-
Afrika nie? Grootmense los mekaar vir elke bakatel en die kinders ly
daaronder. Die kind het die reg op dissipline. 'n Ongedissiplineerde jeug
is 'n verwilderde en ontredderde jeug. Die rankplant het die reg op die
rankstok waarteen hy gevorm kan word. Daarom haal ek ook Psalm 144 aan:
``Laat ons seuns wees soos plante wat opgekweek is in hul jeug.''

In die lig hiervan wil ek vandag 'n beroep doen - dit mag omstrede wees -
dat Jeugdag in Suid-Afrika op 'n ander dag as 16 Junie gevier sal word. Die
datum 16 Junie spreek van opstand en rebellie. Dit spreek van die jeug wat
ons agendas moet vervul en het 'n verdelende karakter. Kom ons kyk eerder
na 'n dag waarop al die jeug van Suid-Afrika saamgesnoer kan word sonder
die verdelende faktore van die hede en sonder stryd. Kom ons gee aan ons
kinders weer die reg om kínd te wees. [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of
Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr C AUCAMP: Madam Speaker, I would like to begin on a personal note. The
highlight in my service as a minister over a period of 22 years was
undoubtedly when, on my 45th birthday five years ago, I could christen my
first grandchild, little Casper. On this occasion the text was from Psalm
90, a prayer by Moses in those difficult times in the desert. He concludes
the psalm with the prayer: ``May Your splendour be upon our children.'' Our
children's place was then already so important to all of us.

For that reason I would like to speak to hon members today - and not
politicise the debate as has happened here today - about the right to be a
child. Do our children really still have the right to be children? What
does this entail? It entails a carefree existence as a child in a safe
environment. One of the prophets also prayed that our children should once
again be able to play in the fields in safety and carefreeness. We involve
our children too much in adults' battles and feuds and struggles.

Too many of the speeches today also dealt with this; a political debate
about the struggle and not a debate on being a child and our youth. Should
the matter not be reversed somewhat, because we forget about being a child.
A child has the right to opportunities, to education and training and open
opportunities. I want to tell hon members that the Afrikaner youth who know
nothing about apartheid do not understand why they should still be
punished.

A child has the right to an identity, to culture and religion and language
transfer from his parents' home, as well as in the school to which he is
sent, because he does not enter this world as a stranger or a citizen of
the world. It is very important that a child has the right to two parents
who remain together in marriage. How many broken families are there in
South Africa today? Adults leave one another over the smallest things and
the children suffer as a result. A child has the right to discipline. An
undisciplined youth is a wild and damaged youth. The vine is entitled to
the support against which it can grow. I therefore also quote from Psalm
144: ``Then our sons in their youth will be like well-nurtured plants.''

In the light of this I would like to make an appeal today - it may be
controversial - that Youth Day in South Africa be celebrated on a day other
than 16 June. The date 16 June denotes revolt and rebellion. It refers to
the youth who must fulfil our agendas and has a divisive character. Let us
rather look at a day on which all the youth of South Africa can be drawn
together without the divisive factors of the present and without struggle.
Let us return to our children the right once again to be children. [Time
expired.]]

Mr N J CLELLAND: Madam Speaker, this Friday, 16 June, we will commemorate
the youth of our country who stood up against the brutal massacre and
defied police bullets in a sustained campaign against oppression,
exploitation and racial humiliation. Their very real foe was the apartheid
state and a system that denied them any hope of a normal life. They took to
the streets in a protest that today is widely recognised as one of the
first turning points in the fight to end apartheid. Youth Day is an
opportunity for all of us to pay tribute to the heroic and selfless role
that the youth of this country played in securing freedom, democracy and
justice.

It is great to celebrate the achievements of the youth of the past; but, as
Government, we have another function to perform and that is to address the
issues of the youth of today and the youth of tomorrow. The challenges they
face are very different from those of 1976. Aids and poverty are central
challenges which threaten the future of our youth. Even Minister Skweyiya
has warned, and I quote: ``South Africa is sitting on a time bomb of
poverty and social disintegration.''

Here are the facts. Every single day 1 700 South Africans, mostly young
South Africans, become infected with HIV - 1 700! A million jobs have been
lost since 1994 and employment in the formal sector of the economy is now
down to a level on a par with that of the late 1970s. That is an ironic and
terrible linkage to the youth of 1976. The future facing our youth looks
bleak.

Our Government's attitude in addressing some of the central challenges
facing the youth varies from the ineffectual to the bizarre, the most
obvious of which is the presidential attitude and approach towards Aids
that creates controversy, ridicule and scepticism. We also have an
expensive, toothless and largely ineffectual Youth Commission tasked to
deal with youth development and transformation, and, of course - with
respect - an hon Minister in the Presidency tasked with youth matters who
has achieved nothing in terms of improving the plight of our youth during
his first year in office. Frankly, the youth of our country deserve more
than an ineffective ragbag of commissions, Ministries, bizarre strategies
and an annual holiday. Government must get real.
The DP believes that the only way in which poverty and unemployment can be
reduced in a substantial and sustainable way in South Africa is for South
Africa to have a growth rate of 6% or more per year. [Interjections.] This
can be achieved, but it requires of Government a resolve, which so far it
has lacked, to tackle thorny issues such as faster privatisation, greater
labour market flexibility and a more efficient Public Service. If the hon
the Minister in the Presidency wants to play a meaningful role in the
eradication of poverty and the upliftment of our youth, he should champion
this cause and use his influence to effect this kind of consequential
change.

With regard to Aids and HIV, the Government must start implementing
effective and efficient strategies based on careful thought and planning.
Financial resources must be used to implement a programmed, response-based
plan to tackle Aids and HIV on three different levels. The first level is
an education programme that informs people of the transmission of Aids and
demystifies the myths surrounding the disease.

The second level is a counselling and treatment programme aimed at
destigmatising HIV/Aids testing and providing pre- and post-HIV test
counselling. It also incorporates treatment initiatives, including
distribution of antiretroviral drugs, condoms and any other treatment that
will prevent an infection. On the third level of the fight against Aids,
there should be a nondiscrimination programme that will be aimed at
sensitising society to the issues of Aids/HIV.

It is time to take decisive action against the challenges that face the
youth today, which are poverty and HIV/Aids. This is the new struggle. It
is different from the struggle of 1976, but the message then, from Oliver
Tambo to the youth, is just as valid now, and I quote:


  There can be no going back. The offensive must be broadened, deepened and
  generalised to encompass the whole country and involve every section of
  our people.

[Applause.]

Mr M A MANGENA: Madam Speaker, the duration of tyranny is as long as the
endurance of the oppressed. When the oppressed stand up and say no more, it
is the beginning of the end of the oppressor. Although we had been under
the heel of racist white settler colonialism for 342 years, we never, as a
people, gave up. June 16, 1976, is a manifestation of that heroic spirit of
our people. The events of 16 June 1976 gave our struggle for liberation a
mighty push forward. Although more than 600 of us were killed by the
regime, Steve Biko murdered in prison, thousands of young people, in
particular, imprisoned, 17 black consciousness organisations banned and
lots of property destroyed, the impetus given to the struggle could not be
reversed. As a result of those events, the political consciousness of our
people reached unprecedented levels. The ranks of the liberation movements,
both inside and outside the country, were swelled by patriots eager to give
their all.

As we prepare to commemorate this important day in the history of our
country, some of us are concerned about the amount of money we are spending
on it. We are not a rich country and our needs are enormous. In a country
where millions live in mekhukhu [shacks]; where school children sit on the
cement floor for lack of desks and others learn under trees; where the
Minister of Education is considering discontinuing the free supply of
stationery and textbooks for lack of money; where patients in public
hospitals sleep on the floor with their own blankets, because of the lack
of linen and beds in those hospitals, it seems inappropriate to spend R20
million on just one commemoration.

Many of us know that we have in the past commemorated these important days
without spending too much money. Can Comrade Minister Pahad tell us why we
have to spend so much money? Do we think that if there is no promise of
food, drink and dancing to the music of the likes of Boom Shaka, the people
might not come? What about the fact that some of us in this House have,
rightly so, been criticising students on campuses for spending too much
money on freshers' balls, when their families and the institutions they are
at are so poor? Will they not say that they are taking a cue from the
state? Will they not tap into the wisdom of Patrick Mphephu of Venda
Bantustan fame and say: If the state did it, why can't we do it?
[Laughter.]

May the memory of our gallant 1976 patriots direct all of us to work hard
for our country, for our people, and may we all be prepared to make
sacrifices for the upliftment of our people. [Applause.]

Mr K M N GIGABA: Madam Speaker, the 24th anniversary of the 1976 uprising
is, once more, upon us. Yet again, our national memory is drawn towards the
youth that time and again had to pay a high price for freedom. Our
attention is drawn to the monumental sacrifices that they had to make in
the firm belief, knowledge and conviction that we had a glorious future to
fight for. This day stands as a watershed between liberty and bondage in
our country, in our region and in our continent.

Exactly 24 years ago, the evil regime of apartheid savagely maimed our
youth in answer to their legitimate demand for freedom and quality
education. In maiming the youth, arresting their leaders and killing
others, such as Hector Petersen and Steve Biko in 1977, while forcing
others to exile, the regime thought it would permanently silence the youth
into submission. However, we continuously rose in revolt against this
criminal system and fought it relentlessly to its demise. We organised
ourselves into mass youth organisations, in anticipation and preparation
for the titanic battles ahead.

The people of South Africa, in their response to this callous challenge
from the apartheid authorities, resorted to all forms of struggle to defend
the lives of their children and youth and their right to be free. The
international community was mobilised like never before. It isolated the
apartheid regime and imposed sanctions against it, demanding freedom for
the people of South Africa. Everywhere in South Africa and abroad one
common message echoed: Down with apartheid; away with fascism; freedom for
the people of South Africa.

Relentlessly, since that fateful day, the youth rebelled against and
refused to be governed by a regime we had not elected. Determined that this
struggle should result in victory, we took the responsibility for fighting
on with courage and the tenacity characteristic of the stoicism displayed
by our forebears during the anticolonial wars.

For this, we became the pre-eminent targets of the apartheid forces of
repression. The full force of repression was unleashed against us in an
endeavour to break us materially and spiritually. But even the persistent
force of the apartheid forces could not achieve this goal. We kept our
heads high and held aloft the banner of freedom, fighting resiliently in
the full believe and conviction that victory was in sight.
It makes sense, therefore, that the nation should salute the youth of 1976,
and all the generations of youth that have ensured that apartheid was as
shortlived as its founders were shortsighted. By forever rising in favour
of freedom and justice, we ensured that their maniacal dreams were turned
into nightmares. Even today, apartheid stands condemned in front of all our
people, and the serial murderers who sustained this system are still
haunted by their deeds.

While the date of 16 June appeared in form only as a rejection of the
imposition of Afrikaans as a language of instruction in African schools, it
was, in essence, a crystallisation of the discontent that had been building
up in African communities, as a consequence of the socioeconomic effects of
apartheid. All that was needed was a single spark that would turn the
apartheid edifice into an uncontrollable conflagration.

By these actions, we conducted ourselves - and we must continue to conduct
ourselves - in a manner that confirmed that youth interests are inseparable
from the interests of our people as a whole. As a result of the victory of
our struggle, we have arrived at a point where we, as a people, can
commence with our task of a continental renaissance. The youth must play a
leading part in the achievement of this goal.

If the saying is true that we must think globally and act locally, then we
should, in every locality, act to contribute to the achievement of the
objectives of the African century. By our local actions - in fighting
crime, learning intensively, working very hard, fighting HIV/Aids, striving
for excellence, embarking on community service, and in everything else that
we do - we will be laying a very strong foundation for our continental
renaissance.

All of us must know that the African renaissance will be a result of local
actions everywhere, the totality of which will lead to the common
reconstruction and development of our continent as a whole. Transcending
our local areas, we must demonstrate our solidarity with the youth of other
African countries such as Angola, which is today plagued by wars,
dictatorships, terrorist violence, floods, drought and poverty.

We have witnessed the savagery of the wars and the lack of democracy in
many countries. We have watched in horror as our fellow African youth have
been maimed in wars. We have come to appreciate the principal necessity for
democracy and elections. We should, therefore, as South African youth, not
demean our rights to vote by abstaining from participation in democratic
elections in our country. Accordingly, we urge the youth of South Africa to
go out and register to vote in the local government elections, and when
that day comes, to vote. Surely, we would also be irresponsible and
negligent if we gave the youth a blank cheque - they must vote ANC!
[Applause.]

We must condemn the recruitment of children to fight wars, and reject the
absurd notion of child soldiers. Through this, we must promote the culture
of solidarity and oneness with our fellow African youth and fight
xenophobia everywhere - in South Africa, Europe or the Americas. As the
current generation of the African youth, we must act according to the
challenges of this epoch, indeed, to earn ourselves the accolade of being
called the renaissance generation.

As we commence this African century, so should we work hard to ensure that
it also becomes a century during which the problem of the colour line,
namely racism, is resolved. June 16, 1976, was produced by this very
refusal of the South African youth to accept that our people should
continue to be defined by race, colour or ethnic group. Even at the height
of racism in our country, we rejected the notion that we should posit black
racism as an alternative to white supremacy. Instead, we put forward the
demand for a nonracial and nonsexist South Africa, insisting that this new
society we were creating be united in its diversity. [Applause.]

Towards this effort, we must take drastic steps to promote dialogue,
understanding and co-operation between the South African youth. Our young
white compatriots must know the truth that it is not democracy and a
nonracial society that threaten their future, but rather racism that
continues to pose a dire threat to our common survival as a nation.
[Applause.]

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank all
the speakers for participating in this debate. First of all, I would like
to turn to the hon member Pieter Mulder. He knows that for a long time now
I have been trying to understand why he keeps on saying that Afrikaners and
the Afrikaner youth cannot fit into the new South Africa, when for the
first time in their lives, they have an environment in which to grow up
free from hatred. It is an environment in which they can look people in the
eye in such a way that they can see them as human beings.

We are now in a position which is better than what we have ever been in
before in the history of this country. [Applause.] I would like to say to
Pieter Mulder that we will, however, continue with our discussion. I would
ask him also to have discussions with the ANC Youth League, and to let us
see how we can solve the problem, if there is a problem.

I want to turn to the two speakers from the DP. I want to say that if it
were not for my great respect for this wonderful institution, I really
would treat with contempt the way they treat with contempt debates in this
Parliament. One of the great failings of white liberalism in South Africa
was not to escape from the stifling and deadening attitudes of paternalism.
From the way in which some of these people speak, it looks as if this is
not yet dead: ``You must tell these poor blackies: `This is what you must
do; this is what you must not do. If you do this, you would be better
off.'' I mean, really! We have had enough of that.

If the DP wants to approach us positively, and if they want to come with
constructive proposals, and if they want to say: ``Let us sit down and find
common solutions to common problems'', we will listen. But, frankly, I can
promise them that I am not going to listen to a lot of barmy lectures.
[Interjections.] It is a great pity that in that party the one person with
soul, the one person who still commands our great respect, is somebody who
is young at heart, but old in age. I just wish the DP would learn something
from the hon Eglin. [Applause.]

Who else but someone who has benefited from a privileged education and a
privileged background can come and stand in this Parliament and say, ``The
quality of education leaves much to be desired'', when listening to Mr
Montsitsi speaking? Of course the quality of education has fallen at the
school Mr Da Camara went to. If he went to a school in the townships, he
would not say the same thing. If he stood here and said, ``How do we work
together to improve the educational facilities for the millions of young
African children who still require them?'', we would have something to talk
about. But he must not come and talk to me about the quality of education,
because that hon member has had all the privileges. He benefited from the
fact that education spending was five times more on every white child than
on every African child. [Interjections.] Yet he sits here and talks about
the quality of education. [Applause.]

I want to say to the hon member that it is about time that he began to
understand that there is a history that we have come from, that there is a
history of resistance that we have been involved in, that there are many
people sitting in this room who were prepared to sacrifice their lives so
that he could come and sit in a democratic parliament. [Interjections.] His
predecessors were sitting in a racist parliament.

Even though there was Helen Suzman, she was alone, but it was a racist
institution. All the local councils that the hon member sat in were racist.
The Johannesburg Council - that stupid thing they put outside the
Johannesburg City Hall - was a racist council. Now it is we, and above all
the black people of South Africa, who, by their sacrifices, have enabled
the hon member to come and sit in this institution. So sometimes the hon
member must just show a little bit of respect to the black people of this
country, and to the democratic institutions of South Africa.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Business suspended at 12:38 and resumed at 14:07.

                              Afternoon Sitting

                      MEETING OF JOINT RULES COMMITTEE

                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Order! Before we deal with the orders of the day, I would like
to remind members that a meeting of the Joint Rules Committee will take
place tomorrow, commencing at 08:30, in the Old Assembly Chamber.

                        TAXATION LAWS AMENDMENT BILL

                               (Introduction)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, hon members, taxes and death are
the inevitables. We cannot do too much about the laws of death, but the
Bill we are presenting before this House today introduces amendments to
almost all the different revenue laws administered by Sars, thereby
incorporating into law most of the tax proposals announced earlier this
year.

As we have said in this House before, the package of tax proposals put
forward this year is the biggest ever announced in this country. This Bill,
therefore, is the first instalment in the codification of those proposals.
There are, however, more to come in the form of the residents-based
approach and capital gains tax later this year and early next year.

The current Bill before the House has already received some extensive press
coverage. What is, however, disappointing is that what so often happens is
that the focus is directed only to issues that are sometimes perceived as
unpopular measures. Again, it is like death and taxes: everybody wants to
go to heaven, but nobody wants to die. [Laughter.] Everybody wants South
Africa not to have a bad tax system, but nobody wants to pay tax.

Therefore, the comments about the changes have, at times, been exceedingly
unflattering, but these are necessary measures to protect South Africa's
tax base and to keep this country in line with international tax practice.
I would, therefore, like to make use of the opportunity, in the first
instance, to highlight certain relief measures dealt with in this Bill.

Firstly, in respect of personal income tax, the Bill fixes a new tax rate
structure for individuals, which will cost this Government about R9,9
billion. This is, undoubtedly, the biggest tax cut for individual taxpayers
that has ever been introduced in this country. It reduces the tax burden
across the board for all taxpayers, and is a step in the direction of
narrowing the gap between the company tax rate and the maximum marginal
rate for individual taxpayers. It eliminates the effects of inflation
completely and, therefore, effectively puts extra money in the pockets of
all taxpaying individuals in this country.

Secondly, interest exemptions, coupled with these, are adjustments that
have been made to the exemption levels for interest received by individual
taxpayers. The R2 000 exemption, as we recall, has been increased to R3 000
in the case of persons under the age of 65 and R4 000 in the case of
persons who are 65 years old and older. As interest-bearing investments
such as fixed deposits are often used by lower-income earners, this measure
should provide some relief in that regard. The family unit can, therefore,
earn up to R6 000 tax-free by investing in such discretionary savings
instruments. This exemption now also includes foreign dividends received by
individuals.

Thirdly, on the question of small business corporations, we all understand
the importance of small business in this country and the role that it can
play in stimulating growth and job creation. We are acutely aware, however,
of the capital formation and cash-flow constraints experienced by these
entities. It is for this reason that this Bill also introduces a dual-rate
tax system for active small business corporations. To qualify for the
reduced rate, they will need to comply with certain criteria, one of which
is that the turnover may not exceed R1 million a year.

Small business corporations will, therefore, with effect from their
financial years commencing on or after 1 April this year, pay tax at a
lower rate of 15% on the first R100 000 of their taxable income. The normal
rate of 30% will apply in respect of the taxable income exceeding R100 000.
This effectively means a cash-flow advantage of R15 000 for each small
business corporation which has a taxable income in excess of R100 000.

Further, just to jog the memory, I will address the depreciation for
permanent structures. A further area of relief is the granting of a
depreciation allowance for tax purposes in respect of certain structures of
a permanent nature, such as pipelines used for the transportation of oil
and gas; telephone and electricity transmission lines; and railway lines.

The development of this country and of the region as a whole is of
paramount importance. The exploitation of natural gas in the area is,
therefore, an important contributing factor to the development of the
region. Similarly, as some of our large parastatals become taxpaying
entities, it is necessary for them to become entitled to internationally
accepted tax practices, in relation to assets, such as railway lines,
electricity and telephone transmission lines which were traditionally state-
owned. It is in this regard that it is proposed that pipelines used for
transporting natural oil or gas be depreciated for tax purposes over 10
years, while electricity, telephone and railway lines will be written off
over 20 years.

In respect of public benefit organisations, so-called nonprofit
organisations, the existing relief measures in this regard have developed
in a somewhat fragmented way over many years. The purpose of the measures
in this Bill is to regulate the exempt status of these types of
organisations and the tax deductibility of donations to such organisations
in a more organised and systematic way, and, at the same time, to extend
the ambit thereof.

The logic of the new provisions will be that this Bill provides the
framework in terms of which I will be able to determine the categories of
public benefit activities that public benefit organisations must engage in
in order to qualify for tax-exempt status. Once that has been done, the
public benefit organisation must approach the commissioner for approval in
terms of certain objective criteria set out in the Bill.

The Bill also extends the category of public benefit organisations, which
now include organisations mainly involved in HIV issues and the provision
of care to persons affected by Aids; pre-primary schools that provide an
approved educare programme, as well as primary schools; children's homes
caring for abandoned, abused or orphaned children; and organisations
involved in caring for destitute aged persons.

One of the much-vaunted elements of change is the taxation of foreign
dividends. As far as some of the other issues in this Bill are concerned,
the proposals relating to the taxation of foreign dividends have attracted
a great deal of attention. The origins of our income tax system can be
traced back to the income tax system of New South Wales in Australia, as it
was at the beginning of the 20th century.

The source principle of taxation, on which many of the tax regimes of the
earlier British colonies was based, is therefore, still, to a large extent,
enshrined in our system, whilst many of those jurisdictions abolished this
principle decades ago. As South Africa has now become a player in the
global market, its tax system must also develop along similar lines and
become internationally competitive.

The taxation of foreign dividends is therefore a step in that direction.
Even the Margo Commission, which advocated the abolition of tax on
dividends in the mid 1980s, suggested that foreign dividends should be
taxed on a basis suggested by that commission. The taxation of foreign
dividends also has the added advantage that it neutralises certain tax
schemes operating through tax havens.

As the proposal applies in respect of all dividends accruing to South
African residents on or after 23 February this year, it has been argued by
some that the measures are of a retroactive nature and that reserves built
up prior to 23 February will now become taxable. A point worth stressing in
this regard is that the amendment will not be introduced on a retroactive
basis, as the event that will trigger the tax will only arise in respect of
dividends accruing to shareholders from the date of the announcement. No
tax will be levied on the companies declaring the dividend. The tax
liability will fall on a different taxpayer, namely the shareholders, on a
proactive basis.

When the secondary tax on companies, STC, was introduced, it was done on
exactly the same basis and no distinction was made between old and new
profits. The same also applied when the STC rate was increased thereafter
or later halved. The proposal also contains internationally accepted relief
measures to avoid the effect of economic double taxation. These will be
further refined when the provisions in relation to the full residence
system are introduced.

As always, the annual Taxation Laws Amendment Bill contains measures to
neutralise attempts to exploit the tax system. I said to tax advisers
gathered earlier this week that, by implementing such avoidance measures,
we keep them honest and creative. This year is no exception and extremely
important measures are proposed to deal with issues of this nature, such as
matching income and expenditure, taxation of restraint of trade, the
proposal to tax certain personal services companies.

The amending Bill before us is 137 pages long and contains 94 clauses.
Within the time limit available it is impossible to deal comprehensively
with all of them. I would just like to place this Bill before the House and
plead for consensus support in the interest of serving the people of this
country. [Applause.]

Bill, together with the introductory speech, referred to the Portfolio
Committee on Finance for consideration and report.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                     (Debate on Supplementary Estimate)

Vote No 3 - Agriculture:

Mnr A J BOTHA: Mevrou die Speaker, agb Minister, die DP het gedurende die
begrotingsdebat oor landbou verskeie tekortkomings geïdentifiseer, en enige
aanvullende bedrae geld word dus verwelkom. Hoewel R10 miljoen nie veel mag
klink nie, is dit geld, en vir die armes en die arme belastingbetalers is
dit sommer baie geld. Dit word aangevra vir die aanwending in die
provinsies, waarop ons dus die aandag moet toespits.

Hieruit tree die uiters kommerwekkende beeld van die Vrystaatse
landboudepartement na vore. Hierdie geliefde provinsie van my wat dekades
lank 'n eenpartyjuk van die NP moes verduur, word nou oorheers deur die ANC
wat daar regeer, presies soos pres Mbeki gister op sy blitsbesoek aan die
Parlement verduidelik het. Die lewering waarna die President verwys het,
vind egter net nie plaas nie. Dit is die einste direkteurs-generaal wat
deur die President aangestel is, en waarop hy so trots is, wat die probleme
skep. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr A J BOTHA: Madam Speaker, hon Minister, the DP identified various
shortcomings during the debate on the agriculture Vote, and any
supplementary amounts of money are therefore welcomed. Although R10 million
may not sound like much, it is money, and to the poor and the poor
taxpayers it is a lot of money. It is being requested for application in
the provinces, on which we should therefore focus our attention.

In this regard the extremely troubling image of the Free State agricultural
department comes to the fore. This beloved province of mine, which had to
endure the one-party yoke of the NP for decades, is now being dominated by
the ANC which is governing there, precisely as President Mbeki explained
yesterday during his flying visit to Parliament. The delivery to which the
President referred is, however, simply not taking place. It is the very
same directors-general who were appointed by the President, and of whom he
is so proud, who are creating the problems.]

The hon President is so committed to land reform, that he even negotiated a
R100 million aid package for our neighbours, who are being mugged by
president Mugabe. But, the President apparently is blissfully unaware that
a similar R100 million aid package has since 1997, for three whole years,
been gathering dust on the bureaucratic shelves in the Free State.

The European Union granted this aid over a period of five years, depending
on commitment and, for our part, a demonstrated capacity for constructive
projects. To date less than 3% of the money has been utilised. Not because
the money is not available or because there are no projects. On the
contrary, the European Union is desperate to give the money. The recipients
are desperate to receive it. The farmers, although besmirched as being
recalcitrant by the Ministers of the hon President, are willing and anxious
to get involved.

And yet nothing is happening, because the political appointees of the
President are demonstrating a lust for internal political infighting that
precludes any reasonable delivery on their part and, worst of all, prevents
others from getting on with the job. The notorious squabbles in the Free
State are being caused by the ANC mandarins of the President who from
Johannesburg appointed three different premiers in six years and now a new
ANC leadership in the province. This administration clearly has little
truck with democracy and demonstrates an alarming distrust of its own
supporters. This same political interference has so incapacitated the Free
State Department of Agriculture that it cannot even place foreign gifts
into the supplicating hands of the people.

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, before I ask the Minister of Agriculture
whether she wishes to respond to that, I want to make it clear that I was
advised, literally as I was coming into the House, that the normal
procedure had been changed by agreement between the parties and that the DP
would not be asking questions but would be making three statements. On the
basis of the agreement between the parties - as I said I was advised as I
walked into the House - I have allowed this. It should not be seen as a
precedent for the future. We will have to discuss it, but since it was
agreed to, I have allowed it for the moment.

Mr J H MOMBERG: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: I may totally not be
here. I know nothing about these three statements. I have not been party to
them. The ANC has not talked about them and I do not know what is going on.
[Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! I am sorry, I was given the wrong impression.

Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: May I address you on
that point of order? There seems to be some misunderstanding. Let us just
clarify matters. The fact is that one is not constrained to ask questions
only. One can make statements; and that has always been the case from 1994
onwards and long before that, too. Thus, the parties... [Interjections.]

I invite the hon the Minister to read the Rules, if he would like to do
that. The parties do not have to ask questions. They can make short
statements as well. Each party has a certain time allocation, and when it
has used up that time, whether it is on one speaker making a speech or
three or six speakers, that is their business. That is the procedure that
we have always followed and we should continue to follow.

The SPEAKER: Order! Mr Chief Whip, I am aware of that procedure. The point
I am making is that it will be very strictly adhered to in that the
statement should be relevant to the supplementary estimates.
[Interjections.] It will not be a general political statement, and I will
apply that very strictly.

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Madam Speaker, maybe to
clarify some of the issues that have been raised by hon A J Botha, I do not
think the allegation that he seems to be making around why spending has not
happened in the Free State, particularly around the donation of the EU, is
actually factual. It has nothing to do with any in-fighting whatsoever.

However, one of the difficulties around that donation was that it was
supposed to be matched on a rand-for-rand basis by the provincial
government. And the provincial government is looking at that matter in
relation to their budget. So, there is no money that is just sitting and
gathering dust, and beneficiaries have been told what difficulties are
being experienced.

I think he should understand that that was an agreement which was reached
at a particular time and the European Union has been informed of some of
the difficulties.

Mr M F CASSIM: Madam Speaker, I would like to enquire from the Minister
whether, in respect of this programme, any money will be made available for
research with regard to the extraction of methanol from sugarcane, to add
to our limited petrol supplies and in order to make sure that South African
motorists will be able to buy petrol at a reasonable price in future?

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Madam Speaker, in response
to the hon Cassim's question, I am not sure whether the money for
agricultural research can actually be used for that type of research.
However, in consultation with the Ministers of Arts, Culture, Science and
Technology, and of Minerals and Energy we can surely explore whether there
are any possibilities of undertaking joint research to deal with the matter
the hon Cassim has raised.

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon Minister, you are welcome to sit. That is my seat
and you are most welcome to take it.

The MINISTER: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

Mr T ABRAHAMS: Madam Speaker, I merely want to ask the hon the Minister
whether she can indicate, with regard to the additional amount that is
being sought, what portion thereof will be directed towards assistance for
up-and-coming previously disadvantaged farmers?

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Madam Speaker, the amount
that has actually been added to the Agriculture budget relates to the Jobs
Summit commitments we made. The programme that is run under that programme
is actually the land care programme, which assists not just farmers, but
also communities in order to improve their natural resource base, be it
land, water or removing alien or invasive vegetation.

Vote No 4 - Arts, Culture, Science and Technology:

Mr I J PRETORIUS: Madam Speaker, I would like to ask the hon the Minister
which poverty relief projects will benefit from the additional funds being
allocated to his department.

The SPEAKER: Order! Minister of Finance, are you responding to that? Oh,
sorry Minister Ngubane, I did not see you there.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: The Minister of Arts, Culture, Science and
Technology is in the House, Madam Speaker.

The SPEAKER: I am sorry, I did not notice that you were in the House.

The MINISTER OF ARTS, CULTURE, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Madam Speaker, I
thought the question was for Agriculture.

The SPEAKER: No, we had moved on. I apologise.

The MINISTER: Madam Speaker, I will certainly tell the hon member that we
have allocated R12 million to the promotion of arts and culture in the
Republic, and R18 million to Programme 5: Science, technology and meta-
information, subprogramme: Science, technology and knowledge system
development and maintenance. I can give more details about this, if needs
be.

The SPEAKER: Order! Regarding the question from the New NP, perhaps Mr
Pretorius wants to repeat his question.

Mr I J PRETORIUS: Madam Speaker, I will repeat my question: Which poverty
relief projects will benefit from the additional funds allocated to the
Minister's department?

The MINISTER OF ARTS, CULTURE, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Madam Speaker, the
major outputs of the allocation will be to projects that comprise job
creation, poverty alleviation and infrastructure development. The projects
will include those that foster cultural tourism, cultural industry
development, heritage development and paper packaging.

These are in the arts and culture sector. They are: firstly, cultural
industry development - the Buy South Africa Campaign, the Eastern Cape and
KwaZulu-Natal spatial projects, small-batch production centres, cinema
development, recording facility development; secondly, heritage development
- Khoisan community centres; thirdly, cultural tourism development -
African cuisine, cultural performances, cultural festivals, business
management skills; and, fourthly, paper packaging projects, which will all
run from June 2000 to March 2001.

With regard to Programme 5: Science, technology and meta-information, the
aim is the implementation of strategic initiatives that facilitate the
introduction of technological processes for developing secondary industries
for agricultural products in such a way that new business ventures are
generated, particularly for community participants in rural and semi-rural
areas.

The outputs will be, firstly, the introduction of processing technologies
for natural and plant fibres and indigenous foods in the following specific
areas: hemp, cashmere, silk, leather, essential oils and foods. The
timeframe for primary processing operations, that is extraction, in
selected communities is September 2000. Manufacturing, that is value-added
products, will be operationalised by February 2001. It is estimated that
these projects will assist in the generation of 850 jobs over a 12-month
period.

Secondly, the introduction of superior indigenous cattle genetic material
to improve the quality of cattle types, which will be set up in selected
committees, will be finalised by September 2000, and the breeding programme
will be initiated by December 2000.
Nkszn O N MNDENDE: Somlomo, njengoko esitsho uMphathiswa ukuba inxalenye
yale mali iza kusetyenziselwa ukuphuhlisa iilali, ndicela, ukubuza
okokuqala, ukuba malungiselelo mani anawo ukuqinisekisa ukuba ngenene
nangenyaniso oko kuza kwenzeka? Okwesibini, njengokuba iimfuno
zasedolophini zingafani nezasezilalini, ngubani oza kwenza izigqibo
ukuqinisekisa ukuba olu phuhliso luhamba ngokweemfuno zabantu bendawo?
(Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[Ms O N MNDENDE: Madam Speaker, as the Minister has said that part of this
money is going to be utilised in developing the rural areas I would like to
know the following. Firstly, what preparations are in place to ensure that
this really happens? Secondly, since the needs in the cities are different
to those in the rural areas, who is going to take decisions to ensure that
development is in line with the needs of the people of the area concerned?]

The MINISTER OF ARTS, CULTURE, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Madam Speaker, in
partnership with technikons we already have programmes going. We have
partnerships with the following technikons: Mangosuthu in Durban, North
West, Pretoria, Bloemfontein and Free State. These are ongoing projects in
the area of chemical and electronics, manufacturing, and metals moulding.

Together with Technikon Witwatersrand, we have a paper packaging programme
in Eshowe which is producing materials out of recycled paper used as
carrier bags and boxes. We have orders placed with major shopping centres,
particularly around gift packaging. We are also working towards providing
wine packaging and so on from recycled paper. The technologies use grass
and all sorts of waste to produce packaging paper. The quality is good
enough, and big industries are impressed.

On the other hand, in the cultural industry sector, we have crafts
promotion, and we are setting up a sector education and training agency. We
already have export programmes with major orders from the jubilee
celebration in Rome. We have had many orders for Easter eggs which have
been bidden for and which have already been delivered. Even Gucci has
placed an order for some of their jewellery. So the infrastructure and
apparatus are there, and we are going to extend the outreach of these pilot
projects into the areas that I have enumerated. Therefore rural communities
will be adequately provided for because we are already active in those
areas.

Vote No 8 - Education:

Adv A H GAUM: Madam Speaker, can the Minister explain the allocation of the
amount of more than R3 million in the supplementary estimate, which has
been earmarked for consultants and other professional services, and tells
us how and for what purposes he intends utilising the services of these
consultants?

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Speaker, the supplementary estimate is for
R31 295 000 and it is not for consultants. The supplementary allocation is
part of a Cabinet decision earlier this year to allocate R75 million to
deal specifically with HIV/Aids. Out of the R75 million, the Minister of
Finance, on the advice of the three Ministers involved, has allocated R31
million to the Department of Education. This will be used to focus on
training young people with regard to HIV/Aids, to train trainers, to
develop learning areas, and I am prepared to answer the question in detail.

As far as the consultants are concerned, this is in fact because the
department is entirely a department of policy-making and monitoring. It is
necessary in a small department, although the question has arisen from the
supplementary estimates, to turn to people on the outside, whom we call
consultants. They are educationalists. They are specialists from outside
who work within the department and add value to the department. They are
not the normal kind of consultants, such as engineers and others, who add
very little value to Government departments. They work together in a team,
and it is absolutely vital for any development in the department to rely on
external services, particularly since the allegation has been made that my
department does not have a sufficient number of specialists at national
level. As these allegations have been made publicly, it is important to
turn to specialists.

On the other hand, we would like to recruit specialists, so that they are
available permanently, but at the same time there are demands for a leaner
Public Service. We cannot have it both ways. We have to rely on external
assistance for the formulation and implementation of policy.

Mr S J DE BEER: Madam Speaker, I would like to ask the hon the Minister a
question about the largest part of the supplementary amount to be voted,
namely R26,9 million, which is described as transfer payments. Firstly, how
is this amount to be spent under programme 3 and what is the desired
outcome? Secondly, can the hon the Minister indicate which provinces will
benefit most from the supplementary amount to be voted?

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Speaker, yes, the constitutional
arrangement is that the provinces are the implementing agencies. Out of the
R31 million, R4,3 million is earmarked for the national department, which
will work out the direction and approach to dealing with HIV/Aids. All the
provinces will obtain an equitable share of the R26,9 million. The amounts
are, if hon members would like to know: for the Eastern Cape - R4,5
million; the Free State - R2,2 million; Gauteng - R2,2 million; KwaZulu-
Natal - R4,6 million; Mpumalanga - R2,4 million; the Northern Cape - R1,4
million; the Northern Province - R4,5 million; the North West - R2,3
million; and the Western Cape - R2,2 million.

How will these amounts be spent? Well, they will, in fact, be spent on the
basis of a business plan worked out by each province. The business plan
will replace the agreements entered into by the Government departments.
Documents comprising about 20 pages have set out in detail how the training
and activities will take place in each of the provinces. They will be
supervised by both the national department and the Department of Finance.
Payment will only be made on the basis of the business plan and stage by
stage, as the business plan is fulfilled, payment will be made. It is a
very important question, for the provinces have not been using the money,
which has, for example, been allocated for training at institutions for
principals, and the in-service training of teachers.

Less than 50% of the money allocated last year was actually used by the
provinces, so in a sense this kind of question will add a particular
strength to the need that provinces must work out the implementation
programme, particularly for HIV/Aids. This is a reflection of the
Government's seriousness that we must be dealing with this - in the absence
of a vaccine - with an educational vaccine of training and education. It
will be a very extensive programme that will be worked out. However, the
hon Mr De Beer is right. The actual implementation will depend on the
capacity and the pertinacity of the provinces.

Adv A H GAUM: Madam Speaker, I am afraid that the hon the Minister's reply
to my question was not correct. It is clear from the estimate that the R31
million is made up, inter alia, of R3 million for consultant services and
other professional services, so my question remains as follows: For what
purpose within the broader framework of Aids will these consultants be
used?

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Speaker, I do not know what lawyers do in
their offices, but one has to train trainers. These are not employed by the
Government department. Perhaps they are employed in the lawyers' offices.
One has to make provision for the institutional arrangements in each of the
provinces. We have to work out, from the central allocation, how the
provinces will implement the R26 million or R27 million, as Mr De Beer has
asked. One therefore needs these specialists, because we do not have the
resources in the central department.

The Auditor-General has said that central Government departments are very
poor at project management. That is a serious matter. Because we are very
poor at project management, one has to have project leaders for that. One
can call them consultants, Beelzebubs or anything one likes, but that is
the technical term that is used in terms of Public Service regulations, and
they are absolutely vital for the implementation of this very important
allocation.

I gain the impression that Mr Gaum, like me, has very little time for
consultants. I agree with him, because they very rarely add value to the
employer or contractor. That is why I think it is important that we should
see them as suppliers of special technical services which are vital for the
implementation of the HIV/Aids programme. I would like to thank the member
very much for his question.

Vote No 9 - Environmental Affairs and Tourism:

Mev M E OLCKERS: Mevrou die Speaker, die Nuwe NP is baie dankbaar vir die
ekstra geld wat goedgekeur is vir Omgewingsake en Toerisme. Ons wil net
graag van die Minister weet of die departement die kapasiteit het om die
ekstra fondse vir die projekte te administreer, en indien wel, of die
Minister vir die Huis 'n kort beskrywing kan gee van watter tipe kapasiteit
dit is. Gaan die provinsies dit administreer, gaan die NRO's dit doen of
wie? Indien nie, gaan dit deur oordragbetalings gedoen word? Hoe gaan dit
gedoen word en watter interne beheermeganismes is in plek om te verseker
dat die geld effektief bestee gaan word in die gemeenskappe waarvoor dit
bedoel is? (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mrs M E OLCKERS: Madam Speaker, the New NP is very grateful for the extra
money which has been approved for Environmental Affairs and Tourism. We
would just like to know from the Minister whether the department has the
capacity to administer the extra funds for the projects, and, if so,
whether the Minister could give the House a brief description of what kind
of capacity this is. Are the provinces going to administer this, are the
NGOs going to do so, or what? If not, is it going to be done by way of
transfer payments? How is this going to be done and what internal control
mechanisms are in place to ensure that the money is going to be spent
effectively in the communities for which it is intended?]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Madam Speaker, I
am sorry but I did not get the interpretation of the first two sentences. I
got it towards the end and I struggled with the interpretation. Could the
hon member repeat her question in English please?
Mrs M E OLCKERS: Madam Speaker, would the Deputy Minister like me to say it
in English? [Interjections.] Should it be just the last two sentences?

The DEPUTY MINISTER: The first two.

Mrs M E OLCKERS: Madam Speaker, we want to know whether she has the
capacity in the department to utilise the funds well. If she does have it,
what is that capacity that she wants to utilise to administer the money in
the interests of communities, the environment, etc. If she is not going to
do it within the department, how is it going to be done? Is it going to be
through transfer payments? Is it going to be internally managed so that the
provinces do it? How is she going to spend that money? [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER: Madam Speaker, firstly, the member knows that we work
with the provinces. Certain projects are implemented by the provinces,
since they have the capacity to do that. Secondly, we are working with
community projects. Once there are community projects, it means that they
are community driven. The communities themselves run the projects in order
that they will be sustainable and they account to us. For instance, our
waste management projects are initiated by the communities themselves, and
then we are able to make those transfers and they run the projects. The
NGOs also assist us in that. Most of our projects are therefore done in
partnership. The provinces, NGOs and communities implement them and account
to us with regard to each and every step and for each and every cent that
they spend. We then do the rest.

Gen C L VILJOEN: Madam Speaker, I would like to ask the Minister to give us
more details on what is meant by tourist product development, in respect of
which R20 million will be spent. I can understand the infrastructure
development and the other R14 million, but what is meant by product
development?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Madam Speaker,
the tourism development allocation is the money we are using to sell South
Africa to other countries and everybody else. It is also used to develop
the tourism industry, because we are quite aware that we have many people
who were left outside that industry. We need to develop this. For instance,
we have cultural and township tourism, and those are the structures that we
need to support as Government. We need to develop them, so that they can
also participate fully in the tourism industry.

Prof L M MBADI: Madam Speaker, how many jobs does the Deputy Minister hope
to create through the R85 million allocated to tourism development and the
R14 million allocated to environmental quality and protection during the
next 10 months of this financial year?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Madam Speaker, I
am sure the hon member is quite aware that I cannot give exact figures at
the moment, but what I want to assure the hon member of is that we are
going to create more jobs than we had last year, as hon members can see in
the budget. If the hon member can make a follow up through my office, I
will send him the exact figures. I do not like thumbsucking.

Vote No 13 - Health:

Mrs S F BALOYI: Madam Speaker, of the R75 million announced by the Minister
of Finance during his Budget Speech for integrated HIV programmes, R36
million has been allocated to the Minister's department. In view of this,
what criteria have been used in the allocation of the R16,8 million to
provinces? Can the Minister assure this House that the money will be spent
as was intended, and that the provinces have the capacity to spend the
money? Thirdly, can the Minister also outline the strategies in place to
ensure that the R20,1 million allocated for national programmes will not be
rolled over again?

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Madam Speaker, yes indeed, I can assure this House
that the money or the resources will be used.

Mr M J ELLIS: [Inaudible.]

The MINISTER: No, that is me. That hon member just has to clean his ears in
order to hear me. I am using the microphone - maybe it is not working. I
was saying yes, I can assure the House that the money will be spent. There
are quite a number of mechanisms that we have put in place. As hon members
know, we have been working feverishly, in the first place, to ensure that
we have a programme based on our policies to stop the spread of HIV in this
country.

We have completed the development of the five-year strategy plan in the
fight against HIV/Aids. This is one programme we were very consultative on
as we were putting it together. Many stakeholders participated in that. As
hon members know, we have also established the SA National Aids Council,
which is a body that will monitor the implementation of that strategy. We,
as the department, have allocated that body R20 million for its operations
for monitoring the implementation of the strategic plan.

We are also in the process of training health workers to use the guidelines
for managing opportunistic infections, and for properly managing pregnant
women who are HIV-positive when they come to deliver. So there is a lot of
activity that is going to be taking place, and we are convinced that this
money will be utilised.

In so far as the provinces are concerned, yes, the R75 million, as hon
members will all remember, was allocated to the three departments by the
Minister of Finance during his Budget Speech. As a department we were
allocated R36 903. We are also going to utilise that money. This is very
much an integrated plan in which the Departments of Health, of Welfare and
of Education are participating. We are going to use this money for the
implementation of the lifeskills programme, the rolling out of counselling
and voluntary testing sites, community outreach programmes and community-
based programmes.

Yes, part of the money, R16 819 of the R36 903, was allocated to the
provinces. We are convinced that the provinces will be able to utilise this
money because they themselves have put in place their own programmes, and
they are also in the process of establishing their own provincial councils.
I am happy to announce that KwaZulu-Natal has in fact launched its own
Provincial Aids Council, and Gauteng will be launching its own council next
week, on 20 June 2000. We are hoping that all the provincial councils will
have been launched by the end of this year. I could continue and read the
figures which show how these funds were allocated. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon Minister, we have asked Ministers to try to confine
their responses to two minutes. I am sure there are a lot of supplementary
questions that will be coming up. Would you like to just draw your answer
to a close?

The MINISTER: Madam Speaker, I was trying to give a comprehensive response,
but if that is enough, I will be happy to sit down.

The SPEAKER: Order! We are going on, as it is, till eleven o'clock tonight.
So, I do not think hon members want to go beyond that. Ministers will be
required to be in the House as well.

Mrs S V KALYAN: Madam Speaker, a supplementary estimate of R36,9 million
has been made available for implementing a national integrated plan for
children infected and affected by HIV/Aids. The areas to be covered include
lifeskills and training, community-based care and support, voluntary
counselling, testing and community outreach. Can the hon the Minister
explain what allocation has been made for drug-based treatment? Secondly,
the plan says that 32 teachers will be trained as lay counsellors. Can the
hon the Minister explain how these 32 teachers were selected; in other
words, what were the selection criteria? And which areas will these
counsellors cover?

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Madam Speaker, the R75 million is not the only
amount we have for implementing our programme. As I said, the R75 million
only covers the implementation of the integrated plan that we have been
working on together with Education and Welfare. We have funds in our
regular budget for acquiring drugs for managing opportunistic infections.
So, it is not part of this allocation that was made available to us by the
Minister of Finance in his Budget.

As far as the teachers are concerned, certainly if it is an integrated
plan, and we are working together with Education, we are going to be
relying on the Department of Education to identify the teachers that must
be trained. But what I know is that we are going to be targeting, in
particular, those provinces where we have the highest prevalence of
HIV/Aids, and it is going to be quite some task for us to identify those
provinces and those particular areas. But we are working together with the
Department of Education.

Dr S J GOUS: Madam Speaker, first of all, we would like to welcome the
extra funds in respect of the fight against HIV/Aids. What I would like to
know from the Minister is whether she could enlighten us on the voluntary
counselling and testing. Firstly, which institutions or areas will be
designated, and on what criteria or basis will this happen? Secondly, which
laboratories will be utilised for the testing? Thirdly, could she give us
an estimate of the costs of one of these rapid tests?

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Madam Speaker, the process that we undertook was to
ask the provinces first of all to do an audit of the counselling and
voluntary testing in the provinces. Once we have done that, then we are
going to roll out the voluntary counselling and testing. We have not quite
finished the audit yet, but I know that most provinces do have these sites.
What was the next question?

Dr S J GOUS: Hon Minister, the next question deals with the basis which
would determine where these sites would be. On what basis would these sites
be allocated - on a higher incidence of HIV/Aids or on a higher population?

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: The hon member has just said it. I think what we
also want to do is ensure that these sites are not only concentrated in the
urban areas, but in the rural areas as well. Yes, we are going to do that
because, at the moment, the Elisa test is the cheapest test that we have -
and I am sure that the hon member knows how much it costs.

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, hon Minister, with regard to the supplementary
estimate amount of over R36 million, the Minister has indicated here that
this is going to assist children infected with and affected by HIV/Aids.
Would this amount cover all the children who are either infected or
affected, or does the Minister foresee that there are children this amount
could not possibly help?

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Madam Speaker, again I think it must be accepted in
this House that the question of fighting the epidemic and of taking care of
those who are infected and affected, including the children, is not just
the responsibility of Government alone. This is why we have also
established Sanac, because members of Sanac in their own projects are able
to mobilise funds, and this is the amount that Government is putting on the
table. The other members of Sanac are doing likewise - mobilising their own
funds, so that we can pool all the resources and, indeed, attend to the
children and orphans who are affected as a result of HIV/Aids.

Mrs S V KALYAN: Madam Speaker, the Minister evaded my question. Could the
Minister be more specific as to the amount within the allocated and/or
additional budget to be used specifically for drug-based treatment?

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Madam Speaker, I am not able to give that figure.
All I can say is that as a department we have R2 billion to spend on drugs
across the board. We have not said which amount will be for purchasing
antiretrovirals, because we know that the same drug which we may use for
opportunistic infections may also be used for something else.

Ms F B MARSHOFF: Madam Speaker, I just want to ask the Minister, following
on from her response on the voluntary counselling and testing issue,
whether the national department has systems in place that would support the
provinces in the implementation of the voluntary counselling and testing,
and whether there are enough resources available for the training of lay
persons to provide home-based care.

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Madam Speaker, the question as to whether we have
enough resources is always problematic, because what is meant by ``enough
resources''? However, as the hon member can see from the amount that has
been allocated, these  resources are additional to what we as a department
already have, and to what other departments have as well. It must also be
accepted that this is not the responsibility of the Department of Health
alone. All departments in Government have the responsibility of
implementing these programmes. All that has happened is that the Minister
of Finance has given us additional funds, and each department has its own
allocation. This is similar with regard to the provinces and also local
government.

So we have some resources, but I cannot say whether these resources are
enough or not. However, we do have mechanisms in place at the national
office to support the training of lay counsellors. We have just completed a
curriculum for training lay counsellors, and there are people at the
national office and also at the provincial offices, who will be monitoring
the training.

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon Minister for Justice and Constitutional
Development, are you requesting the Minister of Health for some medical
assistance? I note that you are limping. [Laughter.]

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Madam Speaker, I
suspect that I am paying for having laughed at the hon Douglas Gibson some
time back. I am also limping now! [Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: Mr Gibson, I was well aware that it would be your fault. I
already have a supplementary question.

The MINISTER: Madam Speaker, I am told by the Minister for Agriculture and
Land Affairs that in Zulu they say: Inxeba lendoda alihlekwa. [Never laugh
at someone's suffering.] One should never laugh at another man's suffering
because one will pay for doing so. [Laughter.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Speaker, on the point of order raised by the hon the
Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development: May I address you on
that as well?

The SPEAKER: On the same point of order, yes.

Mr D H M GIBSON: He has been struck down and retribution was swift and
sure. [Laughter.] But he was so kind to me, and I am sorry that he is
limping. I hope he gets better soon. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

The MINISTER: Madam Speaker, I am very impressed with his ability to
empathise with an ill person. His sins are forgiven, as a result.
[Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: I think we should now return to the Supplementary Estimates.

Vote No 19 - Labour:

Mr M N RAMODIKE: Madam Speaker, noting that the amount allocated, as
requested by the Minister, is relatively small, how will the projects that
are indicated in the Minister's explanatory memorandum contribute to
poverty relief and job creation? Secondly, why should funds be utilised to
print posters to be placed at mines and other places, instead of utilising
these funds for poverty relief and job creation?

UMPHATHISWA WEZABASEBEMZI: Somlomo, linyanisile ilungu elibekekileyo ukuba
imali le siyifumanayo incinci kakhulu, zizigidi ezi-3,4 zeerandi. Le mali
yeyokwenza laa msebenzi uchaziweyo, wokwazisa abo basebenzi badendwayo
okukuba mabathini na bakuba befumene imbalelwano okanye ukudendwa oko
emisebenzini yabo. Uninzi lwabasebenzi abadendwayo lusemigodini.
Kuyanyazeleka ke ngoko ukuba sibe nento esiyenzayo ukwazisa abasebenzi
abasemigodini.

Ngelishwa ke, le asiyo mali yokudala amathuba emisebenzi, yeyokulumkisa
abasebenzi, okokuqala. Okwesibini, yeyokunceda abaqeshi ukuba mabenze ntoni
na ukulungiselela abo basebenzi badendwayo emisebenzini. Ke ngoko, le mali
yeyaba bakhutshwayo emisebenzini.

Sizama ukukhawulelana naloo mba wokudendwa kwabasebenzi emisebenzini, kuba
basuka balahlwe nje okwenja engena lufele okanye efileyo, okukompha. Thina
ke apha kweli sebe lethu sizama ukuqokelela sihole abo badendwayo,
sibabonise ukuba mabathini na.

Adv Z L MADASA: Somlomo, ndicela ukubuza kuMphathiswa ukuba kutheni le mali
engayibonanga ngela xesha bekusenziwa uhlahlo-lwabiwo mali? Kutheni eyiveza
mva nje, eyinyengeza? Kutheni engasixelelanga kwa ngela xesha ukwenzela
ukuba nathi sikwazi ukuzilungiselela ukuze sibenakho ukumphendula. Kutheni
eyifaka mva ngoku? Akayifihli kodwa?

UMPHATHISWA WEZABASEBENZI: Somlomo, ngethamsanqa, ukuba ilungu
elibekekileyo linokubuyela kumaphepa alo eSebe lezaBasebenzi linakho
ukuqaphela ukuba sasinikwe imali engama-50 ezigidi zeerandi. Loo nto
yalixelela ukuba siye sasebenzisa imali engakanani na ukwenza lo msebenzi.
Kuyabonakala ke ukuba umsebenzi lo siwenze kakuhle kakhulu, kwanyanzeleka
ke ukuba songezelelwe imali.

Akukho nto siyinyengezayo kuba asina nto siyifihlayo, ngoba nalo ilungu
elibekekileyo eli liseza kudendwa ngomso, silincede ngale mali xa eli qela
lalo lezopolitiko lingasalifuni. [Kwahlekwa.] (Translation of Xhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Madam Speaker, what has been said by the hon
member is true: The amount we have been allocated, namely R3,4 million, is
very small. It is meant for the stated objective of informing workers who
are being retrenched what they should do when they receive correspondence
informing them of their impending or actual retrenchment. Most of the
workers being retrenched are from the mines. Circumstances demand that we
do something and inform mineworkers.

Unfortunately, though, this amount is not meant for job creation. It is to
be used to inform workers, first and foremost. Secondly, it is meant to
help employers so that they know what they have to do to help workers who
are retrenched. Therefore, this amount is for those workers who are being
retrenched.

We are trying to minimise the impact of retrenchments on workers, because
they are often discarded like a mangy or dead dog, something useless. We in
our department are trying to bring together such workers and show them what
to do.

Adv Z L MADASA: Madam Speaker, I would like to ask the Minister why this
amount was not indicated during the budget stage. Why does he indicate it
so late, and so secretively? Why did he not tell us at that stage, so that
we could prepare ourselves and be able to respond to him? Why is he
including it so late? Is he not hiding it?

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Madam Speaker, if the hon member refers to his
documents from the Department of Labour, he will realise that we were
allocated an amount of R50 million. That tells him what portion of this
amount we have used for this purpose. It was obvious that we did a very
good job, and had to get an additional amount.
We are not including anything secretively, because we have nothing to hide.
When the hon member's political party no longer wants him, he too will be
retrenched and we will give him assistance from this fund. [Laughter.]]

Vote No 22 - Provincial and Local Government:

Dr P W A MULDER: Madam Speaker, I would like to ask the hon the Minister
about the amount of R75 million that has been allocated in the
Supplementary Estimate. This amount is for specific local economic
development initiatives, and these projects will have to meet certain
criteria. The last of these criteria is priority-targeting of previously
disadvantaged sectors. What I would like to ask the Minister is: Will
sectors other than the previously disadvantaged ones therefore be excluded
from this specific grant?

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon Minister, will you respond to that?

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Madam Speaker, the main
thing is that municipalities that want to take initiatives which require
that they be assisted must produce the necessary business plans, but the
real test will be whether these projects will have the effect of tilting
the balance in favour of the poor. We cannot conceivably say that we are
alleviating poverty by putting money into the pockets of people whose
pockets are already bulging.

Dr P W A MULDER: Madam Speaker, could I ask the hon the Minister something?
I understand what he is saying, but does that mean he is referring to all
the poor?

The MINISTER: Madam Speaker, it is important that we address the situation
in which all the people who are poor find themselves, but one cannot just
throw money at the problem of poverty. One must be satisfied that there are
projects which are intended, in the end, to benefit poor people.

Chief N Z MTIRARA: Madam Speaker, an amount of R42 million was approved in
the Adjustments Estimate of 1999-2000. Now an amount of R75 million is
being allocated in the Supplementary Estimate for 2000-2001 for the Local
Economic Development Fund. Why was there no provision in the Main Estimate
for 2000-2001 for this programme? Secondly, how many municipalities will be
assisted with this supplementary amount that is to be voted on, and in
which provinces are they primarily located? How many jobs does the Minister
intend to create with this additional allocation of R75 million?

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Madam Speaker, I first
want to make the point that if we did not demonstrate that we had the
capacity to spend the money allocated to us for these purposes, the
Minister of Finance would indeed not have approached Government and said
that we must be given additional funds. So, because we demonstrated that we
have the requisite capacity, we are receiving these additional funds.

The hon member will know that all the provinces have communities that are
in dire need of this kind of resource. So, this money is not targeted at
specific provinces to the exclusion of others. In our criteria, we are
indeed keen to ensure that preference is given particularly to rural areas
and poor areas that exist on the peripheries of cities and towns. However,
we are not targeting these areas exclusively, but I am saying that,
primarily, we are targeting these areas. [Interjections.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: When is the election date? [Laughter.]

The MINISTER: Madam Speaker, the hon member is free to proclaim the date.

The SPEAKER: Order! On the point of order, neither the Minister nor Mr
Gibson was recognised. [Interjections.]

Chief N Z MTIRARA: Madam Speaker, how many jobs does Mr Mufamadi intend to
create?

Angandinceda ngaloo mbuzo umtwan'egazi? [Can the hon Minister answer this
question for me?]

The MINISTER: Mulangadzulo, tshipiḓa tsha u thoma tsha mbudziso yavho. A
tho ngo pfa tshipiḓa tsha u thoma tsha mbudziso yavho. [Zwiseo.] [Speaker,
as regards the first part of your question; I did not hear the first part
of your question. [Laughter.]]

Vote No 34 - Water Affairs and Forestry:

Mnr S SIMMONS: Mevrou die Speaker, die Nuwe NP verwelkom in beginsel die
bedrag van R231 miljoen wat addisioneel tot die agb Minister se begroting
onder program 5 aangevra word, en het geen beswaar daarteen nie, aangesien
dit oorwegend benut gaan word vir infrastruktuurinvestering ten opsigte van
waterdiensteprojekte om water te bring tot waar die nood die grootste is,
en vir die Werk vir Water-program wat werkskepping teweeg sal bring.

Ek wil graag vra of die Minister eerstens kan aandui welke interne
beheermaatreëls in sy departement gevestig is om te verseker dat die staat
waarde vir geld kry, en tweedens welke provinsies deur die Werk vir Water-
program geraak word met gepaardgaande bedrae sowel as die moontlike getal
werkgeleenthede wat staan geskep te word vir elke betrokke provinsie.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr S SIMMONS: Madam Speaker, in principle the New NP welcomes the amount
of R231 million which is being requested in addition to the hon the
Minister's allocation under programme 5, and has no objection to it, as it
will be utilised mainly for infrastructure investment in respect of water
service projects in order to take the water to where the need is the
greatest, and for the Working for Water programme which will create
employment.
I would like to ask whether the Minister could firstly indicate what
internal control measures have been established in his department to ensure
that the state gets value for money and, secondly, which provinces are
affected by the Working for Water programme, with the accompanying amounts
as well as the potential number of job opportunities that may be created
for each province involved.]

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Madam Speaker, the internal
measures of the department for the Working for Water programme are so
exceptional that my colleague on the right has, as members can see from the
estimates, increased the amount in this allocation to this department, for
which we are very grateful. So, the Department of Finance clearly show
their vote of confidence. We have the measures within the department's
strong management. With the Working for Water programme, we have
exceptionally strong management to monitor proceedings, and I must say that
I am delighted with the kind of reports that I receive, which show this to
me.

As far as job creation and benefits are concerned, in terms of water
service projects, the number of jobs that will be created are 10 000. The
Working for Water project will create just under 3 000. The number of
people served by the water projects will be 150 000. The number of hectares
of invasive, alien vegetation cleared will be 25 000. Over 4 000 people
will receive training, in all, for both projects.

Genl C L VILJOEN: Mevrou die Speaker, ek wil graag hê die Minister moet vir
ons sê hoekom die waterdiensteprojekte beperk word tot vier provinsies.
Volgens my het dié vier provinsies almal 'n redelik hoë reënval. Wat dan
van ander provinsies soos die Noord-Kaap, die Wes-Kaap en Mpumalanga? Kry
hulle nie ook werkgeleenthede nie, of wat is die rede dat die
waterdiensteprojekte net aan vier provinsies toegeken word? (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Gen C L VILJOEN: Madam Speaker, I would like the Minister to tell us why
the water service projects are being restricted to four provinces. To my
mind all four of these provinces have a fairly high rainfall. What about
other provinces such as the Northern Cape, the Western Cape and Mpumalanga?
Are they not also going to receive job opportunities, or what is the reason
for the water service projects only being allocated to four provinces?]

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Madam Speaker, the provinces of
the Eastern Cape, KwaZulu-Natal and Northern Province were identified by my
illustrious predecessor to my left, and I followed his trail very closely,
because it works.

I can tell the hon member Viljoen that the three provinces were identified
because these are the provinces with the greatest number of people
suffering from poverty. The problem is quite enormous. These three
provinces have 80% of the people in this country who have not been reached
by our water service, and as we all know they are the most rural provinces
and the provinces with the highest population rates.

The other provinces are indeed dealt with by the department in terms of our
ordinary ongoing work, but this particular amount for poverty alleviation
goes principally to these three provinces, as far as the water projects are
concerned. Members will see that the North West has been included, and that
is because we are striving to deal with the figure of just under 10% of the
people who have not been serviced with water, putting that province in
fourth place.

As far as the clearing of alien vegetation is concerned, this applies to
all the provinces. The amount that has been provided will go to the teams
in all nine provinces.

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, hon Minister, the increase in the budget for
the implementation of water service projects from R609 million to R730
million is quite substantial. Was it not possible to include that in the
Main Estimate? Why is that increase so substantial? Secondly, are the
projects that are in place sustainable, or will the Minister come back to
this House next year and ask for a substantial amount of money to sustain
these projects?

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Madam Speaker, I am afraid the
member's first question is not really focused on the allocation for poverty
relief that I am addressing here, as far as I understand. The question is
not of working out a budget vis-à-vis poverty relief. We work out our
budget and we would love to have as much as possible. That is obviously not
possible, as we are in a real world and not in heaven yet. [Interjections.]
We work out the allocation to the best of our ability. Anything additional
which the Minister of Finance and the committee dealing with poverty relief
are able to provide, of course we are very grateful for and will try to
apply that where it will do the most work.

As far as sustainability is concerned, last Friday I did present the
defence of my budget in the National Assembly. One of the key elements of
what I described as four pillars of delivery is termed sustainability. The
sustainability factor is improving all the time. The first goal of my
department, with the backlog which we inherited in 1994, was to deal with
12 million rural people who had never been serviced with water. The
strategy that was adopted is one that I would have adopted myself and I
would say any military man would have as well. That strategy was to try to
develop that infrastructure to reach as far as possible. That was done at a
magnificent pace.

The question of ensuring ongoing operation, maintenance and sustainability
is an area that presented a certain degree of problems. This is something
which we are focusing on now as a key element, and I am confident that when
I return to this House in a year's time - if, God willing, I am still here,
and I hope the member is praying for me - I will be able to show that
sustainability is improving all the time.

Mnr S SIMMONS: Mevrou die Speaker, dankie aan die agb Minister vir die
antwoord wat hy verskaf het. Hy het egter in gebreke gebly om 'n sekere
gedeelte van die vraag te beantwoord, naamlik welke provinsies deur hierdie
projekte geraak word. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr S SIMMONS: Madam Speaker, thank you to the hon the Minister for the
reply he gave. However, he neglected to answer a certain part of the
question, namely which provinces are affected by these projects.]

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Madam Speaker, he is quite
right. I apologise. I have indicated which provinces the Working for Water
programme essentially focuses on. As regards the water projects, there is
an area of the spacial development initiative, and as far as that is
concerned, we are focusing on the Wild Coast area. We have a number of
projects there - 8 in all. In the Lebombo area, three projects are being
delivered.

In as far as the remaining amounts are concerned, our business plan has not
yet been completed. That is being worked on and will be provided to me
within a month. I will certainly provide members with all the information
then. But, essentially, the water projects - as I mentioned to the hon
Constand Viljoen - are primarily in the Northern Province, KwaZulu-Natal
and the Eastern Cape. Those are really the provinces on which we are
focusing.

Ms B P SONJICA: Madam Speaker, hon Minister, it is generally known that
there is a huge backlog in sanitation. I would like to know whether
sanitation is going to benefit from this allocation?

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Madam Speaker, I wish to thank
the hon member very much. In as far as the spatial development initiative
is concerned, which we are, incidentally, focusing on together with the
Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism, the Minister for Agriculture
and Land Affairs and the Minister of Trade and Industry, we are striving to
develop those spatial development centres for tourism and for the local
people.

The question of sanitation, which constitutes an extremely serious backlog
for this country with over 20 million people unserviced, is something which
we will pay special attention to in the SDIs. As far as the remaining funds
are concerned - and those are substantial - we are looking at the extent to
which sanitation, the Cinderella service, can receive assistance.

Vote 35 - Welfare and Population Development:

Mrs P W CUPIDO: Madam Speaker, in the budget debate earlier this year, the
DP expressed its concerns on the failure of service delivery and poverty
relief in the Department of Welfare and Population Development.

Because of the increase in poverty in this country, and the fact that mass
unemployment is driving many people to violence and crime to survive, any
supplementary amount would be most welcome. The DP, therefore, welcomes the
additional R6,8 million for the relief of HIV/Aids, but what actually
happens to the rest of the money in the Department of Welfare and
Population Development? The Minister announced in his supplementary budget
of 2000-01 that he is suspending - and I emphasise, suspending - R83
million, which he promised for additional poverty relief.

In sy verklarende memorandum blyk die Minister se rede te wees dat daar
geen definitiewe, konstruktiewe beplanning in die welsyndepartement bestaan
nie. Minister Fraser-Moleketi wat verantwoordelik is vir die dilemma waarin
ons ons bevind, asook die huidige Minister, Dr Zola Skweyiya, wat
onsuksesvol is om vertroue in te boesem by die Minister van Finansies en
die breë publiek, sit albei nog veilig in die ANC-kabinet. As die
departement nie vinnig reggeruk word nie, stuur hy af op 'n bankrotboedel.
Wat anders kan ons verwag as daar 'n wisseling van vyf direkteurs-generaal
oor 'n tydperk van vyf jaar was? Elke keer word daar 'n nuwe direkteur-
generaal met sy of haar eie beplanning aangestel. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[In his explanatory memorandum the Minister's reason appears to be that
there is no definite, constructive planning in the Department of Welfare.
Both Minister Fraser-Moloketi, who is responsible for the dilemma that we
find ourselves in, and the present Minister, Dr Zola Skweyiya, who is
unsuccessful in inspiring the confidence of the Minister of Finance and the
general public, are both still seated safely within the ANC Cabinet. If the
department is not straightened out soon, it will be heading for bankruptcy.
What else can we expect with a turnover of five directors-general in a five-
year period? Every time a new director-general is appointed with his or her
own way of planning.]

The Minister for Welfare and Population Development must get his act
together, so that the Minister of Finance can review the supplementary
amount in October/November. It is a shame that poor people must suffer
because of bad planning, whilst additional money is available for poverty
relief.

HON MEMBERS: Hear, hear!

Die Regering sal in elk geval dringend moet kyk na staatsondersteuning vir
skoolgaande kinders tussen die ouderdomme van agt en 18. Die President sal
miskien vir eers moet vertoef in Suid-Afrika en toesien dat mense se
armoede aangespreek word, en dat die situasie in Welsyn drasties verbeter.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The Government will in any case have to look urgently into state support
for school-going children between the ages of eight and 18. Maybe the
President will have to remain in South Africa for a while and see to it
that the poverty of the people is addressed and that the situation in
Welfare improves drastically.]

My question to the Minister is: Can the Minister tell this House what job
creation programmes ... [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order!

Mrs P W CUPIDO: ... he is planning for poverty relief and in what provinces
they will occur? Can he also tell us why the R83 million was suspended?

HON MEMBERS: Hear, hear!

The MINISTER FOR WELFARE AND POPULATION DEVELOPMENT: Madam Speaker, first
of all, I would like to answer the lady's question. The R83 million that
was cut from the poverty relief funds was cut for the same reason that it
was given in the first place, namely that taking into account the
department's current financial capacity, we would be able to spend the R120
million that was allocated by the Department of Finance for poverty relief.
Whatever money is left over from this amount will be distributed in all the
provinces.

The hon lady should, firstly, understand that the money that we get has to
be given to projects that are able to spend that money. The money that has
been allocated has been allocated in two instalments. Only 10% of that
amount ought to have been allocated, and the majority of the projects in
the provinces have not necessarily spent the money to our satisfaction. So
what we are going to do - should they be able to spend their allocations to
our satisfaction - is to concentrate in general on all the provinces that
show such deficiencies and give them the capacity to spend the money
effectively.

Secondly, the hon member must understand that the people we are dealing
with are not like her, they generally need to be assisted, not only by the
department, but basically by everybody, including the NGOs and the
churches. We are working on that basis at the present moment. The money we
are asking for at the present moment is meant for Aids, as my colleagues in
Education and Health have already said, and it is mainly going to be spent
on community-based Aids projects in six provinces, that is the Eastern
Cape, the Northern Cape, the North West, the Northern Province, Mpumalanga
and the Free State. In general, all the funds that are meant for poverty
relief are being spent on the poor in almost all the provinces.

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, arising from the hon the Minister's reply,
what percentage of what amount of money from this estimate is going to go
to the economic empowerment of disabled people?

The MINISTER FOR WELFARE AND POPULATION DEVELOPMENT: Madam Speaker, this
money is meant specifically for community-based care projects that deal
with Aids and HIV in the six provinces I have mentioned.

The disabled people were given R20 million last year by the Office of the
Minister in the Presidency, and they have not spent all that money yet. A
large amount of that money has not yet been spent, and we are talking to
them to enable them to spend that money.

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, would you sit down there. Mrs Cupido is
going to speak first and I will call you thereafter.

Mrs P W CUPIDO: Madam Speaker, the Minister mentioned the amount of
R83 million. I would like to quote from the explanatory notes. There the
Minister of Finance indicated that the reason he suspended the money was
because the department did not plan well. That is what is said in the
explanatory notes. I would like to know, specifically, how the Minister
plans on improving the management structures in the department.

The MINISTER FOR WELFARE AND POPULATION DEVELOPMENT: Madam Speaker, I think
it has been said here in this House before that we have been working with
the Ministries of Finance and of State Expenditure to improve the financial
management capacity of the department. We are in the process at the present
moment of appointing a chief executive officer for the financial part of
our department. We are working with the Department of State Expenditure to
find that person. We have advertised, and the Auditor-General is working
with us to finally ensure that we do get the right person, as he promised
before.

Prof L M MBADI: Madam Speaker, hon Minister, in the explanatory memorandum
it is stated that R5,6 million is earmarked as a conditional grant to
provinces, and six provinces have been identified. On what basis has this
amount been divided among the provinces and which ones will receive the
largest monetary benefit? Secondly, what guarantee can the Minister give
that the amount asked for will, in effect, be spent on community-based care
and will not be rolled over at the end of the financial year?

The MINISTER FOR WELFARE AND POPULATION DEVELOPMENT: Madam Speaker, as I
have said, the amount of R6,8 million has been earmarked for the community-
based care projects on HIV/Aids in the six provinces I mentioned. An amount
of R1,180 million of that money has been earmarked for the national
department.

The provinces that are going to receive this money, as I said, are the ones
that have been mentioned. This is based on the incidence of Aids in the
province and on the population of the province. Regarding the capacity of
the provinces to spend this money, we are working with the provinces
themselves and, as I have said, the Department of State Expenditure is
working very closely with us to ensure that the provinces have the
necessary capacity to spend the money. Having spoken to the MECs, I have no
reason to doubt that they will be able to spend that money.
Mr E SALOOJEE: Madam Speaker, we are encouraged to learn that the Minister
has made the reform of social security one of his department's priorities.
In the light of the huge unemployment problem, it is encouraging that
consideration is being given to the notion of a basic income grant targeted
at the most needy sectors of our society.

We trust that the task team appointed to investigate such reforms will
enable us, as the Government, to implement reforms that will have a
fundamental impact on providing a better life for all. Could the Minister
tell us when the report of this task team will be made available?

The MINISTER FOR WELFARE AND POPULATION DEVELOPMENT: Madam Speaker, when we
announced the setting up of this inquiry, we indicated clearly that it
would take from a year to 18 months for the work to be done. The work has
been going on and we hope that in the next few weeks the committee will be
able to give a report to the group of Ministers that are leading this whole
project. We will make that public as fast as possible so that everybody is
informed.

Debate concluded.
                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                (Decision of Question on Votes and Schedule)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! I have been informed that the Whips have
identified Votes in respect of which parties would like to make
declarations, or have objections recorded, or call for divisions. I will
therefore deal with this item in line with that arrangement.

Vote No 1 - Presidency - put.

Declarations of vote:

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, yesterday we were treated to a
lecture from many members of the ANC about the opposition. [Interjections.]
The hon Mr Derek Hanekom, having failed in Government, presumed to give the
opposition a lecture on how to behave. Actually, it is not the Government's
job to tell the opposition how to do its job. It is the Government's job to
govern. We would actually like the Government to govern effectively, wisely
and well. [Interjections.] We would like to see a 6% to 7% rate of economic
growth in this country, so that we can get the poor out of poverty and get
South Africa back to work. When that happens we will support this Vote.
Until that happens, we will not support this Vote. [Interjections.]

However, I would like to say that people also ask what is going on in the
opposition. I am pleased to say that this morning the DP signed up the
following as members from various communities: Prof Themba Sono - the
Chairman of the Free Market Foundation, Mr Hernus Kriel, and the Malemelela
Organisation for the Social Unemployed. [Interjections.] I think that these
are developments which are exciting for South Africa and I think it means
that we are going to start breaking the monopoly of power exercised by the
ANC.

However, I want to say this: The hon the President yesterday confronted us
on Zimbabwe. He said that there was essentially violence in Zimbabwe today,
and that there was violence in South Africa in 1994. What is the
difference? The difference is this: The man the President chooses to
literally and figuratively hold hands with, Mr Mugabe, promised that:
``death would befall his opponents'' and that they would ``be met with
fire''. Those are the words of the head of state - the head of government -
who turned an entire section of his population into enemies of the state.
[Interjections.] Those are not the people that our President should consort
with. That is the difference between South Africa and Zimbabwe.
[Interjections.] [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Could we have some order, hon members? Proceed,
hon Zondi.

Rev K M ZONDI: Madam Speaker, yesterday we did not get time regarding Vote
No 1 to declare our support for the difficult work that the Deputy
President has been assigned to do, particularly in leading the task team
that has to deal with the HIV/Aids pandemic, which we all know is a very
difficult problem.

We really want to appeal in this House for calm, because this is a national
problem which should not be used, however much temptation there is, as a
party-political football. The mothers of young people who are dying from
Aids do not have the time to make jokes about the disaster that is on their
hands. Those of us who also have the responsibility of presiding over
funerals know that we are at a loss for words as to what to say when people
ask what they have done to God to deserve this. So we wanted to say the
Deputy President deserves our support in what he is doing.

We also want to extend our support to the work of the Minister in the
Presidency, because we do know that he is also in charge of very difficult
assignments - gender issues, the youth and the disabled. All these issues,
actually, are national issues which should be prioritised. We want to
encourage them in what they are doing, and we support them. [Applause.]

Mr R S SCHOEMAN: Madam Speaker, on behalf on the national leader of the New
NP, Martinus van Schalkwyk, I wish to record that the New NP will support
the Vote of the Presidency. We are going to vote for this budget because
the President has put positive policy frameworks in place, and is
attempting to govern in a more professional way, which we welcome.
[Applause.]

As a party, we place a high premium on good governance and the setting of
clear goals and objectives. Coming after the Mandela era, with its heavy
emphasis on symbolism, our country now needs such a businesslike approach.
There are, however, a number of concerns on our side. Firstly, an important
concern is the increasing centralisation of power to the Presidency, which,
in our view, is not healthy. A second and major criticism in the past year,
is the President's handling of the Zimbabwean issue, as articulated by the
national leader of the New NP yesterday, during the discussion of the Vote
of the Presidency, when he said the following:


  ... our conviction is that quiet diplomacy was not the way to deal with
  this issue. All our concerns and predictions about the dangers of quiet
  diplomacy and the meaninglessness of Mr Mugabe's undertakings have since
  been proven correct.

He further said:


  What could have been the launching pad of the President's vision of the
  African renaissance - to stand up with courage and conviction for what is
  right, to give moral leadership, to alienate old political friends if
  necessary - is now, instead, becoming just another tombstone in our
  continent's graveyard of elections conducted in the absence of real
  democracy.

That is our strongly held view. However, all aspects considered and on
balance, the New NP will vote in favour of the Presidency's budget.
[Applause.]

Mr M E MABETA: Madam Speaker, we support the Vote on the Presidency and we
would like to stress the points that we made yesterday; firstly, that the
complexity in the institutional reconstruction of our society and the
international system as a whole, makes it very naive to expect short-term
changes which might impact on the capacity of our Government to deliver
immediately. We also accept the Deputy President's commitment here that
rural rejuvenation and working together in the establishment of a
sustainable development strategy are a priority in his department. We think
this is very, very important. We will do everything in our power to make an
input in this respect.

We strongly feel that opposition politics in South Africa are likely to
degenerate, because of a tendency amongst ourselves to resort to racism and
to biased, opportunistic tendencies to mobilise the feelings of people for
purposes of short-term gain. In our view, the only acceptable criterion to
the people of South Africa for a respectable and constructive opposition is
a commitment to the original agenda of the transformation of our society,
such that the gains made in 1994, as defined in our Constitution, cannot be
lost through the forces of racism and the resurgence of fascism in our
midst.

We, therefore, hope that our members on this side of the House and all the
opposition parties will, whilst pursuing their own party-political
interests, make this moral commitment that our society should never, at any
point time, go back ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, hon Ministers and members, we in the ACDP of
course realise and support the importance of the work that the President's
Office is doing, and we also realise and support the importance of having
the necessary resources. However, we are very concerned about the increased
centralisation of power in the President's Office and we think that is the
reason there has been a significant increase in the medium-term expenditure
estimates for the President's Office, but of course this, we notice, is due
to the expansion of core activities.

We, however, welcome the recommendations by the Presidential Review
Commission. We commend them for the good work that they have done and we
also commend them for actually managing to increase the capacity within the
Presidency. What we believe is that what can be done by line function
departments, by the Cabinet and the various departments, should be done by
those departments, and should not be taken over by the President's Office.
However, the ACDP will support this Vote. [Applause.]

Genl C L VILJOEN: Mevrou die Speaker, die VF het kritiek teen die
Presidensie uitgespreek. Ons sê eerstens dat daar sekere ooreenkomste is
wat die hoofrolspelers van hierdie Presidensie met die VF aangegaan het wat
tot dusver nie nagekom is nie.

Sy party het verder ook nie praktiese erkenning verleen aan die toepassing
van taal- en minderheidsregte in Suid-Afrika nie. Sy Regering werk te
gesentraliseerd en konsentreer hoofsaaklik op globalisering in plaas van
lokalisering, wat meer by die Afrikastyl pas. Die misdaad, werkskepping,
swak ekonomie, ondoeltreffende regering en korrupsie is alles aanduidend
dat die President op die oomblik te veel in die buiteland is en nie
heeltemal sy hande op die stuur het nie.
Die VF aanvaar egter die Presidensie se bona fides aangesien goeie
internasionale betrekkings opgebou moet word en die President in dié
verband hoë prioriteit daaraan verleen. Tweedens probeer die President hoë
prioriteit verleen aan die werf van beleggings wat sekerlik vir
armoedeverligting, vir ekonomiese groei en vir ons almal baie belangrik is
omdat Suid-Afrika 'n rol te speel het, sowel internasionaal as in 'n
onstabiele Afrika. Met inagneming hiervan sal die VF hierdie begrotingspos
steun. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Gen C L VILJOEN: Madam Speaker, the FF voiced its criticism of the
Presidency. We want to say in the first place that there are certain
agreements that were concluded with the FF by the main role-players of this
Presidency, which have not been complied with as yet.

His party furthermore did not give practical recognition to the application
of language and minority rights in South Africa. His Government operates in
too centralised a manner and mainly concentrates on globalisation instead
of localisation, which suits the style of Africa better. Crime, job
creation, the poor economy, inefficient government and corruption are all
indications that the President is spending too much time abroad at the
moment and does not quite have his hands on the steering wheel.

However, the FF accepts the bona fides of the Presidency since sound
international relations must be forged, and the President is lending this a
high priority. Secondly, the President is trying to lend high priority to
recruiting investment, which is certainly important for poverty relief, for
economic growth and for all of us, because South Africa has a role to play,
internationally as well as in an unstable Africa. Taking this into
consideration, the FF will support this Vote.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Madam Speaker, it is very interesting to have the trio we
have in the Presidency in the persons of the President, the Deputy
President and the Minister, and to see the manner in which they exert
themselves and exercise their responsibilities over the different aspects
that they administer. When one compares this to the situation next door in
Botswana, where a deputy president even had to be given leave because of
disagreements, we can consider ourselves very, very fortunate that things
are going well.

We are very, very grateful and we would like to request that this unity
should continue and that the people outside, particularly the disabled
people, should get the necessary attention and support, as they have been
doing. Our womenfolk, under the care of the Minister in charge, should also
continue to be assisted. On that note the UCDP will in no way hesitate to
vote in favour of this Vote. [Applause.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, the Presidency is the arms and legs of the
entire political administration in the country. The budget plan for the
Presidency facilitates the implementation of an effective measure as a tool
for transformation and successful performance management, so that the
demands of the national and international community can be met. The MF
wholeheartedly supports the Vote of the Office of the Presidency.
[Applause.]

Mr C AUCAMP: Mr Madam Speaker, I have nothing new to add at this stage.

Dit word laat. Ek het niks om te sê nie. [Gelag.] [It is getting late. I
have nothing to say. [Laughter.]]

Mr M A MANGENA: Madam Speaker, some people say it is easier to fight for
freedom than to govern. When one is fighting for freedom, both the enemy
and the frontline are clear. But when one is governing, the fronts are many
and undefined, and the pitfalls are as many and treacherous as the potholes
in some of our townships.

In our own case, the direction we need to take as a country is very clear.
We must normalise our society as quickly as we can. We can only do that by
improving the social and economic status of the black majority, who have
lived under oppression for nearly three and a half centuries.

Are we moving in that direction? Yes, we are. Are we moving fast? Not fast
enough. Are we perhaps too impatient? Maybe we are, but we have every
reason to be eager to see rapid change for the better.

Azapo will support the Vote. [Applause.]

Mr C NQAKULA: Madam Speaker, the Vote of the Presidency is informed by the
commitment of the ANC to fundamental, democratic transformation to benefit,
in the main, those of our people who for many years were deprived, through
institutional means, of their human rights. The Presidency needs our co-
operation and support so that it can fulfil its role as the nucleus and the
main co-ordinator of Government's work to provide a better life for all our
people.

As the main force for democratic change in our country, the ANC is
committed to bringing relief to the millions of our people whose
socioeconomic conditions were designed by the apartheid regime to condemn
them to a state of perpetual poverty, illiteracy and ill-health. We are
committed to consolidating and strengthening our new political order and to
securing the necessary conditions for thoroughgoing democracy and freedom
for all our people, black and white.

It is incumbent on all of us as public representatives to work together to
foster a sense of national consensus that will refocus our people and
reorientate them towards the national goals of full democracy,
reconciliation, peace and justice. Consequently, the ANC supports the Vote,
believing that all the people of our country who love freedom and peace
will do the same, and let the retrogressive forces, led by the DP, stew in
their own self-inflicted isolation. [Applause.]
Division demanded.

The House divided:


  AYES - 277: Abrahams, T; Abram, S; Arendse, J D; Asmal, A K; Bakker, D M;
  Balfour, B M N; Baloi, G E; Baloyi, M R; Baloyi, S F; Bekker, H J; Belot,
  S T; Beukman, F; Bhengu, F; Bhengu, N R; Biyela, B P; Blaas, A; Bloem, D
  V; Bogopane, H I; Booi, M S; Botha, N G W; Buthelezi, M G; Buthelezi, M
  N; Camerer, S M; Carrim, Y I; Cassim, M F; Chalmers, J; Chauke, H P;
  Chiba, L; Chohan-Kota, F I; Cindi, N V; Coetzee-Kasper, M P; Cronin, J P;
  Davies, R H; De Beer, S J; De Lange, J H; De Lille, P; Didiza, A T;
  Dithebe, S L; Ditshetelo, P H K; Dlamini, B O; Doidge, G Q M; Douglas, B
  M; Dowry, J J; Durand, J; Du Toit, D C; Erwin, A; Fankomo, F C;
  Feinstein, A J; Fihla, N B; Fraser-Moleketi, G J; Frolick, C T; Gandhi,
  E; Gaum, A H; Geldenhuys, B L; Gerber, P A; Gigaba, K M N; Gogotya, N J;
  Gomomo, P J; Goniwe, T M; Goosen, A D; Gous, S J; Green, L M; Greyling, C
  H F; Grové, S P; Gumede, D M; Gxowa, N B; Hajaig, F; Hanekom, D A;
  Hangana, N E; Hendrickse, P A C; Hlangwana, N L; Hlengwa, M W; Hogan, B
  A; Holomisa, S P; Jana, D P S; Jassat, E E; Jeffery, J H; Joemat, R R;
  Jordan, Z P; Kalako, M U; Kannemeyer, B W; Kasienyane, O R; Kekana, N N;
  Kgauwe, Q J; Kgwele, L M; Kota, Z A; Kotwal, Z; Landers, L T; Lekgoro, M
  K; Lekgoro, M M S; Lekota, M G P; Lockey, D; Louw, J T; Lucas, E J; Lyle,
  A G; Mabandla, B S; Mabeta, M E; Mabudafhasi, T R; Madasa, Z L;
  Magashule, E S; Magubane, N E; Mahlalela, C C; Mahlangu, M J; Mahomed, F;
  Maimane, D S; Maine, M S; Makasi, X C; Makunyane, T L; Makwetla, S P;
  Malebana, H F; Maloney, L; Maluleke-Hlaneki, C J; Malumise, M M; Mangena,
  M A; Manie, M S; Manuel, T A; Maphalala, M A; Maphoto, L I; Mars, I;
  Marshoff, F B; Martins, B A D; Masala, M M; Maserumule, F T; Masithela, N
  H; Masutha, M T; Mathebe, P M; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F; Matthews, V J G;
  Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M; Maziya, A M; Mbadi, L M; Mbombo, N D; Mbongo,
  P F; Mbulawa-Hans, B G; Mbuyazi, L R; Mdladlana, M M S; Mfundisi, I S;
  Mgidi, J S; Middleton, N S; Mkhatshwa, S; Mkhize, B R; Mlangeni, A;
  Mnandi, P N; Mngomezulu, G P; Mnumzana, S K; Modise, T R; Modisenyane, L
  J; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, E P; Mogoba, M S; Mohai, S J; Mohamed, I J;
  Mokoena, D A; Molebatsi, M A; Molewa, B G; Moloto, K A; Momberg, J H;
  Mongwaketse, S J; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K; Morkel, C M; Morobi, D M;
  Moropa, R M; Morwamoche, K W; Mothoagae, P K; Motubatse, S D; Mpahlwa, M;
  Mpaka, H M; Mshudulu, S A; Msomi, M D; Mthembi-Mahanyele, S D; Mthembu,
  B; Mtirara, N Z; Mtsweni, N S; Mufamadi, F S; Mulder, C P; Mulder, P W A;
  Mutsila, I; Mzondeki, M J G; Nair, B; Nash, J H; Ncube, B; Ndlovu, V B;
  Ndou, R S; Nel, A H; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngcengwane, N D;
  Ngculu, L V J; Ngubane, B S; Ngubane, H; Ngubeni, J M; Nhlanhla, J M;
  Nhleko, N P; Njobe, M A A; Nkomo, A S; Nkosi, D M; Nonkonyana, M;
  Nqakula, C; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M B; Ntuli, S B; Nzimande, L P M; Olckers,
  M E; Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G; Pahad, E G; Phala, M J; Phantsi, N E;
  Pheko, S E M; Pieterse, R D; Pretorius, I J; Rabie, P J; Radebe, J T;
  Rajbally, S; Rajoo, K; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin, M; Ramodike, M N;
  Ramotsamai, C M P; Ripinga, S S; Saloojee, E; Schneemann, G D; Schoeman,
  R S; Scott, M I; Seaton, S A; Sekgobela, P S; September, R K; Shabangu,
  S; Shilubana, T P; Shope, N R; Sigcau, S N; Sigcawu, A N; Sigwela, E M;
  Sikakane, M R; Simmons, S; Sisulu, L N; Sithole, D J; Skhosana, W M;
  Skosana, M B; Skweyiya, Z S T; Slabbert, J H; Smit, H A; Smith, V G;
  Solo, B M; Solomon, G; Sonjica, B P; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Southgate,
  R M; Swart, S N; Thabethe, E; Tinto, B; Tolo, L J; Tshabalala-Msimang, M
  E; Tsheole, N M; Turok, B; Twala, N M; Vadi, I; Van den Heever, R P Z;
  Van der Merwe, A S; Van der Merwe, J H; Van Deventer, F J; Van Wyk, A
  (Annelizé); Van Wyk, J F; Van Wyk, N; Verwoerd, M; Vilakazi, B H;
  Viljoen, C L; Woods, G G; Xingwana, L M T; Zita, L; Zondi, K M; Zondo, R
  P; Zulu, N E; Zuma, J G.

  NOES - 34: Andrew, K M; Aucamp, C; Bell, B G; Borman, G M; Botha, A J;
  Bruce, N S; Clelland, N J; Cupido, P W; Da Camara, M L; Davidson, I O;
  Delport, J T; Eglin, C W; Ellis, M J; Gibson, D H M; Gore, V C; Grobler,
  G A J; Heine, R J; Kalyan, S V; Lee, T D; Leon, A J; Moorcroft, E K;
  Ntuli, R S; Opperman, S E; Pillay, S; Schmidt, H C; Selfe, J; Semple, J
  A; Seremane, W J; Singh, A; Smuts, M; Sono, B N; Swart, P S; Taljaard, R;
  Waters, M.

Vote accordingly agreed to.

Vote No 2 - Parliament - put and agreed to.
 
Vote No 3 - Agriculture - put.

Declarations of vote:

Mnr A J BOTHA: Mevrou die Speaker, die DP het die agb Minister in die
begrotingsdebat gesteun, ten spyte van ernstige tekorte wat aangedui is.
Daar is veral daarop gelet dat die Landbounavorsingsraad heeltemal te stief
behandel is. Navorsing is die mees basiese vereiste vir toekomstige
ontwikkeling, waar sonder ons nie die aanslag van globalisering sal kan
hanteer nie. Hierbenewens sal Suid-Afrikaanse landbou ten gronde gaan as
die agb Minister nie druk op die Kabinet uitoefen om 'n doeltreffende
stelsel vir die hef van tariewe daar te stel nie. Sonder hierdie stelsel
sal Suid-Afrikaanse landbouers net nie kan meeding met swaar gesubsidieerde
ingevoerde produkte nie.

Voorts moet ons ons ernstige teleurstelling uitspreek oor die agb Minister
se onvermoë om die dieselrabat vir landbou te herstel. Die agb Minister van
Finansies het onlangs sy twyfel uitgespreek daaroor of dit moontlik sou
wees om mariene diesel se rabat te misbruik. Ek kan die agb Minister van
Finansies verseker dat dit net so maklik is vir 'n matroos om skelm te wees
as wat dit vir 'n boer is om skelm te wees.

Die MINISTER VAN FINANSIES: Jy weet mos, né!

Mnr A J BOTHA: Almal van ons weet dit, agb Minister. Wat hier ter sprake
is, is onregverdige diskriminasie wat uit die weg geruim moet word. Die DP
versoek die agb Minister om in die komende jaar baie nouer met die
portefeuljekomitee saam te werk sodat landbou weer sy regmatige plek in die
Begroting kan herwin. Die DP steun hierdie begrotingspos. (Translation of
Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr A J BOTHA: Madam Speaker, the DP supported the hon the Minister in the
Budget debate, in spite of serious shortcomings that were pointed out.
Special attention was given to the fact that the Agricultural Research
Council has been treated particularly badly. Research is the most basic
requirement for future development, without which we shall be unable to
deal with the onslaught of globalisation. Apart from this South African
agriculture will go to rack and ruin if the hon the Minister does not put
pressure on the Cabinet to introduce an efficient system for levying
tariffs. Without this system South African agriculturalists will simply not
be able to compete with heavily subsidised imported products.

Furthermore, we must convey our deep disappointment regarding the hon the
Minister's inability to restore the diesel rebate for agriculture. The hon
the Minister of Finance recently expressed his doubts as to whether it
would be possible to abuse the rebate on marine diesel. I can assure the
hon the Minister of Finance that it is just as easy for a sailor to be
dishonest as it is for a farmer.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: You would know!

Mr A J BOTHA: All of us know that, hon Minister. What is at issue here is
unfair discrimination that must be eliminated. The DP wants to request the
hon the Minister to work much more closely with the portfolio committee in
the coming year so that agriculture can regain its rightful place in the
Budget. The DP supports this Vote.]

Mr M F CASSIM: Madam Speaker, we in the IFP are happy to support Vote No 3
- Agriculture. We are greatly heartened by the hard work of the Minister
and the Deputy Minister. They have a great team.

We need, as we have said before, to focus on indigenous vegetables, herbs
and plants. We are returning to a pre-antibiotics age, since we know that
most of our antibiotics are now failing. South Africa, because of its great
heritage of plant materials, needs to exploit this to the advantage not
only of our country, but the world at large.

We also request the Minister that there be a downward transfer of
technology to the rural communities, in order that they may be able to farm
in a sustainable manner and also be able to enjoy greater profits.

We also wish to raise the problem of the fruit farmers in the Western Cape.
We feel that the markets for our fruit farmers are beginning to diminish,
and it is the role of the department, probably together with the Minister
of Trade and Industry, to see how we can continue to expand our fruit
export markets.

Finally, there is another problem with regard to our farmers. Farmers are
losing whole herds overnight, and even their crops just when those crops
are about to be harvested. Some form of security will serve as
encouragement to our new farmers that, if they do go into farming, it will
provide a guaranteed form of income.

We also wish to plead, on behalf of the IFP, that land transfer to black
farmers be accelerated. We know that the Minister is doing a good job and
we encourage him in this respect. We support him and we hope that this
process will be accelerated further.
Finally, we hope that there will be a sufficient number of field officers
to enable our new farmers to enjoy scientific and technical expertise, in
order that they do not remain as subsistence farmers, but indeed become
commercial farmers. The advent of the black commercial farmer will indicate
that our Government and the Ministry have succeeded. [Time expired.]

Mr M A MANGENA: Madam Speaker, we support the attempts by the Department of
Agriculture to democratise farming in our country. Suggesting that 38% or
so of agricultural land could be in black hands in the near future is
welcome news indeed.

We are aware that the acquisition of land, training of farmers and
provision of support systems will cost a lot of money and take quite some
time, but it has to be done. White farmers are where they are today because
governments of the past gave them lots of support. The future of our
country is integrated. We should therefore seek to correct the situation
where large-scale commercial farming is the preserve of a particular race
group. Azapo will support this Vote.

We also wish to observe that since 1995 only 2 500 restitution claims, out
of 63 000 lodged, have been settled. This is roughly 4% of all restitution
claims. This has benefited roughly 70 000 families or households in our
country. The Minister and the Land Restitution Commission have been
assuring us that the tempo of settlements will be increased. We are really
hoping that this will happen in the near future. Once more, we support the
Vote.

Adv S P HOLOMISA: Madam Speaker, we as the ANC support this Vote. The
Ministry of Agriculture and Land Affairs is in constant communication with
all relevant stakeholders in the agricultural sector, both the commercial
and emerging farmers. We are aware of their concerns, including the matter
of the diesel rebates. The Minister of Finance is looking into this matter,
and we are hoping that a resolution of the problem will be found soon.

With regard to the ARC, that is the Agricultural Research Council, the
Minister is looking into it. She is working hand in hand with the Minister
of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology, as the money for that particular
council comes from that department, to be deposited with the Department of
Agriculture and Land Affairs.
Land is, indeed, being transferred into the hands of some of the black
members of our society. The department has a programme that will soon be
implemented. The programme will, firstly, be looking primarily at ensuring
that agricultural land that is in the hands of the state is targeted and
transferred to the deserving black communities. The Minister is working
hand in hand with her counterparts in the provinces, and we are convinced,
as the ANC, that results will soon be seen. [Applause.]

Vote No 3 agreed to.

Vote No 4 - Arts, Culture, Science and Technology - put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr R S NTULI: Madam Speaker, in opposing this Vote, the DP wants to make
the following points: The party is concerned at the manner in which the
department handled the new coat of arms for the country. [Interjections.]
There was no consultation with Parliament. National symbols are intended to
unify the nation, but become unnecessarily controversial when imposed by
the ruling party. [Interjections.]

If we are serious about national unity in our cultural diversity, then
consultation on such symbols is necessary. A further reason for not
supporting the budget is that there was no adequate funding for the
performing arts, because of the department's overspending. The failure of
the Ministry to nurture and integrate emerging African artists into the
existing infrastructure in performing arts is a cause for concern.

Finally, it is very difficult to accept the integration of arts and culture
with science and technology, because their objectives do not form a natural
cohesive unit. This becomes obvious in discussions in the portfolio
committee. The state would be better served if the departments were
disbanded and the portfolios transferred to other departments.

In conclusion, this restructuring would be cost-effective and would assist
all portfolios to meet their objectives. The DP will not support the Arts,
Culture, Science and Technology Vote. [Interjections.]

Mr M F CASSIM: Madam Speaker, it is very sad indeed that the DP will not be
supporting this Vote, when this particular department has done so much. For
example, last year we had the Year of Science and Technology which, for the
first time, anywhere in the world, happened over one whole year. It has
never happened in the annals of history. One needs to congratulate the hon
the Minister and also to recognise the unique role that the IFP has been
playing in respect of arts and science. Wherever we go in the world, the
combined role of the ANC and the IFP in respect of arts and science has
been universally accepted. The fact that we have so many binationals with
Germany, the United States of America and every other country indicates the
way in which the rest of the world focuses on our arts and science.

We have, indeed, an important role to play in this regard. The fact that we
perfected negotiations in this country is one which, through the Department
of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology, we can give to the rest of the
world as part of the legacy of the new Government. We do, of course, need
to brand ourselves as a peculiarly African country. And this is the new
challenge that the Minister and his department will have to face in this
respect.

I must also point out the fact that with the large telescope, in respect of
the laser, and in respect of a number of other aspects of high sciences,
this country, through the CSIR and the Science Foundation, has been really
contributing in a sterling manner to South Africa, to its economy and to
its intellectual growth. It is really presuming on the generosity of the
masses of this country that the DP fails to recognise the signal
contribution and to give it the wholehearted support it needs. We in the
IFP want to say to this House: ``Support this, because, via arts and
science, we will indeed become the premier nation on this continent and in
this world.'' [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr I J PRETORIUS: Madam Speaker, the main reason the New NP will be voting
against this Vote is that the Government, inter alia, abolished art and
music as subjects in state schools. The South African music industry is
presently valued at approximately R2 billion. The entertainment industry is
valued at approximately R7,4 billion. The whole industry employs
approximately 32 000 people.

The other criticism I have against this department is the fact that the
Government is not buying any library books. Our domestic publishing
industry is worth more than R6 billion, and employs between 60 000 and 80
000 people.
Mr M A MANGENA: Madam Speaker, the Minister, the Deputy Minister and
members of the Portfolio Committee on Arts, Culture, Science and Technology
have told this House of their intention to correct the discrimination of
the past by promoting and supporting cultural projects in the black
community. May they please do something that we can see.

In particular, could they consider doing something that would promote and
benefit our legendary and senior artists such as Philip Tabane and his
Malombo, Miriam Makeba, Jonas Gwangwa and so forth. Could they do something
that will brighten their lives and make them more comfortable in accordance
with their exalted status in our society. Could we do something while they
are still alive, so that we do not repeat the regrets that we had when
Mahlathini, Margaret Mcingana and others passed away. We will support this
Vote.

Ms N M TSHEOLE: Madam Speaker, I rise on behalf of the ANC to support this
Vote, because, although other people do not see the value of arts and
culture, the Department of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology is
redressing the imbalances of the past. When the imbalances of the past are
being redressed, obviously, certain people have to feel neglected, because
they have been getting more than the others were getting.

On behalf of the ANC, we would like to support this Vote because we look at
the pilot projects in science and technology. We have pilot projects which
have been established. They use technology stations and technology
incubators for the development of SMMEs. This is a good foundation or a
good basis for full-scale technology-development-related SMMEs.

Then we also have money put aside for IKS, the Indigenous Knowledge
Systems. This is seeking to address the imbalances of the past where
indigenous knowledge was not given any attention at all. On this basis, we
support this Vote.

The other issue that I would like to refer to is the legacy projects.
Members know that everything that is being done is to redress the
imbalances of the past. We have science and technology legacy projects and
community-based, multifunctional centres. One will find that they are there
in arts and culture. The people who are complaining are those who have been
getting more; and, because they do not want to share, they feel that they
cannot support this Vote.

We look at language. There are lots of positive developments. We know the
Khoisan community which has been neglected for centuries. The department
has done a lot. There is already a body established for the revival of the
culture and the languages of the Khoisan communities. The portfolio
committee is also establishing a project for living treasures for the
issues that the hon member Mangena referred to. So on all these issues -
they are so many - we support this Vote. [Applause.]

Vote No 4 agreed to (Democratic Party, New National Party and Afrikaner
Eenheidsbeweging dissenting).

Vote No 5 - Communications - put.

Declarations of vote:

Ms M SMUTS: Madam Speaker, when we debated this Vote here in May, we said
that the department behaves like a law unto itself, instead of respecting
the law as it stands and accelerating the preparation of new law to
liberalise the sector. It follows therefore that we said that we could not
support the Vote and that remains the position today.

In particular, we objected to the fact that the director-general treats the
regulators like toy telephones ... [Laughter] ... and that the hon the
Minister had repealed Satra's regulations on interconnection and facility
provision after gazetting them - yet another example of executive
interference with the independent, predictable, stable regulation without
which we cannot hope to establish an attractive investment environment.

Since then, Satra has taken legal opinion. It has reinstated its
regulations. Relations between Satra and the director-general have
deteriorated to the point where the latter calls Satra, I quote: ``People
who do not have the interests of Government and the industry at heart,''
and for whom he has, therefore, no time. He has described the reinstatement
of the regulations as: ``The last kicks of a dying horse.'' And that is a
shocking statement.

As the information industry of South Africa said this week, we cannot have
Ministers and bureaucrats sweeping aside controls simply because it does
not suit their agenda to follow the law. We congratulate the Minister on
achieving a reduction in Telkom's exclusivity period and for announcing a
date for full liberalisation, although we think that 2007 is too far away.
But, until the department learns to respect the regulators and the law, we
vote against. [Applause.]

Mnu V B NDLOVU: Mhlonishwa Somlomo, i-IFP, ngaphambi kokuthi ilwesekele
lolu daba, ifuna ukuveza ukuthi ukukhuliswa kwezilimi kwa-SABC kufuneka
kwandiswe ukuze zonke izilini ezikhulunywa lapha eNingizimu Afrika
zizwakale zonke.

Okwesibili, sifuna ukuthi lo Mnyango wenze isiqiniseko sokuthi ezemidlalo
ziyazeka kulo lonke izwe laseNingizimu Afrika, zingatholakali esilungwini
kuphela. Okwesithathu ngukwehliswa kwemali ekhokhelwa ukusebenzisa
omakhalekhukhwini. Kufanele bangabizi kangaka bese kuthi umuntu ongenayo
imali angabi nawo umakhalekhukhwini. Kufanele batholakale kalula. Okwesine
ngukuthi uM-Net mawungatholwa yizigwili kuphela kepha mawutholwe yiwo wonke
umuntu.

Ngakho-ke, kunesidingo sokuthi kuzo zonke lezi zinto ezixhumanisa abantu,
ezibafundisayo, ezibakhulisayo ngokomqondo, nezenza ukuthi bakwazi
ukuxhumana, kungasetshenziswa isiNgisi kuphela kepha kusetshenziswe zonke
izilimi zabantu khona bezokuzwa. Siyowesekela-ke lo Mnyango uma ukwenza
lokho. (Translation of Zulu speech follows.)

[Mr V B NDLOVU: Madam Speaker, before the IFP supports this Vote, it wants
firstly to point out that the use of different languages by the SABC should
be increased so that all languages spoken in South Africa will be heard on
the air.

Secondly, we want this department to ensure that sport is broadcast not
only on English channels but also on all channels for all South Africans.
Thirdly, the price of cellular phones should be decreased. Cellular phones
should not be so expensive that low-income-earners find it difficult to
have cellular phones. Cellular phones should be easily obtainable.
 
Fourthly, M-Net must not be a channel for rich people only, everybody must
be able to receive it. Therefore, there is a need for the SABC not to
broadcast only in English, because the programmes that it broadcasts
facilitate communication, teach, increase knowledge and connect people with
their world. All languages must be used so that people will be able to
understand what is being said in these programmes. We will support this
department if it does exactly what I have just mentioned.]

Mnr J J DOWRY: Mevrou die Speaker, van die positiewe aspekte van
telekommunikasie die afgelope drie jaar was die feit dat 800 000 nuwe
telefoonlyne aangelê is, waarvan 70% na plattelandse gemeenskappe aangelê
is. Aan die einde van vanjaar sal meer as 1 miljoen voorheen benadeelde
mense beskik oor telefone.

Die openbare uitsaaier het ook die afgelope jaar beter gevaar op finansiële
gebied, soseer dat staatshulp aan dié korporasie tot 'n groot mate beëindig
kan word. Nog 'n positiewe aspek is dalk die moontlike opening van die 800-
frekwensiespektrum, wat nie net die derde selfoonlisensiehouer sal baat
nie, maar ook die bestaande twee netwerke.

Die Nuwe NP is egter verontrus en teleurgesteld oor die hantering van die
derde selfoonlisensie, asook die feit dat Satro se begroting soos wat
aangevra is, nie aan hom toegestaan is nie. Die somtotaal is egter dat die
arm mense van ons land groot voordeel getrek het uit die werksaamhede van
die Ministerie oor die afgelope jaar. Dit sal daarom volgens die Nuwe NP
verkeerd wees om teen hierdie begroting te stem. Gevolglik steun ons die
begrotingspos. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr J J DOWRY: Madam Speaker, one of the positive aspects of
telecommunications during the past three years was the fact that 800 000
new telephone lines were laid on, of which 70% were laid on to rural
communities. By the end of this year over 1 million previously
disadvantaged people will have telephones.

The public broadcaster also fared better financially during this past year,
so much so that state aid to this corporation can be stopped to a great
degree. Another positive aspect may be the possible opening of the 800-
frequency spectrum, which will not only be to the benefit of the third
cellular licence holder, but also the existing two networks.

The New NP is, however, alarmed and disappointed about the handling of the
third cellular licence, as well as the fact that Satra was not granted the
budget that it requested. The result, however, is that the poor people of
our country benefited greatly from the activities of the Ministry during
the past year. It would, therefore, in the opinion of the New NP, be wrong
to vote against this budget. We accordingly support the Vote. [Applause.]]

Mr S ABRAM: Madam Speaker, the department has very important functions to
perform, and it has made great strides. Some statutory bodies function
under the aegis of this department and, therefore, its importance increases
accordingly. All facets of the communications fraternity fall under the
department.

However, all is not well with this fraternity. There has been controversy
surrounding the awarding of the third cellular licence. The successful
bidder has still to be identified and informed of its identification. Legal
action has been instituted and allegations and counterallegations of
alleged misdemeanours abound. Suspicion and mistrust seem to be the order
of the day.

The Minister and her director-general will have to act decisively to
restore confidence. What has been happening does not augur well for the
future of communications and investor confidence in the industry. One
cannot expect possible investors in the third cellular network to be held
hostage for over a year, whilst decision-makers are bickering. If need be,
the entire process should be stopped, and a new process set in motion
within strict timeframes for its finalisation. With these few remarks, the
UDM will be supporting the Vote. [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, hon Ministers and members, effective
communication is crucial to sustain a healthy democracy. South Africa, in
comparison to the rest of Africa, has the capacity to become a world player
in the field of telecommunications. Despite our potential and Telkom's
attempts to put a telephone within the reach of every family and every
home, we have noted in this new millennium that there are several million
poor families who cannot afford a basic telephone service.

We welcome the decision by Government to end Telkom's monopoly by the year
2001, and we believe that a new competitive national telephone company will
assist to put an affordable telephone system in every home.
We commend the two cellphone companies, Vodacom and MTN, for the
improvement in their services and we deplore the incompetent manner in
which Satra has handled the process of granting a third cellular licence,
which has still not been finalised. We are also very disappointed about the
manner in which the IBA has treated the applications of Christian community
radio stations. Almost all of them have been rejected and we therefore
cannot support this Vote.

Dr P W A MULDER: Mevrou die Speaker, die VF en die komitee het goeie
verhoudinge met die direkteur-generaal en daar is gereelde skakeling met
hom. Ek wil hom ook graag gelukwens met die verskeie prestasies van sy
departement, veral met betrekking tot telefoonvoorsiening.

Ongelukkig, aan die ander kant, is daar ook heelwat probleme. Miljarde
rande word jaarliks in die Suid-Afrikaanse telekommunikasiewêreld bestee.
Daarom is dit belangrik dat 'n liggaam soos Satro se geloofwaardigheid bo
alle twyfel moet wees. Die fiasko met die derde selfoonlisensie het hierdie
geloofwaardigheid permanent in Suid-Afrika en internasionaal geskaad. Dit
maak dit vorentoe problematies om dit weer te herstel.

Die SABC val ook op 'n indirekte wyse onder hierdie departement en onder
die Minister se pos. Ons het in die verlede tydens die bespreking van die
begrotingspos volledig ons probleme en besware met die SABC uiteengesit.
Ons het ook waardering uitgespreek vir verbeterings by die SABC,
byvoorbeeld taalblokke wat ingebring is wat verstandiger is en meer
konkreet met die mark ooreenstem.

Hierdie Parlement het egter wat ons betref 'n onregverdige stelsel van
televisielisensies aanvaar. Baie mense word geforseer om vir
televisielisensies te betaal terwyl hulle nie 'n volledige diens ontvang
nie. Baie gedeeltes van die platteland ontvang nie al die kanale nie. Ons
het ook probleme spesifiek wat die nuusdekking betref. Die
bimediabenadering, glo ons, werk mee tot nuussentralisering en tot die
manipulering van nuus en ons kan nie daarmee saamstem nie. Ons dink ook dit
is uit 'n kommunikasieoogpunt die verkeerde benadering. Die VF sal teen
hierdie portefeulje stem. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER: Madam Speaker, the FF and the committee have a sound
relationship with the director-general and we liaise with him regularly. I
would also like to congratulate him on the various achievements of his
department, in particular with regard to the provision of telephones.

Unfortunately, on the other hand, there are also quite a number of
problems. Annually billions of rands are expended in the world of South
African telecommunications. That is why it is important that the
credibility of a body such as Satra should be above reproach. The fiasco
with the third cellular licence has permanently harmed this credibility in
South Africa and internationally. This is making its future restoration
problematic.

The SABC also falls indirectly under this department and the Minister's
Vote. In the past, during the discussion of the Vote, we fully expounded
our problems with and objections to the SABC. We also expressed
appreciation for improvements at the SABC, for example, language blocks
that were introduced that were more sensible and corresponded more
concretely with the market.

However, as far as we are concerned, this Parliament accepted an unfair
system of television licensing. Many people are forced to pay for
television licences while they do not receive a full service. Many parts of
the rural areas do not receive all the channels. We also have problems
specifically concerning news coverage. The bimedia approach, we believe,
contributes to the centralising and manipulation of news and we cannot
agree with that. We also think that from the point of view of communication
it is the wrong approach. The FF will vote against this portfolio.]

Mr N N KEKANA: Madam Speaker, we are sick and tired of the fairy tales of
the DP. [Interjections.] What we know is that behind the headlines and the
sound bites there is real work to be done to address the legacy of
apartheid.

The ANC supports this Vote because we are on course to roll out 2,8 million
lines by March 2002. Telkom, our national operator, has installed over 1
million lines. Of these lines, 14 000 were installed in schools, hospitals
and police stations, and over 2 091 villages have received, for the first
time, basic telephone services.

Today the Post Office receives no subsidy from the Government. We have
entered into a strategic management partnership with the New Zealand Post
Office in order to turn around the loss-making Post Office and meet the
postal needs of all South Africans. In more than 200 years only 3 million
postal addresses were allocated in South Africa. Today, as we speak, the
ANC-led Government has, in just four years, added 4 million new addresses.
That is a major achievement.

We are supporting this Vote because we now have 112 community-radio-station
licences and 15 private radio stations, introducing a plurality of voices
and opinions. The public today has a variety of programmes on radio and
television, with e.tv and DSTV offering additional television programmes to
the three SABC television channels.

The department and the Ministry are also paying a lot of attention to
training and skills development. There is also an investigation into the
possibility of launching, for the first time, our own satellite. Therefore,
the ANC believes that the department and the Ministry are on course to
deliver and improve the lives of our people in this country, and we stand
to support this Vote. [Applause.]

Division demanded.
The House divided:


  AYES - 270: Abrahams, T; Abram, S; Arendse, J D; Asmal, A K; Bakker, D M;
  Balfour, B M N; Baloi, G E; Baloyi, M R; Baloyi, S F; Bekker, H J; Belot,
  S T; Beukman, F; Bhengu, F; Bhengu, N R; Blaas, A; Bloem, D V; Bogopane,
  H I; Booi, M S; Botha, N G W; Buthelezi, M G; Buthelezi, M N; Camerer, S
  M; Carrim, Y I; Cassim, M F; Chalmers, J; Chauke, H P; Chohan-Kota, F I;
  Cindi, N V; Coetzee-Kasper, M P; Cronin, J P; Davies, R H; De Beer, S J;
  De Lange, J H; De Lille, P; Diale, L N; Didiza, A T; Dithebe, S L;
  Ditshetelo, P H K; Dlamini, B O; Doidge, G Q M; Douglas, B M; Dowry, J J;
  Duma, N M; Durand, J; Du Toit, D C; Erwin, A; Fankomo, F C; Feinstein, A
  J; Fihla, N B; Fraser-Moleketi, G J; Frolick, C T; Gandhi, E; Gaum, A H;
  Geldenhuys, B L; George, M E; Gerber, P A; Gogotya, N J; Gomomo, P J;
  Goniwe, T M; Goosen, A D; Gous, S J; Greyling, C H F; Grové, S P; Gumede,
  D M; Gxowa, N B; Hajaig, F; Hangana, N E; Hendrickse, P A C; Hlangwana, N
  L; Hlengwa, M W; Hogan, B A; Holomisa, S P; Jana, D P S; Jassat, E E;
  Jeffery, J H; Joemat, R R; Jordan, Z P; Kalako, M U; Kannemeyer, B W;
  Kasienyane, O R; Kekana, N N; Kgarimetsa, J J; Kgauwe, Q J; Kgwele, L M;
  Kota, Z A; Kotwal, Z; Landers, L T; Lekgoro, M K; Lekgoro, M M S; Lockey,
  D; Louw, J T; Lucas, E J; Lyle, A G; Mabandla, B S; Mabeta, M E;
  Mabudafhasi, T R; Magashule, E S; Magubane, N E; Magwanishe, G; Mahlangu,
  G L; Mahlangu, M J; Maimane, D S; Maine, M S; Makasi, X C; Makunyane, T
  L; Makwetla, S P; Malebana, H F; Maloney, L; Maluleke-Hlaneki, C J;
  Malumise, M M; Mangena, M A; Manie, M S; Manuel, T A; Maphalala, M A;
  Maphoto, L I; Mars, I; Marshoff, F B; Martins, B A D; Masala, M M;
  Maserumule, F T; Masithela, N H; Mathebe, P M; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F;
  Matthews, V J G; Maunye, M M; Maziya, A M; Mbadi, L M; Mbombo, N D;
  Mbongo, P F; Mbulawa-Hans, B G; Mbuyazi, L R; Mdladlana, M M S; Mfundisi,
  I S; Mgidi, J S; Mkhatshwa, S; Mkhize, B R; Mlambo-Ngcuka, P G; Mlangeni,
  A; Mnandi, P N; Mndende, O N; Mngomezulu, G P; Mnumzana, S K; Modise, T
  R; Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, E P; Mogoba, M S; Mohai, S J;
  Mohamed, I J; Mokoena, D A; Molebatsi, M A; Molewa, B G; Moloto, K A;
  Momberg, J H; Mongwaketse, S J; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K; Morkel, C M;
  Morobi, D M; Moropa, R M; Morwamoche, K W; Moss, M I; Mothoagae, P K;
  Motubatse, S D; Mpahlwa, M; Mshudulu, S A; Msomi, M D; Mthembi-Mahanyele,
  S D; Mthembu, B; Mtirara, N Z; Mtsweni, N S; Mufamadi, F S; Mutsila, I;
  Mzondeki, M J G; Nair, B; Nash, J H; Ncinane, I Z; Ncube, B; Ndlovu, V B;
  Ndou, R S; Nel, A H; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngcengwane, N D;
  Ngculu, L V J; Ngubane, B S; Ngubeni, J M; Ngwenya, M L; Nhlanhla, J M;
  Nhleko, N P; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njobe, M A A; Nkomo, A S; Nkosi, D M;
  Nonkonyana, M; Nqakula, C; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M B; Ntuli, S B; Nzimande,
  B M; Nzimande, L P M; Olckers, M E; Olifant, D A A; Pahad, E G; Phala, M
  J; Phantsi, N E; Pheko, S E M; Pieterse, R D; Pretorius, I J; Rabie, P J;
  Radebe, B A; Radebe, J T; Rajbally, S; Rajoo, K; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M;
  Ramgobin, M; Ramotsamai, C M P; Ripinga, S S; Saloojee, E; Schneemann, G
  D; Schoeman, R S; Scott, M I; Seaton, S A; Sekgobela, P S; September, C
  C; September, R K; Shabangu, S; Shilubana, T P; Shope, N R; Sigcau, S N;
  Sigcawu, A N; Sigwela, E M; Sikakane, M R; Simmons, S; Sisulu, L N;
  Sithole, D J; Skhosana, W M; Skosana, M B; Skweyiya, Z S T; Slabbert, J
  H; Smit, H A; Smith, P F; Smith, V G; Solo, B M; Solomon, G; Sonjica, B
  P; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Thabethe, E; Tinto, B; Tolo, L J; Tshabalala-
  Msimang, M E; Tsheole, N M; Turok, B; Twala, N M; Vadi, I; Van den
  Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe, A S; Van der Merwe, J H; Van Deventer, F J;
  Van Wyk, A (Annelizé); Van Wyk, J F; Van Wyk, N; Verwoerd, M; Vilakazi, B
  H; Woods, G G; Xingwana, L M T; Zita, L; Zondo, R P; Zulu, N E.

  NOES - 41: Andrew, K M; Aucamp, C; Bell, B G; Borman, G M; Botha, A J;
  Bruce, N S; Clelland, N J; Cupido, P W; Da Camara, M L; Davidson, I O;
  Delport, J T; Eglin, C W; Ellis, M J; Gibson, D H M; Gore, V C; Green, L
  M; Grobler, G A J; Heine, R J; Kalyan, S V; Lee, T D; Madasa, Z L;
  Mayatula, S M; Moorcroft, E K; Mulder, C P; Mulder, P W A; Ntuli, R S;
  Opperman, S E; Pillay, S; Schmidt, H C; Selfe, J; Semple, J A; Seremane,
  W J; Singh A; Smuts, M; Sono, B N; Southgate, R M; Swart, P S; Swart, S
  N; Taljaard, R; Viljoen, C L; Waters, M.

Vote No 5 accordingly agreed to.

Vote No 6 - Correctional Services - put.

Declarations of vote:

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Madam Speaker, the budget provides for the incarceration
of 150 000 prisoners, 17 000 short of the existing number. It is
inconceivable that the budget can be supported on the basis of an expected
and definite shortfall. Two of the most important programmes relating to
offenders, namely the care of offenders and their reintegration into the
community, have received the lowest increases proportionate to other main
functions.

A figure of R33 million was allocated to design a new uniform, despite a
Cabinet decision on 1 April to demilitarise. In contradiction to the
Cabinet decision, the old uniforms are still in use, and a possible return
to the old uniforms, with cosmetic changes, at a price of R18,75 million is
being considered.

The electronic monitoring project is still not in a position to be
implemented, despite the fact that the department initially undertook the
project from September 1996 to August 1997.

The totally inadequate amount of R4,6 million allocated for the imposition
of private-public partnerships shows that the department has still not
realised that the privatisation of certain functions within the department
is financially and effectively better managed by the private sector. About
R35 million of the 1999-2000 budget will be unspent and rolled over to the
next financial year.

The management of the Department of Correctional Services levelled major
criticism at the department owing to the lack of proper planning and
budgeting, the overcentralisation of many of its functions, the lack of any
official service delivery improvement plan, the overcentralisation of
control, and the deeply felt sense of unfairness towards the organisation,
which was thought to be riddled with favouritism, cronyism and corruption.

In conclusion, the DP does not support the budget.

Mrs S A SEATON: Madam Speaker, the IFP fully supports this Vote.
[Interjections.] This is one department that, I think, really works under
extremely difficult circumstances. It works under circumstances not of its
own making. The Departments of Safety and Security, and of Justice play a
big role in the overcrowding which the Department of Correctional Services
has to deal with. It is important that we applaud the Minister and his
department for the initiatives they have taken to sort out the corruption
that they have found in the department. This is something to be applauded,
and should not be knocked at all.

I think that it is time that the people who vote against such things take
the time and trouble to understand the transformation that has taken place
in this department. [Interjections.] [Applause.] It is one of the greatest
transformations I have seen in any department in this Parliament since
1994. [Applause.] We congratulate the Minister, and the IFP will be
supporting this Vote. [Applause.] [Interjections.]

Mr J DURAND: Madam Speaker, corruption, bad management and the
misappropriation of funds have rocked this department. The New NP demanded
intervention by President Mbeki. We are pleased to say that President Mbeki
and Minister Skosana did not cover anything up. Our call to clean the
department and kick out corrupt and incompetent officials has been heeded
to. A new commissioner has been appointed with officials from the Public
Service Commission. Vacancies have been advertised to replace corrupt
officials. I visited the Durban-Westville and Pietermaritzburg prisons, and
I could see great improvements.

Die Nuwe NP is verbind tot skoon, effektiewe regering. Ons sal die
begroting steun en belowe aan alle Suid-Afrikaners om ons waghondfunksie
vreesloos en konstruktief te beoefen. Ons wil die agb Minister gelukwens
met die goeie werk wat hy doen en dat hy sonder aansien des persoons ook
vreesloos optree om skoon te maak. [Tussenwerpsels.] [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The New NP is committed to clean, effective government. We will support
the budget and promise all South Africans to perform our watchdog functions
fearlessly and constructively. We want to congratulate the hon the Minister
on the good work he is doing and that he is also acting fearlessly, without
fear or favour, to clean up the administration. [Interjections.]
[Applause.]]

Mr S N SWART: Madam Speaker, during the submissions on this Vote the issue
of overcrowding in the prisons was emphasised. In this regard, I was
recently able to visit the Potchefstroom prison, where I was able to
personally witness the deplorable overcrowding, owing to, inter alia,
budgetary constraints.

The concept of restorative justice is a definite method of addressing
overcrowding in prisons. By means of employing divertive programmes,
offenders, particularly the youth, can be diverted from criminal justice
processes, and thus possible incarceration.

The focus is placed on acknowledgement of blame by the offender and on
restitution to the victim. In terms of the recent United Nations Crime
Conference Declaration, member states are encouraged to develop
``restorative justice policies, procedures and programmes that are
respectful of the rights, needs and interests of victims, offenders,
communities and all other parties''.

In this regard, the Applied Fiscal Research Centre of UCT, having been
commissioned by the SA Law Commission to evaluate the cost of implementing
the proposed child justice Bill, which proposes directing children towards
restorative justice programmes, concluded that, possibly, the most
outstanding aspect of the new child justice Bill is that it will enable the
Government to realise substantial savings, and also ensure that the
remaining state expenditure is spent more effectively.

Whilst we have severe reservations about this Vote, owing to widespread
corruption and nepotism, we trust that the actions taken by the new
commissioner and the Ministry will address these issues. We earnestly
request the Minister, together with other departments in the security
cluster, to implement and look at these concepts of restorative justice as
a matter of urgency.

In conclusion, we support this Vote. [Applause.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Madam Speaker, I also rise to support this Correctional
Services Vote, firstly, because I have just visited the prisons and have
seen for myself what they are like.

However, arising from that, I received a letter from a New NP supporter.
This New NP supporter asks me in the letter: ``Why are you protecting the
coloured and kaffir, black child criminals?'' This is in the letter. Now,
this makes ... [Interjections.] No, she said so. Here is the letter. I will
give it to members just now.

I just want to tell the hon members that when I visited the prisons, I was
surprised not to see one white child in prison. The question remains: Where
are the white children in this system? Nobody can tell me that one cannot
find a naughty white child. Why is it only coloured and black children who
are kept in this system?

This is from a New NP supporter. She says: ``I voted for Mark Wiley.''
[Interjections.] No, that member is confused. He is dead already, in any
case. [Laughter.] The reason I rise to support this Vote is because the
keeping of children in prisons is a violation of sections 12, 28 and 35 of
the Constitution. I think that the New NP should go and teach its members
about the Constitution. [Applause.]

Mr D V BLOEM: Mevrou die Speaker, ek is bly dat Patricia de Lille die ...
[Tussenwerpsels.] [Madam Speaker, I am glad that Patricia de Lille ...
[Interjections.]]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order!

Mnr D V BLOEM: Enige regdenkende mens in Suid-Afrika sal hierdie begroting
steun. Dit is net mense wat nie probleme het nie wat teen hierdie begroting
sal stem. Patricia de Lille is heeltemal reg dat hierdie mense nie weet wat
in die gevangenisse aangaan nie. Daar was in die verlede probleme. Hierdie
probleme word gehanteer.

Die Minister, die President en die hele Kabinet is besig om aandag te gee
aan probleme wat daardie agb lede se party geskep het en vir ons nagelaat
het. Ons het nie hierdie probleme geskep nie. Minister Skosana is nou 'n
paar maande in hierdie pos, en hy is al grys soos hy werk aan hierdie
probleme. Hy slaap letterlik in die gevangenis om te kyk hoe dinge daar
verloop. [Tussenwerpsels.] Ons steun hierdie begroting. Hierdie mense wat
so baie kla dat daar by hulle huise ingebreek word, is net daar om met die
media te praat.

Ek wil egter hê die mense daar buite moet sien wie is die mense wat
kriminele aanmoedig om hierdie land in 'n swak lig te stel. Dit is die DP
en andere wat teen hierdie begroting gaan stem. Dit is die mense wat nie
wil hê misdaad ... Hulle gaan praat in die buiteland oor die misdaad, maar
hier in die land sê hulle hierdie begroting moenie gesteun word nie. Hulle
is volslae lafaards om nie hierdie begroting te steun nie. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr D V BLOEM: Any right-minded person in South Africa would support this
budget. Only people who have no problems would vote against this budget.
Patricia de Lille is quite correct in saying that these people do not know
what is happening in the prisons. In the past there were problems. These
problems are being dealt with.

The Minister, the President and the whole Cabinet are addressing problems
which those hon members' party created and bequeathed us. We did not create
these problems. Minister Skosana has been in this post for a few months and
already his hair has gone grey from working on these problems. He literally
sleeps in the prison to see how things are progressing there.
[Interjections.] We support this budget. These people who are always
complaining that their houses are being broken into, are only there to talk
to the media.

However, I want the people out there to see which people are encouraging
the criminals to create a negative image of the country. It is the DP and
others who are voting against this budget. They are the people who do not
want crime ... They go abroad and talk about the crime situation, but back
in the country they say that this budget must not be supported. They are
utter cowards not to support this budget. [Applause.]]

Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: Is it Parliamentary
for the hon member to refer to the official opposition in such unflattering
terms? [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon Bloem, could you just translate what you
said? [Interjections.]

Mr D V BLOEM: Mevrou die Speaker, hy is die eerste lafaard na wie ek verwys
het. [Madam Speaker, he is the first coward I referred to.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! No, could you just say what you said?

Mr D V BLOEM: Ek het gesê ... [I said ...]

Mr D H M GIBSON: Moenie lelik wees nie. Ons is groot vriende. Moet nou nie
lelik wees nie. [Tussenwerpsels.] [Do not be nasty. We are great friends.
Do not be nasty now. [Interjections.]]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon Gibson, please let the hon member answer my
question. [Interjections.] Please take your seat. Hon Bloem, please take
the podium and proceed.

Mr D V BLOEM: Wat ek gesê het, is dat lafaards teen hierdie begroting gaan
stem, en ek glo nie dit is onparlementêr om te sê dat hierdie party 'n
groep lafaards is nie. [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[I said that cowards are going to vote against this budget, and I do not
think that it is unparliamentary to say that this party consists of a bunch
of cowards. [Interjections.]]

Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Speaker, may I address you?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! No, hon member, you asked whether it was
unparliamentary for the hon member to refer to the Opposition party in such
unflattering language. He says he referred to the DP as ``cowards'', right?
[Interjections.] I really would like to examine the Hansard before I decide
on this one. [Interjections.] Being a coward is something very human and so
I really wish to look at the Hansard to make up my mind whether it is
unparliamentary or not.

Mr D H M GIBSON: Thank you, Madam. I abide by that ruling. May I raise
another point of order?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Another point of order?
Mr D H M GIBSON: Yes, the other point of order is that after that this hon
member said I was the first one of the cowards and he pointed straight at
me. [Interjections.] Because if the hon member does not admit that, then he
is unfortunately a liar. [Interjections.]

Mr D V BLOEM: Mevrou die Speaker, ek het gesê die lid lyk soos 'n
``coward''. Hy is nie 'n ``coward'' nie. [Interjections.] [Madam Speaker, I
said that the member looks like a coward. He is not a coward.
[Interjections.]]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, please take your seats! Please take
your seats! Hon Bloem, please, if you did refer to the hon member as ``the
first coward'', would you withdraw that? [Interjections.] I am waiting on
you.

Mr M J ELLIS: Be a man.

Mr D V BLOEM: Ek is al lankal 'n man. Ek trek daardie woorde terug, want ek
is 'n man. [I have been a man for a long time now. I withdraw those words,
because I am a man.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, please take your seats. I have four
members of the ruling party on their feet. Please take your seats, hon
members. Hon members, we are going to be here beyond midnight. Are you
aware of that. [Interjections.] I just want to remind you. [Interjections.]
Order! I just want to remind members that our programme already takes us
beyond midnight. [Interjections.] And therefore, really, I do not think it
is fair that we waste our time on just bickering about who said what. I am
still going to rule on the question of whether or not hon Bloem was
unparliamentary in what he said. I am still going to rule on that and I
would like us to proceed.

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Speaker, a real point of order! In his
concluding remarks hon Mr Gibson said: ``If he said so, then he is a
liar.'' That is quite clear. One does not need an interpretation and I ask
him to withdraw that the hon member ``is a liar’’.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon Gibson, the hon member has already withdrawn
his words, so I would like you please to withdraw unconditionally and not
to waste our time.

Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Speaker, I do so with the greatest of pleasure.
[Laughter.]
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Thank you. Let us now go back to Vote No 6 -
Correctional Services.

Division demanded.

The House divided:


  AYES - 281: Abrahams, T; Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Arendse, J D; Asmal, A
  K; Bakker, D M; Balfour, B M N; Baloi, G E; Baloyi, M R; Baloyi, S F;
  Belot, S T; Beukman, F; Bhengu, F; Bhengu, N R; Blaas, A; Bloem, D V;
  Bogopane, H I; Booi, M S; Botha, N G W; Buthelezi, M G; Buthelezi, M N;
  Camerer, S M; Carrim, Y I; Cassim, M F; Chalmers, J; Chauke, H P; Chiba,
  L; Chohan-Kota, F I; Cindi, N V; Coetzee-Kasper, M P; Cronin, J P;
  Davies, R H; De Beer, S J; De Lange, J H; De Lille, P; Diale, L N;
  Didiza, A T; Ditshetelo, P H K; Dlamini, B O; Doidge, G Q M; Douglas, B
  M; Dowry, J J; Duma, N M; Durand, J; Du Toit, D C; Erwin, A; Fankomo, F
  C; Feinstein, A J; Fihla, N B; Fraser-Moleketi, G J; Frolick, C T;
  Gandhi, E; Gaum, A H; Geldenhuys, B L; George, M E; Gerber, P A; Gigaba,
  K M N; Gogotya, N J; Gomomo, P J; Goniwe, T M; Goosen, A D; Gous, S J;
  Green, L M; Greyling, C H F; Gumede, D M; Gxowa, N B; Hajaig, F; Hanekom,
  D A; Hangana, N E; Hendrickse, P A C; Hlangwana, N L; Hlengwa, M W;
  Hogan, B A; Holomisa, S P; Jana, D P S; Jassat, E E; Joemat, R R; Jordan,
  Z P; Kannemeyer, B W; Kasienyane, O R; Kekana, N N; Kgarimetsa, J J;
  Kgauwe, Q J; Kgwele, L M; Kota, Z A; Kotwal, Z; Landers, L T; Lekgoro, M
  K; Lekgoro, M M S; Lockey, D; Louw, J T; Lucas, E J; Lyle, A G; Mabandla,
  B S; Mabeta, M E; Mabudafhasi, T R; Madasa, Z L; Magashule, E S;
  Mahlalela, C C; Mahlangu, G L; Mahlangu, M J; Mahomed, F; Maimane, D S;
  Makasi, X C; Makunyane, T L; Makwetla, S P; Malebana, H F; Maloney, L;
  Maluleke-Hlaneki, C J; Malumise, M M; Mangena, M A; Manie, M S; Manuel, T
  A; Maphalala, M A; Maphoto, L I; Mars, I; Marshoff, F B; Martins, B A D;
  Masala, M M; Maserumule, F T; Mashimbye, J N; Masithela, N H; Masutha, M
  T; Mathebe, P M; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F; Matthews, V J G; Maunye, M M;
  Mayatula, S M; Maziya, A M; Mbadi, L M; Mbombo, N D; Mbongo, P F; Mbulawa-
  Hans, B G; Mbuyazi, L R; Mdladlana, M M S; Mfundisi, I S; Mgidi, J S;
  Middleton, N S; Mkhatshwa, S; Mkhize, B R; Mlambo-Ngcuka, P G; Mlangeni,
  A; Mnandi, P N; Mndende, O N; Mngomezulu, G P; Mnumzana, S K; Modise, T
  R; Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, E P; Mogoba, M S; Mohai, S J;
  Mohamed, I J; Mokoena, D A; Molebatsi, M A; Molewa, B G; Moloto, K A;
  Momberg, J H; Mongwaketse, S J; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K; Morkel, C M;
  Morobi, D M; Moropa, R M; Morwamoche, K W; Moss, M I; Mothoagae, P K;
  Motubatse, S D; Mpahlwa, M; Mpaka, H M; Mshudulu, S A; Msomi, M D;
  Mthembi-Mahanyele, S D; Mthembu, B; Mtsweni, N S; Mufamadi, F S; Mulder,
  C P; Mulder, P W A; Mutsila, I; Mzondeki, M J G; Nair, B; Nash, J H;
  Ncinane, I Z; Ncube, B; Ndlovu, V B; Ndou, R S; Nel, A H; Nene, N M;
  Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngculu, L V J; Ngubane, B S;
  Ngubane, H; Ngubeni, J M; Ngwenya, M L; Nhlanhla, J M; Nhleko, N P;
  Nhlengethwa, D G; Njobe, M A A; Nkomo, A S; Nkosi, D M; Nonkonyana, M;
  Nqakula, C; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M B; Ntuli, S B; Nzimande, B M; Nzimande,
  L P M; Olckers, M E; Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G; Pahad, E G; Phala, M
  J; Phantsi, N E; Pheko, S E M; Phohlela, S; Pieterse, R D; Pretorius, I
  J; Rabie, P J; Radebe, B A; Radebe, J T; Rajbally, S; Rajoo, K; Ramakaba-
  Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin, M; Ramotsamai, C M P; Ripinga, S S; Saloojee, E;
  Schneemann, G D; Scott, M I; Seaton, S A; September, C C; September, R K;
  Serote, M W; Shabangu, S; Shilubana, T P; Shope, N R; Sigcau, S N;
  Sigcawu, A N; Sigwela, E M; Sikakane, M R; Simmons, S; Sisulu, L N;
  Sithole, D J; Skhosana, W M; Skosana, M B; Skweyiya, Z S T; Slabbert, J
  H; Smit, H A; Smith, P F; Smith, V G; Solo, B M; Solomon, G; Sonjica, B
  P; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Southgate, R M; Swart, S N; Thabethe, E;
  Tinto, B; Tolo, L J; Tshabalala-Msimang, M E; Tsheole, N M; Turok, B;
  Twala, N M; Vadi, I; Van den Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe, A S; Van der
  Merwe, J H; Van Deventer, F J; Van Wyk, A (Annelizé); Van Wyk, J F; Van
  Wyk, N; Verwoerd, M; Vilakazi, B H; Viljoen, C L; Woods, G G; Xingwana, L
  M T; Zita, L; Zondo, R P; Zulu, N E.

  NOES - 33: Andrew, K M; Aucamp, C; Bell, B G; Borman, G M; Botha, A J;
  Bruce, N S; Clelland, N J; Cupido, P W; Da Camara, M L; Davidson, I O;
  Delport, J T; Eglin, C W; Ellis, M J; Gibson, D H M; Gore, V C; Grobler,
  G A J; Heine, R J; Kalyan, S V; Lee, T D; Moorcroft, E K; Ntuli, R S;
  Opperman, S E; Pillay, S; Schmidt, H C; Selfe, J; Semple, J A; Seremane,
  W J; Singh, A; Smuts, M; Sono, B N; Swart, P S; Taljaard, R; Waters, M.

Vote No 6 accordingly agreed to.

Vote No 7 - Defence - put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr A J BOTHA: Madam Speaker, our soldiers, sailors, airmen and airwomen,
and medics could face one of the toughest military missions ever, should
the military be deployed in the Democratic Republic of Congo. Because of
this, there is no more appropriate time than now to take a hard look at the
SA National Defence Force.

Because of year-on-year budget cuts and the imperatives of providing jobs
to the party faithful, the military preparedness of the SA National Defence
Force has been devastated. The Defence Force's full-time component is
unable to maintain adequate border protection because of budget cuts. The
South African Army can man only 12 of its 148 Rooikat armoured vehicles,
and the South African part-time component is unable to give adequate
support to the SA Police Service, particularly in the rural areas, because
of budget cuts. Only 15% of the Defence Force's part-time component
vehicles are serviceable.

Rather than a professional military, we have a form of armed welfare where
soldiers lie idle in barracks, aircraft remain in hangars and ships lie
alongside in harbours. The hon the Minister should note that we have a
situation where we are spending huge amounts on new equipment while funds
to use our existing manpower, even on old equipment and existing equipment,
is lacking. For this reason, the DP cannot support the Defence budget of
R13,7 billion for the 2000-2001 financial year.

Mr V B NDLOVU: Madam Speaker, the IFP believes that the Government must
make more concerted efforts to address the difficulties within the Defence
Force that have arisen as a result of misunderstandings between personnel
from different cultural backgrounds. The tragic killing at the Tempe
military base in the Free State reinforced the IFP's view that a much
greater effort must be made to ensure that effective intercultural
education is provided to members of the Defence Force. We must teach all
personnel to understand and respect each other's traditions.

Retrenchments must also be tackled sensitively. The need to reduce overall
force levels is well understood, but I urge that this should be done with
great caution, particularly with regard to the proposed employment
initiative retrenchments. To turn large numbers of trained military
personnel out onto the street without alternative employment could add
significantly to the crime crisis which we already face in South Africa.
Force levels can surely be managed down through natural attrition, rather
than compulsory retrenchments.
Tragically, the incidence of HIV/Aids in our armed forces suggests that
many personnel will be retiring early over the coming years. It would be
more sensitive to conduct proper research to assess the likely effect of
HIV/Aids before the employment initiative retrenchment plan is adopted.

The IFP will support the Vote. [Applause.]

Mr H A SMIT: Madam Speaker ...

Mr J H MOMBERG: Hier kom Hernus Kriel nommer 2! [Here comes Hernus Kriel
number 2!]

Mr H A SMIT: Mevrou die Speaker, daardie agb lid sal my nog altyd by die
Nuwe NP kry. Ek loop nie agter Hernus Kriel aan nie. [Gelag.] [Madam
Speaker, that hon member will always find me in the New NP. I do not follow
Hernus Kriel. [Laughter.]]

The SANDF is a proud and important arm of our public sector.
[Interjections.] Anyone who plans to harm this arm will meet with serious
resistance from the New NP. [Interjections.] I regard the SANDF as an
institution that should be above petty party politics. I seriously hope
that the DP will take this statement to heart. [Interjections.]

Our Defence budget is, of course, underfunded. I believe that it is of the
utmost importance to try to achieve the ideal rightsizing of 70 000
personnel as agreed upon in the Defence Review. We must get a satisfactory
ruling regarding certain expenses, such as our involvement during the
Mozambique general elections. We will fulfil our duty as an opposition
party to criticise if necessary, but hon members will never have to doubt
our loyalty when it comes to this proud force. We will vote for the
adoption of the Defence budget.

Lastly, on behalf of my leader and my party, I want to express our sincere
gratitude to all members of the SANDF who participated in the much-needed
rescue and humanitarian aid operations in South Africa and Mozambique
during the recent floods and fires that devastated so many parts of our
region. The SANDF rescued nearly 15 000 people and delivered more than
7 500 tons of food, medical and emergency supplies to people in need in
both South Africa and Mozambique.
In conclusion, one can always find reasons to criticise, but the SANDF is,
in the famous words, simply the best. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: I thought that
it would only be proper for the hon member to talk of the SANDF, not the
SADF. [Laughter.]

Mr H A SMIT: The South African National Defence Force! Thank you, Minister.
[Interjections.]

Mr M E MABETA: Madam Speaker, we support this Vote. Our support follows a
process of in-depth discussions and briefing by the department on the
various aspects of the transformation programme by the department and the
management of the SANDF. We would wish the following aspects to be
addressed. The first is the clarification of the restructuring process and
the relevant arrangements made to offset the impact of this on those who
end up being retrenched from the Defence Force.

We also request that adherence to the White Paper review on Defence be
established. We further request that the special sensitivities of all
soldiers from the formerly disadvantaged communities, who largely occupy
the lowest ranks in their divisions, be addressed. We also request that the
special civic education programme, aimed at the reconciliation of the
different cultures from the statutory forces and nonstatutory forces,
should be supported, so that, as the country as a whole addresses such
issues as racism and language issues, the SANDF is not left behind. We also
request that the role played by the Secretary for Defence and his
relationship to Parliament be further discussed and clarified. We also
request that the role played by Parliament be further enhanced by continued
communication between the Department of Defence and the various committees
that deal with issues of defence.

In conclusion, I would like to commend and thank the Minister of Defence
for the respectful and dignified manner in which he has treated the
Portfolio Committee on Defence.

Adv Z L MADASA: Somlomo, umbutho we-ACDP ufuna ukuvakalisa inkxalabo
ngeenquleqhu neenzame zoMphathiswa zokurhwebelana namaTshayina ngezixhobo.
[Uwele-wele.] Asilwali urhwebelano namaTshayina. Wonke umntu uyarhwebelana
nawo nangona kukhalazwa ngamalungelo oluntu kulaa ndawo. AmaMelika
namaYurophu nawo ayarhwebelana neTshayina. Kodwa sithi kuMphathiswa, phambi
kokuba enze olu rhwebelwano makasazise siyikomiti ukuze sazi ukuba yintoni
le ayenzayo nala maTshayina.

Okokugqibela ndithi, eyona nkxalabo ingamandla kolu rhwebelwano
namaTshayina kukuba sirhwebelana nawo ngezixhobo ngexesha apho simele uxolo
eAfrika. Loo nto ke ithanda ukungqubana kwaye iyaxhalabisa. Nangona
ndithethe oku kungentla, siyavumelana nevoti yeZokhuselo. (Translation of
Xhosa speech follows.)

[Adv Z L MADASA: Madam Speaker, the ACDP would like to express its concern
regarding the endeavours of the Minister of Trade and Industry to enter
into an arms deal with the Chinese. [Interjections.] We are not against
trade with the Chinese. Everybody trades with them even though there are
complaints about human rights abuses in China. Americans and Europeans also
trade with China. However, we are saying to the Minister that before
concluding this deal, he must first inform us as a committee so that we
know what it is that he is doing with the Chinese.

Finally, our main concern about this arms deal with the Chinese is that it
comes at a time when we are standing for peace in Africa. That is rather
ironic and a cause for concern. Be that as it may, we support the Defence
Vote.]

Genl C L VILJOEN: Mnr die Voorsitter, hoe kan ek nou teen verdediging stem!
Verdediging was nog altyd 'n onderwerp vir konsensus. Die Minister het
belowe om dit so te hou. Daar is kritiek wat ons kan uitspreek, maar ek wil
begin deur te sê daar is tog redes waarom ons hierdie begrotingspos sal
steun.

Eerstens het die Minister saam met die SANW daarin geslaag om die Weermag
professioneel en lojaal te hou teenoor die land sodat hulle hul plig gedoen
het. Hulle het onlangs ook baie goed gepresteer tydens die oorstromings in
Mosambiek. Die Minister het sy bes gedoen om die hoë professionele
standaarde in die Weermag tydens die moeilike proses van oorgang te
handhaaf.

Verder het die SA Nasionale Weermag vandag 'n spesifieke rol in Suid-
Afrika, veral as ons sien hoe oorlog in baie gevalle om ons besig is om oor
te spoel na die aangrensende lande. Ons is nie noodwendig hiervan gevrywaar
nie. Dan is daar 'n kommandostelsel in die Weermag wat baie belangrike en
nuttige werk kan doen om veral die moorde op boere teen te werk. As die
kommandostelsel goed befonds en gebruik word, kan dit gebeur.

Daar is egter ook kritiek. Ek dink die onoordeelkundige en lomp hantering
van die Lesotho-operasie het lank geneem. Die laaste mense is onlangs eers
daar onttrek. Lesotho sal nie die rekening kan betaal nie. Ons sal dit moet
betaal. Die inwoners van Lesotho is nou vyande van Suid-Afrika, en dit vorm
'n nuwe grensbedreiging vir ons.

Die dissipline in die Weermag is nie op standaard nie, en dit wil kort-kort
lyk asof daar ook probleme met die samehorigheid is. Meriete is nie die
hoofkriterium van die aanstellings nie. Dit raak die moraal in die Weermag,
en dit laat politieke aanstellings deurglip wat dan weer in die naam van
transformasie deurgevoer word. In die geheel gesien is die VF egter bereid
om hierdie begrotingspos te steun. (Translation of Afrikaans speech
follows.)

[Gen C L VILJOEN: Mr Chairperson, how can I vote against Defence! Defence
has always been a subject for consensus. The Minister has promised to keep
it that way. There are aspects which we can criticise, but I want to start
by saying that there are reasons why we will support this Vote.

Firstly, the Minister and the SANDF have managed to keep the Defence Force
professional and loyal to the country, with the result that they did their
duty. Recently they also performed very well during the floods in
Mozambique. The Minister has done his best to maintain the high
professional standards in the Defence Force during the difficult process of
transformation.

Furthermore, the SA National Defence Force has a specific role in South
Africa at present, especially when we see how wars around us are in many
cases spreading to neighbouring countries. We are not necessarily
safeguarded against this. Then there is a commando system in the Defence
Force which can do very important and useful work to counteract the
murdering of farmers in particular. If the commando system is properly
financed and utilised, it can happen.

However, there is also criticism. I think the injudicious and clumsy
handling of the Lesotho operation took too long. The last people have only
recently been withdrawn there. Lesotho will not be able to pay the account.
We will have to pay it. The inhabitants of Lesotho are now enemies of South
Africa, and this now poses a new border threat to us.

The discipline in the Defence Force is not up to standard, and every now
and then it appears as if there are problems with regard to solidarity.
Merit is not the main criterion for appointments. This has an impact on
morale in the Defence Force and political appointments slip through, which
are then implemented in the name of transformation. However, as a whole the
FF is prepared to support this Vote.]

Ms T R MODISE: Chairperson, the ANC will definitely be supporting this
Vote. It is necessary for us to remember that we all agreed on a balanced,
modern, technologically advanced defence force. It is also necessary to
remember that a few weeks ago we were all proud of the Defence Force. We
were all in tears over and enraptured by the pictures we saw on our TVs.

That better consideration should be given to rationalisation and
retrenchment is a fact, and we will do that. We do not see why that should
be brought here as an issue and used to reject the budget. Therefore, there
is absolutely no basis for the rejection as outlined by the DP. We
definitely support the budget. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon members, order! There is a lot of
speaking and laughing on this side of the House. Please keep quiet.

Vote No 7 agreed to (Democratic Party dissenting).

Vote No 8 - Education - put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr R S NTULI: Chairperson, the DP cannot support the Education Vote for the
following reasons. Firstly, the entire education system, as we all know,
from the primary education sector to the higher education sector is in a
dysfunctional state in terms of management and delivery. This is reflected
by the following poor performance indicators. The management and
implementation of Curriculum 2005 in Grades 1, 2, 3 and 7, as reviewed by
the Curriculum Review Commission recently, were found to be painfully
inept.

The ethos and general discipline in many schools, especially in the
previously disadvantaged communities, as regards both teachers and
learners, is a matter of great concern and needs serious redress. The
overall effect of these glaring shortcomings is the chronically poor
performance of learners as reflected by the perennially poor matric results
over six years in the historically disadvantaged schools. [Interjections.]
The late delivery of textbooks and other learning materials contributes to
the poor performance of the learners.

The situation in higher education is also no cause for comfort. Financial
mismanagement of several of these institutions is too common. Student
unrest in these institutions is on the increase. We submit that the
performance audit of the department remains dismal, to say the least,
despite numerous noble pronouncements by the energetic Minister, Kader
Asmal, which we salute. The DP, therefore, cannot support the Vote.
[Interjections.]

Mr M F CASSIM: Mr Chairman, the IFP enthusiastically supports this Vote. In
saying that, we are also quite puzzled and dismayed by the fact that if
education is jointly and severally controlled by the Minister and the MECs
in the provinces, the vote of the DP - which is a negative vote - must also
then imply a negative vote against Minister Helen Zille and what she is
attempting to do in the Western Cape, because it cannot be the
responsibility of the one Minister and not of the other. The fact also
remains that the cruellest injustice perpetrated against the people of this
land was in the form of the denial of education over a very long period of
time.

Restitution has begun, and we are only six years into this process. We wish
to salute those who are at the helm of education, who have taken us from
those dark days and age when our children had almost a kind of intellectual
holocaust perpetrated against them. That is how serious the situation was.
This denial has to be corrected and we believe that by, jointly and
together, taking education out of the political arena we can constructively
support the growth of education for the benefit of our children.

We wish to argue very strongly that as a form of restitution of mathematics
and science education, in particular, which the black child in this country
was denied, we must begin to employ extra resources in this important area
in order to have a skills base from which our economy can continue to grow.
We also feel that the tradition of hard work and good discipline, which the
IFP supports, must permeate education in order that we should succeed in
this area. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Adv A H GAUM: Chairperson, the New NP has considered voting for this
budget, because Minister Asmal has taken a number of sensible steps which
may very well improve the education situation in our country in good time.
He has even allowed the review committee to slaughter the ANC's sacred cow,
Curriculum 2005. But we have decided otherwise, because it is this
Government that created a curriculum which was doomed to failure and which
was forced down the throats of educators and learners despite our warnings
from the outset that it would not work.

Millions of rands of taxpayers' money has been thrown into yet another
bottomless ANC pit. Thousands of children have fallen victim to a failed
social experiment. Millions of rands in this budget will still be wasted on
Curriculum 2005, before it is eventually overtaken by Curriculum 21. There
is widespread uncertainty on the phasing out of the old and the
implementation of the new curriculum. The first sign of a looming new
crisis is that many publishers are once again at their wits' end, because
textbooks for Grades 4 and 8 have already been printed. The publishers are
about to sustain heavy losses, because the books are probably going to be
useless. [Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: [Inaudible.]

Adv A H GAUM: That is true, Mr Minister, that is true! This will lead to
more expensive textbooks and more problems with textbook supplies next
year. We cannot see how this budget will help to implement Minister Asmal's
flagship plan Tirisano. We support Tirisano but do not believe that it will
succeed if the Government is not committed to financing it.

We have serious doubts about the Government's sincerity about the promotion
of mother-tongue education, notwithstanding the direct correlation between
the availability or otherwise of mother-tongue education and achievement.
If the Government intends to reach equity in education, then the vehicles
for communicating thought, developing cognitive skills and engaging with
the content of the curriculum need to be brought to the surface. Hiding
from or dodging the language issue is not a useful way of planning for
success.
Mr S J DE BEER: Mr Chairperson, the UDM will support the Education Vote.

Wanneer ons dit sê, wil ons egter nie daarmee sê dat ons volkome gelukkig
is met wat op die oomblik op die onderwysterrein gebeur nie. Daar is baie
aspekte wat pla. Wanneer ons kyk na die skoletoneel, dan blyk dit dat daar
'n groeiende onrustigheid is. Ook ten opsigte van ons tersiêre inrigtings
is daar 'n groeiende onrustigheid.

Onderwys in sekere gebiede, veral in die verre platteland waar die
parlementêre portefeuljekomitee ook onlangs 'n besoek gebring het, is
inderdaad op die rand van ineenstorting. Die onrus wat besig is om toe te
neem in sekere skole is 'n kommerwekkende faktor. Die hantering van
Kurrikulum 2005 het veel te wense oorgelaat.

Ons moet egter ook die positiewe dinge raaksien. Dit is miskien in die tyd
waarin ons lewe meer belangrik om die positiewe dinge raak te sien as om
oor alles negatief te wil wees. Daar is op die oomblik duisende
hardwerkende, entoesiastiese onderwysers. Ons sal vir die onderwysers wat
pligsgetrou hulle werk doen, sê ons ondersteun hulle, en ons sal hulle moet
aanmoedig om hierdie taak te verrig.
Dit is ons taak om nie vas te steek by die verlede nie. Ons mag in hierdie
tye nie van die onderwys 'n politieke speelbal maak nie. Om onderwys te
laat slaag in hierdie tydsgewrig moet 'n uitdaging wees vir alle
regdenkende Suid-Afrikaners, en daarom sal die UDM hierdie begrotingspos
heelhartig steun. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[However, in saying that, we are not saying that we are entirely happy with
what is currently happening in the sphere of education. There are many
aspects which are cause for concern. When we look at schools, it becomes
apparent that there is a growing uneasiness. Also with regard to our
tertiary institutions there is a growing uneasiness.

Education in certain areas, particularly in the isolated rural areas which
the parliamentary portfolio committee also recently visited, is indeed on
the verge of collapse. The uneasiness which is on the increase in certain
schools is an alarming factor. The handling of Curriculum 2005 left a lot
to be desired.

However, we must also recognise the positive things. It is perhaps more
important in the times in which we live to recognise the positive things
than to want to be negative about everything. There are currently thousands
of hardworking, enthusiastic teachers. We want to say to the teachers who
do their jobs diligently that we support them, and we will have to
encourage them to carry out this task.

It is our task not to remain stuck in the past. In these times we must not
turn education into a political football. To enable education to succeed at
this juncture must be a challenge for all right-minded South Africans, and
for that reason the UDM wholeheartedly supports this Vote.]

Mr L M GREEN: Mr Chairperson, hon Ministers and members, the ACDP supports
this Vote, despite our reservations, because we believe Minister Asmal,
being a new Minister of Education, deserves a chance to prove himself.

We are also mindful that the Minister has inherited a difficult Ministry
with many problems, and we should not be quick to judge him and his
Ministry. We recognise his sincere attempts, firstly, to address the low
teacher morale in all communities; secondly, to address the problems of
management and administration in our schools, universities and colleges;
and thirdly, to address the poor quality of learning in our schools.

The national mobilisation of education and training under the slogan
Tirisano, for us, is also commendable, and we pray that Minister Asmal will
succeed where his predecessor struggled with this Ministry. A vote against
this Vote would, I think, send a message of no confidence in our teachers
and in our pupils, and therefore we support this Vote.

Dr P W A MULDER: Mnr die Voorsitter, daar is algemene konsensus dat
onderwys tans een van die grootste probleme in Suid-Afrika is. Die Minister
het 'n reusetaak aangepak, en ons sê vir hom baie sterkte met die
verrigting daarvan. Die Minister het besluit om realisties oor Kurrikulum
2005 te wees. Dit het moed gekos, en ons gee hom graag erkenning daarvoor
dat hy die foute van sy voorganger begin regstel.

In my toespraak tydens die begrotingspos het ek volledig uitgebrei oor hoe
belangrik moedertaalonderrig is, nie as 'n VF-beginsel nie, maar as 'n
universeel aanvaarde onderwysbeginsel orals in die wêreld op primêre vlak,
op sekondêre vlak en op tersiêre onderwysvlak. Dit bly vir my wreed - en ek
het sulke voorbeelde in my omgewing - om 'n graad 4-Sotho- of -Zulukind te
sien wat skielik deur medium van Engels moet leer, en om die onsekerheid te
sien as daardie kind dit moet deurgaan. Ek verstaan dit nie.

Suid-Afrika het 22 universiteite, en die VF het reeds vier jaar gelede
voorgestel dat ten minste twee van hierdie universiteite erkenning kry as
universiteite wat hoofsaaklik Afrikaans as onderrigtaal gebruik, anders
gaan daar op die lang termyn nie één kan oorleef as 'n mens die
getalleprojeksies maak nie. Tot nou het ons geen sukses hiermee gehad nie.

Afrikaanse staatskole maak minder as 5% uit van alle staatskole in Suid-
Afrika. Tans word meer en meer Afrikaanse staatskole jaarliks dubbel- en
parallelmediumskole, om kort daarna dan alleenlik Engelse skole te word.
Dit is vir ons onverstaanbaar en onaanvaarbaar. Terwyl artikel 23 in die
Grondwet wel enkelmediumskole moontlik maak, lyk dit egter asof daar
geleidelik nie daaraan voldoen word nie. Die VF sal teen hierdie
begrotingspos stem. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER: Mr Chairperson, there is general consensus that education
is currently one of the biggest problems in South Africa. The Minister has
tackled an enormous task, and we wish him everything of the best in
performing it. The Minister has decided to be realistic about Curriculum
2005. This took courage, and we would like to recognise that he is
beginning to correct the mistakes of his predecessor.

In my speech during the discussion of his Vote I elaborated comprehensively
on how important mother-tongue education is, not as a FF principle, but as
a universally accepted education principle everywhere in the world at
primary, secondary and tertiary levels of education. To me it remains cruel
- and I have such examples in my area - to see a Grade 4 Sotho or Zulu
child who suddenly has to learn in the medium of English, and to see the
uncertainty when that child has to do so. I do not understand it.

South Africa has 22 universities, and four years ago already the FF
proposed that at least two of these universities receive recognition as
universities which primarily use Afrikaans as the medium of instruction,
otherwise in the long term not one will be able to survive if one does the
numerical projections. Up to now we have had no success in this regard.

Afrikaans state schools comprise less than 5% of all state schools in South
Africa. Currently more and more Afrikaans state schools are annually
becoming dual and parallel-medium schools, shortly after that to then
become solely English schools. To us this is inexplicable and unacceptable.
Although section 23 of the Constitution does indeed make provision for
single-medium schools, it would appear however that this is gradually not
being complied with. The FF will vote against this Vote.]

Mr C AUCAMP: Chairperson, I want to state briefly why the AEB cannot
support the Education Vote, despite a very energetic Minister doing his
best. I want to mention a few points. Firstly, the funding of private
schools is in practice zero, and that must be looked at. Secondly, the
ideology of the education system is not neutral. It has more and more signs
of a New Age ideology in which our children cannot be at home. Together
with that, I think that our children are being deprived of the right to
education according to the ethos, belief and culture of their homes. Then a
large amount of money was wasted with the Curriculum 2005 experiment,
despite the warnings from this side of the House that it would not work. We
extend our congratulations to the Minister for seeing that it could not
work and accept the aanbevelings van die komitee. [recommendations of the
committee.]

School governing bodies were deprived of a lot of their jurisdiction, with
the adoption of the education amending Bills. Then, I think the suggestion
- I think it was from the Minister - that a means test may be used for
paying for textbooks will be quite impractical. It will be impossible to do
that and is a deviation from free education as stipulated.

Laastens is daar toestande in die onderwys in die Noordelike Provinsie waar
ek vandaan kom, sowel administratief as logistiek, wat hoegenaamd nie na
wense is nie. Die AEB wens die Minister baie sterkte toe met sy moeilike
taak, maar vir hierdie rondte sal hy nog ons magtige stem moet ontbeer.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Lastly there are conditions in education in the Northern Province, which
is where I come from, both administratively and logistically, which are not
at all as they should be. The AEB wishes the Minister everything of the
best with his difficult task, but for this round he will still have to do
without our vote.]

Prof S M MAYATULA: Chairperson ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, both to my left and my
right, you are speaking rather too loudly. I agree you might be tired, but
I think you can still lower your voices.

Prof S M MAYATULA: Chairperson, hon members, the ANC supports this Vote.
Even if what the members of the DP are saying, namely that the entire
education system is dysfunctional, there is late delivery of textbooks,
student unrest etc were true, I do not understand how not voting for this
Vote will make things better.

As we accept and support this Vote, we are mindful of the problems and
conditions under which our people work due to the legacy of apartheid. Some
have no classrooms, no toilets, no offices in which they can talk to their
people, no water, the basic necessities of education. Though we know that,
we must also understand that 21% of the budget of this country goes to
education. In the provinces, 85% of the budget goes to education, health
and welfare. Basically this means that we are contributing as much as we
can as far as education is concerned.

This Government has taken many strides to turn the education system around.
The country is abuzz with Tirisano, where everybody is giving a hand, both
in cash and in kind. We must also commend the international community that
is working with us in these areas.

The norms and standards for funding are biased towards poor schools in
order to improve them. An amount of R1,5 billion has been set aside for
building schools. The Financial and Fiscal Commission has put proposals
that are going to be changing, so that we are able to take along the
backlogs. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Division demanded.

The House divided:


  AYES - 247: Abrahams, T; Ainslie, A R; Arendse, J D; Asmal, A K; Balfour,
  B M N; Baloyi, M R; Baloyi, S F; Bekker, H J; Belot, S T; Bhengu, F;
  Bhengu, N R; Biyela, B P; Bloem, D V; Bogopane, H I; Booi, M S; Botha, N
  G W; Buthelezi, M G; Buthelezi, M N; Carrim, Y I; Cassim, M F; Chalmers,
  J; Chauke, H P; Chiba, L; Chohan-Kota, F I; Cindi, N V; Coetzee-Kasper, M
  P; Cronin, J P; Davies, R H; De Beer, S J; De Lille, P; Diale, L N;
  Didiza, A T; Dithebe, S L; Ditshetelo, P H K; Dlamini, B O; Douglas, B M;
  Duma, N M; Du Toit, D C; Erwin, A; Feinstein, A J; Ferreira, E T; Fihla,
  F F; Fraser-Moleketi, G J; Frolick, C T; Gandhi, E; George, M E; Gerber,
  P A; Gogotya, N J; Gomomo, P J; Goosen, A D; Green, L M; Gumede, D M;
  Gxowa, N B; Hajaig, F; Hanekom, D A; Hangana, N E; Hendrickse, P A C;
  Hlangwana, N L; Hogan, B A; Holomisa, S P; Jana, D P S; Jassat, E E;
  Jeffery, J H; Jordan, Z P; Kalako, M U; Kannemeyer, B W; Kekana, N N;
  Kgauwe, Q J; Kgwele, L M; Kota, Z A; Kotwal, Z; Landers, L T; Lekgoro, M
  K; Lekgoro, M M S; Lockey, D; Louw, J T; Lucas, E J; Lyle, A G; Mabandla,
  B S; Mabeta, M E; Madasa, Z L; Magashule, E S; Mahlalela, C C; Mahlangu,
  G L; Mahomed, F; Maimane, D S; Maine, M S; Makasi, X C; Makunyane, T L;
  Makwetla, S P; Malebana, H F; Maloney, L; Maluleke-Hlaneki, C J; Mangena,
  M A; Manie, M S; Manuel, T A; Maphalala, M A; Maphoto, L I; Masala, M M;
  Mars, I; Marshoff, F B; Martins, B A D; Maserumule, F T; Mashimbye, J N;
  Masutha, M T; Mathebe, P M; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F; Matthews, V J G;
  Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M; Maziya, A M; Mbadi, L M; Mbombo, N D; Mbongo,
  P F; Mbulawa-Hans, B G; Mdladlana, M M S; Mfundisi, I S; Mgidi, J S;
  Middleton, N S; Mkhatshwa, S; Mkhize, B R; Mlangeni, A; Mnandi, P N;
  Mndende, O N; Mngomezulu, G P; Mnumzana, S K; Modise, T R; Modisenyane, L
  J; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, E P; Mogoba, M S; Mohai, S J; Mohamed, I J;
  Mokoena, D A; Molebatsi, M A; Molewa, B G; Moloto, K A; Momberg, J H;
  Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K; Morobi, D M; Moropa, R M; Morwamoche, K W;
  Moss, M I; Mothoagae, P K; Motubatse, S D; Mpahlwa, M; Mpaka, H M;
  Mshudulu, S A; Msomi, M D; Mthembi-Mahanyele, S D; Mthembu, B; Mtsweni, N
  S; Mufamadi, F S; Mutsila, I; Mzondeki, M J G; Nair, B; Nash, J H; Ncube,
  B; Ndlovu, V B; Ndou, R S; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngcengwane,
  N D; Ngculu, L V J; Ngubane, B S; Ngubane, H; Ngubeni, J M; Ngwenya, M L;
  Nhlanhla, J M; Nhleko, N P; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njobe, M A A; Nkomo, A S;
  Nkosi, D M; Nonkonyana, M; Nqakula, C; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M B; Ntuli, S
  B; Nzimande, B M; Nzimande, L P M; Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G; Pahad,
  E G; Phantsi, N E; Pheko, S E M; Phohlela, S; Pieterse, R D; Radebe, B A;
  Radebe, J T; Rajbally, S; Rajoo, K; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin, M;
  Ramodike, M N; Ramotsamai, C M P; Ripinga, S S; Schneemann, G D; Scott, M
  I; Seaton, S A; Sekgobela, P S; September, C C; September, R K; Shabangu,
  S; Shilubana, T P; Shope, N R; Sigcau, S N; Sigcawu, A N; Sigwela, E M;
  Sikakane, M R; Sisulu, L N; Sithole, D J; Skhosana, W M; Skosana, M B;
  Skweyiya, Z S T; Slabbert, J H; Smith, P F; Smith, V G; Solo, B M;
  Solomon, G; Sonjica, B P; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Southgate, R M; Swart,
  S N; Thabethe, E; Tinto, B; Tolo, L J; Tshabalala-Msimang, M E; Tsheole,
  N M; Turok, B; Twala, N M; Vadi, I; Van den Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe,
  J H; Van Wyk, A (Annelizé); Van Wyk, J F; Van Wyk, N; Verwoerd, M;
  Vilakazi, B H; Woods, G G; Xingwana, L M T; Zita, L; Zondi, K M; Zondo, R
  P; Zulu, N E.

  NOES - 52: Andrew, K M; Aucamp, C; Bakker, D M; Bell, B G; Beukman, F;
  Blaas, A; Borman, G M; Botha, A J; Bruce, N S; Camerer, S M; Cupido, P W;
  Da Camara, M L; Davidson, I O; Delport, J T; Dowry, J J; Durand, J;
  Eglin, C W; Ellis, M J; Gaum, A H; Geldenhuys, B L; Gore, V C; Gous, S J;
  Grobler, G A J; Heine, R J; Kalyan, S V; Lee, T D; Moorcroft, E K;
  Morkel, C M; Mulder, C P; Mulder, P W A; Nel, A H; Ntuli, R S; Olckers, M
  E; Opperman, S E; Pillay, S; Pretorius, I J; Rabie, P J; Schmidt, H C;
  Selfe, J; Semple, J A; Seremane, W J; Simmons, S; Singh, A; Smit, H A;
  Smuts, M; Sono, B N; Swart, P S; Taljaard, R; Van der Merwe, A S; Van
  Deventer, F J; Viljoen, C L; Waters, M.

Vote No 8 accordingly agreed to.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! We now come to Vote No 9 -
Environmental Affairs and Tourism. There are no requests for declarations
in respect of this Vote. I now put the question. Are there any objections
to the Vote being adopted?

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, sorry to interrupt, sir.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Yes, Mr Ellis.

Mr M J ELLIS: With regard to the Education Vote, I cannot believe that
there were only 41 people who voted against it. There are 30 people, at
least, in the DP. The New NP voted against it. How do you get to 41, sir?
[Interjections.]

Mr J H MOMBERG: [Inaudible.]

Mr M J ELLIS: I beg your pardon, Mr Momberg? [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon Mr Mike Ellis, I am advised that
there were an additional six members who brought their cards for the noes,
therefore 47 members voted no. [Interjections.] Order!

Mr M J ELLIS: I would like to say with respect, sir, that that is still not
correct. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! [Interjections.] Order!
[Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, according to our records, there should be at
least 56 or 57 people who voted against the Vote, not 41 or 47.
[Interjections.] There is something wrong, sir. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, I am in charge in the
House. I am going to repeat the division to put an end to all this arguing.
[Interjections.] Order! Hon members, let us vote again on Vote No 8,
please. [Interjections.] Order!
Dr B G MBULAWA-HANS: Chairperson, I am concerned because the DP had not
raised their concern about the numbers. I do not think it is fair to this
House that we should repeat the division. The DP did not have this
questioned, so why now with the Education Vote? I think it is unfair that
this House should be subjected to that type of thing. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! That is not a point of order.
[Interjections.] Order! [Interjections.]

Take your seat, Mr Ellis. Order, hon members! Take your seat, hon Mlangeni.

Mr A MLANGENI: I cannot hear you.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: You cannot hear me?

Mr A MLANGENI: Yes, you are inaudible. Mr Chairperson, could you have the
sound system checked please?

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Could the mikes be fixed please? Not
Mike Ellis, my mikes here. [Laughter.] [Interjections.]
The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Can you hear me now?

HON MEMBERS: Yes!

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon members, I think we have got this sorted
out now. I now have the results in writing. I have 13 abstentions.
[Interjections.] Order! Some of those abstentions come from the opposition
parties, which could be added to the noes. I think then I have got ...
[Inaudible.] [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, are you saying that all 13 abstentions will be
added to the no-votes? [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Yes.

Mr M J ELLIS: Thank you. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Let me just correct that. Not all of
them, Mr Ellis, because some of them have already brought their cards here.
Some of them will be added to the no-votes. [Interjections.] Order!

Mr M RAMGOBIN: Mr Chairperson, on a point of order, and to help the House:
If the DP so wishes, I think it would be possible for us to reveal from the
papers there who has voted for and who has voted against. Perhaps it would
be a good thing for the DP to know, and to expose them.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! The matter is now settled.

Vote No 9 - Environmental Affairs and Tourism - put and agreed to.

Vote No 10 - Finance - put and agreed to.

Vote No 11 - Foreign Affairs - put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr C W EGLIN: Mr Chairperson, the DP will be supporting this Vote, but, as
a cautious opposition party, it will certainly have certain reservations
and concerns.
 
The role of South Africa in international affairs has grown enormously.
Today, our country enjoys a status as an important international player
amongst the medium-sized nations of the developing world. This is a plus
for our country and we congratulate the department on it. However, we must
realise that, in due course, our success will be judged not on the status
that we enjoy or accolades that we receive, but on the harsh realities of
results and delivery. On that issue, the jury is still out.

While the role and responsibility of the department have been expanding,
its budget in real terms has been shrinking, and that has placed tremendous
strain on the personnel of the department. In these difficult circumstances
they have done extraordinarily well, displaying skill, expertise and a deep
commitment to a democratic South Africa.

The department has recently announced that it intends launching a new
process of departmental transformation. The DP believes that in doing so,
the sterling work that has been done by the personnel under the guidance of
the previous director-general should be recognised and built upon. We
believe that the transformation that is required by the Constitution should
be achieved by creating new opportunities, developing new skills, and
augmenting existing skills and expertise, and not merely by discarding the
old ones.

We have one serious concern, and that is that South Africa's commitment to
advancing human rights, which was the cornerstone of its foreign policy
during the Mandela presidency, appears to have been put on the backburner
in favour of tactical expediency. [Time expired.]

Rev K M ZONDI: Chairperson, in voicing our support for the Foreign Affairs
Vote, we would like to highlight the following issues. Firstly, in view of
exchange rate fluctuations against the rand, a situation which severely
undermines and erodes this department's budget, we appeal once again to the
Minister of Finance, as we did during the debate on the Vote of the
department, to find creative ways to ensure that crucial programmes of the
department are not jeopardised.

Secondly, in view of the new outbreak of conflict in the Democratic
Republic of Congo, we would like to see the department intensifying
diplomatic efforts to ensure that the war does not escalate to the extent
that the Lusaka agreement is severely undermined.

Dr B L GELDENHUYS: Chairperson, the Department of Foreign Affairs is one of
the best-managed departments in the Public Service. One of the reasons for
this success story is undoubtedly the dedication of its officials in
promoting the interests of South Africa worldwide. It is therefore
regrettable that some of them were informed through the press that they
have outstayed their welcome and hopefully the Minister of Foreign Affairs
will put the whole process of transformation in perspective as soon as
possible.

Indien die begroting, en vorige sprekers het daarna verwys, steeds afneem
in reële terme, gaan hierdie belangrike departement in 'n posisie beland
waar hy nie meer operasioneel sal wees nie. Miskien moet daaraan aandag
gegee word om die departement ten minste te vergoed vir die verlies in die
wisselkoers. Die Nuwe NP steun die begrotingspos. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[If the budget, and previous speakers have referred to this, continues to
be reduced in real terms, eventually this important department will be in a
position in which it will no longer be operational. Perhaps attention
should be given at least to compensating the department for the loss in the
exchange rate. The New NP supports the Vote.]

Mr M E MABETA: Chairperson, the UDM supports this Vote. We will continue to
criticise where appropriate, and we hope that the Minister of Foreign
Affairs will respect this right in every instance where it is required. We
will support and commend those actions and decisions that are in the best
interests of our country.

We would like to make the point that we welcome the announcement by the
director-general that his priority in the department is the transformation
of the Department of Foreign Affairs. We are not aware of any commendable
work done by the previous management of the Department of Foreign Affairs
that can honestly be said by any South African to have adequately addressed
the issue of transformation in the department.

It is unfortunate that when the director-general made this announcement
that the department needed to be transformed and that he was committed to
this, it was understood to be a deliberate, contrived agenda to sideline
certain people. Every racial group, black, white or whatever in South
Africa will be affected by the reconstruction of our state, our
governmental institutions and any other structures in our society that have
been put in place to achieve the objectives that have been entrenched in
our Constitution and that were accepted by our people in the 1994 election.
It is an unfortunate sideline that these efforts are racist. We wish to
deliver by means of these methods. [Time expired.]

Dr Z P JORDAN: Mr Chairperson ... [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! I see the ACDP here, but you sent me
a note that you were not going to speak. Have you changed your mind now?
[Interjections.]

Adv Z L MADASA: Mr Chairperson, I would like to state the fact that the
last time we discussed the issue of sending a peacekeeping force to the
DRC, I stated that there was no peace to be kept in the DRC. This morning,
the Secretary-General of the UN stated that he was not prepared to send a
peacekeeping force because fighting has resumed in the DRC.

I just want to state that, secondly, as the ACDP, we would like to urge the
Minister of Foreign Affairs to speak out, unequivocally and clearly,
wherever she goes, and promote the issue of human rights, as this country
is known as a champion of human rights.

Lastly, I would like to state that we support the Vote, and also say that
uMphathiswa unqabile [the Minister is scarce].

Dr Z P JORDAN: Mr Chairperson, the ANC supports this Vote. I think it is
only the churlish and the wilfully blind who can dispute the fact that the
status and standing of South Africa in the world today has radically
changed from what it was before 1994.

Thanks to the efforts of the previous Minister and our current Minister,
South Africa now is a respected place in the international community. Its
voice is heard loud and clear in every part of the world and that voice is
taken seriously.

In supporting this Vote, we want to commend the Minister of Foreign Affairs
and her department for the sterling work they have done on behalf of our
entire country. [Applause.]

Vote No 11 agreed to.
Vote No 12 - Government Communication and Information System - put and
agreed to.

Vote No 13 - Health - put.

Declarations of vote:

Mrs S V KALYAN: Mr Chairperson, the DP would be doing all South Africans,
especially those persons who are HIV-positive or living with Aids, a great
disservice by supporting the Health budget.

Drug-based treatment has been omitted from the national integrated plan for
persons infected with and affected by Aids. The Minister has consistently
avoided answering questions on this issue. We have heard her waffle about
across-the-board, broad-spectrum drugs, but she hedges at committing
specifically to antiretroviral medication.

Given that there is one Aids death every ten minutes, one would expect the
Government to be pulling out all the stops in preparing to limit the damage
that this pandemic poses to our country. Yet they continue to prevaricate.
Despite standard opinion that the administration of AZT can protect the
infant of an HIV-positive mother, that the price for AZT has been reduced,
and it has been demonstrated that it is cheaper to protect the child than
to treat the later effects of Aids, Government still vacillates as it
queries possible side effects and the status of registration.

Economist Nicoli Nattrass says that funding a short course of AZT is 18
times cheaper than caring for a child with Aids with the average ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, your speaking time has
expired.

Mrs S V KALYAN: The DP opposes the Health budget.

Dr K RAJOO: Mr Chairman, the IFP enthusiastically supports the Health Vote.
In saying this, I would like to state that we understand the concern about
Aids. Everybody understands it. The Minister also understands it, and she
is doing sterling work in trying to combat Aids in our country.

We enthusiastically ask her to look at all possibilities as regards in the
newest of medicines and education in respect of Aids. The Minister of
Education is also helping the Minister of Health in schools, in educating
our children, and that is a step in the right direction.

In the area of service delivery, we understand that the Minister is
building clinics and crèches. We are happy that she is doing so. She should
please look at the rural areas and dormitory townships, where hospitals are
far apart and clinics are scarce. In those areas, where the poorest of our
poor people need assistance, we need the Minister to build crèches and
clinics.

The needy of our country, people who are welfare recipients, pensioners and
unemployed, need medical aid. These are the people for whom these health
clinics are needed. Today, under Dr Nkomo, the Portfolio Committee on
Health adopted the SADC proposals and we now ask our Minister to look far
beyond our borders. There are 119 million people in 14 SADC countries and
she will also have to work with other Ministers. We support her and wish
her well.

The IFP supports this Vote. [Applause.]

Dr S J GOUS: Mr Chairperson, there is a breath of fresh air blowing through
the Department of Health in the form of our new Minister of Health. She has
all our sympathy for the many problems she has to face, most of which, one
must say, she has inherited. The Department of Health has succeeded in one
of its major objectives in the transformation and restructuring of a highly
fragmented department and this has been achieved under difficult
circumstances. Quality service delivery is still lacking and it would
appear that nobody is more aware of this than the Minister and the
Department of Health themselves.

When we examine the conditions under which the Department of Health must
operate, we find an almost unbearable load, especially due to violence and
crime, which would include motor vehicle accidents, TB and Aids. None of
these factors are of the department's making and they are simply trying to
cope as best they can.

There has been much criticism in respect of HIV/Aids, but when one examines
the facts rationally the only thing the Department of Health is guilty of
is allowing other departments, as well as the President, to hijack the
issue under the guise of an integrated, multisectoral approach. We
understand this concept and in fact we support the concept of a
multisectoral approach, but, after all, HIV/Aids is primarily a disease and
therefore the Department of Health should always be in control and under
all circumstances dictate and co-ordinate policy.

Obviously this does not mean we have no criticism; in fact there are many
things which we dealt with more thoroughly during the debate on the Vote.
On balance, however, the department needs our support and encouragement and
we do not enjoy seeing them suffer. Therefore we will support the
Department of Health in this Vote. [Time expired.]

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, Ministers and members, the Government, and in
particular the Department of Health, is continuing with the slaughter of
unborn children in our hospitals and clinics, despite the opposition of the
majority of South Africans to the legalisation of abortion. Time after
time, we have stood up in this House and made declarations on the biblical
world view in terms of which we believe that abortion is murder.

Recently, over the past two to three weeks, we have also seen opposition to
the implementation of the policy of abortion. We have noticed that despite
the acceptance of the legislation in this House, doctors, nurses and
medical people have actually rejected the legislation on moral grounds.
[Interjections.]

Mr J H MOMBERG: They are being paid by backstreet abortionists.

Mr L M GREEN: Let me finish, Jannie. On the issue of backstreet abortions,
it has been found that there is no decrease in backstreet abortions since
the introduction of this legislation. I therefore do not think the member's
argument is valid when we come to the issue of abortion. [Interjections.]

We as the ACDP cannot support this Vote because of the funding that will be
used for the continuation of the destruction of unborn children. We are
taking a moral position here and we are going to vote against this Vote.

Dr P W A MULDER: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek dink in hierdie Huis is daar
konsensus oor hoe ernstig die probleem van vigs tans in Suid-Afrika is. As
ons al ons probleme in 'n ry plaas, sal dit waarskynlik die eerste of
tweede probleem wees wat hierdie Regering moet aanspreek.
Elke minuut word 11 mense wêreldwyd deur die vigsvirus besmet, waarvan 10
in Afrika is, en spesifiek suid van die Sahara woon. Dit is 'n reusekrisis
wat 'n gesamentlike veldtog van ons almal nodig het. Die feit van die saak
is dat dit niemand gaan oorslaan nie. Mense wat maklik dink dit gaan hulle
nie raak op watter wyse ook al nie, maak 'n groot fout as hulle dink die
krisis gaan nie elkeen op die een of ander wyse raak nie. In Suid-Afrika
lyk dit of die veldtog teen vigs nou wel begin momentum kry. Ons wil die
departement gelukwens met wat gedoen is tot nou toe om die momentum aan die
gang te kry.

Teen hierdie agtergrond van sukses is dit egter 'n fout om nou skielik 'n
openbare debat oor die verwantskap tussen MIV en vigs aan die gang te sit,
of dit nou van die departement of van watter kantoor af ook al kom. Hoekom
is dit 'n fout? Omdat die debat so tegnies is dat die gewone nie verstaan
waaroor dit gaan nie. Wat is die resultaat daarvan? Dit is dat ons tans
verwarring kry: is MIV werklik nou die oorsaak of nie? Sommige veldwerkers
berig dat die jeug heel verstaanbaar sê, ``As die Regering twyfel of MIV
vigs veroorsaak, waarom moet ons ons bekommer?'', en dan begin hulle
terugkeer na ou gewoontes. Jare se werk en miljoene rande word deur hierdie
verwarring vernietig.
Dit geld dan ook die konferensie wat onlangs gehou is om te luister na
alternatiewe wetenskaplikes. Die harde feite is dat die geld wat daaraan
gespandeer is genoeg middels sou kon koop om ongeveer 2 000 babas se lewe
te red, en ons is oortuig dit sou beter aangewend wees daar as andersins.

Die VF gaan teen hierdie begrotingspos stem. (Translation of Afrikaans
speech follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER: Mr Chairperson, I think there is consensus in this House
on how serious the Aids problem in South Africa is at present. If we
arrange our problems chronologically, this would probably be the first or
second problem which this Government must address.

Every minute 11 people worldwide are infected with the Aids virus, 10 of
whom live in Africa, more specifically south of the Sahara. This is a major
crisis which requires a joint campaign from all of us. The fact of the
matter is that nobody will remain unaffected. People who think that they
will not be affected by this in one way or another, are making a big
mistake if they think the crisis is not going to affect all of us.

In South Africa it seems as if the campaign against Aids is now gaining
momentum. We want to congratulate the department on what has been done thus
far to get the process started.

However, against this background of success it is a mistake now suddenly to
launch a public debate about the relationship between HIV and Aids, whether
it was initiated by the department or any other office. Why is it a
mistake? Because the debate is so technical that ordinary people do not
understand what it is about. What is the result of that? It is the
confusion we are experiencing at present: is HIV really the cause or not?
Some field workers report that the youth are saying, understandably, ``If
the Government is uncertain whether HIV causes Aids, why should we be
concerned?'', and they then revert to old habits. Years of work and
millions of rands are wasted through this confusion.

This also applies to the conference which was held recently to listen to
alternative scientists. The hard facts are that the money that was spent on
that, would have been enough to buy enough drugs to save the lives of
approximately 2 000 babies, and we are convinced that it would have been
better served there than elsewhere.

The FF will vote against this Vote.]

Dr A S NKOMO: Mr Chairperson, there is no way that the ANC cannot support
this Health Vote. As the Minister has indicated, the bulk of the
supplementary estimates will go towards the HIV/Aids programmes - R16
million is being allocated as conditional grants to the provinces, and R20
million to the national department for programmes such as health promotion,
voluntary counselling and testing, and the training of lay persons in home-
based care and nursing. The main budget allocation goes to promoting equity
in health through the establishment of health systems and the primary
health care approach - all of which are ANC policies.

We would be like Satans ... [Interjections.] Yes, Satans! That member
should listen to what a certain famous sportsperson is saying these days -
Satan!

We would be like Satans if we voted against this Health budget, because we
would be removing from the mouths of hungry babies food that is provided
through the integrated health system. We do not intend to be such Satans.
Also, what would we be saying to the millions of pregnant mothers and
children under the age of six years who are receiving free health care in
the health services? We would be like Satans if we did that.
[Interjections.]

But more than that, there are the hopes of millions of people who are
waiting for answers from the Minister about what we are doing, about the
definitive treatment of HIV/Aids. At the moment we are providing treatment
against opportunistic diseases, to help these women and mothers who are
faced with this lethal disease.

If one can look at Europe, people there are dealing with a disease which
wears the face of a chronic illness: a person living with HIV/Aids can live
for 10 to 15 years. We are living with people who are dying by the minute.
Maybe there are some people here who are running undertaker businesses and
want to benefit from that!

We will support this Vote. [Applause.]

Division demanded.

The House divided.


  AYES - 271: Abrahams, T; Ainslie, A R; Arendse, J D; Asmal, A K; Bakker,
  D M; Balfour, B M N; Baloi, G E; Baloyi, M R; Baloyi, S F; Bekker, H J;
  Belot, S T; Beukman, F; Bhengu, F; Bhengu, N R; Biyela, B P; Blaas, A;
  Bloem, D V; Bogopane, H I; Booi, M S; Botha, N G W; Buthelezi, M G;
  Buthelezi, M N; Carrim, Y I; Cassim, M F; Chalmers, J; Chauke, H P;
  Chiba, L; Chohan-Kota, F I; Cindi, N V; Coetzee-Kasper, M P; Cronin, J P;
  Davies, R H; De Beer, S J; De Lange, J H; Diale, L N; Didiza, A T;
  Dithebe, S L; Ditshetelo, P H K; Dlamini, B O; Doidge, G Q M; Douglas, B
  M; Duma, N M; Durand, J; Du Toit, D C; Erwin, A; Fankomo, F C; Feinstein,
  A J; Ferreira, E T; Fihla, N B; Fraser-Moleketi, G J; Gandhi, E;
  Geldenhuys, B L; George, M E; Gerber P A; Gogotya, N J; Gomomo, P J;
  Goniwe, T M; Goosen, A D; Gous, S J; Grové, S P; Gumede, D M; Gxowa, N B;
  Hajaig, F; Hanekom, D A; Hangana, N E; Hendrickse, P A C; Hlangwana, N L;
  Hlengwa, M W; Hogan, B A; Holomisa, S P; Jana, D P S; Jassat, E E;
  Jeffery, J H; Joemat, R R; Jordan, Z P; Kalako, M U; Kannemeyer, B W;
  Kasienyane, O R; Kasrils, R; Kekana, N N; Kgarimetsa, J J; Kgauwe, Q J;
  Kgwele, L M; Kota, Z A; Kotwal, Z; Landers, L T; Lekgoro, M K; Lekgoro, M
  M S; Lockey, D; Louw, J T; Lucas, E J; Lyle, A G; Mabandla, B S;
  Mabudafhasi, T R; Magashule, E S; Magubane, N E; Mahlangu, G L; Mahomed,
  F; Maimane, D S; Maine, M S; Makasi, X C; Makunyane, T L; Makwetla, S P;
  Malebana, H F; Maloney, L; Maluleke-Hlaneki, C J; Malumise, M M; Mangena,
  M A; Manie, M S; Manuel, T A; Mars, I; Marshoff, F B; Martins, B A D;
  Masala, M M; Maserumule, F T; Mashimbye, J N; Masithela, N H; Masutha, M
  T; Mathebe, P M; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F; Matthews, V J G; Maunye, M M;
  Mayatula, S M; Maziya, A M; Mbadi, L M; Mbombo, N D; Mbongo, P F; Mbulawa-
  Hans, B G; Mbuyazi, L R; Mdladlana, M M S; Mgidi, J S; Middleton, N S;
  Mkhatshwa, S; Mkhize, B R; Mlambo-Ngcuka, P G; Mlangeni, A; Mnandi, P N;
  Mndende, O N; Mngomezulu, G P; Mnumzana, S K; Modise, T R; Modisenyane, L
  J; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, E P; Mogoba, M S; Mohai, S J; Mohamed, I J;
  Mokoena, D A; Molebatsi, M A; Molewa, B G; Moloto, K A; Momberg, J H;
  Mongwaketse, S J; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K; Morkel, C M; Morobi, D M;
  Moropa, R M; Morwamoche, K W; Moss, M I; Mothoagae, P K; Motubatse, S D;
  Mpahlwa, M; Mpaka, H M; Mshudulu, S A; Msomi, M D; Mthembi-Mahanyele, S
  D; Mthembu, B; Mtirara, N Z; Mtsweni, N S; Mufamadi, F S; Mutsila, I;
  Mzondeki, M J G; Nair, B; Nash, J H; Ncube, B; Ndlovu, V B; Ndou, R S;
  Nel, A H; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngculu, L V
  J; Ngubane, B S; Ngubane, H; Ngubeni, J M; Ngwenya, M L; Nhleko, N P;
  Nhlengethwa, D G; Njobe, M A A; Nkomo, A S; Nkosi, D M; Nonkonyana, M;
  Nqakula, C; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M B; Ntuli, S B; Nzimande, B M; Nzimande,
  L P M; Olckers, M E; Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G; Pahad, E G; Phala, M
  J; Phantsi, N E; Pheko, S E M; Phohlela, S; Pieterse, R D; Pretorius, I
  J; Radebe, B A; Radebe, J T; Rajbally, S; Rajoo, K; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M;
  Ramgobin, M; Ramodike, M N; Ramotsamai, C M P; Ripinga, S S; Saloojee, E;
  Schneemann, G D; Schoeman, R S; Scott, M I; Seaton, S A; Sekgobela, P S;
  September, C C; September, R K; Shabangu, S; Shilubana, T P; Shope, N R;
  Sigcau, S N; Sigcawu, A N; Sigwela, E M; Sikakane, M R; Simmons, S;
  Sisulu, L N; Sithole, D J; Skhosana, W M; Skosana, M B; Skweyiya, Z S T;
  Slabbert, J H; Smit, H A; Smith, P F; Smith, V G; Solo, B M; Solomon, G;
  Sonjica, B P; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Thabethe, E; Tinto, B; Tolo, L J;
  Tshabalala-Msimang, M E; Tsheole, N M; Turok, B; Twala, N M; Vadi, I; Van
  den Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe, A S; Van der Merwe, J H; Van Deventer,
  F J; Van Wyk, A (Annelizé); Van Wyk, J F; Van Wyk, N; Verwoerd, M;
  Vilakazi, B H; Woods, G G; Zita, L; Zondi, K M; Zondo, R P; Zulu, N E;
  Zuma, J G.
  NOES - 42: Andrew, K M; Aucamp, C; Bell, B G; Borman, G M; Botha, A J;
  Bruce, N S; Cupido, P W; Da Camara, M L; Davidson, I O; De Lille, P;
  Delport, J T; Eglin, C W; Ellis, M J; Gibson, D H M; Gore, V C; Green, L
  M; Grobler, G A J; Heine, R J; Kalyan, S V; Lee, T D; Mabeta, M E;
  Madasa, Z L; Moorcroft, E K; Mulder, C P; Mulder, P W A; Ntuli, R S;
  Opperman, S E; Pillay, S; Rabie, P J; Schmidt, H C; Selfe, J; Semple, J
  A; Seremane, W J; Singh, A; Smuts, M; Sono, B N; Southgate, R M; Swart, P
  S; Swart, S N; Taljaard, R; Viljoen, C L; Waters, M.

Vote No 13 accordingly agreed to.

Mr C AUCAMP: Chairperson, on a point of order: According to one of the
members on that side, there are now 42 Satans in this House. [Laughter.] As
there are people who voted against this, it means that that was an insult.
Would the member now withdraw his statement? [Laughter.] [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: I did not hear you, hon member.

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Chairperson, I said that they
have got Hansie Cronjé voting on their side. [Laughter.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! That is not a point of order, Mr
Aucamp.

Vote 14 - Home Affairs - put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr M WATERS: Chairperson, the Department of Home Affairs is treated by the
ANC very similarly to how Cinderella was treated by her stepmother -
expected to do all the work with basically no resources. In my budget
speech, I outlined several examples where the department is being
underfunded, and some of these were that 1 200 officers are required to
police the eight million illegal people in this country.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order, hon members! All members,
please be seated. [Interjections.] Hon member!

Mr M WATERS: Yes?
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Please resume your seat. I am waiting
for all hon members to be seated. We are dealing with the declarations of
vote, and it is an important function of Parliament. This is not the place
to be frivolous. Please continue, sir.

Mr M WATERS: Thank you, Chairperson.

In my my budget speech, I outlined several examples where the department is
being underfunded. Some of these examples are that 1 200 officers are
required to police the 8 million illegal immigrants in this country. The
department has only 325 officers. The Airports Company Limited was forced
to employ 15 people itself in order to prevent the total collapse of
passport control at Cape Town International Airport. The IEC is underfunded
by a staggering 54,91% for the local government elections.

To add insult to injury, the ANC-dominated Cabinet forced the department to
appeal against the case of the National Coalition for Gay and Lesbian
Equality. This case cost taxpayers R862 000, which is about three times the
total budget for litigation.

Another area where the ANC has set the department up for failure is through
the invalidation of non-barcoded IDs. The department will be flooded with
900 000 applications. It might make perfect sense that we should all have
the same sort of ID, but one must bear in mind that the new smart card
system is to be phased in during the last quarter of next year at great
expense to taxpayers. Why not then simply suggest that every person without
a barcoded ID be the first to apply for the new smart card system, instead
of putting additional strain on the department?

When the ANC starts taking the Department of Home Affairs seriously and
stops treating it like a stepchild, then only will the DP take the ANC
seriously by supporting the budget. Until then, the DP will oppose this
budget.

Prince N E ZULU: Chairperson, the IFP supports this Vote and wishes to
express a concern that the department's budget has been showing a tendency
to decline over the years, including this year. That tendency accounts for
staff shortages and long queues at the Home Affairs offices.

The Department of Home Affairs is a service provider for well over 40
million South Africans and many more other nationals from all over the
world who have different statuses. There are those who seek permanent
residence, those who come as visitors, those who seek asylum and those who
are undocumented immigrants. Presently, the department is crafting an
international immigration law which is intended to attract to this country
people with skills and capital to help the economy.

The Department of Home Affairs needs to be given the fiscal muscle to
service that class of people when the time comes. That Bill is considered a
world-class piece of legislation. It is going to surprise hon members if
they are spared long enough to realise its economic spin-offs.

We support the Vote. [Applause.]

Mnr I J PRETORIUS: Geagte Voorsitter, die Nuwe NP gaan teen die begroting
stem, omdat die departement mank gaan aan doeltreffende administrasie en
beheer.

Dit is veral die onthulling oor die gebrek aan doeltreffende administrasie
en beheer oor die staatsdrukker in Umtata wat ons beweeg het om teen die
begrotingspos te stem. Die direkteur-generaal van die departement het op 5
Junie vanjaar die Portefeuljekomitee oor Binnelandse Sake ingelig dat die
staatsdrukker in Umtata laas in 1995 gefunksioneer het. Dit kos die
belastingbetaler na raming R11 miljoen per jaar. Dit is 'n saak wat
onmiddellik reggestel moet word.

Ek het egter persoonlik simpatie met die agb Minister, want die departement
kry nie genoeg geld om behoorlik te funksioneer nie. Die OVK is 'n goeie
voorbeeld. Die departement kry ook nie genoeg geld om personeelvakatures
aan te vul nie. Die agb Minister is egter 'n harde werker en die volgende
uitspraak van Abraham Lincoln is dus nie op hom van toepassing nie. Lincoln
het gesê: ``Wanting to work is so rare a want, it should be encouraged.''

Sommige oorlopers uit die Wes-Kaap na die DP behoort egter dié uitspraak
ter harte te neem. [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech
follows.)

[Mr I J PRETORIUS: Hon Chairperson, the New NP is going to vote against
this budget, because the department is lacking in effective administration
and control.

It was above all the revelation about the lack of effective administration
of and control over the government printer in Umtata which has moved us to
vote against this Vote. On 5 June of this year the department's director-
general informed the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs that the
government printer in Umtata had last functioned in 1995. This is costing
the taxpayers an estimated R11 million per year. It is a matter that should
be rectified immediately.

However, I personally sympathise with the hon the Minister, because the
department does not receive enough money to be able to function properly.
The IEC is a good example. The department also does not get enough money to
be able to fill staff vacancies. The hon the Minister is a hard worker,
however, and the following utterance by Abraham Lincoln therefore does not
apply to him. Lincoln said:``Wanting to work is so rare a want, it should
be encouraged.''

Some of those in the Western Cape who crossed the floor to the DP, however,
should take that utterance to heart. [Interjections.]]

Ms A VAN WYK: Chairperson, the UDM will not be supporting this Vote for the
simple reason that we believe that the department is not receiving enough
money to fulfil its task. The IEC is underfunded by more than R500 million.
This is directly affecting voter education and the ability of the IEC to
provide mobile voting stations in rural areas.

This is a threat to our young democracy, in view of the fact that the local
government election will be a far more complex and intricate system than
the general elections of last year. A further contributing factor which
leaves us with little choice but to vote against this budget is the plea by
the director-general of the department to the portfolio committee that he
needs a further R56 million just to perform the department's most basic
functions.

The department's inability to provide the most basic services to all South
African citizens further disenfanchises those who are already the victims
of lack of delivery and poverty. It is especially in rural areas, where
people have to travel hundreds of kilometres to the nearest Home Affairs
office to register births or deaths, and to receive the most basic of
services, that this department fails completely. This is not because of a
lack of will but because of a lack of funding. The underfunding of this
department compromises it and will further enhance its negative image.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, your seat is right
here. [Laughter.]

Mr D A MOKOENA: Chairperson, hon members, this is a very serious Vote.
South Africa is home to all of us. The Ministry of Home Affairs is a very
important Ministry because it looks after everybody from the cradle to the
grave. It is therefore in our interest not to politicise issues of Home
Affairs. It is precisely for that reason that I stand here to support the
budget, and, in fact, to state that the Minister must get more money.

Over the past few years, the budget has been static at R1,3 billion, and
yet Home Affairs is expected to deliver a lot. That is why it is important
for members to forget about partisanship when it comes to Home Affairs. It
does not help to pillory Home Affairs. We must work together because if
Home Affairs falls, all of us are going to collapse. We therefore support
this budget. [Applause.]

Vote No 14 agreed to (Democratic Party, New National Party and United
Democratic Movement dissenting).

Vote No 15 - Housing - put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr T D LEE: Mnr die Voorsitter, aangesien die staat se lewering ... [Mr
Chairperson, since the State's delivery ...]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! [Interjections.] Hon members
you are making it difficult for the member to continue. Some senior members
are shouting, and I do not expect that from them. Please continue, sir.
[Interjections.]

Mr T D LEE: Voorsitter, aangesien die staat se lewering van behuising so
onaanvaarbaar stadig is en aangesien die grootte, sowel as standaard van
huise wat wel gebou is, in baie gevalle baie swak is, sal en kan die DP nie
die behuisingsbegroting steun nie. [Chairperson, since the state's delivery
of houses is so unacceptably slow and since the size, as well as the
standard of houses that are built are in many cases very bad, the DP will
not and cannot support the housing budget.]

The drastic decrease in the Housing budget from 5% in 1994 to 1,4% this
year shows that the housing of the poor is not a priority of this
Government. In the Western Cape alone, there is a waiting list of more than
200 000 people in dire need of housing. This list is getting longer by the
day as people are moving from all over South Africa to the Western Cape in
search of employment. It is estimated that 20 000 people or more are moving
to the Western Cape annually. While this is happening, the Western Cape's
housing budget has been cut by one third. It has been reduced by a whopping
R112 million from R350 million last year to R238 million this year.

Instead of building houses, we are establishing bureaucracies. The NHBRC is
a case in point. These bureaucracies are costing the state millions of
rands which could have been put to much better use, like building more and
bigger houses. Most of these bureaucracies are duplications and they serve
more to impede than to assist the delivery of housing. Could the Minister
stop building bureaucracies and start building houses.
Mr B M DOUGLAS: Mr Chairperson, I do not want to touch the delicate
sensibilities of some of the politicians here today, save to say that it
seems that it is true that when some men and women have persuaded
themselves that, after having derived some powers or commission from
omnipotence itself, they can superintend on matters sometimes so mysterious
as housing, informal settlements or living in townships, where they never
set their foot, they will not understand what is happening there.

I think this misrepresentation should be banned, as they say in Latin, pro
salute animarium, otherwise the electorate will be mislead infinitum in ad
absurdum. The IFP supports this Vote with the necessary conscientious
conviction.

Mr S SIMMONS: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister, and hon members, housing is a
key portfolio. One of the ways of addressing poverty is to provide
adequate, suitable housing to metropolitan and rural areas in South Africa.
[Interjections.]

The New NP notes with alarm that, notwithstanding the need for housing, a
number of provincial governments have refrained from spending the following
amounts, as of 31 March 2000, which were budgeted for housing: the Eastern
Cape - R77,2 million; the Free State - R143,6 million; KwaZulu-Natal -
R108,65 million; Mpumalanga - R77,95 million ... [Laughter] [Interjections]
... the Northern Province - R3,69 million; the North West Province - R3,66
million. The figures given in respect of money not spent are untenable.
Allow me to congratulate the provinces that spent their allocated amounts
of money, and they are the Western Cape, the Northern Cape and Gauteng.

Housing should not be used to score cheap political points, but there is a
clear lack of capacity regarding the building of houses and the
administration and spending of budgeted money. The New NP will oppose the
budget for Housing.

Ms N E HANGANA: Mr Chairperson, there is only one reason why the New NP and
the DP are rejecting this budget. It is because the Department of Housing
is now shifting its resources towards the rural areas. That is why the
Western Cape budget has been cut, and that is why they are crying so loudly
here. [Interjections.] There is no scandal. It is because the hon members
do not want the resources to go to rural areas. That is the scandal. And we
are saying that now the Department of Housing must concentrate on the
poorer provinces.

The Western Cape always says that the Western Cape is the best- governed
area. They should first address the question of the taxis in this province.
[Interjections.] If they are the best- governed province, they should show
us how they can deal with the taxi issue. What we are saying is that this
Government is committed to shifting resources to the poorest of the poor in
the rural areas. [Applause.]

Division demanded.

The House divided:


  AYES - 264: Abrahams, T; Ainslie, A R; Arendse, J D; Asmal, A K; Balfour,
  B M N; Baloi, G E; Baloyi, M R; Baloyi, S F; Bekker, H J; Belot, S T;
  Bhengu, F; Bhengu, N R; Biyela, B P; Bloem, D V; Bogopane, H I; Booi, M
  S; Botha, N G W; Buthelezi, M G; Buthelezi, M N; Carrim, Y I; Cassim, M
  F; Chalmers, J; Chauke, H P; Chiba, L; Chohan-Kota, F I; Cindi, N V;
  Coetzee-Kasper, M P; Cronin, J P; Davies, R H; De Beer, S J; De Lange, J
  H; De Lille, P; Diale, L N; Didiza, A T; Dithebe, S L; Ditshetelo, P H K;
  Dlamini, B O; Doidge, G Q M; Douglas, B M; Duma, N M; Du Toit, D C;
  Erwin, A; Fankomo, F C; Feinstein, A J; Ferreira, E T; Fihla, N B; Fraser-
  Moleketi, G J; Frolick, C T; Gandhi, E; George, M E; Gerber P A; Gogotya,
  N J; Gomomo, P J; Goniwe, T M; Goosen, A D; Green, L M; Grové, S P;
  Gumede, D M; Gxowa, N B; Hajaig, F; Hangana, N E; Hendrickse, P A C;
  Hlangwana, N L; Hlengwa, M W; Hogan, B A; Holomisa, S P; Jana, D P S;
  Jassat, E E; Jeffery, J H; Joemat, R R; Jordan, Z P; Kalako, M U;
  Kannemeyer, B W; Kasienyane, O R; Kasrils, R; Kekana, N N; Kgarimetsa, J
  J; Kgauwe, Q J; Kgwele, L M; Kota, Z A; Kotwal, Z; Landers, L T; Lekgoro,
  M K; Lekgoro, M M S; Lockey, D; Louw, J T; Lucas, E J; Lyle, A G;
  Mabandla, B S; Mabudafhasi, T R; Madasa, Z L; Mahlalela, C C; Mahlangu, G
  L; Mahlangu, M J; Mahomed, F; Maimane, D S; Maine, M S; Makasi, X C;
  Makunyane, T L; Makwetla, S P; Malebana, H F; Maloney, L; Maluleke-
  Hlaneki, C J; Malumise, M M; Mangena, M A; Manie, M S; Manuel, T A;
  Maphalala, M A; Maphoto, L I; Mars, I; Marshoff, F B; Martins, B A D;
  Masala, M M; Maserumule, F T; Mashimbye, J N; Masithela, N H; Masutha, M
  T; Mathebe, P M; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F; Matthews, V J G; Maunye, M M;
  Mayatula, S M; Maziya, A M; Mbadi, L M; Mbombo, N D; Mbongo, P F; Mbulawa-
  Hans, B G; Mbuyazi, L R; Mdladlana, M M S; Mfundisi, I S; Mgidi, J S;
  Middleton, N S; Mkhatshwa, S; Mkhize, B R; Mlambo-Ngcuka, P G; Mlangeni,
  A; Mnandi, P N; Mndende, O N; Mngomezulu, G P; Mnumzana, S K; Modise, T
  R; Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, E P; Mogoba, M S; Mohai, S J;
  Mohamed, I J; Mokoena, D A; Molebatsi, M A; Molewa, B G; Moloto, K A;
  Momberg, J H; Mongwaketse, S J; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K; Morkel, C M;
  Morobi, D M; Moropa, R M; Morwamoche, K W; Moss, M I; Mothoagae, P K;
  Motubatse, S D; Mpahlwa, M; Mshudulu, S A; Msomi, M D; Mthembi-Mahanyele,
  S D; Mthembu, B; Mtirara, N Z; Mtsweni, N S; Mufamadi, F S; Mulder, C P;
  Mulder, P W A; Mutsila, I; Mzondeki, M J G; Nair, B; Nash, J H; Ncube, B;
  Ndlovu, V B; Ndou, R S; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngcengwane, N
  D; Ngculu, L V J; Ngubane, B S; Ngubane, H; Ngubeni, J M; Ngwenya, M L;
  Nhleko, N P; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njobe, M A A; Nkomo, A S; Nkosi, D M;
  Nonkonyana, M; Nqakula, C; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M B; Ntuli, S B; Nzimande,
  B M; Nzimande, L P M; Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G; Pahad, E G; Phala, M
  J; Phantsi, N E; Pheko, S E M; Phohlela, S; Pieterse, R D; Radebe, B A;
  Rajbally, S; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin, M; Ramodike, M N;
  Ramotsamai, C M P; Ripinga, S S; Saloojee, E; Schneemann, G D; Scott, M
  I; Seaton, S A; Sekgobela, P S; September, C C; September, R K; Serote, M
  W; Shabangu, S; Shilubana, T P; Sigcau, S N; Sigcawu, A N; Sigwela, E M;
  Sikakane, M R; Sisulu, L N; Sithole, D J; Skhosana, W M; Skosana, M B;
  Skweyiya, Z S T; Slabbert, J H; Smith, P F; Smith, V G; Solo, B M;
  Solomon, G; Sonjica, B P; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Southgate, R M; Swart,
  S N; Thabethe, E; Tinto, B; Tolo, L J; Tsheole, N M; Turok, B; Twala, N
  M; Vadi, I; Van den Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe, J H; Van Wyk, A
  (Annelizé); Van Wyk, J F; Van Wyk, N; Verwoerd, M; Vilakazi, B H;
  Viljoen, C L; Woods, G G; Xingwana, L M T; Zita, L; Zondo, R P; Zulu, N
  E; Zuma, J G.

  NOES - 47: Andrew, K M; Bakker, D M; Bell, B G; Beukman, F; Blaas, A;
  Borman, G M; Botha, A J; Bruce, N S; Camerer, S M; Clelland, N J; Cupido,
  P W; Da Camara, M L; Davidson, I O; Delport, J T; Durand, J; Eglin, C W;
  Ellis, M J; Geldenhuys, B L; Gibson, D H M; Gore, V C; Gous, S J;
  Grobler, G A J; Heine, R J; Kalyan, S V; Lee, T D; Mabeta, M E;
  Moorcroft, E K; Nel, A H; Ntuli, R S; Olckers, M E; Opperman, S E;
  Pillay, S; Pretorius, I J; Rabie, P J; Schmidt, H C; Schoeman, R S;
  Selfe, J; Semple, J A; Seremane, W J; Simmons, S; Singh, A; Sono, B N;
  Swart, P S; Taljaard, R; Van der Merwe, A S; Van Deventer, F J; Waters,
  M.

Vote No 15 accordingly agreed to.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! There is no Vote 16.

Mr M J ELLIS: Chairperson, on a point of order: I really believe that you
should address the hon Minister Erwin. It is quite clear that he is engaged
in spread betting over there, and the DP would like you to check that.
[Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, we are not playing
cricket here. Please keep it until later. [Laughter.]

Vote No 17 - Independent Complaints Directorate - put.

Declarations of vote:

Adv P S SWART: Voorsitter, die DP steun die begrotingspos, maar slegs omdat
die fondse wat in die verlede begroot is doeltreffend gebruik word,
alhoewel die direktoraat heeltemal onderbefonds is. [Tussenwerpsels.] Die
Polisie funksioneer daagliks in die spervuur. Sommige lede voel tereg asof
hulle hande afgekap is, terwyl misdadigers wat nie aan dieselfde reëls
gebonde is nie, bykans daagliks polisielede vermoor. Die Minister van
Veiligheid en Sekuriteit doen nie veel om die saak te verbeter nie wanneer
hy lede aanmoedig om hardhandig met misdadigers te werk, wat verkeerd
geïnterpreteer word deur gefrustreerde polisielede as goedkeuring om reëls
te omseil. Wat die Polisie juis van die misdadiger onderskei, is dat dit
hulle taak is om mense te beskerm, binne die reg op te tree, die minimum
geweld te gebruik en verantwoordbaar te wees vir hulle dade.

In 1999 is 'n totaal van 9 784 klagtes ontvang deur die Onafhanklike
Klagtesdirektoraat, waarvan slegs 3,2% dissiplinêre optrede teen lede tot
gevolg gehad het. Voorts word ongeveer R32 miljoen per jaar deur die
Polisie aan geskorste lede betaal, R7,8 miljoen meer as die Onafhanklike
Klagtesdirektoraat se hele begroting vir die boekjaar 2000-01. Die
direktoraat is totaal onvoldoende gefinansier. Slegs 28% van goedgekeurde
strukture word gefinansier. Daar is 'n 70%-tekort aan personeel, met die
gevolg dat 71% van die ondersoeke na die Polisie terugverwys word vir
ondersoek. Die gereguleerde word so dus die reguleerder.

Die raamwerk vir mediumtermyn-uitgawes sal hersien moet word om behoorlike
finansiering te verseker. Slegs dan sal die verantwoordbaarheid van die
Polisie verseker word en die vertroue van die publiek in die Polisiediens
herstel word. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Adv P S SWART: Chairperson, the DP supports the Vote, but only because the
funds budgeted in the past are being used effectively, although the
directorate is totally underfunded. [Interjections.] The Police function in
the firing line on a daily basis. Some members justifiably feel as though
their hands have been tied, while criminals who are not bound by the same
rules murder police members virtually every day. The Minister of Safety and
Security is not doing much to improve the situation when he encourages
members to deal roughly with criminals, which is incorrectly interpreted by
frustrated police members as approval to circumvent the rules. Precisely
what distinguishes the Police from the criminal, is that it is their task
to protect people, to act within the law, to use minimum force and to be
accountable for their deeds.

In 1999 a total of 9 784 complaints were received by the Independent
Complaints Directorate, of which only 3,2% led to disciplinary action
against members. In addition, approximately R32 million is paid annually by
the Police to suspended members, R7,8 million more than the entire budget
of the Independent Complaints Directorate for the 2000-01 financial year.
The directorate is totally inadequately financed. Only 28% of approved
structures are financed. There is a 70% shortage of staff, leading to 71%
of the investigations being referred back to the Police for investigation.
In this way the regulated becomes the regulator.

The Medium-Term Expenditure Framework will have to be reviewed to ensure
adequate funding. Only then will the accountability of the Police be
ensured and the confidence of the public in the Police Service be
restored.]

Mr E T FERREIRA: Chairperson, the IFP will be supporting the budget of the
Independent Complaints Directorate. Our support is based on the principle
that the SAPS cannot investigate their own conduct and an independent,
neutral body is needed to perform this important task.

Whereas we have no problem with the ICD per se, we are very concerned about
both their independence and their political neutrality. Up to 80% of their
case dockets are investigated by functional SAPS personnel, which impacts
on their independence - an issue which urgently needs to be rectified.

Their political independence and neutrality is widely questioned, with very
good reason. There are numerous examples which question their neutrality.
Their insistence, for instance, in the Northern Province, on being
personally involved in all promotions in the SAPS, is just one of those
examples.

The ICD has an extremely important task to fulfil in our country. If they
were to stick to their mandate instead of trying to run the Police Force,
they would do us all a big favour.

Mr M E GEORGE: Chairperson, the ANC stands to support this Vote. We
understand the concerns raised by the DP and the IFP. In actual fact, their
concerns are being addressed and, as members of that committee, they know
very well that we are all concerned about the underfunding of the ICD, but
we must also agree that it is doing good work and it must be supported.

Lastly, I want to say that there is no way we can have all the money which
we want in the country, so the money that the ICD has is quite enough to
make sure that their job is done properly. The ANC will support the ICD.
[Applause.]

Vote No 17 agreed to.

Vote No 18 - Justice and Constitutional Development - put.

Dr J T DELPORT: Chairman, the DP cannot support the Justice Vote for the
following reasons. First of all, the legal system is malfunctioning to an
alarming degree. This was publicly admitted by the Minister himself. It was
admitted in statements made by the Department of Justice and Constitutional
Development before the portfolio committee, and it is malfunctioning in
terms of the evaluation of prominent members of the legal fraternity.

Secondly, the Minister himself and majority party members of this House
have, on more than one occasion, referred disparagingly to members of the
judiciary, and, in general, have shown disrespect for the rule of law.

Die DP neem in ag dat baie van die probleme die resultaat is van die swak
administrasie van die huidige Minister se voorganger, maar ons is jammer om
te sê die Minister het 'n lang pad voor om die vertroue van die publiek,
die regswêreld en die internasionale gemeenskap in sy Ministerie te
herstel. [The DP has taken into account that many of the problems are the
result of the poor administration of the present Minister's predecessor,
but we are sorry to say that the Minister has a long way to go to restore
the confidence of the public, the legal fraternity and the international
community in his Ministry.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Chairperson, the IFP supports the Vote, but there is
something I would like to ask, and that is, why is it that the DP is all of
a sudden opposing 20 of the Votes, whereas last year they only opposed a
fraction of that number? And I think that the reason why they are doing so,
is not because they are opposed to it in principle but because they want to
demonstrate to all of us that they have the guts to fight back. [Applause.]
And now we have to sit here until 12 o'clock tonight to watch the guts of
the DP. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Order!

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: I want to tell the DP something. They may be feeling
on top of the world at this stage because Hernus Kriel joined them today,
and dozens of rats are now swimming to them from the sinking ship of the
NP. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Order! Order! Order!

An HON MEMBER: Where do you come from?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: I come from Pretoria, and you? [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member Koos van der Merwe,
please be seated. [Interjections.] Order! Hon member, I will not allow you
to heckle all the time. [Laughter.] Order! Hon member, we are not worried
about rats. We are discussing the Justice and Constitutional Development
Vote. Please continue. [Laughter.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Chairperson, I have been in this Parliament for 23
years, and you will be surprised how many rats I have met here. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Order! Hon member, I advise
you that hon members in this House are not rats. Please continue.
[Laughter.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Well, I accept your assurance, Mr Chairperson ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Unless you are going to lead the
pack.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: In conclusion, I want to say to the DP, in all
seriousness, that one day, on its tombstone, will be written the following:
``The DP perished because it could never win significant black support.’’
[Applause.]

Mrs S M CAMERER: Chairperson, that will be a hard act to follow.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Order!

Mrs S M CAMERER: The Justice budget does have some severe shortcomings, as
the Minister admitted to this House. In the first instance, it is
inadequate, as usual. This has been the case progressively for the past
three years, so that last year we felt constrained to vote against it. The
apparent increase of approximately 10% is not an increase at all in real
terms.

Briefing the portfolio committee, a deputy director-general of the
department admitted that there would be less money for operations this
year. Virtually every official of the department briefing the committee
pleaded lack of funds as the main reason for the department's woes.
However, what has changed this year is the management. The new team at
Justice: The new Minister, the new Deputy Minister and the new Director-
General have frankly admitted and acknowledged past shortcomings, and have
promised to improve the situation through new initiatives.

The Minister has made a hands-on commitment to root out crime. He has
established four more rape courts, making a total of six, and he has built
many new court buildings. We will, therefore, despite our reservations,
give them the benefit of the doubt this time and vote for the budget.
However, if things do not come right, they should not count on us next
year. [Interjections.]

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, the primary role of Government is to safeguard
its citizens and to wield the sword of justice. There is no doubt that the
South African criminal justice system is struggling to cope with the high
levels of crime. It is, therefore, a serious admission of the Government's
failure to protect its citizenry when a member of the judiciary, Justice
Jeppe, describes as ``reasonable and genuine'', an emigrating businessman's
fears that his children will be exposed to crime, among other risks.
However, as was evident in the recent United Nations crime conference,
South Africa is not alone in facing this scourge of levels of high crime.

During the recent hearings on the Vote, I was, indeed, impressed by the
commitment of senior management to improve our criminal justice system. We
further believe that the judicial system must be accessible to all, and
this can be achieved by the provision of adequate legal aid and an adequate
infrastructure.

Whilst the allocation of funds for the provision of functional court
buildings and maintenance falls short of needs, the allocation of R154
million, for capital projects for this financial year, is welcomed by the
ACDP. Furthermore, the facilities for specialised courts, such as sexual
offences courts and family courts, provided at new court buildings at
Waterfall, Knysna, Bethlehem and Alexandra, are also to be welcomed.

We also welcome the Minister's announcement, as reported in the media, that
he does not intend setting up a second investigating unit. We are, however,
concerned about budgetary constraints place upon the Heath Special
Investigating Unit and call upon Government to increase its budget
allocation.

In conclusion, we support this Vote.

Genl C L VILJOEN: Agb Voorsitter, die VF kan nie hierdie begrotingspos
ondersteun nie, om hoofsaaklik twee redes. Eerstens gaan die VF as party se
politieke spil oor sake soos minderheidsregte, die beskerming van inheemse
tale, kulture, asook selfbeskikking. Die beleid van hierdie departement om
Afrikaans, 'n gevestigde inheemse regstaal, uit ons howe te weer sal
Afrikaans as 'n gevestigde juridiese instrument benadeel, asook die taal-
en die kultuurregte van die Afrikaanse gemeenskap. Dit is ongrondwetlik en
dit is ook kwetsend.

Voorts is die doeltreffendheid van die Suid-Afrikaanse howe wat onder die
juridiksie van hierdie departement val, onaanvaarbaar swak en dit dra so by
tot ten minste ses ernstige situasies. Eerstens is daar die onhanteerbare
misdaadsituasie in die land omdat die juridiese proses daar vassteek.
Tweedens het ons die aanhouding van groot getalle verhoorafwagtendes vir
onaanvaarbaar lang tye. In die derde plek is daar die skokkende getal
jeugdiges wat in tronke aangehou word as verhoorafwagtendes.

Vierdens is dit 'n feit dat tronke só oorvol is dat dit onmoontlik is om
die regte van al die aangehoudenes, naamlik normale menseregte, te
handhaaf. Vyfdens is daar die ontsnappings uit die howe en laastens die
vermorsing van geld en tyd van die staat, maar ook van die burgers wat van
daardie fasiliteite moet gebruik maak. Om dié redes sal die VF die
begrotingspos nie kan steun nie. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Gen C L VILJOEN: Hon Chairman, the FF cannot support this Vote, mainly for
two reasons. Firstly, the political hub of the FF as a party is issues such
as minority rights, the protection of indigenous languages, cultures, and
self-determination. The policy of this department to remove Afrikaans, an
established indigenous legal language, from our courts will prejudice
Afrikaans as an established judicial instrument, as well as the language
and cultural rights of the Afrikaans community. It is unconstitutional and
hurtful.

Furthermore, the efficiency of South African courts, which fall under the
jurisdiction of this department, is unacceptably poor and therefore is
contributing to at least six serious situations. Firstly, there is the
unmanageable crime situation in the country, because the judicial process
gets stuck there. Secondly, we have the detention of large numbers of
awaiting-trial prisoners for unacceptably long periods of time. Thirdly,
there is the shocking number of youths being detained in prisons while
awaiting trial.
Fourthly, it is a fact that prisons are so overcrowded that it is
impossible to maintain the rights of all the detainees, that is their
normal human rights. Fifthly, there are the escapes from courts and finally
the wasting of the state's money and time, and also that of the citizens
who have to use those facilities. For these reasons the FF will be unable
to support the Vote.]

Mnr C AUCAMP: Mnr die Voorsitter, net baie kortliks: die AEB kan ook nie
hierdie begrotingspos steun nie. Die Departement van Justisie funksioneer
nie na wense nie. Die oorvol tronke en die lang hofrolle is daarvan
voldoende bewys. 'n Groot rede daarvoor is onervare staatsaanklaers en
landdroste, en ek dink ek wil die Minister adviseer ... (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr C AUCAMP: Mr Chairperson, just very briefly: the AEB cannot support
this Vote either. The Department of Justice is not functioning as it
should. The overcrowded prisons and the long court rolls are proof enough
of this. A big reason for this is inexperienced public prosecutors and
magistrates, and I think I want to advise the Minister ...]

... to take a leaf out of the book of the hon the Minister of Education,
whose intention it is to redeploy officials with experience.

Die voorneme om Afrikaans as verslagtaal uit die howe te weer kan ons ook
nie steun nie. Ook het hierdie departement die verantwoordelikheid van
konstitusionele ontwikkeling, waarvan daar niks gekom het nie. Verder is
daar duidelike tekens van inmenging in die regbank, wat ons alreeds hier
uitgewys het.

Ten laaste het mnr Koos van der Merwe vertel wat op die DP se grafskrif
gaan staan. Ek weet wat op syne gaan staan:


  Hier lê Koos van der Merwe.
  Sy droom lê aan skerwe.
  Hy het die KP verlaat,
  Want Buthelezi sal praat.
  Maar die Alliansie het alles bederwe.

[Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[We cannot support the intention to do away with Afrikaans as a language of
record in the courts either. This department is also responsible for
constitutional development, but nothing has come of this. There are also
clear signs of interference in the judiciary, which we have already pointed
out here.

Lastly, Mr Koos van der Merwe told us what would appear on the DP's
tombstone. I know what will appear on his:


  Hier lê Koos van der Merwe.
  Sy droom lê aan skerwe.
  Hy het die KP verlaat,
  Want Buthelezi sal praat.
  Maar die Alliansie het alles bederwe.

[Interjections.]]

Adv J H DE LANGE: Mr Chairperson, I rise on behalf of the ANC to express my
unconditional support of this budget once again. It is very sad to see that
three of the parties have not supported this Vote. It is interesting to
note that two of these parties have never attended any justice committee
meetings.

I think it is important to deal with the hon Gen Constand Viljoen's point
about Afrikaans, which point is, once again, completely wrong. As usual, he
got his lines a bit mixed up again. At no stage has the ANC ever adopted a
policy or suggested one to remove the use of Afrikaans from the courts. In
fact, it is the ANC's policy to stick to the Constitution which states that
all eleven languages are official languages. Any person who wants to speak
Afrikaans in court will be given the opportunity to do so. There has been
some discussion, but no policy adopted, on the question of a single
language of record for the courts. That matter is receiving further
attention amd has not been finalised.

Yesterday, the hon the President noted that the biggest opposition party
often resorts to mere sloganeering, and that if they do so, we should hear
them and then ignore what they are saying and move forward to deal with the
real problems. Today is a prime example of such sloganeering.

They are coming here to tell us that the justice system is completely
malfunctioning and that the Minister of Justice has said so. This is, of
course, nonsense. The Minister of Justice has indicated that he has, on
many occasions, admitted that there are problems in the judicial system,
but that does not mean that it is malfunctioning to the extent that it does
not operate. Secondly, it definitely does not mean that because one is
dealing with these problems openly, one is suggesting anything of that
nature.

Lastly, there is something I want to point out. I think it is important for
the DP to note this. When one votes against the Justice Vote, one is not
voting against the hon Minister or Penuell Maduna, as they have indicated.
One is not voting against the ANC. One is voting against the thousands of
people that are trying to make the justice system work. That is who they
are voting against. [Applause.]

I want to tell those hon members that I will remind the people of South
Africa, every day if I can, that the DP has not respected or appreciated
the work that those people are doing to try and make things work for the
better. [Interjections.] [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Division demanded.

The House divided:


  AYES - 276: Abrahams, T; Ainslie, A R; Arendse, J D; Asmal, A K; Bakker,
  D M; Balfour, B M N; Baloi, G E; Baloyi, M R; Baloyi, S F; Bekker, H J;
  Belot, S T; Beukman, F; Bhengu, F; Bhengu, N R; Biyela, B P; Blaas, A;
  Bloem, D V; Bogopane, H I; Booi, M S; Botha, N G W; Buthelezi, M G;
  Buthelezi, M N; Camerer, S M; Carrim, Y I; Cassim, M F; Chalmers, J;
  Chauke, H P; Chiba, L; Chohan-Kota, F I; Cindi, N V; Cronin, J P; Davies,
  R H; De Lange, J H; De Lille, P; Diale, L N; Didiza, A T; Dithebe, S L;
  Ditshetelo, P H K; Dlamini, B O; Doidge, G Q M; Douglas, B M; Duma, N M;
  Durand, J; Du Toit, D C; Fankomo, F C; Feinstein, A J; Ferreira, E T;
  Fihla, N B; Fraser-Moleketi, G J; Frolick, C T; Gandhi, E; Gaum, A H;
  Geldenhuys, B L; George, M E; Gerber P A; Gigaba, K M N; Gogotya, N J;
  Gomomo, P J; Goniwe, T M; Goosen, A D; Gous, S J; Green, L M; Greyling, C
  H F; Grové, S P; Gumede, D M; Gxowa, N B; Hajaig, F; Hanekom, D A;
  Hangana, N E; Hendrickse, P A C; Hlangwana, N L; Hlengwa, M W; Hogan, B
  A; Holomisa, S P; Jana, D P S; Jassat, E E; Jeffery, J H; Joemat, R R;
  Jordan, Z P; Kalako, M U; Kannemeyer, B W; Kasienyane, O R; Kasrils, R;
  Kekana, N N; Kgarimetsa, J J; Kgauwe, Q J; Kgwele, L M; Kota, Z A;
  Kotwal, Z; Landers, L T; Lekgoro, M K; Lekgoro, M M S; Lockey, D; Louw, J
  T; Lucas, E J; Lyle, A G; Mabeta, M E; Mabudafhasi, T R; Madasa, Z L;
  Magubane, N E; Mahlalela, C C; Mahlangu, M J; Mahomed, F; Maimane, D S;
  Maine, M S; Makasi, X C; Makunyane, T L; Makwetla, S P; Malebana, H F;
  Maloney, L; Maluleke-Hlaneki, C J; Malumise, M M; Mangena, M A; Manie, M
  S; Manuel, T A; Maphalala, M A; Maphoto, L I; Mars, I; Marshoff, F B;
  Martins, B A D; Masala, M M; Maserumule, F T; Mashimbye, J N; Masithela,
  N H; Masutha, M T; Mathebe, P M; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F; Matthews, V J G;
  Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M; Maziya, A M; Mbadi, L M; Mbombo, N D; Mbongo,
  P F; Mbulawa-Hans, B G; Mbuyazi, L R; Mdladlana, M M S; Mfundisi, I S;
  Mgidi, J S; Middleton, N S; Mkhatshwa, S; Mkhize, B R; Mlambo-Ngcuka, P
  G; Mlangeni, A; Mnandi, P N; Mndende, O N; Mngomezulu, G P; Mnumzana, S
  K; Modise, T R; Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, E P; Mogoba, M
  S; Mohai, S J; Mohamed, I J; Molebatsi, M A; Molewa, B G; Moloto, K A;
  Momberg, J H; Mongwaketse, S J; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K; Morkel, C M;
  Morobi, D M; Moropa, R M; Morwamoche, K W; Moss, M I; Mothoagae, P K;
  Motubatse, S D; Mpahlwa, M; Mpaka, H M; Mshudulu, S A; Msomi, M D;
  Mthembi-Mahanyele, S D; Mthembu, B; Mtirara, N Z; Mtsweni, N S; Mufamadi,
  F S; Mutsila, I; Mzondeki, M J G; Nair, B; Nash, J H; Ncube, B; Ndlovu, V
  B; Ndou, R S; Nel, A H; Nene, N M; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngculu, L V J;
  Ngubane, B S; Ngubane, H; Ngubeni, J M; Ngwenya, M L; Nhleko, N P;
  Nhlengethwa, D G; Njobe, M A A; Nkomo, A S; Nkosi, D M; Nonkonyana, M;
  Nqakula, C; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M B; Ntuli, S B; Nzimande, B M; Nzimande,
  L P M; Olckers, M E; Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G; Pahad, E G; Phala, M
  J; Phantsi, N E; Pheko, S E M; Phohlela, S; Pieterse, R D; Pretorius, I
  J; Radebe, B A; Radebe, J T; Rajbally, S; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin,
  M; Ramodike, M N; Ramotsamai, C M P; Ripinga, S S; Saloojee, E;
  Schneemann, G D; Scott, M I; Seaton, S A; Sekgobela, P S; September, C C;
  September, R K; Serote, M W; Shabangu, S; Shilubana, T P; Shope, N R;
  Sigcau, S N; Sigcawu, A N; Sigwela, E M; Sikakane, M R; Simmons, S;
  Sisulu, L N; Sithole, D J; Skhosana, W M; Skosana, M B; Skweyiya, Z S T;
  Slabbert, J H; Smith, P F; Smith, V G; Solo, B M; Solomon, G; Sonjica, B
  P; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Southgate, R M; Swart, S N; Thabethe, E;
  Tinto, B; Tolo, L J; Tsheole, N M; Turok, B; Twala, N M; Vadi, I; Van den
  Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe, A S; Van der Merwe, J H; Van Deventer, F J;
  Van Wyk, A (Annelizé); Van Wyk, J F; Van Wyk, N; Verwoerd, M; Vilakazi, B
  H; Woods, G G; Xingwana, L M T; Zita, L; Zondo, R P; Zulu, N E; Zuma, J
  G.

  NOES - 37: Andrew, K M; Aucamp, C; Bell, B G; Borman, G M; Botha, A J;
  Bruce, N S; Clelland, N J; Cupido, P W; Da Camara, M L; Davidson, I O;
  Delport, J T; Eglin, C W; Ellis, M J; Gibson, D H M; Gore, V C; Grobler,
  G A J; Heine, R J; Kalyan, S V; Lee, T D; Moorcroft, E K; Mulder, C P;
  Mulder, P W A; Ntuli, R S; Opperman, S E; Pillay, S; Rabie, P J; Schmidt,
  H C; Selfe, J; Semple, J A; Seremane, W J; Singh, A; Smuts, M; Sono, B N;
  Swart, P S; Taljaard, R; Viljoen, C L; Waters, M.

Vote No 18 accordingly agreed to.

Vote No 19 - Labour - put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr R J HEINE: Chairperson, hon members, the budget for Labour before this
House is a budget designed to increase unemployment. It is a budget
designed to make businesses pay for the Government's union-appeasing
policies, and it is a budget that will do nothing whatsoever to help get
South Africa towards the 6% growth rate that it needs to survive
economically and provide for its people.

We will not support this budget because, of the R748 million received by
the Department of Labour, R144 million goes to policing the businesses
which actually pay the taxes which fund the department. We will not support
this budget as long as we as a nation are dealing with chronic unemployment
and as long as the Department of Labour does not think it necessary to
allocate a single cent to job creation.

When our President addressed Parliament at the beginning of February, he
announced that there would be a review of South Africa's onerous labour
legislation. Now, five months later, there is still no progress. In the
meantime, 391 businesses have applied for exemption from various sections
of the Basic Conditions of Employment Act. They say that it is simply too
expensive to shoulder the burden and bear the costs. Nearly 400 000
employees are affected by these applications alone.

It is common knowledge that there is resistance to employing more people
because of the problems associated with complying with the Government's
labour laws. The DP refuses to be a partner in unemployment creation. We
will not protect the interests of organised labour over and above those of
the millions of ordinary people who just want a job so that they can house,
feed and clothe their families.

The budget gets a resounding no-vote from the DP. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Barbara Hogan, please take
your seat. [Laughter.]

Mr N S MIDDLETON: Mr Chairperson and colleagues, the IFP will unite with
anybody to do that which is right and correct. But we will not unite with
anybody to do that which is wrong or detrimental to the people that we
represent.

It is for this reason that the IFP has pledged     to support this Vote,
with the earnest request to our beloved Minister to see to it that the
matters of the creation of jobs and unemployment get priority. [Applause.]

Mnr D M BAKKER: Mnr die Voorsitter, die mense in ons land stem grootliks
saam dat werkloosheid ons enkele grootste probleem is, maar werkloosheid is
aan die toeneem en slegs een uit dertig werksoekers het vandag hoegenaamd
'n kans om werk te kry.

Die agb Minister van Finansies, die agb Trevor Manuel, sê in 'n onderhoud
dat die Regering se beleid nie werk geskep het nie en dat 'n
beleidsverandering nodig is. Hierdie uitspraak is baie bemoedigend, maar
ten spyte van uitsprake soos hierdie sien die land 'n Departement van
Arbeid met die mees rigiede arbeidsbeleid denkbaar. Die agb Minister van
Arbeid deel my mee dat die voorgenome wysigings aan die arbeidswette gereed
is en dat hulle binnekort voorgelê sal word, en hopelik sal dié rigiede
bepalings daardeur aangespreek word. Intussen word dit al hoe duideliker
dat werkgewers in 'n toenemende mate sukkel om gehoor te gee aan die
rigiede bepalings van die arbeidswetgewing.

Verder ondervind die staat self ernstige probleme met hierdie wetgewing.
Hoe die Regering kan verwag dat ander werkgewers die wetgewing moet toepas
terwyl staatsinstellings self nie daaraan gehoor kan gee nie, gaan 'n mens
se verstand te bowe, en dit is 'n duidelike bewys van die onvermoë om die
werkskeppingprobleem aan te spreek. Solank as wat hierdie toestand
voortduur, is dit nie vir die Nuwe NP moontlik om hierdie begrotingspos te
steun nie. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)
[Mr D M BAKKER: Mr Chairperson, the people in our country largely agree
that unemployment is our single biggest problem, but unemployment is on the
increase and today only one out of every 30 job-seekers has any chance of
finding work.

The hon the Minister of Finance, the hon Trevor Manuel, said in an
interview that the Government's policy has not created jobs and that a
policy change is required. This statement is very encouraging, but despite
statements like these the country has a Department of Labour with the most
rigid labour policy imaginable. The hon the Minister of Labour informs me
that the envisaged amendments to the labour laws are ready and that they
will be submitted shortly, and these rigid provisions will hopefully be
addressed by them. In the meantime it is becoming clearer that employers
are struggling more and more to meet the rigid provisions of the labour
legislation.

Furthermore, the state itself is experiencing serious problems with this
legislation. It is beyond one how the Government can expect other employers
to implement the legislation while state institutions themselves cannot
comply with it, and this is a clear indication of the inability to address
the job creation problem. As long as this situation continues, it will not
be possible for the New NP to support this Vote.]

Adv Z L MADASA: Mhlalingaphambili, nangona simxhasa uMnu Mdladlana kule
Voti yakhe, singa singakuvakalisa oku kulandelayo: Oosomashishini nabatyali-
zimali bayakhalaza besithi abasebenzi beli lizwe baziindleko nangona
bengena buchwephetshe. Bathi ke oku kubangela ushishino lungakhuli.
Oosomashishini abasakhasayo bayabethakala ngakumbi kuba umthetho ungqongqo
malunga nemivuzo.

Sithi ke makenze into ngoku, ajike le meko. Olu hlengahlengiso lomthetho
weBCE athetha ngalo makade alugqibe. Sekunjalo ke, siyamxhasa umhlekazi
kule Voti. (Translation of Xhosa speech follows.)

[Adv Z L MADASA: Mr Chairperson, even if we support Mr Mdladlana's Vote we
wish to express the following: The business community and investors are
complaining that workers in this country are expensive despite their lack
of expertise. They are saying this causes the industry not to grow. Small
businesses encounter hardships especially because the law with regard to
wages is strict.
We are therefore saying that he must do something now in order to change
this state of affairs. He must eventually complete the rationalisation he
has referred to. Nevertheless, we support the hon the Minister's Vote.]

Dr P W A MULDER: Mr Chairman, unemployment is South Africa's biggest
problem. The FF is convinced that unemployment is also the main cause of
our totally unacceptable crime rate. How do we solve it? By creating more
jobs. It is as simple as that. But the Government cannot create those jobs.
The private sector must do so. Broadly speaking, our economy is healthy and
growing, yet no new jobs are being created. Why? Because of the effect of
our labour relations legislation on the economy. In South Africa we daily
lose more jobs than we create. Between 1994 and 1997 R5,7 billion was
invested by employers in factory technology. That is automatisation and one
realises the impact of that. In the same period, 46 000 factory workers
lost their jobs. Why? Simply because the labour legislation does not in any
way encourage the creation of new jobs.

In Europa het die hoeveelheid werkers die afgelope 20 jaar bykans konstant
gebly. In sommige lande verminder die werksmag selfs. Europese werkers is
oorwegend hoogs geskoold en semigeskoold. Ons wetgewing is hoofsaaklik op
Europese modelle gebaseer wat vir daardie wêreld werk, maar Suid-Afrika lyk
anders. Ons het meer van die Amerikaanse tipe wette nodig, ongewild soos
dit mag wees by sommige mense. Dit is wette wat min geduld met onwettige
stakers toon, wat effektief met baie nuwe toetreders en met kompetisie in
die arbeidsmark kan werk.

Die Regering het gesê hulle gaan kyk na die arbeidswette ten einde
onvoorsiene gevolge te verbeter. Die feit dat nuwe werk nie geskep word
nie, is een van die ernstige gevolge wat tot nou toe nog nie gehanteer is
nie. Voor ons dit nie doen nie, gaan ons dié probleem nie oplos nie. As die
probleem opgelos is, sal die res outomaties volg. Die VF gaan teen die
begrotingspos vir hierdie portefeulje stem. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[In Europe the number of workers has remained virtually constant for the
past 20 years. In certain countries the labour force is even decreasing.
European workers are mostly highly skilled and semi-skilled. Our
legislation is based in the main on European models that work for that part
of the world, but South Africa is different. We need more American-type
laws, unpopular as this may be with some people. These are laws that show
little patience with illegal strikers, which can work effectively with many
new entrants to and competition in the labour market.

The Government has said that it will look at the labour laws in order to
improve on unforeseen consequences. The fact that new jobs are not being
created is one of the serious consequences that has not been dealt with as
yet. Until we do this, we will not solve this problem. Once the problem has
been solved, the rest will follow automatically. The FF is going to vote
against the Vote for this portfolio.]

Mr M S MANIE: Deputy Chairperson, the ANC supports this Vote. If I ask the
House how we judge what parties stand for, all we need to do is watch what
they vote for and what they vote against. And I must say it comes as no
surprise ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, please resume your
seat. On what point do you rise, sir?

Mr D H M GIBSON: Chairperson, will the hon Mr Manie take a question?
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon Manie, would you take a question,
sir?

Mr M S MANIE: Chairperson, I am sure that Mr Gibson, as somebody who has
served in the old parliament and as well as in this Parliament, understands
that this is the time for declarations of vote, and, Chairperson, I hope
that you will not penalise me for taking up this time. But he can ask me
how old I am. I am much older than he is and he better respect me from now
on. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEE: Order! I will give you injury time,
but do not advise us how old you are, sir. Please continue. [Laughter.]

Mr M S MANIE: So it comes as no surprise to me that those parties which
have indicated that they are going to vote against this Vote, will do so.
It was very predictable, because we know that whatever the DP says here in
Parliament, they are anti-transformation and anti-worker. But I think this
is best captured by their slogan of fight blacks or fight back - to me this
means exactly the same. What that means to me is the English translation of
the swart gevaar. The swart gevaar worked so well in the past that when
they wondered how they could capture the imagination of those people who
had supported that policy, they came up with the English version of that
which says: Fight blacks or fight back - whatever they want to say about
it. [Interjections.] But I want to say something to them. I will not waste
my time giving them advice. I want to warn them that they must remember
that the people they vote against here in this House are not stupid. At the
next elections they are going to vote against them. [Applause.]

Division demanded.

The House divided:


  AYES - 258: Abrahams, T; Ainslie, A R; Arendse, J D; Asmal, A K; Balfour,
  B M N; Baloi, G E; Baloyi, M R; Baloyi, S F; Bekker, H J; Belot, S T;
  Bhengu, F; Bhengu, N R; Biyela, B P; Bloem, D V; Bogopane, H I; Booi, M
  S; Botha, N G W; Buthelezi, M G; Buthelezi, M N; Carrim, Y I; Cassim, M
  F; Chalmers, J; Chauke, H P; Chiba, L; Chohan-Kota, F I; Cindi, N V;
  Coetzee-Kasper, M P; Cronin, J P; Davies, R H; De Lange, J H; De Lille,
  P; Diale, L N; Didiza, A T; Dithebe, S L; Ditshetelo, P H K; Dlamini, B
  O; Doidge, G Q M; Douglas, B M; Duma, N M; Du Toit, D C; Erwin, A;
  Fankomo, F C; Feinstein, A J; Fihla, N B; Fraser-Moleketi, G J; Frolick,
  C T; Gandhi, E; George, M E; Gerber P A; Gigaba, K M N; Gogotya, N J;
  Gomomo, P J; Goniwe, T M; Goosen, A D; Green, L M; Grové, S P; Gumede, D
  M; Gxowa, N B; Hajaig, F; Hanekom, D A; Hangana, N E; Hendrickse, P A C;
  Hlangwana, N L; Hlengwa, M W; Hogan, B A; Holomisa, S P; Jana, D P S;
  Jassat, E E; Joemat, R R; Jordan, Z P; Kalako, M U; Kannemeyer, B W;
  Kasienyane, O R; Kasrils, R; Kekana, N N; Kgarimetsa, J J; Kgauwe, Q J;
  Kgwele, L M; Kota, Z A; Kotwal, Z; Landers, L T; Lekgoro, M K; Lekgoro, M
  M S; Lockey, D; Louw, J T; Lucas, E J; Lyle, A G; Mabandla, B S; Mabeta,
  M E; Mabudafhasi, T R; Madasa, Z L; Mahlalela, C C; Mahlangu, M J;
  Mahomed, F; Maimane, D S; Maine, M S; Makasi, X C; Makunyane, T L;
  Makwetla, S P; Malebana, H F; Maloney, L; Maluleke-Hlaneki, C J;
  Malumise, M M; Mangena, M A; Manie, M S; Manuel, T A; Maphalala, M A;
  Maphoto, L I; Mars, I; Marshoff, F B; Martins, B A D; Masala, M M;
  Maserumule, F T; Mashimbye, J N; Masithela, N H; Masutha, M T; Mathebe, P
  M; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F; Matthews, V J G; Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M;
  Maziya, A M; Mbadi, L M; Mbombo, N D; Mbongo, P F; Mbulawa-Hans, B G;
  Mbuyazi, L R; Mdladlana, M M S; Mfundisi, I S; Mgidi, J S; Mkhatshwa, S;
  Mkhize, B R; Mlambo-Ngcuka, P G; Mlangeni, A; Mnandi, P N; Mndende, O N;
  Mngomezulu, G P; Mnumzana, S K; Modise, T R; Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng,
  T R; Mogale, E P; Mogoba, M S; Mohai, S J; Mohamed, I J; Molebatsi, M A;
  Molewa, B G; Moloto, K A; Momberg, J H; Mongwaketse, S J; Montsitsi, S D;
  Moonsamy, K; Morobi, D M; Moropa, R M; Morwamoche, K W; Mothoagae, P K;
  Motubatse, S D; Mpahlwa, M; Mpaka, H M; Mshudulu, S A; Msomi, M D;
  Mthembi-Mahanyele, S D; Mthembu, B; Mtirara, N Z; Mtsweni, N S; Mufamadi,
  F S; Mutsila, I; Mzondeki, M J G; Nair, B; Nash, J H; Ncube, B; Ndlovu, V
  B; Ndou, R S; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngculu,
  L V J; Ngubane, H; Ngubeni, J M; Ngwenya, M L; Nhlanhla, J M; Nhleko, N
  P; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njobe, M A A; Nkomo, A S; Nkosi, D M; Nonkonyana, M;
  Nqakula, C; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M B; Ntuli, S B; Nzimande, B M; Nzimande,
  L P M; Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G; Pahad, E G; Phala, M J; Phantsi, N
  E; Pheko, S E M; Phohlela, S; Pieterse, R D; Radebe, B A; Radebe, J T;
  Rajbally, S; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin, M; Ramodike, M N;
  Ramotsamai, C M P; Ripinga, S S; Saloojee, E; Schneemann, G D; Scott, M
  I; Seaton, S A; Sekgobela, P S; September, C C; September, R K; Serote, M
  W; Shabangu, S; Shilubana, T P; Shope, N R; Sigcau, S N; Sigcawu, A N;
  Sigwela, E M; Sikakane, M R; Sisulu, L N; Sithole, D J; Skhosana, W M;
  Skosana, M B; Skweyiya, Z S T; Smith, P F; Smith, V G; Solo, B M;
  Solomon, G; Sonjica, B P; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Southgate, R M; Swart,
  S N; Thabethe, E; Tinto, B; Tolo, L J; Tsheole, N M; Turok, B; Twala, N
  M; Vadi, I; Van den Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe, J H; Van Wyk, A
  (Annelizé); Van Wyk, J F; Van Wyk, N; Verwoerd, M; Vilakazi, B H; Woods,
  G G; Xingwana, L M T; Zita, L; Zondo, R P; Zulu, N E; Zuma, J G.

  NOES - 55: Andrew, K M; Aucamp, C; Bakker, D M; Bell, B G; Beukman, F;
  Blaas, A; Borman, G M; Botha, A J; Bruce, N S; Camerer, S M; Clelland, N
  J; Cupido, P W; Da Camara, M L; Davidson, I O; Delport, J T; Dowry, J J;
  Durand, J; Eglin, C W; Ellis, M J; Gaum, A H; Geldenhuys, B L; Gibson, D
  H M; Gore, V C; Gous, S J; Greyling, C H F; Grobler, G A J; Heine, R J;
  Kalyan, S V; Lee, T D; Moorcroft, E K; Morkel, C M; Mulder, C P; Mulder,
  P W A; Nel, A H; Ntuli, R S; Olckers, M E; Opperman, S E; Pillay, S;
  Pretorius, I J; Rabie, P J; Schmidt, H C; Selfe, J; Semple, J A;
  Seremane, W J; Simmons, S; Singh, A; Smit, H A; Smuts, M; Sono, B N;
  Swart, P S; Taljaard, R; Van der Merwe, A S; Van Deventer, F J; Viljoen,
  C L; Waters, M.

Vote No 19 accordingly agreed to.

Vote No 20 - Land Affairs - put.

Declarations of vote:

Mnr A J BOTHA: Mnr die Voorsitter, die DP het die agb Minister onderskraag
gedurende die begrotingsdebat, hoofsaaklik omdat grondhervorming op 'n
gesonde grondslag geplaas is, met die klem op die vestiging van kommersiële
boere. Terwyl bestaansboerdery en tradisionele beheer nog vir 'n geruime
tyd sal voortduur, moet ons aanvaar dat daardie stelsels wêreldwyd in
onbruik verval wanneer die ekonomie meer gesofistikeerd raak en die druk op
voedsel- en veselproduksie vermeerder.

Die agb Minister moet ook saam met die portefeuljekomitee besin oor die
uitwerking van die beoogde belasting op landbougrond. Dit sal 'n
vernietigende invloed hê op alle bestaande boere, sowel in die kommersiële
as in die bestaansektor. Dit sal die vestiging van nuwe boere prakties
onmoontlik maak.
Die agb Minister moet ook kennis neem van die groeiende weerstand in die
portefeuljekomitee teen die wyse waarop ons gemarginaliseer word. Dit is te
algemeen dat ons van nuwe planne verneem via die media, soos nou onlangs
weer met die aankondiging van die nuwe grondhervormingsplanne. Soos hierdie
jongste beleidsverklaring meer algemeen bestudeer word, sal ons uiters
seker moet maak dat daar geen sweem van rassisme daaraan verbonde is nie.
Hiervoor het te veel mense te lank geveg teen diskriminasie en die
vooroordele van die eeue. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr A J BOTHA: Mr Chairperson, the DP supported the hon the Minister during
the budget debate, mainly because land reform has been placed on a sound
basis, with the emphasis on the establishment of commercial farmers. While
subsistence farming and traditional control will continue for quite a
while, we have to accept that those systems become obsolete whenever the
economy becomes more sophisticated and the pressure on food and fibre
production increases.

The hon the Minister must also, together with the portfolio committee,
consider the effect of the envisaged tax on agricultural land. This will
have a destructive effect on all existing farmers, both in the commercial
and in the subsistence sector. It will make the establishment of new
farmers in practice impossible.

The hon the Minister must also take note of the increasing resistance
within the portfolio committee to the manner in which we are being
marginalised. It is a common occurrence for us to learn of new plans via
the media, as happened again recently with the announcement of the new land
reform plans. As this most recent policy declaration is studied more in
general, we will have to make extremely sure that there is not a hint of
racism connected to it. Too many people have struggled for too long against
discrimination and the prejudices of the ages for that.]

Lastly, the hon the Minister should please convince her colleagues with
statistics, and provide the thread of information about the land actually
available for immediate settlement, so that we can get on with this job and
avoid the ANC campaign of discrediting existing farmers, who are loyal
citizens of this country.

The DP supports this Vote.
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon Mbuyazi, please be seated.

Prof H NGUBANE: Mr Chairperson, hon Ministers and hon members, the MECs of
agriculture and land affairs have been given power of attorney in order to
administer the allocation of state agricultural land in their respective
provinces to aspiring people coming from the previously disadvantaged
groups. We support this development, because it is pragmatic and fast-
tracks the distribution of land.

Access to land is basic to the fight against poverty, to which the
Government has committed itself. The Minister and the Department of Land
Affairs have embarked on a number of reviews which lead to fresh approaches
in this exceptionally emotive issue of land.

May I take this opportunity to welcome back Minister Didiza after her brief
maternity leave. As an indication of the importance of this stage in her
own individual development and lifecycle, I would like to present her with
the badge of motherhood. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Genl C L VILJOEN: Mnr die Voorsitter, grondsake raak baie mense. Daar is by
baie mense in Suid-Afrika groot verwagtinge oor grond geskep. Baie mense se
emosies loop hoog. Dit is 'n plofbare saak.

Ons het die geval dat die Suid-Afrikaanse Regering nie na wense vorder met
die herverdeling van staatsbeheerde grond wat beskikbaar is nie. Hulle het
agter geraak met hul doelwitte en die mense wat verwagtinge het, begin hul
ongeduld in dié verband te wys. Dit is presies wat in Zimbabwe gebeur het.

Waar grond wel oorhandig is, soos op Riemvasmaak en ook in baie ander
gevalle, is die grond oorgedra aan nuwe eienaars wat dit nie goed kon benut
nie. Waar herverdeling van skaars landbougrond plaasvind, moet die Regering
tog toesien dat die benutting van daardie grond moontlik is en dat armoede
verminder en nie vererger nie.

Die stadige vordering met die staat se toewysing van grond en afhandeling
van grondeise is besig om hier emosies soos dié in Zimbabwe te genereer.
Grond is beskikbaar, maar die staat gee dit nie vinnig genoeg uit nie en
nou swaai die gevoel van die massas teen die private grondeienaars, soos in
Zimbabwe.
Die begroting vir Landbou toon ook nie vanjaar 'n ernstige benadering met
betrekking tot voorligtingsdienste nie en, soos reeds voorheen gemeld, het
ons die probleem van die gevare van grondbelasting. Navorsing binne die
departement is ook nie goed gefinansier nie. Die gevolge hiervan is dat die
opkomende boere al hoe swaarder gaan kry om die mas op te kom.

Hoewel die VF saamstem met die positiewe aspekte van die agb Minister se
hantering van hierdie saak, iets wat ook deur ander partye genoem is, is
ons bekommerd dat die Regering nie voldoende vorder nie, en daarom sal ons
beswaar aanteken teen hierdie begrotingspos. (Translation of Afrikaans
speech follows.)

[Gen C L VILJOEN: Mr Chairperson, land affairs affects many people. Great
expectations in respect of land have been created in the minds of many
people in South Africa. The emotions of many people are running high. This
is an explosive issue.

We have a situation where the South African Government is not making the
desired progress with the redistribution of state-owned land which is
available. They have fallen behind with their objectives and the people who
have expectations, are beginning to show their impatience in this regard.
This is exactly what happened in Zimbabwe.

Where land has, in fact, been handed over, such as at Riemvasmaak and also
in many other instances, the land was handed over to new owners who could
not utilise it properly.  Where redistribution of scarce agricultural land
occurs, the Government should please see to it that utilisation of that
land is possible and that poverty is reduced and not worsened.

The slow progress with the state's allocation of land and the finalising of
land claims are beginning to generate emotions here such as those in
Zimbabwe. Land is available, but the state is not allowing it quickly
enough and now the feeling among the masses is swinging against private
land owners, as happened in Zimbabwe.

The budget for Agriculture also does not exhibit a serious approach this
year with regard to extension services and, as has already been mentioned,
we have the problem of the dangers of land tax. Research within the
department has also not been financed well. In consequence upcoming farmers
will find it increasingly difficult to make the grade.

Although the FF agrees with the positive aspects of the way in which the
hon the Minister is handling this issue, something which has also been
mentioned by other parties, we are concerned that the Government is not
making sufficient progress, and therefore we record our objection to this
Vote.]

Business suspended at 19:00 and resumed at 20:04.

                               Evening Sitting

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, I am glad to see you awake and energetic.
[Interjections.] We will now continue with the consideration of Vote No 20
- Land Affairs. Will the PAC please make their declaration?

Dr M S MOGOBA: Madam Speaker, just before the adjournment the House made us
choose between land and food, and we chose food. I want to say that there
is no food without land. There is absolutely no food without land! I want
to put a finger on what is absolutely fundamental and that is land. We want
to say that we support the Government's policy of land reform. We are,
however, worried by the state of delivery and the 63 000 claims which were
not met. I know that the number is not quite that now, but I believe this
is a thing that should not happen again in the year that is before us.

Not long ago it was reported that the Minister of Land Affairs had bought
some land from somewhere - I think it was from the state - and decided to
redistribute it among farmers. I want to say that it really warmed my heart
to begin to see the small farmers - the so-called non-farmers - becoming
farmers in the land of their birth. That, I think, is a line we should be
taking; we should be accelerating along it, because it is the right line to
where we are going.

We support land reform. We say it is not enough. We want basic
redistribution of land. We want to suggest something very fundamental, some
might even call it radical. When we were at Codesa, we made a big blunder
with section 25 in the Constitution, and I want to suggest that it is now
time that that section should be repealed. We have the majority. We have
enough votes in this House to bring that about. We really have no excuse
whatsoever not to tackle that section, because until that section is
repealed we can go on talking but nothing is going to happen. [Time
expired.]

Mr C AUCAMP: Madam Speaker, may I, by way of introduction, say that if you
wear that dress when we come to our farewell speeches, I could give you
another CD, Lady in Red.

Of, soos ons in Afrikaans sê: ``Tannie met die Rooi Rokkie''. [Or, as we
say in Afrikaans: ``Tannie met die Rooi Rokkie''.]

Currently, a large degree of uncertainty exists in the farming community as
to where the Government is going with the land redistribution process. Land
and land reform is the most crucial issue.

Ons moet meer duidelikheid oor hierdie saak kry. Die hele saak van
grondpryse en van verbetering op bestaande plaaseiendom kom hierdeur in
gedrang. Die program van staatsgrondverdeling is ver agter en die belofte
dat 15% staatsgrond binne die volgende twee jaar verdeel sal word, is
heeltemal ontoereikend. Ons soek ook duidelike waarborge dat, anders as in
Zimbabwe, 'n kaart en transport werklik nog in ons land waarde sal hê. Ook
die voorgestelde belasting op landbougrond bring groot onduidelikheid.
Vanweë die onduidelikheid oor hierdie saak en vanweë die feit dat daar nie
'n duidelike koers of rigting is nie, sal die AEB nie hierdie begrotingspos
kan steun nie. [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[We must have more clarity on this issue. The whole matter of land prices
and of improvement of existing farm property is prejudiced by this. The
programme of the division of state land is lagging far behind and the
promise that 15% of state land will be divided within the next two years is
completely inadequate. We also seek clear guarantees that, unlike the case
in Zimbabwe, a title deed will truly still have value in our country. The
proposed tax on agricultural land is also giving rise to a great deal of
uncertainty. Due to the uncertainty about this issue and due to the fact
that there is no clear course or direction, the AEB will not be able to
support this Vote. [Interjections.]]

Adv S P HOLOMISA: Madam Speaker, as the ANC we support this Vote. We
support it because the department has a workable programme, which is
designed to address the legacy of colonial and apartheid dispossession of
Africans of their land. The Minister is embarking on a process of making
state land available for both the landless and the people who want to
practise commercial agriculture.

Restitution is also picking up, with 5 000 claims having been finalised in
a matter of one year. We are, however, perturbed by the callousness
displayed by some farmers who continue to commit criminal acts with the
illegal and inhumane eviction of poor and vulnerable farm dwellers. Let
those who continue to do these things be warned that the patience and
tolerance of their victims are not endless. I am disappointed but not
surprised that the DP and those of their ilk do not speak out against this
scourge in the way they continue to speak about other matters.

The Minister has issued powers of attorney to MECs in the provinces with
the intention of accelerating land delivery, and it is our hope that these
powers will not be used for party-political purposes. The Minister is also
working closely with other Ministries to ensure that newly acquired land is
used productively within an integrated development system. [Applause.]
Vote No 20 agreed to (Freedom Front and Afrikaner Eenheidsbeweging
dissenting).

Vote No 21 - Minerals and Energy - put.

Mr I O DAVIDSON: Madam Speaker, the DP wishes to raise its objection to the
Minerals and Energy budget as tabled. This objection is based not so much
on what the Minister or her department have done, but more on what they
have not done. Here I am referring to the whole question of the
restructuring and re-regulation of the liquid fuels industry. Let me say
here that the Minister, herself, indicated that this was one aspect of her
portfolio that she had neglected.

Fuel prices in South Africa have increased from R2,20 per litre in March
last year to a record level of R3,24 per litre this year. Now we recognise
that the increase in the dollar price of oil has played a role in respect
of this increase. But what the Government has, at worst, failed to
recognise, or, at best, failed to acknowledge, is that there are many
anomalies in the way the fuel price has been structured in South Africa,
and that these anomalies have led to higher prices at the pump.
My speech in the debate dealt fully with these aspects. The Minister,
herself, has recognised the need for such a restructuring and re-
regulation. However, she has indicated that a precursor to such a
development is the attainment of certain milestones, one of which is a 25%
black-empowerment presence in the industry. When asked, in a question by
me, whether there was any progress in this regard, she indicated that,
indeed, there was no progress.

Now, restructuring and reregulation, and therefore lower prices, have been
kept hostage to black empowerment - a laudable objective, but not at any
price. Fuel-price increases have delicate and complex ramifications which
affect every individual, every business and, ultimately, the economy as a
whole, as we have seen by the recent increases in the producer- price and
consumer-price indices. The Minister, for heaven's sake, needs to act
boldly and to act now, and until she acts, we must register our objection.
[Interjections.]

Mr E J LUCAS: Madam Speaker, the IFP supports the 2000-2001 Minerals and
Energy Vote. We do, however, request the Minister, as we have done in the
budget debate, to urgently review the current petrol-pricing mechanism with
the objective of reducing the price of petrol to the paying consumer. We
realise that it is a difficult task, and we also know that she does have
the capability to perform this challenging and complicated task.

Mr A H NEL: Madam Speaker, although we are not going to vote against this
Vote, we would have supported it with more enthusiasm if the Minister had
been more proactive in, firstly, addressing the price of petrol in a more
imaginative manner, for example, by temporarily lowering the tax on petrol,
and, secondly, solving the issue of mineral rights and spelling out exactly
what is meant by the principle of ``use it or lose it''.

Of course, there were also positive developments, such as the facilitating
role which the Minister and her department played in the holding of a
mining summit. Unfortunately, this Minister had to deal with the legacy of
her predecessor, but, fortunately for her, because of certain differences,
she cannot imitate him in being a bull in a china shop.

Mnu D M NKOSI: Somlomo, ngiphakama ohlangothini lwe-ANC ukusho ukuthi
siyahambisana nalesi Sabiwo-zimali. Ngithi sisamukele njengoba sibekiwe.
Kuyacaca-ke ukuthi umsebenzi usemningi.

Amalungu ekomidi lawa akhulume ngaphambili, abonise ngokucacile ukuthi
umsebenzi osimele ekomidini mningi kangakanani. Engikuvezayo
nengizokuphakamisa kule Ndlu ngukuthi lokhu abakuphakamisile uNgqongqoshe
ukuzwile. IPhini lakhe kanye nomNyango wezaMandla neziMbiwa ngiyethemba
ukuthi bazokwazi ukusisiza.

Ihhovisi likaNgqongqoshe yilona kuphela esele nomsebenzi omningi osalele
emuva ngoba yiyo eyabambezeleka kakhulu. Ukubambisana nezinye izinhlangano
nokushintshwa koNgqongqoshe bethu kuyinto esichithele isikhathi eside
kakhulu.

Umsebenzi mningi ngakho amalungu ekomidi mawalungele umsebenzi. Sizoqala
bese siqhubekela phambili. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of Zulu speech follows.)

[Mr D M NKOSI: Madam Speaker, on behalf of the ANC I rise to say that we
support this Vote. What I am saying is that we support it as it stands. It
is clear that a lot still needs to be done.
Members of our committee who have spoken just now, have clearly shown us
the work that is still awaiting us as a committee. I would like to inform
this House that everything that the previous speakers proposed was heard by
the hon the Minister. I hope that her deputy and the Department of Minerals
and Energy will be able to assist.

The office of the hon the Minister is behind with a lot of work due to the
delays it has recently experienced. The change in Ministers and our working
together with other organisations are the things that have wasted a lot of
our time.

There is a lot of work to be done, therefore members of our committee must
be ready. We will start and then keep on working. [Applause.]]

Vote No 21 agreed to (Democratic Party dissenting).

Vote No 22 - Provincial and Local Government - put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr J SELFE: Madam Speaker, the Department of Provincial and Local
Government engages in a great deal of activity, but there is always the
danger of confusing activity with action.

There are several reasons why we cannot support the Vote. Firstly, despite
a programme to monitor the financial viability of local government, one in
six municipalities is technically bankrupt and only one in four can raise
credit at commercial banks. Secondly, there is no coherent disaster
management policy and legislation in place. Thirdly, there are hopelessly
insufficient funds to cover the transition to the new system of local
government, despite the fact that elections are going to be held in
November this year. Fourthly, a draft to the Bill on property rates has
caused major panic amongst home owners, yet the department has done nothing
to reassure the public. Fifthly, despite a crying need for capacity
building at local government level, the training board for this purpose has
allocated only about a third of the money voted for this. For these reasons
we will unfortunately not be supporting the Vote.

Mr P F SMIT: Madam Speaker, I was actually hoping to address these comments
in part to the Minister, but I cannot see him. He is hiding somewhere in
the masses. May I say, in any event, that it would be churlish of us not to
acknowledge that the department is doing much that is good and positive in
respect of local governance. I do want to say, however, that it is not our
function today to pat the Minister on the back, or his department for that
matter.

I want to take this opportunity to remind the House and the Minister, in
case he needs reminding, of our implacable opposition to government policy
in so far as the relationship of traditional authorities with municipal
government is concerned. It beggars belief that after eight years we still
have not resolved this issue. It has been on the agenda since Codesa. It
has been through process after process, and we still have no resolution to
the dispute. In fact, it is precisely because this Parliament has failed,
the ruling party has failed and there has been a failure by everybody
involved in the process, that the President has had to intervene to promise
that negotiations will start next month. Hopefully the matter will now be
resolved.

We expect the department to be useful and helpful in this process, not to
be defensive of the existing positions, and to contribute positively
towards an outcome that will, in fact, resolve the matter satisfactory.
However, we are concerned that there is too much of a buy in, by both the
Ministry and the department, into the status quo, and the status quo is
precisely what the problem is. So we would like to say that the process
must be given a chance. We are not entirely confident about what is going
to happen, but we must give it a chance. [Interjections.] We will,
nevertheless, support the Vote. [Applause.]

Mnr F J VAN DEVENTER: Mevrou die Speaker, toe ek vanaand voor ete so kyk,
het ons amper besluit om die begrotingspos te steun, want ons het gesien
die Minister vir Provinsiale en Plaaslike Regering en die Minister van
Finansies praat 'n slag met mekaar. Ons het gehoop dit gaan oor meer geld
vir hierdie departement om hulle kapasiteit te bou, en om die oorgang na
die nuwe plaaslike regeringstelsel behoorlik van die grond af te kry. Toe
kom ons vanaand terug ná ete en sien die Minister is weg. Hy is nie hier
nie. Nou, dit is soos die departement werk - wanneer hy teenwoordig moet
wees, is hy afwesig, en wanneer hy afwesig moet wees, is hy teenwoordig.

Hierdie departement staan voor een van die grootste uitdagings ten opsigte
van die konstitusionele ontplooiing van die Suid-Afrikaanse staatkunde wat
enige departement in hierdie Parlement seker nóg die hoof moes bied. Die
belangrikheid van die stap wat hierdie departement moet doen, naamlik om
Suid-Afrika in 'n nuwe plaaslike regeringsbedeling in te lei, word ondermyn
as gevolg van 'n departement wat nie oor die kapasiteit beskik om die werk
te kan doen wat hy moet doen nie, en as gevolg van onderfinansiering.

In die tweede instansie kry 'n mens die gevoel dat daar nie behoorlike
beheer oor hierdie departement en sy werksaamhede is nie, en daarom kan ons
hierdie begrotingspos nie steun nie. Daar is 'n verdere aspek wat vandag na
vore gekom het. Die party hier aan my linkerkant is besig om oudministers
wat belas was met plaaslike regering uit die ou apartheidsdae by hulle te
versamel. Ek wil nou net vir die agb Huis sê dat hulle katvoet moet loop,
want diegene wat hulle tot dusver versamel het, is 'n bietjie ``pale-
faced'', en 'n bietjie uit die ou dae uit. Die Minister is nie hier nie,
seker omdat hy op die oomblik 'n oproep het van mnr Tony Leon om darem
daardie ``image'' reg te stel, veral met die oog op die munisipale
verkiesings. Ons kan hierdie begrotingspos om daardie rede dus nie steun
nie. [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr F J VAN DEVENTER: Madam Speaker, this evening before supper we almost
decided to support the Vote, because we saw the Minister for Provincial and
Local Government talking to the Minister of Finance for a change. We hoped
that it was about more money for this department, to build their capacity,
and to launch the transition to the new local government system properly.
Then we came back after supper this evening and noticed that the Minister
was missing. He is not here. Now, this is how the department works - when
he should be present, he is absent, and when he should be absent, he is
present.

This department is facing one of the greatest challenges concerning the
constitutional development of South African politics that any department
has probably ever had to deal with in this Parliament. The importance of
the step this department must take, namely to lead South Africa into a new
dispensation in local government, is being undermined owing to a department
that does not have the capacity to do the work it should do, and owing to
being underfinanced.

Secondly, one gets the feeling that there is no proper control over this
department and its activities, and that is why we cannot support his Vote.
There is a further aspect that has emerged today. The party here to my left
is collecting former ministers who were entrusted with local government in
the apartheid era on their side. I just want to tell the House that they
should exercise caution, because those they have collected thus far are a
bit ``pale-faced'' and date back to the old days somewhat. The Minister is
not here, probably because he is now taking a call from Mr Tony Leon about
rectifying that image, especially with a view to the municipal elections.
For that reason we cannot support this Vote. [Interjections.]]

Mrs R M SOUTHGATE: Madam Speaker, what still remains a concern is the
equitable share of the national revenue to local government, and what
formula is used to decide on the equitable share.

What was not clear in the budget was what the financial implications would
be for the establishment of new municipalities and the cost of the
transition. Most municipalities do not have the capacity to raise their own
revenue to make it economically and financially viable. This brings us to
the controversial Bill on property rates. The communities are very
concerned about this proposal, especially the once disenfranchised
communities, who feel that they will be penalised a second time, because of
these increases. They feel that it will cause greater hardship and many of
them might even lose their homes.

However, with all our concerns, the ACDP will, with reservations, support
the Vote and I just feel that we need to stress that not enough is being
done to turn the tide of unemployment and poverty in many of our poorer
communities.

Dr C P MULDER: Mevrou die Speaker, die VF is jammer dat die agb Minister
nie op die oomblik in die Raad is nie. Ek wil my spesifiek bepaal by twee
punte. Die eerste is dat tydens die bespreking van die agb Minister se
begrotingspos daar spesifiek gepraat is oor die sogenaamde artikel 185-
kommissie, naamlik die kommissie van regte van gemeenskappe. Die Minister
was bekommerd daaroor dat die VF na bewering die standpunt sou inneem dat
die tegniese komitee nie vinnig genoeg gewerk het nie. Die VF het nooit
verwys na die tegniese komitee wat nie sy werk vinnig genoeg gedoen het
nie, maar juis na die Regering se vertraging van die hele proses vanaf die
finalisering van die Grondwet in 1996 tot en met die tegniese komitee se
implementering.

Die tweede punt wat betref die probleem wat die VF het met dié departement
se werksaamhede handel oor plaaslike regering. Die blote reg wat 'n
individu het om as sodanig te stem beteken nie noodwendig op sy eie
demokrasie nie. Die probleem met die huidige plaaslike regeringsverkiesings
en proses waarheen ons beweeg, gaan in die praktyk beteken dat, as gevolg
van die afbakeningsproses, en as gevolg van die hele proses wat daaruit
gaan voortvloei, verskeie gemeenskappe in Suid-Afrika in iedere en feitlik
elke dorp, ontmagtig of ``disempowered'' gaan word as gevolg van die
getallesituasie, en as gevolg van die wyse waarop die afbakening
plaasgevind het. Wat dit gaan vererger, is die volgende: daardie
gemeenskappe wat gaan vind dat hulle ontmagtig is, gaan in 'n groot mate
die las opgelê word om die belastings in daardie gemeenskappe te betaal.

Agb lede sal onthou dat die Amerikaanse Revolusie sy oorsprong gehad het by
die slagspreuk, ``no taxation without representation''. Die praktiese
proses mag daartoe lei, met hierdie hele proses, dat gemeenskappe gaan vind
dat hulle geen werklike inspraak gaan hê op plaaslike regeringsvlak nie,
dat hulle totaal ontmagtig gaan word, maar dat daar van hulle verwag gaan
word om die finansiële las te dra. Daardie proses is 'n resep vir probleme
en konflik in Suid-Afrika en sal dringend opgelos moet word. In die lig
daarvan sal die VF nie hierdie begrotingspos steun nie. (Translation of
Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr C P MULDER: Madam Speaker, the FF regrets that the hon the Minister is
not in the House at present. I want to concentrate on two aspects
specifically. The first is that during the discussion on the hon the
Minister's Vote specific mention was made of the so-called section 185
commission, namely the commission on the rights of communities. The
Minister was concerned that the FF had allegedly taken the stand that the
technical committee had not worked quickly enough. The FF never said that
the technical committee had not done its work quickly enough, but that the
Government had delayed the whole process from the finalisation of the
Constitution in 1996 up to and including the implementation of the
technical committee.

The second point relating to the problem that the FF has with the
activities of this department concerns local government. The mere right a
person has to vote as such does not necessarily mean democracy, if
considered in isolation. The problem with the present local government
elections and the process towards which we are moving, will in practice
mean that, owing to the demarcation process and owing to the entire process
that will emanate from it, various communities in South Africa in virtually
every town will be disempowered because of the situation in respect of
numbers, and owing to the way in which the demarcation took place. What is
going to exacerbate this is the following: those communities that will find
that they have been disempowered, will to a great degree be burdened with
the liability to pay the taxes in those communities.

Hon members will remember that the American Revolution had its origin in
the slogan, ``no taxation without representation''. The practical process,
in this whole process, may lead to communities finding that they have no
real say at local government level, that they will be completely
disempowered, but that they will be expected to carry the financial burden.
That process is a recipe for problems and conflict in South Africa and will
have to be resolved urgently. In the light of that the FF will not support
this Vote.]

Mnr C AUCAMP: Mevrou die Speaker, om eerlik te wees moet ek sê dat
plaaslike bestuur in baie gevalle in ons land in 'n ernstige toestand is.
Baie munisipaliteite is tegnies bankrot en ander op die rand van
bankrotskap. Verder is daar probleme met die afbakening van munisipaliteite
ten opsigte waarvan daar nie naastenby gepoog is om die werklik spesifieke
eie belange van gemeenskappe in ag te neem nie. Duidelike probleme hier is
sekerlik die geval van Orania waarna verwys is, asook die posisie van
tradisionele leiers. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr C AUCAMP: Madam Speaker, to be honest, I must say that in many cases in
our country local government is in a serious state. Many municipalities are
technically bankrupt and others are on the brink of bankruptcy. Furthermore
there are problems with the demarcation of municipalities, in respect of
which no effort at all was made to take the specific individual interests
of communities into consideration. Definite problems here are certainly the
case of Orania, to which reference has been made, as well as the position
of traditional leaders.]

This department is preparing the section 185 commission Bill. Although the
AEB is not entirely satisfied with that, we believe that there is an avenue
open through which the fundamental issue of the rights of linguistic,
cultural and religious communities can be addressed. I am positive about
that.

In die laaste plek skep die konsepwetsontwerp oor eiendomsbelasting wat in
omloop is baie groot onsekerheid. Ons sien dat dit al die tiende uitgawe
daarvan is. Tydens die begrotingspos van die Minister van Finansies het ek
gevra vir groter toewysing aan munisipaliteite. Dit het nie gebeur nie. Ek
wil weet of ons dan nou 'n groter belading gaan kry op die tweede linie,
naamlik op plaaslike belasting. In die lig van hierdie onsekerhede sal die
AEB dan ook nie hierdie begroting kan steun nie, alhoewel ons positief is
oor die sake wat verband hou met die artikel 185-kommissie.
[Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Lastly, the draft Bill on property rates that is doing the rounds is
creating great uncertainty. We see that the tenth version has already been
published. During the discussion of the Minister of Finance's Vote, I asked
for a larger allocation for municipalities. That did not happen. I want to
know whether there is now going to be a heavier load on the second line,
namely local tax. In the light of these uncertainties the AEB will be
unable to support this budget, although we are positive regarding matters
relating to the section 185 commission. [Interjections.]]

Mr Y I CARRIM: Madam Speaker, Comrades, friends, nothing new, nothing
original, but rather boring issues, frankly, have been raised here. All
these issues were, in fact, addressed in the 15-page report that appeared
in the ATCs last week.

It is very boring to have to say this, because all the opposition parties
know about it, but I will say it, yet again. Firstly, with regard to
financial viability ... [Interjections.]

If the hon member can give me a moment ... yes, indeed, there are
difficulties with the current municipalities. That is precisely why we have
a demarcation process under way which is almost complete. We have a major
local government financial review under way which is looking at the issue
of the equitable share, the fiscal powers between district councils and
local councils, national tariff policy, and a wide range of other issues.
Of course, demarcation in and of itself will not solve these problems, but
will provide a foundation to address them.

Regarding the issue of transition, we have said it before and we will say
it again: We could not cost the transition until the demarcation process
had been completed and we had a better sense of the nature and number of
the new municipalities. [Interjections.] As the opposition parties know,
there is a process under way, which includes the Departments of Finance and
of Provincial and Local Government, the Demarcation Board and the Financial
and Fiscal Commission, to do precisely that. [Interjections.]

With regard to the issue of the rates Bill, as we know so well, this rates
scaremongering is totally unfounded. Only today at about 13:30, the
Minister met the opposition parties and communicated that to them. In fact,
the new draft is being processed. It will come before the portfolio
committee shortly, but even before that, early in July, it will be
published for public comment.

With regard to the local government education and training matter, of
course, Seta has now been created and will address those issues. With
regard to traditional leadership, as we know, some two weeks ago, on 6 and
7 June, this very Parliament had a major public hearing. The process
continues on 13 June and 1 July. In fact, we understand from the press and
other sources that the President will, in fact, be meeting the traditional
leaders.

Finally, regarding the section 185 commission, that Bill will reach us in
July and will, hopefully, be processed before 24 July. What about local
economic development? I have barely begun, but I will forego it for now.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Vote No 22 agreed to (Democratic Party, New National Party, Freedom Front
and Afrikaner Eenheidbeweging dissenting).

Vote No 23 - Public Enterprises - put.

Declarations of vote:
Ms R TALJAART: Madam Speaker, Minister of Public Enterprises and hon
members, in Vision 2004, the department states its strategic objective as
follows:


  Given South Africa's development path historically, the restructuring
  programme of the Department of Public Enterprises is guided by a
  strategic objective that seeks to balance economic and social objectives.
  In this strategic objective vests the judgment on the Minister's Vote.

Investors will base their investment decisions, as will the DP its support
or opposition to his work, on where the balance will fall between economic
and social objectives, and on whether we will sacrifice economic objectives
wholesale in selected instances in the interests, purely, of social policy
or a political agenda.

In having to decide on this Vote, I was particularly constrained by the
absence of a policy document to make a guided decision. The only guidelines
I was left with were those that Minister released in his Vote speech in
April, primarily among which I would cite the Government's priorities and
the restructuring timetable for the next four years which we are awaiting
in his policy document.

The Vote of his department forms a further strategic building block in the
transformation of the department into a streamlined, corporate-minded unit
focused on privatisation. The DP hopes to see a unit that will focus its
attention on a restructuring timetable and a privatisation timetable that
would not only meet our expectations, but also the expectations of the
international investment community.

We have seen very little detail on the privatisation of the big four, that
is, Transnet, Eskom, Telkom and Denel, despite waiting for a policy
document on the privatisation process for six months since the December
interministerial Cabinet committee lekgotla on restructuring. Next week
exactly one year will have lapsed since the headline-grabbing announcement
on the SAA privatisation by our President. I say to the hon the Minister
that this is what we need. We need more announcements, such as the SAA
announcement. We need more success stories, such as the SAA success story.

In the absence of the Minister's policy document, I regret that we do not
support the Vote. [Applause.]

Mr M D MSOMI: Madam Speaker, South Africa like a bear has come in out of
the cold of a long winter of isolation and discontent, lean, fit and ready
to come of age. It has carved for itself a niche position in the global
village to become a dynamic player in the restructuring, transformation and
orderly privatisation of state-owned enterprises.

That bear is figuratively represented by the hon the Minister of Public
Enterprises, his department, officials and the management of the state-
owned enterprises. The department is well resourced to tackle the difficult
task of turning around the state-owned enterprises, destined for the
business scrapheap, from becoming monumental failures of our time.

The budget represents the vision of the majority of people in South Africa,
which is to become a regional and global player in business and in the
economic development of the majority. For this reason, the IFP supports the
budget. [Applause.]


Mr S T BELOT: Madam Speaker, I rise on behalf of the ANC to support this
budget. The Department of Public Enterprises has succeeded in making sure
that the state-owned enterprises fulfil their mandate.

According to today's Business Day, for example, Transnet has reported
positive results, and so have many others. I thank the Comrade Minister for
that. The department has put in place systems and processes that will make
sure that those state-owned enterprises are viable. I want to appeal to all
members whenever we deal with the restructuring process, that we deal with
the economy of the country.

Yesterday hon Minister Alec Erwin appealed to members, whenever they dealt
with the economy of the country, to be very careful of the signals that
they sent out. Let us not try to score political points. Those who oppose
this budget are not arguing or questioning the viability and profitability
of the state-owned businesses. They are not questioning whether the
enterprises are achieving the social programmes for which they were
intended. They are deliberately avoiding the question, because they know
that those enterprises have had a turnaround and are achieving what they
are meant to.

It is not correct to say that there is no policy that guides this process
of restructuring. Cabinet has considered the policy framework and it will
be released when the appropriate time comes. I need to say to hon members
that we are not going to be rushed into selling state assets. Government is
going to move at a very cautious speed, a speed that will make us rich and
get what we have set ourselves. We support this budget. [Applause.]

Division demanded.

The House divided:


  AYES - 272: Abrahams, T; Ainslie, A R; Arendse, J D; Asmal, A K; Aucamp,
  C; Bakker, D M; Balfour, B M N; Baloi, G E; Baloyi, M R; Baloyi, S F;
  Belot, S T; Bhengu, F; Bhengu, N R; Biyela, B P; Blaas, A; Bloem, D V;
  Bogopane, H I; Booi, M S; Botha, N G W; Buthelezi, M N; Camerer, S M;
  Carrim, Y I; Cassim, M F; Chalmers, J; Chauke, H P; Chiba, L; Chohan-
  Kota, F I; Cindi, N V; Coetzee-Kasper, M P; Cronin, J P; Davies, R H; De
  Beer, S J; De Lille, P; Diale, L N; Didiza, A T; Dithebe, S L;
  Ditshetelo, P H K; Dlamini, B O; Doidge, G Q M; Douglas, B M; Dowry, J J;
  Duma, N M; Durand, J; Erwin, A; Fankomo, F C; Feinstein, A J; Ferreira, E
  T; Fihla, N B; Fraser-Moleketi, G J; Frolick, C T; Gandhi, E; Geldenhuys,
  B L; George, M E; Gerber P A; Gigaba, K M N; Gogotya, N J; Gomomo, P J;
  Goniwe, T M; Goosen, A D; Gous, S J; Green, L M; Greyling, C H F; Gumede,
  D M; Gxowa, N B; Hajaig, F; Hanekom, D A; Hangana, N E; Hlangwana, N L;
  Hlengwa, M W; Hogan, B A; Jana, D P S; Jassat, E E; Jeffery, J H; Joemat,
  R R; Kalako, M U; Kannemeyer, B W; Kasienyane, O R; Kasrils, R; Kekana, N
  N; Kgarimetsa, J J; Kgauwe, Q J; Kgwele, L M; Kota, Z A; Kotwal, Z;
  Lekgoro, M K; Lekgoro, M M S; Lockey, D; Louw, J T; Lyle, A G; Mabandla,
  B S; Mabeta, M E; Mabudafhasi, T R; Madasa, Z L; Magubane, N E;
  Mahlalela, C C; Mahlangu, M J; Mahomed, F; Maimane, D S; Maine, M S;
  Makasi, X C; Makunyane, T L; Makwetla, S P; Malebana, H F; Maloney, L;
  Maluleke-Hlaneki, C J; Malumise, M M; Mangena, M A; Manie, M S; Manuel, T
  A; Maphalala, M A; Maphoto, L I; Mars, I; Marshoff, F B; Martins, B A D;
  Masala, M M; Maserumule, F T; Mashimbye, J N; Masithela, N H; Masutha, M
  T; Mathebe, P M; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F; Matthews, V J G; Maunye, M M;
  Mayatula, S M; Maziya, A M; Mbadi, L M; Mbombo, N D; Mbongo, P F; Mbulawa-
  Hans, B G; Mbuyazi, L R; Mdladlana, M M S; Mfundisi, I S; Mgidi, J S;
  Middleton, N S; Mkhatshwa, S; Mkhize, B R; Mlambo-Ngcuka, P G; Mlangeni,
  A; Mnandi, P N; Mngomezulu, G P; Mnumzana, S K; Modise, T R; Modisenyane,
  L J; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, E P; Mogoba, M S; Mohai, S J; Mohamed, I J;
  Mokoena, D A; Molebatsi, M A; Molewa, B G; Moloto, K A; Momberg, J H;
  Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K; Morkel, C M; Morobi, D M; Moropa, R M;
  Morwamoche, K W; Moss, M I; Mothoagae, P K; Motubatse, S D; Mpahlwa, M;
  Mpaka, H M; Mshudulu, S A; Msomi, M D; Mthembi-Mahanyele, S D; Mthembu,
  B; Mtirara, N Z; Mtsweni, N S; Mulder, C P; Mulder, P W A; Mutsila, I;
  Mzondeki, M J G; Nair, B; Nash, J H; Ncube, B; Ndlovu, V B; Ndou, R S;
  Nel, A H; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngculu, L V
  J; Ngubane, B S; Ngubane, H; Ngubeni, J M; Ngwenya, M L; Nhlanhla, J M;
  Nhleko, N P; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njobe, M A A; Nkomo, A S; Nkosi, D M;
  Nonkonyana, M; Nqakula, C; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M B; Ntuli, S B; Nzimande,
  B M; Nzimande, L P M; Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G; Omar, A M; Pahad, E
  G; Phala, M J; Phantsi, N E; Pheko, S E M; Phohlela, S; Pieterse, R D;
  Pretorius, I J; Rabie, P J; Radebe, B A; Radebe, J T; Rajbally, S; Rajoo,
  K; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin, M; Ramodike, M N; Ramotsamai, C M P;
  Ripinga, S S; Saloojee, E; Schneemann, G D; Scott, M I; Seaton, S A;
  Sekgobela, P S; September, C C; September, R K; Shabangu, S; Shilubana, T
  P; Shope, N R; Sigcau, S N; Sigcawu, A N; Sigwela, E M; Sikakane, M R;
  Simmons, S; Sithole, D J; Skhosana, W M; Skosana, M B; Skweyiya, Z S T;
  Slabbert, J H; Smit, H A; Smith, P F; Smith, V G; Solo, B M; Solomon, G;
  Sonjica, B P; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Southgate, R M; Swart, S N;
  Thabethe, E; Tinto, B; Tolo, L J; Tsheole, N M; Turok, B; Twala, N M;
  Vadi, I; Van den Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe, A S; Van der Merwe, J H;
  Van Wyk, A (Annelizé); Van Wyk, J F; Van Wyk, N; Verwoerd, M; Vilakazi, B
  H; Viljoen, C L; Woods, G G; Xingwana, L M T; Zondo, R P; Zulu, N E;
  Zuma, J G.

  NOES - 32: Andrew, K M; Bell, B G; Beukman, F; Borman, G M; Botha, A J;
  Bruce, N S; Cupido, P W; Da Camara, M L; Davidson, I O; Delport, J T;
  Eglin, C W; Ellis, M J; Gibson, D H M; Gore, V C; Grobler, G A J; Heine,
  R J; Kalyan, S V; Lee, T D; Moorcroft, E K; Ntuli, R S; Opperman, S E;
  Pillay, S; Schmidt, H C; Selfe, J; Semple, J A; Seremane, W J; Singh, A;
  Smuts, M; Sono, B N; Swart, P S; Taljaard, R; Waters, M.

Vote No 23 accordingly agreed to.

Vote No 24 - Public Service and Administration - put and agreed to.

Vote No 25 - Public Service Commission - put and agreed to.

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Madam Speaker, on a
point of order: I just want to assure the House that the fact that they are
adopting this Vote does not mean that salaries for MPs will not be dropped.
[Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon Minister, I am waiting to draw your attention and
that of the Minister of Finance to the fact of how hard members work. I
hope you have noted that. [Interjections.] [Laughter.] [Applause.]

Mrs S M CAMERER: Madam Speaker, will the hon the Minister consider overtime
pay?

The SPEAKER: Order! I think that should also be taken into account.

Vote No 26 - Public Works - put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr S E OPPERMAN: Madam Speaker, grave concern was expressed at the meeting
of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts on Wednesday, 7 June, about
the present state of financial management and control in the Department of
Public Works. Serious implications were attached to that concern.
It is clear that, unless Government becomes serious in dealing with the
finances entrusted to it, it will surely lead to more disasters. We need
skilled people in key positions. It was disturbing to hear at the same
meeting that some officials had refused to co-operate with the Auditor-
General. Do these officials have different options to choose from?

The Deputy Chairperson of this House, the hon Dr Rajoo, proposed, during
that same meeting, a thorough investigation into what he suggested could be
sweetheart agreements that are costing the taxpayers of our country
millions of rands. In spite of the fact that the director-general of the
department is new, it is important that every official must realise his or
her responsibility and, therefore, accountability. Until such time as we
get our house in order in the Department of Public Works, we cannot support
this Vote.

INkosi M W HLENGWA: Somlomo namalungu ahloniphekile, siyasisekela
iSabiwomali esinikezwe umNyango wezemiSebenzi, nanxa kunesidingo esikhulu
sokwengeza ukuze kushatshalaliswe ubuphofu kuleyo miphakathi eyayilahlwe
ngaphandle okwenyongo yenyathi kwezentuthuko, ngesikhathi sombuso
wencindezelo.

Kuyiqiniso ukuthi umhlonishwa onguNgqongqoshe wezemiSebenzi uwufice lo
mNyango kukhona izinto ezidinga ukulungiswa njengokuthi nje kwakunezikhala
ezikhundleni eziphezulu ezinjengesomQondisi-Jikelele womnyango.
Siyamethemba uNgqongqoshe ukuthi uzozilungisa lezo zinto ayezifice
zonakele.

Sifisa ukukhuthaza umnyango ekusebenzisaneni ngokubambisana nabaholi
bomdabu - amakhosi phela - ukuze kugwemeke ukubukeka kwamakhosi
njengezigxivizo nje emsebenzini wentuthuko emiphakathini eholwa yiwo
amakhosi.

Iqembu leNkatha liyasisekela lesi Sabiwomali. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of
Zulu speech follows.)

[Chief M W HLENGWA: Madam Speaker and hon members, we support the Vote of
the Department of Public Works, although there is still a great need to
increase it so that we can eradicate poverty in the communities that were
marginalised by the apartheid government as far as development is
concerned.

It is true that when the hon the Minister took this position, there were
things in this department that needed to be corrected. For example, senior
posts like the posts of Director-General are still vacant. We hope that the
hon the Minister will rectify all those things that were not corrected
before she became Minister.

We wish to encourage the Department to work together with the amakhosi so
as to dismiss the notion that they are the rubber stamps of the department
when it comes to the development of the rural areas.

In conclusion, the IFP supports this Vote. [Applause.]]

Mnr A S VAN DER MERWE: Mevrou die Speaker, dit is algemene kennis dat die
Departement van Openbare Werke een van die departemente in die staatsdiens
is wat die swakste bestuur word. Gelukkig het die agb Minister 'n nuwe
direkteur-generaal en adjunkdirekteur-generaal aangestel en ons sien met
verwagting uit na die nuwe jaar.

Die nuwe direkteur-generaal erken dat daar 'n gebrek aan toesig  en
beheermaatreëls was. Verder erken hy dat daar 'n gebrek aan
verantwoordbaarheid in verskeie bestuurstrukture bestaan het. Daarbenewens
het hy die ontsettende verskoning dat daar nie interne beheermaatreëls
bestaan het nie. Hy verwys ook na die onkundigheid van die departement ten
opsigte van staatstenderraadprosedures, en ook die onkundigheid wat daarmee
verband hou dat personeel nie weet dat kontrakte op skrif behoort te wees
nie, of dat betalings met stawende en magtigingsdokumentasie gepaard moet
gaan nie.

Die feit dat die Komitee oor Openbare Rekenings besluit het om nie meer te
wag vir die Ouditeur-generaal se volgende verslag nie, maar op 'n gereelde
basis fisiek te gaan kyk of beplande bestuursmaatreëls wel in plek is, is
tog 'n rede tot kommer. Dit is 'n klad op die naam van die departement dat
daar van soveel kundigheid ontslae geraak is, en dat dit vervang is met
totale onkundigheid.

Ons stem teen die begrotingspos omdat geld wat bestem is vir die verligting
van armoede, naamlik R226 miljoen, nie gebruik is nie. Dit dui op 'n
onvermoë in die departement om die geld aan te wend, en dit vir so 'n
belangrike saak. Dit is alles net omdat regstellende optrede voorkeur
geniet bo die verligting van armoede. 'n Mens ys om te dink hoe
doeltreffend die aanwending van geld wat wel bestee is, geskied het. Ons
stem teen hierdie begrotingspos. [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of
Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr A S VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker, it is general knowledge that the
Department of Public Works is one of the departments in the Public Service
which is most poorly managed. Fortunately the hon the Minister has
appointed a new director-general and deputy director-general and we await
the new year with anticipation.

The new director-general admits that there was a lack of supervision and
control measures. He furthermore admits that there was a lack of
accountability in various management structures. Apart from that he has the
appalling excuse that internal control measures did not exist. He has also
referred to the lack of expertise in the department with regard to State
Tender Board procedures, and also the lack of expertise which related to
the fact that staff do not know that contracts should be in writing, or
that payments must be accompanied by corroborative and authorisating
documentation.

The fact that the Committee on Public Accounts has decided not to wait for
the Auditor-General's next report, but physically to check on a regular
basis whether the planned management measures are indeed in place, is
surely a cause for concern. It is a blot on the name of the department that
so much expertise was shed, and that it was replaced with total ignorance.

We are voting against the Vote because money which was voted for the relief
of poverty, namely R226 million, was not used. This indicates an inability
within the department to utilise the money, and for such an important
matter too. This is all simply because affirmative action receives
preference to the relief of poverty. One shudders to think how efficiently
the utilisation of money which was indeed spent, took place. We are voting
against this Vote. [Interjections.]]

Adv Z L MADASA: Somlomo, siyahambisana neVoti yobekekileyo
nendimhloniphileyo uNkszn Sigcau. Sixhalabile kodwa.

Ekuqaleni konyaka sathi siyiKomiti yeNkonzo yakwaRhulumente sahambela
kwiphondo laseMpuma Koloni, apho aphuma khona naye uMphathiswa. Saya
nakwelakhe isebe. Sabona into embi phaya, amagosa engqunga, esoyika
ukuhlangana nathi. Ethubeni beza, bethu. Babenkwantya besoyika ubani
ebajongile nje.

Isizathu soko babesithi kukuba abayazi nabo ukuba bathini na, bevuma ukuba
izinto azintlanga kwelaa phondo. Xa izinto zingentlanga kwiSebe leNkonzo
yakwaRhumente azibi ntle ke kuwo onke amasebe.

Makazame ke uNkszn Sigcau, kuba abantu bajonge kuye. Siyamxhasa ke phofu
kwiVoti le. (Translation of Xhosa speech follows.)

[Adv Z L MADASA: Madam Speaker, we support hon Minister Sigcau's Vote, but
we are apprehensive.

At the beginning of the year we, as the Portfolio Committee on Public
Works, visited the Eastern Cape where she also comes from. We visited her
department. What we saw there was awful. The officers there were going
around in circles, because they were reluctant to meet us. Eventually they
came to meet us, but fear was written all over their faces.

The reason for that, as they themselves admitted, was that they did not
know what to say to us, as things were not going well at all in that
province. Once things go wrong in the Public Works Department, they go
wrong in all other departments. The hon the Minister should please try and
do something, because people look up to her. However, we support her Vote.]

Mr E M SIGWELA: Madam Speaker, the ANC supports the Vote. We are aware of
the heavy responsibilities of the Department of Public Works. It has to
care for the accommodation requirements of all the other departments. It
has to care for state property which is valued at R120 billion and needs a
budget for the maintenance and proper management of all those assets. We in
the ANC know that the Minister's department is the hope of many
disadvantaged, emerging contractors who are eagerly looking forward to and
standing to gain a lot from the emerging   contractor development
programmes.

We cannot forget that, in the very near past, it was a crime for Africans
here in the Western Cape to work in their trades - the trades that they
were qualified for. I cannot forget, in particular, the trucking of nearly
2 000 workers in the winter of 1981 by Piet Koornhof out of the Cape
Peninsula and dumping them in the Transkei in Umtata to starve and die
there. The community-based Public Works programme, which is at the
forefront of the job creation and poverty alleviation programme of the ANC
Government, is looked upon by the rural communities as their hope for
salvation from the quagmire of a lack of development and grim poverty which
are the legacies with which former white minority regimes left us.

We are particularly happy that this programme is currently focusing on the
creation of Community Production Centres - the CPCs, not the Coloured
People's Congress - and multipurpose centres - MPCs, not Members of the
Provincial Council - based on the concept of rehabilitating existing
disused, unproductive  assets ... [Interjections.] We support the budget.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Division demanded.

The House divided:


  AYES - 262: Abrahams, T; Ainslie, A R; Arendse, J D; Asmal, A K; Aucamp,
  C; Balfour, B M N; Baloi, G E; Baloyi, M R; Baloyi, S F; Belot, S T;
  Bhengu, F; Bhengu, N R; Biyela, B P; Bloem, D V; Bogopane, H I; Booi, M
  S; Botha, N G W; Buthelezi, M N; Carrim, Y I; Cassim, M F; Chalmers, J;
  Chauke, H P; Chiba, L; Chohan-Kota, F I; Cindi, N V; Coetzee-Kasper, M P;
  Cronin, J P; Davies, R H; De Beer, S J; De Lange, J H; De Lille, P;
  Diale, L N; Didiza, A T; Dithebe, S L; Ditshetelo, P H K; Dlamini, B O;
  Doidge, G Q M; Douglas, B M; Duma, N M; Du Toit, D C;  Erwin, A; Fankomo,
  F C; Feinstein, A J; Ferreira, E T; Fihla, N B; Fraser-Moleketi, G J;
  Frolick, C T; Gandhi, E; George, M E; Gerber P A; Gigaba, K M N; Gogotya,
  N J; Gomomo, P J; Goniwe, T M; Goosen, A D; Green, L M; Gumede, D M;
  Gxowa, N B; Hajaig, F; Hanekom, D A; Hangana, N E; Hlangwana, N L;
  Hlengwa, M W; Hogan, B A; Holomisa, S P; Jana, D P S; Jassat, E E;
  Jeffery, J H; Joemat, R R; Jordan, Z P; Kalako, M U; Kannemeyer, B W;
  Kasienyane, O R; Kasrils, R; Kekana, N N; Kgarimetsa, J J; Kgauwe, Q J;
  Kgwele, L M; Kota, Z A; Kotwal, Z; Landers, L T; Lekgoro, M K; Lekgoro, M
  M S; Lockey, D; Louw, J T; Lyle, A G; Mabandla, B S; Mabeta, M E;
  Mabudafhasi, T R; Madasa, Z L; Magubane, N E; Mahlalela, C C; Mahlangu, M
  J; Mahomed, F; Maimane, D S; Maine, M S; Makasi, X C; Makunyane, T L;
  Makwetla, S P; Malebana, H F; Maloney, L; Maluleke-Hlaneki, C J;
  Malumise, M M; Mangena, M A; Manie, M S; Manuel, T A; Maphalala, M A;
  Maphoto, L I; Mars, I; Marshoff, F B; Martins, B A D; Masala, M M;
  Maserumule, F T; Mashimbye, J N; Masithela, N H; Masutha, M T; Mathebe, P
  M; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F; Matthews, V J G; Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M;
  Maziya, A M; Mbadi, L M; Mbombo, N D; Mbongo, P F; Mbulawa-Hans, B G;
  Mbuyazi, L R; Mdladlana, M M S; Mgidi, J S; Middleton, N S; Mkhatshwa, S;
  Mkhize, B R; Mlambo-Ngcuka, P G; Mlangeni, A; Mnandi, P N; Mngomezulu, G
  P; Mnumzana, S K; Modise, T R; Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, E
  P; Mogoba, M S; Mohai, S J; Mohamed, I J; Mokoena, D A; Molebatsi, M A;
  Molewa, B G; Moloto, K A; Momberg, J H; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K;
  Morobi, D M; Moropa, R M; Morwamoche, K W; Moss, M I; Mothoagae, P K;
  Motubatse, S D; Mpahlwa, M; Mpaka, H M; Mshudulu, S A; Msomi, M D;
  Mthembi-Mahanyele, S D; Mthembu, B; Mtirara, N Z; Mtsweni, N S; Mulder, C
  P; Mulder, P W A; Mutsila, I; Mzondeki, M J G; Nair, B; Nash, J H; Ncube,
  B; Ndlovu, V B; Ndou, R S; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngcengwane,
  N D; Ngculu, L V J; Ngubane, B S; Ngubane, H; Ngubeni, J M; Ngwenya, M L;
  Nhlanhla, J M; Nhleko, N P; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njobe, M A A; Nkomo, A S;
  Nkosi, D M; Nonkonyana, M; Nqakula, C; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M B; Ntuli, S
  B; Nzimande, B M; Nzimande, L P M; Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G; Omar, A
  M; Pahad, E G; Phala, M J; Phantsi, N E; Pheko, S E M; Phohlela, S;
  Pieterse, R D; Radebe, B A; Radebe, J T; Rajbally, S; Rajoo, K; Ramakaba-
  Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin, M; Ramodike, M N; Ramotsamai, C M P; Ripinga, S S;
  Saloojee, E; Schneemann, G D; Scott, M I; Seaton, S A; Sekgobela, P S;
  September, C C; September, R K; Shabangu, S; Shilubana, T P; Shope, N R;
  Sigcau, S N; Sigcawu, A N; Sigwela, E M; Sikakane, M R; Sithole, D J;
  Skhosana, W M; Skosana, M B; Skweyiya, Z S T; Slabbert, J H; Smith, P F;
  Smith, V G; Solo, B M; Solomon, G; Sonjica, B P; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M;
  Southgate, R M; Swart, S N; Thabethe, E; Tinto, B; Tolo, L J; Tshabalala-
  Msimang, M E; Tsheole, N M; Turok, B; Twala, N M; Vadi, I; Van den
  Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe, J H; Van Wyk, A (Annelizé); Van Wyk, J F;
  Van Wyk, N; Verwoerd, M; Vilakazi, B H; Viljoen, C L; Woods, G G;
  Xingwana, L M T; Zondo, R P; Zulu, N E; Zuma, J G.

  NOES - 50: Andrew, K M; Bakker, D M; Bell, B G; Beukman, F; Blaas, A;
  Borman, G M; Botha, A J; Bruce, N S; Camerer, S M; Cupido, P W; Da
  Camara, M L; Davidson, I O; Delport, J T; Dowry, J J; Durand, J; Eglin, C
  W; Ellis, M J; Gaum, A H; Geldenhuys, B L; Gibson, D H M; Gore, V C;
  Gous, S J; Greyling, C H F; Grobler, G A J; Heine, R J; Kalyan, S V; Lee,
  T D; Moorcroft, E K; Morkel, C M; Nel, A H; Ntuli, R S; Olckers, M E;
  Opperman, S E; Pillay, S; Pretorius, I J; Rabie, P J; Schmidt, H C;
  Selfe, J; Semple, J A; Seremane, W J; Simmons, S; Singh, A; Smit, H A;
  Smuts, M; Sono, B N; Swart, P S; Taljaard, R; Van der Merwe, A S; Van
  Deventer, F J; Waters, M.

Vote No 26 accordingly agreed to.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: It is now the second time
tonight that Minister Erwin has engaged in spread betting. I really ask you
please to call him to order and say that this is not allowed in this House!
[Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: Order! I will take that on advisement, consider it and then
report back to you.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, we would like you to confirm that
the bookies did not get to the table this evening. [Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: Is that what you were doing when you came out ... [Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Madam Speaker, I think it is really
reprehensible to accuse an hon Minister of spread betting. I am merely
trying a bit of political education. [Laughter.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, yes, he has just referred to himself as the
Minister of Spread Betting. I think that is probably exactly where it lies
at the present time. [Laughter.]

Vote No 27 - SA Management Development Institute - put and agreed to.

Vote No 28 - SA Police Service - put.

Declarations of vote:

Adv P S SWART: Madam Speaker, owing to the absence of the Minister of
Safety and Security in the House, I will ask his official whisperer, the
hon Ndlovu, to convey the message to him in the corridors sometime.
[Interjections.]

Yesterday I witnessed a very sad thing in this House. I saw a cowboy
crying, and that being our chief cowboy. When the Minister, the very person
tasked with ensuring safety and security in this House, complains in
Parliament to the President about people operating and acting outside the
scope of the law, it tends to underline his inability to successfully
address crime in this country.

The reason for this - and also the reason why the DP cannot support this SA
Police Service budget - is the very fact that, while we are talking about
empowering the people, owing to manpower and resource shortages we are
disempowering the very people that must keep us safe, the bobby on the
beat. At every police station we heard the same story - at least 50%
understaffed, vehicle shortages and a lack of other resources. The budget
makes provision for 300 new personnel for the Firearms Control Bill and
millions of rands for the administrative implementation, but does not at
all address its enforcement.

Where are the police officers who should go round ensuring compliance with
this Bill, thus making provision for the grandiose plans of the national
commissioner? Almost nothing is budgeted for the plight of police officers
on the street, not only in terms of being understaffed and underresourced,
but also very much so in terms of improving their service conditions,
which are a disgrace to this Government.

I trust the Minister's whisperer will explain to him why we cannot support
this Vote, while our people are being murdered, raped and robbed every day
on the streets of our country. [Interjections.]

Mnu V B NDLOVU: Somlomo, ngaso sonke isikhathi uma kufanele silwe
nezigebengu kufuneka amaphoyisa abe nazo izinto zokulwa nazo ukuze sikwazi
ukubhekana nazo, ngqo, emehlweni.

Okwesibili, kufuneka sikhuphule umdlandla wokusebenza kwamaphoyisa,
ikakhulukazi ezimweni asebenza phansi kwazo. Izimo asebenza phansi kwazo
zibukhuni kakhulu. Abanye abakhokhelwa ngendlela okufanele ukuthi
bakhokhelwe ngayo. Abanye basebenza amahora amade kakhulu angaphezu
kwabanqunyelwe wona, kanti abanye basebenza isikhathi eside kakhulu
besemahhovisi. Ngakho-ke, mayelana nezikhathi abasebenza ngazo, bezinikela
emsebenzini omkhulu kangaka, kubonakala ngokusobala ukuthi bazinikela
ngempilo yabo yonke.

Kufuneka ngaso sonke isikhathi, thina njengoHulumeni, sibabhekele ukuze
bakwazi ukukhokheleka kahle futhi bakwazi ukusebenza kahle. Ngamanye amazwi
kufuneka ngaso sonke isikhathi sibone ukuthi, uma kufanele bakhushulwe
ezikhundleni zabo, bakwazi ukukhushulwa, kungavimbeleki lokho ngenxa
yokuthi imali ayikho. Kudingeka sizame ukuyithola imali ukuze bakwazi
ukuthola izikhundla ezikahle.

Okwesithathu, kufanele sizame ukuthi sibalekelele ngomxhaso kwezempilo
ukuze bakwazi ukukhokhelwa ngokugcwele yonke imali eqondene nokuthola usizo
lokwelashwa. Kuyathokozisa ukubona ukuzinikela kwabo, besebenza amahora
angaphezu kwanqunyelwe ngaso sonke isikhathi. Kodwa, ngaso sonke isikhathi
kufuneka, thina njengoHulumeni, sikwazi ukuhlangabezana nabo kuzo zonke
izimfuno zabo nezikhalo zabo.

Kubuhlungu-ke ukuzwa ukuthi njengoba sengaziwa ukuthi umhlonishwa
uNgqongqoshe uhleba nami, kube khona abantu abakujivazayo lokho ngoba uma
umfowethu ekhuluma nami, usuke ekhuluma nami, akuyona imfihlo leyo. Uma
bengebona abafowabo kuye, akundaba yami leyo. [Uhleko.] (Translation of
Zulu speech follows.)

[Mr V B NDLOVU: Madam Speaker, firstly, if we want to fight criminals, we
need to arm our police officers so that they will be able to confront them.

Secondly, we should create incentives in the job of policing, especially
because of the circumstances under which they work. They work under
difficult conditions indeed. Some are not paid in the way that they should
be. Others work longer hours than they are supposed to, while some work
long hours in offices. Looking at their working hours, during which they
commit themselves to this difficult job, it is clear that they are
sacrificing the whole of their lives.

We as the Government have to consider the possibility of paying them fairly
so that they will be able to work well. We should always know when it is
time to promote those who qualify, without being prevented by financial
constraints. We should raise money so that they will be able to obtain
positions that suit them.

Thirdly, we should assist them with medical aid so that they will be able
to pay for all the expenses pertaining to medical treatment. We appreciate
their commitment and their willingness always to even work overtime. We as
the Government should be able to meet all of their demands and grievances.

It is saddening to hear people criticising the fact that the hon the
Minister and I have some secrets. It is bad, because if the hon the
Minister talks to me, that is not a secret. If those critics are not
friends of the Minister, it is none of my business. [Applause.]]

Dr B L GELDENHUYS: Madam Speaker, despite the fact that the Minister of
Safety and Security has declared war on criminals and even arrested one
single-handedly, despite the fact that the national commissioner introduced
an innovative approach to combating crime and despite the commitment by a
very capable Deputy Minister, the New NP cannot support this Vote, for the
following reasons: The budget is totally inadequate to combat crime or to
improve the working conditions of the SA Police Service. The shortage of
7 000 trained police officers and 7 860 vehicles and equipment worth
R85,2 million are not being addressed in the budget. [Interjections.]
Furthermore, the Government has failed to fulfil its most basic
responsibility, namely to protect its citizens.
Om dié rede is daar al twee siviele eise teen die Regering ingestel van
R110 miljoen en R10 miljoen onderskeidelik. [Tussenwerpsels.] Dit is die
enigste land in die wêreld waar so iets gebeur.

Daar is ook 'n laaste rede. Die begroting maak voorsiening vir 'n
wapenbeheerwetsontwerp wat nie die probleem van onwettige wapens in Suid-
Afrika sal oplos nie, maar wat duisende wetsgehoorsame wapeneienaars oornag
in kriminele gaan verander. Ons is dus teen hierdie begrotingspos gekant.
[Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[It is for this reason that two civil claims of R110 million and R10
million respectively have been instituted against the Government.
[Interjections.] This is the only country in the world where this has
happened.
There is also a last reason. The budget makes provision for a Firearms
Control Bill which will not solve the problem of illegal firearms in South
Africa, but which will change thousands of law-abiding firearms owners into
criminals overnight. Therefore, we are opposed to this Vote.
[Interjections.]]

Ms A VAN WYK: Madam Speaker, we believe that the integrated, holistic
approach adopted by the SA Police Service is a step in the right direction
in fighting crime. Though more will always be welcome, the UDM believes
that the increase of R1 billion in the budget will go some way towards
addressing the shortcomings in the department. The UDM does, however, call
on the Minister and his department to build into upcoming budgets funds
that will drastically improve the conditions of service of members of the
SA Police Service.

The time has arrived for South Africans to unite as one behind the SA
Police Service and its members in the fight against crime. The first line
of defence is the SAPS and its dedicated members. The community should form
a shield around the SAPS. This House should set the example, in that
political parties should commit themselves and demonstrate their commitment
by working actively in finding solutions and improving the framework within
which the SAPS functions. This requires much more than verbal criticism. It
requires active participation within the committee to contribute to and
improve the Bills before us and initiate other actions that will contribute
positively to achieving the aims and objectives of this department.
The UDM wishes the Minister, the command structures and all members of the
SAPS well in their fight against crime and providing a safe environment for
all South Africans. We will support the Vote.

Mr S N SWART: Madam Speaker, although there are various provisions in our
legislation to provide protection or limited compensation to victims of
crime, such as the Criminal Procedure Act, Probation Services Act,
Prevention of Family Violence Act and Promotion of National Unity and
Reconciliation Act, there can be no doubt that victims have been neglected
in South Africa. The perception is created that the South African legal
system is geared to the protection of the rights of the offender whilst
victims enjoy little protection. Whilst the National Crime Prevention
Strategy sought to address the needs of victims by setting up a national
programme in victim empowerment, much still needs to be done in this
regard.

The international community agreed, in the 1985 United Nations Victims
Declaration, on the following rights for victims of crime: Firstly, the
right to be treated with respect and recognition; secondly, the right to be
referred to adequate support services; thirdly, the right to receive
information on the progress of the case; fourthly, the right to be present
and to speak at all crucial stages of criminal proceedings; fifthly, the
right to protection of physical safety and privacy; and,  sixthly, the
right to restitution from the offender.

The ACDP welcomes the victim empowerment programmes of the SAPS and the
budgetary allocations for these, but calls for more resources to be
allocated to assist victims of crime. Subject to the above reservations,
the ACDP supports this Vote. [Interjections.]

Genl C L VILJOEN: Mevrou die Speaker, ek mag stroomop wees, maar om die
SAPD alleen aanspreeklik te hou vir misdaad, is nie reg nie en dit wys ook
nie dat mense verstaan wat met misdaad in die land aan die gang is nie. Ek
voel verder dat om die SAPD te straf vir die 800 boere wat sedert 1994
wreedaardig gesterf het en selfs vir die toenemende voorkoms van
plaasaanvalle, is ook nie billik nie.

Sou ek as 'n party vandag hier staan en miskien ligtelik, maar miskien ook
baie ernstig vir partypolitieke doeleindes, met my stem demonstreer dat ek
'n organisasie in uniform wil afsny van fondse, dan voel ek dit het 'n
invloed op daardie geüniformdes se selfbeeld. Dit kan ons ook nie bekostig
nie. Die hele ANC-regering moet die aanspreeklikheid vir hierdie saak
aanvaar. As ons eerstens misdaad in die algemeen, tweedens spesifiek die
feit dat sewe maal meer boere per 100 000 vermoor word as ander Suid-
Afrikaners, derdens die feit dat hierdie departement saam met die
susterdepartemente van Justisie, Korrektiewe Dienste en die SANW
gekoördineerd behoort op te tree, en laastens  die ingewikkeldheid van die
oorsake van misdaad, wat geskiedkundige, ekonomiese en sielkundige
grondslae het, alles in ag neem, dan lê die probleem van misdaad in Suid-
Afrika baie wyer as net by die SAPD.

As ek die President was, het ek 'n Adjunkpresident aangestel om spesifiek
te kyk na landsveiligheid. Die koördinasie binne die Regering is nodig; een
polisiemag - soos die Grondwet sê - is goed, maar hy moet groter
desentralisasie na die laer vlak en na gemeenskappe bewerkstellig en daar
moet 'n diepgaande ondersoek kom, dan kan die herorganisasie van al die
departemente volg. Om dus solidariteit teenoor die SAPD en my geüniformde
kollegas te toon sal die VF hierdie begroting tog steun. (Translation of
Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Gen C L VILJOEN: Madam Speaker, I may be swimming against the stream, but
to hold the SAPS alone accountable for crime, is not right and also
indicates that people do not understand what is happening in the country
with regard to crime. I furthermore feel that to punish the SAPS for the
800 farmers who have died cruelly since 1994, and even for the increasing
incidence of farm attacks, is also not fair.

If I as a party were to stand here today and perhaps lightly, but perhaps
also very seriously for party-political purposes, demonstrate with my vote
that I want to cut an organisation in uniform off from funding, I feel that
this will have an effect on the self-image of those in uniform. We can also
not afford this. The entire ANC Government must accept responsibility for
this matter. If we take into account, firstly, crime in general, secondly,
specifically the fact that seven times more farmers per 100 000 are
murdered than any other South Africans, thirdly, the fact that this
department together with the sister departments of Justice, Correctional
Services and the SANDF should act in a co-ordinated manner, and, finally,
the intricacy of the causes of crime, which have historical, economic and
psychological foundations, the problem of crime in South Africa is
attributable to far more than merely the SAPS.

If I were the President, I would appoint a Deputy President specifically to
look at public safety. Co-ordination within the Government is necessary;
one police force - as the Constitution says - is good, but it must achieve
greater decentralisation to the lower levels and to communities and a far-
reaching investigation must take place, which can be followed by the
reorganisation of all the departments. Therefore, to display solidarity
with the SAPS and my uniformed colleagues, the FF will support this Vote
after all.]

Mr C AUCAMP: Madam Speaker, bearing in mind the existing backlog in
personnel, the fact that some 40 000 employees who have qualified for
promotion have not been promoted during the past two years and the fact
that the superintendent of police in Mpumalanga has acknowledged that a
lack of vehicles is seriously limiting the ability of the police, the
question may be asked whether, within the present budget, the Minister has
a snowball's hope of reforming the SAPS into a body which can fulfil its
duty of protecting our lives and property.

Die personeelsituasie in die Polisie is só kritiek dat die Minister nou al
self arrestasies moet uitvoer! 'n Saak wat kritieke afmetings aanneem, is
plaasmoorde met 'n totaal van 4 730 sedert 1992. Laat ons maar die feite in
die oë kyk: hierdie kritieke situasie word nie met die doelgerigtheid deur
die Regering aangepak wat dit vereis nie. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[The personnel situation in the Police is so critical that the Minister
himself now has to make arrests! A matter which is assuming critical
proportions is that of farm murders, with a total of 4 730 since 1992. Let
us face facts: This critical situation is not being tackled by the
Government with the single-mindedness of purpose that it demands.]

As regards the proposed Firearms Control Bill, despite an unprecedented
public outcry and petitions signed by hundreds of thousands of law-abiding
citizens, despite enough public presentations to fill the four telephone
directories that were blown up in Stalplein this morning, the chairperson
of the portfolio committee said, ``you can bluff and `skel' [shout] as much
as you wish, we are elected by the public and the ANC will decide''. He
said this despite section 59 of the Constitution, which boasts about public
access to and involvement in the National Assembly.

Mr Paul Swart of the DP quoted Naas Botha when he said, ``cowboys don't
cry''. I also want to agree with Naas Botha. At the end of the day, the AEB
cannot support this Vote.

Mr M E GEORGE: Madam Speaker, I want again to say to the DP, the New NP and
the FF that crime is the biggest challenge facing our young democracy, and
I do not think they understand that, although they might say that they
understand it. [Interjections.]

We support this budget, but we want to appeal to the DP to stop their game.
Crime is a serious challenge. They must stop turning it into a political
football, to the point where they believe their own lies. They keep on
telling the public and themselves that nothing is adequate in the
department. They say there are not enough policemen, there are not enough
funds and nothing is adequate in the department. They believe their own
lies.

When efforts are made to combat crime, when laws are drafted which are
aimed at bringing down the levels of crime, they are the first to oppose
them. When we talk about firearms control, which is aimed at controlling
the proliferation of arms, they are the first to say that they do not
support that. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, are you rising on a point of order?

Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Speaker, indeed I am. The hon member who is
addressing the House has accused the hon Mr Ellis or myself of telling
lies. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, did you say that?

Mr M E GEORGE: Madam Speaker, what I said, and I want to repeat it so that
he can understand - because I know he does not understand anything in South
Africa these days - is that the DP keeps on telling the public lies about
what is wrong and what is lacking in the SAPS. [Interjections.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Speaker, condemned out of his own mouth.
The SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, I think you need to withdraw the reference
to the members telling lies.

Mr M E GEORGE: Madam Speaker, let me say that the DP, the New NP and the FF
are telling untruths, and I withdraw. [Interjections.] [Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: Order! The member has withdrawn. [Interjections.]

Mr M E GEORGE: Madam Speaker, just before I finish, I want to warn the FF
that the game that they have been playing for the last five years is over.
[Interjections.] The farmers are not represented by them. They have said
openly and unequivocally that there is no party in this House that can
claim to be talking on behalf of farmers. We have supporters who are
farmers just like the FF has supporters who are farmers. So, the farmers
are speaking for themselves.

So, if the opposition thinks that it is talking for farmers, they must go
and look for some other people to talk to. We are just as concerned about
farmers as they are. [Time expired.] [Applause.]
Division demanded.

The SPEAKER: Order! The bells are ringing, Minister Manuel.
[Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, I was just going to ask if you
could take the bets early. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

The House divided:


  AYES - 270: Abrahams, T; Ainslie, A R; Arendse, J D; Asmal, A K; Balfour,
  B M N; Baloyi, M R; Baloyi, S F; Bekker, H J; Belot, S T; Bhengu, F;
  Bhengu, N R; Biyela, B P; Bloem, D V; Bogopane, H I; Booi, M S; Botha, N
  G W; Buthelezi, M N; Carrim, Y I; Cassim, M F; Chalmers, J; Chauke, H P;
  Chiba, L; Chohan-Kota, F I; Cindi, N V; Coetzee-Kasper, M P; Cronin, J P;
  Davies, R H; De Beer, S J; De Lange, J H; De Lille, P; Diale, L N;
  Didiza, A T; Dithebe, S L; Ditshetelo, P H K; Dlamini, B O; Doidge, G Q
  M; Douglas, B M; Duma, N M; Du Toit, D C; Erwin, A; Fankomo, F C;
  Feinstein, A J; Ferreira, E T; Fihla, N B; Fraser-Moleketi, G J; Frolick,
  C T; Gandhi, E; George, M E; Gerber P A; Gigaba, K M N; Gogotya, N J;
  Gomomo, P J; Goniwe, T M; Goosen, A D; Green, L M; Grové, S P; Gumede, D
  M; Gxowa, N B; Hajaig, F; Hanekom, D A; Hangana, N E; Hendrickse, P A C;
  Hlangwana, N L; Hlengwa, M W; Hogan, B A; Holomisa, S P; Jana, D P S;
  Jassat, E E; Jeffery, J H; Joemat, R R; Jordan, Z P; Kannemeyer, B W;
  Kasienyane, O R; Kasrils, R; Kekana, N N; Kgarimetsa, J J; Kgauwe, Q J;
  Kgwele, L M; Kota, Z A; Kotwal, Z; Landers, L T; Lekgoro, M K; Lekgoro, M
  M S; Lekota, M G P; Lockey, D; Louw, J T; Lucas, E J; Lyle, A G;
  Mabandla, B S; Mabeta, M E; Mabudafhasi, T R; Madasa, Z L; Magashule, E
  S; Magubane, N E; Mahlalela, C C; Mahlangu, M J; Mahomed, F; Maimane, D
  S; Maine, M S; Makasi, X C; Makunyane, T L; Makwetla, S P; Malebana, H F;
  Maloney, L; Maluleke-Hlaneki, C J; Malumise, M M; Mangena, M A; Manie, M
  S; Manuel, T A; Maphalala, M A; Maphoto, L I; Mars, I; Marshoff, F B;
  Martins, B A D; Masala, M M; Maserumule, F T; Mashimbye, J N; Masithela,
  N H; Masutha, M T; Mathebe, P M; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F; Matthews, V J G;
  Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M; Maziya, A M; Mbadi, L M; Mbombo, N D; Mbongo,
  P F; Mbulawa-Hans, B G; Mbuyazi, L R; Mdladlana, M M S; Mfundisi, I S;
  Mgidi, J S; Middleton, N S; Mkhatshwa, S; Mkhize, B R; Mlambo-Ngcuka, P
  G; Mlangeni, A; Mnandi, P N; Mngomezulu, G P; Mnumzana, S K; Modise, T R;
  Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, E P; Mogoba, M S; Mohai, S J;
  Mohamed, I J; Mokoena, D A; Molebatsi, M A; Molewa, B G; Moloto, K A;
  Momberg, J H; Mongwaketse, S J; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K; Morobi, D M;
  Moropa, R M; Morwamoche, K W; Moss, M I; Mothoagae, P K; Motubatse, S D;
  Mpahlwa, M; Mpaka, H M; Mshudulu, S A; Msomi, M D; Mthembi-Mahanyele, S
  D; Mthembu, B; Mtirara, N Z; Mtsweni, N S; Mulder, C P; Mulder, P W A;
  Mutsila, I; Mzondeki, M J G; Nair, B; Nash, J H; Ncube, B; Ndlovu, V B;
  Ndou, R S; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngculu, L V
  J; Ngubane, B S; Ngubane, H; Ngubeni, J M; Ngwenya, M L; Nhlanhla, J M;
  Nhleko, N P; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njobe, M A A; Nkomo, A S; Nkosi, D M;
  Nonkonyana, M; Nqakula, C; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M B; Ntuli, S B; Nzimande,
  B M; Nzimande, L P M; Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G; Omar, A M; Pahad, E
  G; Phala, M J; Phantsi, N E; Pheko, S E M; Phohlela, S; Pieterse, R D;
  Radebe, B A; Radebe, J T; Rajbally, S; Rajoo, K; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M;
  Ramgobin, M; Ramodike, M N; Ramotsamai, C M P; Ripinga, S S; Saloojee, E;
  Schneemann, G D; Scott, M I; Seaton, S A; Sekgobela, P S; September, C C;
  September, R K; Shabangu, S; Shilubana, T P; Shope, N R; Sigcau, S N;
  Sigcawu, A N; Sigwela, E M; Sikakane, M R; Sisulu, L N; Sithole, D J;
  Skhosana, W M; Skosana, M B; Skweyiya, Z S T; Slabbert, J H; Smith, P F;
  Smith, V G; Solo, B M; Solomon, G; Sonjica, B P; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M;
  Southgate, R M; Swart, S N; Thabethe, E; Tinto, B; Tolo, L J; Tshabalala-
  Msimang, M E; Tsheole, N M; Tshwete, S V; Turok, B; Twala, N M; Vadi, I;
  Van den Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe, J H; Van Wyk, A (Annelizé); Van
  Wyk, J F; Van Wyk, N; Verwoerd, M; Vilakazi, B H; Viljoen, C L; Woods, G
  G; Xingwana, L M T; Zita, L; Zondo, R P; Zulu, N E; Zuma, J G.

  NOES - 52: Andrew, K M; Aucamp, C; Bakker, D M; Baloi, G E; Bell, B G;
  Beukman, F; Blaas, A; Borman, G M; Botha, A J; Bruce, N S; Camerer, S M;
  Cupido, P W; Da Camara, M L; Davidson, I O; Delport, J T; Dowry, J J;
  Durand, J; Eglin, C W; Ellis, M J; Gaum, A H; Geldenhuys, B L; Gibson, D
  H M; Gore, V C; Gous, S J; Greyling, C H F; Grobler, G A J; Heine, R J;
  Kalyan, S V; Lee, T D; Moorcroft, E K; Morkel, C M; Nel, A H; Ntuli, R S;
  Olckers, M E; Opperman, S E; Pillay, S; Pretorius, I J; Rabie, P J;
  Schmidt, H C; Selfe, J; Semple, J A; Seremane, W J; Simmons, S; Singh, A;
  Smit, H A; Smuts, M; Sono, B N; Swart, P S; Taljaard, R; Van der Merwe, A
  S; Van Deventer, F J; Waters, M.

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon Minister Manuel, it may be more profitable if you
actually bet on the total numbers that vote. I have been noticing the
differences.

Vote No 28 accordingly agreed to.

Vote No 29 - Sport and Recreation - put.

Declarations of vote:

Adv P S SWART: Madam Speaker, this is the third time today I have risen to
declare, and the first time I find the relevant Minister in the House.
Maybe, I have something nice to say about the Minister of Sport and
Recreation. I want to acknowledge the positive role he has played in
rejecting racial quotas and the equally unacceptable behaviour of Nocsa in
preventing the men's hockey team from going to the Olympic Games. I thank
him for that role that he is playing.

As a liberal party, the DP supports the concept of a lean and efficient
state. These unfortunately are not the words I would use to describe the
Department of Sport and Recreation. Out of the department's R57 million
budget this year R22 million, an incredible 39%, will be spent on the
National Sports Commission. We have an even more amazing 21% of the entire
department's budget being spent on salaries and the administration of the
commission.

Frankly, common sense must ask why South Africa needs a sports commission
operating in parallel with the Department of Sport and Recreation. The
commission was originally meant to replace the National Sports Council and
the department, once the sports Ministry was dissolved in line with the
recommendations of a presidential inquiry into the structure of governance.
This never happened.

The commission, which came into effect last year, is now a really useful
accessory to the department. While, in theory, the two have separate
functions, when one comprehends the reality of the R57 million Sports
budget, the arrangement seems unwieldy and extravagant. We believe in
giving credit where it is due, and we did so to the hon the Minister.
However, we also believe in a lean and efficient state. The DP cannot
support this budget. [Interjections.]

Mr E T FERREIRA: Madam Speaker, the IFP will be supporting the Vote for
Sport and Recreation. We are, however, in agreement with the Minister, as
he pointed out in his budget speech, that the amounts budgeted for are
completely inadequate. Government is paying very good lip service to the
importance of sport in nation-building. However, when one looks at the
national sport budget in terms of rands and cents, one does not really get
the impression that it is all that serious about this matter. There is no
adhesive in our country that can bond South Africans of different
languages, cultures and persuasions together in the way sport can.
Government should not be shy to invest more in sport. The returns will be
tremendous.

The shortage of sports facilities, especially in the rural areas, is quite
shocking. Although Government is doing its fair share to improve the
situation, they have only just started scratching the surface. We hope and
trust that it will be possible, in next year's budget, to invest more in
sport and recreation. We are happy to see that sport will be one of the
beneficiaries of the South African national lottery. [Applause.]

Mr C M MORKEL: Madam Speaker, during the Minister's budget speech, we
mentioned that 0,025% of the total national Budget is not good enough, and
we want to suggest that he improves his relationship with the Minister of
Finance. I understand that the Minister is himself quite a friendly chap.

With Youth Day approaching, I have to add one thing that we did not mention
in the last budget debate. School sport is being left behind as a
stepchild. We need the Minister of Education and the Minister of Sport and
Recreation to decide which Minister is going to deal with it, because it
seems there is a vacuum at the moment. We need clarity on this point. The
United Students' Sports Association of South Africa has complained to the
Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation that they feel like a
stepchild, and one of the Ministers will have to deal with that.

On the issue of investigations into boxing, soccer, cricket, etc, it is not
a good situation to be in, but we do understand that the Ministry of Sport
and Recreation will have to deal with these things from time to time and
will require money for it.

Concerning Nocsa, we need the Minister to be more firm with, in particular,
Sam Ramsamy. We feel that he is using personal gripes with the
administrators in SA Hockey to punish the men's hockey team. This is unfair
to the men's hockey team just because he has a problem with the
administrators. We want the Minister please to deal with this issue as
quickly as possible. It has nothing to do with them not being
representative enough or good enough. They are!

About the broadcasting of sports events of national importance, I am sure
the Minister has already seen the paper in which we state our position. We
believe that we must move away from exclusive broadcasting rights to
primary and secondary broadcasting rights, because there will then be
universal access.

About the Soccer World Cup bid, our party is still fully behind Safa and
the Ministry of Sport and Recreation on this. We are disappointed in
Morocco, but we will support this Vote. [Applause.]

Mrs R M SOUTHGATE: Madam Speaker, I am thankful to see that the hon the
Minister is in the House. [Interjections.] Sport deserves a more equitable
and workable budget from Government. The department must play a strong role
in the way in which money is used and allocated to federations, and
measures must be implemented against those who do not adhere to the
criteria set out in the funding policy.

I wish to commend the Minister on the sterling work he is doing, especially
with reference to the manner in which he has handled Fifa and the sensitive
way in which he is dealing with Morocco, which has become the second
African bidder. I wish him every success as he continues in his
negotiations with the Moroccans. I am sure I am speaking for the whole
House when I say that we are looking forward with anticipation to a
positive result regarding the 2006 Soccer World Cup.

However, everything is not rosy. [Interjections.] The Minister should not
get involved in the indemnity issue of the cricketers. He should leave this
matter in the capable hands of the commission and the lawyers of the
parties involved. His involvement could compromise his neutrality.

The ACDP supports this Vote. [Applause.]

Ms N R BHENGU: Madam Speaker, the Vote for Sport and Recreation is centred
on the transformation agenda as outlined in the ANC's policy. This
transformation agenda seeks to address imbalances in sport that are still
reflected in some of the sporting codes which are not yet accessible to the
previously disadvantaged people of South Africa, especially those in the
rural areas.

This Vote aims at addressing the imbalances in sport by making sports
facilities accessible to all communities and ensuring that all sporting
codes adhere to the principle of representivity and move away from a
tradition of lily-white teams. This we seek to do without compromising the
merit standards.

The ANC supports the Vote, fully understanding the challenges in sport,
which include racism, as we have seen in Upington and Calvinia during our
study tour visit to the Northern Cape; corruption, as alleged in the Hansie
Cronjé saga; the promotion of indigenous sports, and the accessibility of
sports and sports facilities to the disabled people of South Africa.

It is not surprising that the DP does not support this Vote, because they
have never been on the study tours to the provinces. Therefore, they would
not even relate to the Vote that is needs-based. We went to the Eastern
Cape and the DP chose to go to Zimbabwe to engage in political rhetoric and
sloganeering, instead of dealing with the real issues affecting South
Africans.

We support this Vote. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon Minister, before I take the vote, was there a
declaration of a party when South Africa wins the bid next week? I was just
checking if you had made the declaration of a party for the House when
South Africa wins the bid. [Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: I bet you, Madam Chair, that you will
try to make sure that we have a party, but we have to do some betting
around here. [Laughter.] And I think I can fix it. [Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Minister of Sport and Recreation, I think that is a
dangerous statement to make. [Laughter.]

Vote No 29 agreed to (Democratic Party dissenting).

Vote No 30 - State Expenditure - put and agreed to.

Vote No 31 - Statistics South Africa - put and agreed to.

Vote No 32 - Trade and Industry - put.
 
Declarations of vote:

Mr N S BRUCE: Madam Speaker ... [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order!

Mr N S BRUCE: I want to thank the IFP member from Pretoria for pointing out
the guts that the DP has. It is not often that recognition comes in this
House and it is not often that recognition comes from that quarter. But I
must say, to be candid about it, that during the 23 years that the hon
member has been in this House, I do not think that he has shown any guts at
all. [Laughter.] But I will say this: He showed a great deal of gut. So
much so, in fact, that I thought, when I first arrived here, that he was a
member of the governing party. He looks so much like the hon Jannie
Momberg, and one never knows which side of the House he is sitting on.
[Interjections.] If both these members ate less and thought more, they
would know that it is very difficult to see that this party is not firing
on all four cylinders. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order!

Mr N S BRUCE: I could read out a long list, but there are some things that
they did well, for instance, the European deal. There is the fact that we
are keeping on reducing protection in this country, and the fact that we
are taking a more enlightened view on international trade. These are all
solid achievements. We were very tempted to vote for the Minister on this
matter. Certainly they are more solid than counting water taps, which is
all the Minister of Education can boast about these days - his outcomes-
source reticulation. [Interjections.]

These are quite solid advantages. We came very close to voting for this
Minister. However, one cannot possibly vote for a Minister who has deprived
the poor, the sick and the suffering of the proceeds of charities that are
rightfully theirs. This is really a dreadful thing. He clearly does not
have the poor in mind, and the more I point that out, the more indignant he
gets about it. But I must say that when I listen to him defending himself
he reminds me of that bravado politician Piet Koornhof who was all
conscience, kitsch and kugels. So I am afraid we are against the Minister.
[Applause.]

Mr H J BEKKER: Madam Speaker, thank you for calling the Minister of Sport
and Recreation to order. We in the IFP fully support that party and we
fully support the World Cup bid.

With regard to Vote 32 - Trade and Industry - the IFP supports this Vote.
Trade and Industry policy is directed at attracting direct foreign
investment and encouraging local investors to invest in industry and,
particularly, in manufacturing.

The IFP is, however, of the opinion that much more can still be done. In
this regard we support the Minister's concept of industrial development
zones. The IFP believes that these development zones could attract
substantially more foreign investment if we could cluster them, adjoining
them to one or more future free ports. That would mean that industrialists
operating in such port areas would be exempt from taxation and duties -
very much along Hong Kong lines.

In this regard we are particularly looking at the Richard's Bay area, the
Mpangeni area, the Durban area, as well as the Nqurha port area in the
Eastern Cape. All of these areas should actually be favourably considered.

Hon members are reminded that the Government's economic policy has shifted
substantially towards the basic IFP philosophy of a socially responsible
free market economy. Despite the hon the Minister turning up his nose at
us, I can assure him that as has been the case in the past, the more the
Government steals the fundamental principles and economic policy of the
IFP, the better it will be for this Government. Therefore, I have no
hesitation in giving the Minister, the Deputy Minister and the director-
general - the whole group from Trade and Industry - the thumbs-up. The IFP
supports this Vote. [Applause.]

Mnr F BEUKMAN: Mevrou die Speaker, politieke partye wat teen hierdie
begrotingspos stem, stem teen die belange van Suid-Afrikaanse maatskappye,
teen die belange van Suid-Afrikaanse boere en asook spesifiek teen die
belange van die Wes-Kaap. Alhoewel ons oor die bestuur se
finansieringsprobleme met die kleinsake-finansieringsagentskap van die
departement probleme het, is ons van mening dat die departement se
begroting met die oog op die herstrukturering van Handel en Nywerheid,
globalisering, wêreldwye tariefvermindering en nuwe handelsooreenkomste reg
gerig is. Suid-Afrikaanse vervaardigers van motorbande, onderdele, die
tekstiel- en volstruisbedryf, die vrugte-inmaakbedryf en landbouprodusente
word direk deur die EU-ooreenkoms bevoordeel waaroor die amptenare van
hierdie departement onderhandel het.

In 'n tyd waar wynboere, sagtevrugteprodusente en koöperatiewe kelders in
die Wes-Kaap finansieel baie swaar kry, is toegang tot groter markte vir
ons mense, veral ook die werkers op ons plase, van oorlewingsbelang. Die
departement se bydrae tot die finalisering van die ooreenkoms plaas 'n
verpligting op opposisiepartye wat ernstig is oor Suid-Afrikaanse produkte,
en vervaardigers en plaaswerkers se regte om hierdie begrotingspos te
steun.

Die feit dat 32 miljoen liter Suid-Afrikaanse wyn en spiritualieë na die EU
nie onderwerp word aan tariewe nie, kan vir ons Wes-Kaapse wynprodusente en
hul werkers oorlewing beteken sowel as groter toegang tot markte en
afsetgebiede. Enige politieke party wat die Wes-Kaap se belange vooropstel,
sal hierdie begrotingspos weens hierdie feite steun. Ons gaan nie weens die
een of ander probleem oor loterye hierteen stem nie. Ons gaan hierdie
begrotingspos steun. [Tussenwerpsels.][Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans
speech follows.)

[Mr F BEUKMAN: Madam Speaker, political parties who vote against this Vote
are voting against the interests of South African companies, against the
interests of South African farmers and also specifically against the
interests of the Western Cape. Although we have problems with the
management's financing problems with the small business financing agency of
the department, we are of the opinion that the department's budget is
correctly directed with a view to the restructuring of Trade and Industry,
globalisation, worldwide tariff reduction and new trade agreements. South
African manufacturers of car tyres, parts, the textile and ostrich
industries, the fruit canning industry and agricultural producers benefit
directly from the EU agreement on which the officials of this department
negotiated.

At a time when wine farmers, deciduous fruit producers and co-operative
cellars in the Western Cape are struggling a lot financially, access to
bigger markets is essential to the survival of our people, particularly
also the workers on our farms. The department's contribution to the
finalisation of the agreement places an obligation on opposition parties
who are serious about South African products, and producers' and farm
workers' rights, to support this Vote.

The fact that 32 million litres of South African wine and spirits to the EU
are not subjected to tariffs, could mean survival for our Western Cape wine
producers and their workers, as well as greater access to markets and
outlets. Any political party which places the interests of the Western Cape
first, will support this Vote for these reasons. We are not going to vote
against it because of some or other problem regarding lotteries. We are
going to support this Vote. [Interjections.] [Applause.]]
Dr R H DAVIES: Madam Speaker, the Department of Trade and Industry is
engaged in an energetic and very far-reaching process of restructuring
aimed at significantly improving its capacity to effect transformation in
the real economy, which is essential in promoting growth and development in
our country.

As part of its oversight function, the portfolio committee has decided to
engage with this process, among other things, through quality time
interactions on key policy and delivery issues with the department. We had
one such engagement in May, and it is a great pity that Mr Nigel Bruce did
not find time to engage seriously in the real issues on that particular
occasion. [Interjections.]

Yesterday Minister Erwin distinguished between opposition based on real
engagement and empty vessels making meaningless gestures, playing to the
gallery. I think we saw a particularly pathetic version of the latter in Mr
Bruce's objection just now. Several of us have given advice to the
opposition over the past few days, and I cannot resist adding my own voice.
[Interjections.] If they want to make an impact, they should choose a few
issues and focus on them. This evening the DP has done just the opposite.
It has raised vacuous objections to almost everything, and instead of
creating an impact, they have just created tedium. I do not think that
anybody is paying any attention to them outside this House. They will have
no impact whatsoever. The ANC will, of course, be supporting this Vote.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! I now put the question. Are there any
objections?

HON MEMBERS: No.

Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Speaker, the hon the Minister's lucky number has not
come up and the DP is therefore objecting to this one. Please note our
objection.

Vote No 32 agreed to (Democratic Party dissenting).

Vote No 33 - Transport - put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr S PILLAY: Madam Speaker, the DP is clear that, among other matters, road
safety, especially the law enforcement component, road maintenance, the
Arrive Campaign, the underutilisation of nearly 12 000 km of railway lines,
and the activities of the Road Accident Fund have not received sufficient
resources, nor have they been efficient with the funds allocated to them.

One life lost on the roads owing to a lack of law enforcement is one life
too many. Supporting an inadequate budget that is inefficiently used is not
in the interests of the country. Accidents have increased by approximately
14% over the past ten years as more and more commuters rely on private
transport as the preferred way to commute. Yet, if one looks at the budget
presented here by the hon the Minister, it is surprising to note that where
one would expect a major increase in allocations towards regulation and
safety, one sees an overall decrease of some 17%.

Taxi violence is escalating. There are approximately 8 000 vacant traffic
police posts throughout the country. There is no efficient mechanism to
ensure the efficient utilisation of the previously allocated funds. On 15
February my hon colleague, the hon Stuart Farrow, offered to share
information about certain members of the SAPS from the police stations in
Breedgat, Shoshanguve and Puthanong, who are intimately involved in taxi
violence. To our knowledge, no investigation is taking place.

The backlog of over R9,5 billion in road maintenance renders this budget
inappropriate and inadequate, and will continue to breed inefficiency.
Therefore we cannot support this Vote.

In conclusion, I would like to say that I trust that as we leave here, the
incident that happened last week will not repeat itself. After I spoke on
Wednesday, I was robbed on Thursday. I trust that this will not happen
again.

We cannot support this Vote. [Interjections.]

Mr J H SLABBERT: Madam Speaker, since I spoke on the Transport Vote on 11
March, violence has escalated, buses have been burnt, and ordinary, poor,
hardworking people and even schoolchildren have to struggle to get to work
and school and back home again. Our people were promised a better life for
all. Surely they are also entitled to better transport for all. Transport
is becoming a fiercely contested terrain.

Mr M J ELLIS: [Inaudible.]

Mr J H SLABBERT: I wish hon Mr Ellis would keep quiet. [Laughter.] This is
a huge challenge to law and order and to government in general.

Once again, let me return to another issue of great concern, which I am
sure the hon the Minister is also concerned about, and that is that despite
our 32 000 km of railway lines, 15% to 20% of freight is being moved by
rail, whilst thousands of huge lorries are destroying our roads.

While the IFP will support this Vote, we request that the issues we have
raised be addressed seriously and quickly. [Interjections.] I wish the hon
the Minister the wisdom and strength he needs to sort out these problems.
[Interjections.]

Mnr S SIMMONS: Mevrou die Speaker, die Nuwe NP wil sy besorgdheid uitspreek
daaroor dat paaie, veral op die platteland, in 'n haglike toestand verkeer,
en dat die verval van paaie so groot is dat hulle byna heeltemal herbou sal
moet word. Dit is ook sorgwekkend dat die agb Minister in die huidige
boekjaar nie 'n enkele sent begroot het vir die instandhouding van ons
paaie op die platteland nie.

Die swak instandhouding van paaie het 'n nadelige effek op landbou,
toerisme en kommersiële dienslewering. Daarom sal die onvoldoende fondse
wat beskikbaar gestel word vir hierdie diens eenvoudig nie die nodige
fisieke toegang tot werkplekke, klinieke, hospitale en skole bied nie, en
ook nie help om die lewenstandaard van ons mense te verhoog en om
ekonomiese groei te stimuleer nie.

Die Nuwe NP is terdeë bewus daarvan dat die Departement van Vervoer 'n
tekort aan fondse het, en ons doen 'n beroep op die agb Minister om meer
fondse te beding om gemelde tekortkominge in die komende boekjare te dek.
Nieteenstaande die gemelde tekortkomings, steun die Nuwe NP die
begrotingspos. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr S SIMMONS: Madam Speaker, the New NP wants to express its concern about
the fact that roads, in particular in the rural parts, are in a dreadful
condition and that their state of disrepair is so great that they will have
to be virtually rebuilt. It is also alarming to note that in the current
financial year the hon the Minister has not budgeted a single cent for road
maintenance in the rural parts.

Poor road maintenance has a detrimental effect on agriculture, tourism and
the rendering of commercial services. That is why the insufficient funds
that are being made available for this service simply do not grant the
necessary physical access to workplaces, clinics, hospitals and schools,
and also do not help to improve the standard of living of our people or to
stimulate economic growth.

The New NP is fully aware that the Department of Transport is experiencing
a shortage of funds, and we appeal to the hon the Minister to negotiate
more funds in order to cover the above-mentioned shortfalls in the coming
financial year. Despite the said shortfalls, the New NP will support this
Vote.]

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, hon members, this morning while on our way to
Parliament, my colleague and I left our homes at 06:30 with the intention
of arriving at Parliament at 07:15. What is usually a 45-minute journey
took us more than three hours. We later discovered, when listening to the
radio news, that the bus drivers of Golden Arrow had decided to block all
the roads leading to Cape Town in protest against the senseless killings of
bus drivers which has taken place over the past few months.

We are approving this Vote this evening, because we would like to have safe
roads. I am sure that this morning most MPs and staff members lost at least
three hours. This state of lawlessness on our roads cannot be allowed to
continue in our nation. We are especially concerned when MPs, who have to
prepare themselves for an important day like this, and who also have
certain privileges in terms of the privileges Act, are being blocked or
prevented from coming to their work on time.

We appeal to the Minister of Transport, as well as the Western Cape
Provincial Government, to collectively address this crisis in the Western
Cape. We support the Arrive Alive campaign. How about promoting an ``Arrive
On Time'' campaign?

Our party supports this Vote. [Applause.]

Mr J P CRONIN: Madam Speaker, I am glad that the previous speaker referred
to the events of this morning, because I am quite disappointed that at
least one of the parties here - continuing the strain of oppositional
device of objectional behaviour that we have seen - has decided to oppose
this Vote. I think that this is not the signal we want to send on this
particular Vote out there in the public. We want to convey an impression of
unity and determination, as politicians and leaders, that we want to get
the public transport system right in South Africa.

This morning's events, which the hon Green has referred to, are born of
frustration, fear and incomprehension by bus drivers that not enough has
been done to address their safety concerns. I hope that from the law and
order side there will be an understanding of what this particular action
was born of. I think it has wide public support, notwithstanding the
frustrations that many of us must have felt this morning in trying to get
to work.

What these actions underline - and all the events that have been happening
around us in the past several months here in this province - is that we
have to have a planned and equitable approach to the provision of public
transport. Operating licences must be awarded on the basis of the actual
social needs out there, on the basis of plans and clear regulation, and
they must be aligned with the development of our cities and towns. They
must be awarded transparently and by bodies which are representative and
have legitimacy - much of which does not exist, not least here in this
province.

The Bill that we will be bringing on Monday to the National Assembly, the
National Land Transport Transitional Bill, envisages trying to implement
all these things. If we pass this budget, it will help us to make progress
in this direction. It will even help the coalition government here in the
Western Cape to sort out the mess that it got itself in - of course,
assuming that the coalition government survives.

We have been listening to the hon Gibson and hon Ellis standing up and
saying: ``We are obliged to divide, divide, divide, divide.'' I am not sure
whether they are talking about the voting process here or what they intend
doing out there.

As the ANC, we support this Vote. [Time expired.]
Vote No 33 agreed to (Democratic Party dissenting).

Vote No 34 - Water Affairs and Forestry - put and agreed to.

Vote No 35 - Welfare - put.

Declarations of vote:
Mrs P W CUPIDO: Madam Speaker, I think this is the first time that I have
been able to agree with the ANC, and that is on the fact that the Welfare
department is in a shambles.

Die DP het groot kommer oor die welsynsbegroting wat deur die Minister
aangekondig is. Dit is 'n absolute skande dat die kindertoelae vir
skoolgaande kinders weggeneem is en niks, maar niks, in die plek daarvan
ingestel is nie. Ek hoop dat hierdie Huis besef dat daar in hierdie stadium
van die bewind van die nuwe Regering geen staatshulp vir gestremde kinders
onder die ouderdom van 18 jaar oud bestaan nie. [Tussenwerpsels.] Wat sê
die Handves van Regte in die Grondwet? (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[The DP is very concerned about the Welfare budget which has been announced
by the Minister. It is an absolute disgrace that the child grant for
schoolgoing children has been abolished, and absolutely nothing has been
put in its place. I hope that this House realises that at this stage of the
tenure of the new Government there is no state aid for handicapped children
under the age of 18 years. [Interjections.] What does the Bill of Rights in
the Constitution say?]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, can we have some order! We need to
hear the hon member.

Mev P W CUPIDO: Wat sê die Handves van Regte in die Grondwet? In Hoofstuk
2, artikel 27(1)(c) word bepaal dat elkeen die reg het op
staatsondersteuning as hulle nie by magte is om na hulself om te sien nie.

Tans is daar geen voldoende begroting of konstruktiewe debat om verligting
en verandering aan te bring in die lewens van straatkinders,
verhoorafwagtende kinders, kinders in tronke, kinders met vigs en
weeskinders nie. Die land vier op Vrydag, 16 Junie Jeugdag terwyl dit
duidelik blyk dat daar geen toekoms vir jongmense in ons land is nie. Wat
bied die Regering die derduisende matrikulante elke jaar? Absoluut niks.
Daar is baie min of geen werkgeleenthede vir jongmense nie. Die Minister
kondig 'n verhoging van R20 aan vir pensioentrekkers wat 'n week later deur
'n aansienlike verhoging in die petrolprys ingesluk word weens die
verhoogde taxifooie.

Subsidies vir tehuise vir bejaardes en ander hulpbehoewende inrigtings is
ernstig aan die afneem en beperk dienslewering in sulke sentra. Die
bewilliging van R83 miljoen vir armoedeverligting is opgeskort omdat die
Departement van Welsyn nie oor die vermoë beskik of enigsins die potensiaal
toon om die departement suksesvol te bestuur nie. Gevolglik is dit
onmoontlik vir die DP om 'n begroting te steun wat glad nie voorsiening
maak vir die welsyn van die armste van die armes nie. [Tussenwerpsels.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mrs P W CUPIDO: What does the Bill of Rights in the Constitution say? In
Chapter 2, section 27(1)(c), it is provided that everyone has the right to
social security if they are unable to support themselves.

At present there is no adequate budget or constructive debate to bring
relief and change in the lives of streetchildren, awaiting-trial children,
children in prisons, children with Aids and orphans. On Friday, 16 June,
the country will celebrate Youth Day, while it is clear that there is no
future for young people in our country. What does the Government offer the
many thousands of matriculants every year? Absolutely nothing. There are
very few, if any, job opportunities for young people. The Minister
announced an increase of R20 for pensioners, which was cancelled out a week
later by a considerable increase in the petrol price, which led to
increased taxi fares.

Subsidies for old age homes and other institutions for the needy are
decreasing dramatically and this is restricting service delivery in such
centres. The allocation of R83 million for poverty relief has been
suspended because the Department of Welfare does not have the ability or
show any potential to manage the department successfully. Consequently it
is impossible for the DP to support a budget which does not make any
provision at all for the welfare of the poorest of the poor.
[Interjections.]]

Ms S C VOS: The IFP voiced its concern regarding the Department of Welfare
during the main Budget debate. We take this opportunity to reiterate our
commitment to ensuring that, in future, the oversight obligation of the
portfolio committee is strictly observed in order to elicit adequate
responses from the department, as we have a collective duty to ensure that
South Africa has a welfare sector committed and sensitive to the very real
needs of the most marginalised sector of the South African population. We
have supported the Welfare budget despite our genuine concerns, as we are
confident that this goal can be achieved. We remain committed to making
South Africa a better place for all.

We support this Vote. [Applause.]

Mev M E OLCKERS: Mevrou die Speaker, die nuwe NP kan nie hierdie
begrotingspos steun nie, omdat daar in die vorige boekjaar 99%, bykans R203
miljoen van die bewilliging vir armoedeverligting nie bestee is nie. Die
afgelope drie jaar is altesaam R516 miljoen van die departement se geld nie
bestee nie, en dit alles dui op swak administrasie en totale onbekwaamheid
van die vorige Minister en die departement.

Volgens getuienis voor die portefeuljekomitee is daar erken dat senior
amptenare wat in 1996 en 1997 in die departement aangestel is, 'n skok
gekry het toe hulle hoor dat deel van hul verantwoordelikhede finansiële
bestuur sou insluit. Daar was al ses direkteurs-generaal oor die afgelope
ses jaar in daardie departement. Dit is duidelik dat van die amptenare
weinig benul het van wat in die departement aangaan. As sowat 78% van die
totale begroting nie benut is nie, is dit absurd om meer geld vir die
departement te gee alvorens daar beter bestuur in daardie departement
gevestig word. [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mrs M E OLCKERS: Madam Speaker, the New NP cannot support this Vote,
because in the previous financial year 99%, almost R203 million, of the
allocation for poverty alleviation was not spent. In the past three years
altogether R516 million of the department's money was not spent, which all
points to poor administration and total incompetence on the part of the
previous Minister and the department.

According to evidence before the portfolio committee it has been admitted
that senior officials who were appointed in the department during 1996 and
1997 were shocked to learn that their responsibilities would include
financial management. Over the past six years there have been six directors-
general in that department. Clearly some of the officials have very little
idea of what is going on in the department. If about 78% of the budget has
not been utilised, it would be absurd to give more money to the department
before better management has been established there. [Interjections.]]
Mrs R M SOUTHGATE: Madam Speaker, Mr Minister, bad management, corruption
and the misappropriation of funds have riddled this department for a very
long time. Over the past six years they have changed five directors-
general. If I may add, I do support the present director-general, and I
hope that she will stick to this department and, at least, try to make it
float.

I would just like to raise some of my concerns. The R83 million which the
Minister of Finance has withdrawn from the department has sent out loud
signals of a vote of no confidence in this department.

The state maintenance grant to children has been withdrawn and not replaced
with an alternative. The reintroduction of the child grant of R100, which
is paid to children up to the age of seven, does not alleviate hardship. It
has actually caused severe hardship in some homes.

The old age pension is badly administered. This has subjected our aged -
especially those in the rural areas, where there is a lack of co-
ordination, sympathy and compassion - to harsh conditions, no
refreshments, unsuitable venues for drawing pensions, long queues and, at
times, very bad weather conditions.

To add insult to injury, the Constitution guarantees that everyone has
inherent dignity, and the right to have their dignity respected and
protected. The inhumane treatment that our elderly are subjected to in
institutions and in their family homes, flies in the face of these
constitutional rights. The ACDP will do everything in its power to fight
these abuse of our elderly citizens.

I regret that we as the ACDP do not support this Vote.

Mr E SALOOJEE: Madam Speaker, in the short time that I have I think I
should just mention one thing. We have had to live with Mrs Cupido for the
past six years in the Portfolio Committee on Welfare and Population
Development. In all those years, she has not learnt a thing, very true.
[Interjections.] When she addresses herself to any problems, it is in a
hopelessly superficial way. Her indifference to this is shown by her lack
of even proper attendance.

The reason I mention this is because the DP is continually harping on the
plight of the poor in our country. [Interjections.] None of them have ever
come to terms with what the ANC has actually done. Research has also shown
that the South African social security system, and more especially the
social pensions system, is possibly one of the best antipoverty programmes
that one can find in any place. But none of the DP members have that
information; they do not know what the numbers are. They send poor little
Mrs Cupido to confront us here. As a result, she really has nothing to say.

Many of the other parties in the opposition have, at least, gone a long way
to signal that we have a common problem here, and that we have to impact on
the lives of the poor, and they are doing everything to help. They know
that there are good policies in place. They know that the state has
released substantial funds for a lot of these programmes, and they try to
help. But this lot here have no concern or commitment to the poor and the
disadvantaged of our country. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Division demanded.

Mr J H MOMBERG: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: The parties came
together on four occasions to decide on divisions and objections, but the
ACDP never indicated to us that they were going to call for a division. I
think this is against the spirit of our negotiations.

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, let me address you on this matter. I would
agree that the Whips did sit down and negotiate the whole matter. However,
you must also understand that we did not consult with our caucus at the
time when we finally negotiated with the Whips. [Interjections.]

The Rules of Parliament, however, allow us to call for a division, if we so
wish. So we have played along very consistently until the very last minute.
I think that the Rules allow us to call for a division, if we so wish.
Mr J H MOMBERG: Madam Speaker, please give me a chance!

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Hold on, hon Momberg. I think it is
clear that the Whips discussed the issue of how they were going to conduct
the deliberations of this evening, including who was going to object to
what. That is why I have lists here. It is clear that the ACDP has deviated
from that. I think that the hon Momberg is correct to object to the fact
that the ACDP has deviated from the arrangement that was agreed upon by all
the parties.

However, we have to allow the party to ask for a division. But I think it
is clear that the Whips should discuss the matter of how we are going to
work in future, because it breaks the faith between the parties if, after
having negotiated and agreed on issues, there is a deviation from that
agreement.  [Interjections.] Order, hon members! Hon Green, I do not want
us to spend a whole hour discussing this problem. [Interjections.]

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, on a further point of order: If the hon Jannie
Momberg can recall, we also said that when we reached  10 o'clock, we would
be flexible. That is what we agreed to. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, please let us hear him out!

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, I appeal for that flexibility.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! I now would like to establish whether we do have
four members who support the request for a division? [Interjections.] Are
there four ACDP members in the House? [Interjections.]

Mr J H MOMBERG: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: The Rules are clear
that the ACDP has a right to call for a division. I am not going to object
to that. I just want to say in front of the whole House that the ACDP has
reneged on all our agreements, and they must not come to us in future and
cry, because they will get nothing from us. [Interjections.]

The House divided:


  AYES - 248: Ainslie, A R; Asmal, A K; Balfour, B M N; Baloi, G E; Baloyi,
  M R; Baloyi, S F; Bekker, H J; Bhengu, F; Bhengu, N R; Biyela, B P;
  Bloem, D V; Bogopane, H I; Booi, M S; Botha, N G W; Buthelezi, M G;
  Buthelezi, M N; Carrim, Y I; Cassim, M F; Chauke, H P; Chiba, L; Chohan-
  Kota, F I; Cindi, N V; Coetzee-Kasper, M P; Cronin, J P; Davies, R H; De
  Beer, S J; De Lange, J H; De Lille, P; Diale, L N; Didiza, A T; Dithebe,
  S L; Ditshetelo, P H K; Dlamini, B O; Doidge, G Q M; Douglas, B M;  Duma,
  N M; Du Toit, D C; Erwin, A; Fankomo, F C; Feinstein, A J; Ferreira, E T;
  Fihla, N B; Fraser-Moleketi, G J; Gandhi, E; George, M E; Gerber P A;
  Gigaba, K M N; Gogotya, N J; Gomomo, P J; Goniwe, T M; Goosen, A D;
  Grové, S P; Gumede, D M; Gxowa, N B; Hajaig, F; Hanekom, D A; Hangana, N
  E; Hlangwana, N L; Hlengwa, M W; Hogan, B A; Holomisa, S P; Jana, D P S;
  Jassat, E E; Jeffery, J H; Joemat, R R; Jordan, Z P; Kalako, M U;
  Kannemeyer, B W; Kasienyane, O R; Kekana, N N; Kgarimetsa, J J; Kgwele, L
  M; Kota, Z A; Kotwal, Z; Landers, L T; Lekgoro, M M S; Louw, J T; Lucas,
  E J; Lyle, A G; Mabandla, B S; Mabeta, M E; Mabudafhasi, T R; Magashule,
  E S; Magubane, N E; Mahlalela, C C; Mahlangu, M J; Mahomed, F; Maimane, D
  S; Maine, M S; Makasi, X C; Makunyane, T L; Makwetla, S P; Malebana, H F;
  Maloney, L; Maluleke-Hlaneki, C J; Malumise, M M; Mangena, M A; Manie, M
  S; Manuel, T A; Maphalala, M A; Maphoto, L I; Mars, I; Marshoff, F B;
  Martins, B A D; Masala, M M; Maserumule, F T; Masithela, N H; Masutha, M
  T; Mathebe, P M; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F; Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M;
  Mbadi, L M; Mbombo, N D; Mbongo, P F; Mbulawa-Hans, B G; Mbuyazi, L R;
  Mdladlana, M M S; Mfundisi, I S; Mgidi, J S; Middleton, N S; Mkhatshwa,
  S; Mkhize, B R; Mlambo-Ngcuka, P G; Mlangeni, A; Mnandi, P N; Mngomezulu,
  G P; Mnumzana, S K; Modise, T R; Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale,
  E P; Mogoba, M S; Mohai, S J; Mohamed, I J; Mokoena, D A; Molebatsi, M A;
  Molewa, B G; Moloto, K A; Momberg, J H; Mongwaketse, S J; Montsitsi, S D;
  Moonsamy, K; Morobi, D M; Moropa, R M; Morwamoche, K W; Moss, M I;
  Mothoagae, P K; Motubatse, S D; Mpahlwa, M; Mpaka, H M; Mshudulu, S A;
  Msomi, M D; Mthembi-Mahanyele, S D; Mthembu, B; Mtirara, N Z; Mtsweni, N
  S; Mulder, C P; Mulder, P W A; Mutsila, I; Mzondeki, M J G; Nair, B;
  Nash, J H; Ncube, B; Ndlovu, V B; Ndou, R S; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen,
  W S; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngculu, L V J; Ngubane, H; Ngubeni, J M; Ngwenya, M
  L; Nhlanhla, J M; Nhleko, N P; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njobe, M A A; Nkomo, A
  S; Nkosi, D M; Nonkonyana, M; Nqakula, C; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M B; Ntuli,
  S B; Nzimande, B M; Nzimande, L P M; Oliphant, G G; Omar, A M; Pahad, E
  G; Phala, M J; Phantsi, N E; Pheko, S E M; Phohlela, S; Pieterse, R D;
  Radebe, J T; Rajbally, S; Rajoo, K; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin, M;
  Ramodike, M N; Ramotsamai, C M P; Ripinga, S S; Saloojee, E; Schneemann,
  G D; Scott, M I; Seaton, S A; Sekgobela, P S; September, C C; Serote, M
  W; Shabangu, S; Shilubana, T P; Shope, N R; Sigcau, S N; Sigcawu, A N;
  Sigwela, E M; Sikakane, M R; Sithole, D J; Skhosana, W M; Skosana, M B;
  Skweyiya, Z S T; Slabbert, J H; Smith, P F; Smith, V G; Solo, B M;
  Solomon, G; Sonjica, B P; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Thabethe, E; Tinto, B;
  Tolo, L J; Tshabalala-Msimang, M E; Tsheole, N M; Turok, B; Twala, N M;
  Vadi, I; Van den Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe, J H; Van Wyk, A
  (Annelizé); Van Wyk, N; Vilakazi, B H; Viljoen, C L; Woods, G G;
  Xingwana, L M T; Zita, L; Zondi, K M; Zulu, N E; Zuma, J G.

  NOES - 47: Andrew, K M; Aucamp, C; Bakker, D M; Bell, B G; Beukman, F;
  Blaas, A; Borman, G M; Botha, A J; Bruce, N S; Camerer, S M; Cupido, P W;
  Da Camara, M L; Davidson, I O; Delport, J T; Dowry, J J; Durand, J;
  Ellis, M J; Geldenhuys, B L; Gibson, D H M; Gore, V C; Green, L M;
  Greyling, C H F; Grobler, G A J; Kalyan, S V; Lee, T D; Madasa, Z L;
  Moorcroft, E K; Morkel, C M; Nel, A H; Ntuli, R S; Olckers, M E;
  Opperman, S E; Pillay, S; Rabie, P J; Selfe, J; Semple, J A; Seremane, W
  J; Simmons, S; Singh, A; Smuts, M; Sono, B N; Southgate, R M; Swart, P S;
  Swart, S N; Taljaard, R; Van der Merwe, A S; Waters, M.

Vote 35 accordingly agreed to.

Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL
                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker and hon members, we have rights. One
of the rights we have is to test the tolerance of this House. My speech is
fairly long, so I move. [Applause.] [Laughter.]

Ms B A HOGAN: Madam Speaker, I have it on good authority that at supper
time there were lots of bids going on how long this debate was going to
take. I would like to see where it stands at the moment. But this Budget
has been debated extensively, both in the First Reading debate and in an
extensive debate on each Vote. Suffice it for me to say, on behalf of the
ANC, that I rise to support this Bill for reasons that have been put far
more eloquently by my colleagues in this House than I could put them.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mr K M ANDREW: Madam Chair, I regret to advise the House that their luck
has run out! May I start by thanking the UCDP and the FA for giving us
their time, so that we can cover this important debate a little more
thoroughly. [Interjections.]

This is the last debate on the Appropriation Bill, which was tabled on 23
February this year. Since then most of our economic indicators have taken a
turn for the worse. Economic growth has been slower than anticipated,
inflation has increased, business confidence has decreased sharply and the
value of the rand has declined substantially. Time will tell whether these
adverse developments are a temporary aberration or not. However, we should
not allow our attention to be diverted from the desperate plight of the
unemployed and poor people of our country.

The ANC Government should hang its head in shame when it comes to the
neglect of the poor in our society. [Interjections.] Six years after the
ANC came to power, there are more poor people and they are worse off than
they were in 1994. [Interjections.] Six years after the ANC came to power,
we discover that nearly half a billion rands - nearly R500 million - which
was specifically budgeted for poverty relief last year, has not been spent.
Nearly half a billion rands for poverty relief was unspent in just one
year. This is not just a disaster in one department: at least six
departments are guilty of perpetrating this injustice. It is an absolute
disgrace, yet the Ministers responsible remain comfortably ensconced and
protected from the consequences of their ineptitude.

In the Budget debate, the DP emphasised the importance of South Africa
achieving a 6% growth rate, to enable us to reduce unemployment and
poverty. As usual, the Minister - who always has the last word in these
debates - avoided addressing the serious issues raised and chose to ignore,
twist or scoff, as the mood took him. He did anything but answer the
arguments presented. He declared, and I quote:


  ... the DP's criticism of our Budget proposal amounts to no more than a
  clutter of soft-headed populist appeals to the simple-minded. This is how
  they insult the electorate with their unbelievable, unashamed and
  unaffordable populism.

[Interjections.] What were these soft-headed, populist appeals of the DP?
The first appeal was: Get our growth rates up to 6%, to reduce unemployment
and poverty. Just three days after that budget debate, the IMF produced a
report on South Africa, and what did the IMF say? I quote:


  The urgent challenge facing the authorities is to raise South Africa's
  growth potential so as to facilitate job creation and improve living
  standards.

I wish to ask the Minister if that is soft-headed populism.
[Interjections.]

The second appeal by the DP was: Make South Africa attractive for both
domestic and foreign investors. What did the IMF say? It said:


  The key to generating high and sustainable output and employment growth
  lies in the pursuit of policies aimed at, amongst other things,
  accelerating structural reforms that would help increase domestic
  investment and attract foreign investment.

Is that more soft-headed populism? [Interjections.]

The DP's third appeal was: We need rapid privatisation. The IMF noted how
slowly the privatisation process was taking place and stressed the
importance of accelerating it. Was that unbelievable and unaffordable?
[Interjections.]

The DP's fourth appeal was: We need a deliberate campaign to increase the
supply of skilled people. What did the IMF say? It said: ``South Africa
must increase the skills of the labour force.''

The DP's fifth appeal was for greater labour market flexibility.
[Interjections.]

Dr R H DAVIES: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: I am wondering whether
the DP is the local branch of the IMF. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! That is out of order.

Mr K M ANDREW: No, Mr Davies, and we are not the local branch of a
communist party either. [Interjections.]

We appeal for greater labour market flexibility. What did the IMF say? It
pointed to the need for faster labour market reform and underscored the
need for more fundamental changes to certain aspects of the labour market
policy to encourage job creation for the unskilled. What does the Minister
want us to believe? That the IMF executive board are soft-headed populists?
And who is the chair of the board of governors of the IMF and the World
Bank? A soft-headed populist, propagating, unbelievable, unashamed and
unaffordable populism, or our very own Minister of Finance himself?
[Interjections.]

As part of short-term poverty alleviation, the DP proposed a basic
subsistence grant. Obviously, this touched a raw nerve in the ANC and,
naturally, the Minister tried to shoot the whole idea down, yet within
weeks, President Mbeki appointed two committees to look into South Africa's
social welfare system, including the concept of a basic income grant. So
much for the Minister's scorn and derision.

The simple fact is that Government lacks the courage and imagination to
take South Africa away from a future of increasing unemployment, poverty
and crime. Government is planning to implement policies which Government
itself knows will result in rising unemployment and poverty. The DP will
not support such an approach. The DP will not support this Bill.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Dr G G WOODS: Madam Speaker, it is not because I am afraid of being mugged
outside at midnight that I am going to invite members to consult the
Hansard of, I think, 8 June, or the First Reading of this debate, should
members be interested in the IFP's views on the Budget and why we supported
it. [Applause.]

Dr P J RABIE: Madam Speaker, hon Deputy President, hon  Minister, hon
Deputy Minister, hon members, the New NP is an opposition party with a
social conscience. The Budget of 2000-2001 is particularly noteworthy,
because it is an attempt to alleviate poverty and address the needs of the
marginalised sectors of our society. As a constructive opposition party we
will give credit to the Government and to the Minister of Finance where it
is due. However, we retain the right to criticise legislation which we feel
is not in the interests of the public.

The New NP supports the Appropriation Bill and we will vote for it.
Economics is not an exact science. [Applause.] It refers to human beings,
their needs, their aspirations, their material and spiritual wellbeing. The
Government's serious attempt to reduce the Budget deficit of 2,6% of GDP in
2000-2001 is commendable. The hon the Minister said in his Budget Speech
that a healthy fiscal policy must be matched by sound monetary measures.
This is an accepted international norm at present.

The vote against the Department of Trade and Industry by the DP is a sad
one. I would like the DP to explain this to the thousands of poor people in
the Western Cape who depend on the canning industry, and on the wine
exports and so forth. Maybe their vote is not important, but to the
constituents who I represent, this is a serious thing, and I think the DP
will have to pay much serious attention to that.

The New NP supports the measures taken to curb inflation. The target band
of 3% to 6% by 2002 is important. Rising inflation invariably leads to
higher interest rates, a phenomenon which invariably imposes hardship on
the materially deprived and a severe financial burden on the small and
medium-sized business sector. The reduction in personal and corporate tax
is acknowledged. We welcome the relief for the lower, middle and higher
income tax brackets.

The question remains whether our tax relief measures are adequate. South
Africa competes within a global economic environment. In order to retain a
competitive edge, our tax measures must be fair, and attract foreign
investors to invest in our country. Direct foreign investment is a
prerequisite for sustained economic growth.

The hon the Minister predicted an average growth of 3,4% over the next
three years in his Budget Speech. Our present population growth is roughly
2% per year. Our official unemployment rate is something like 37,5%. The
present rates of crime, and of emigration of skilled South Africans are,
however, the result of our present unacceptable rate of unemployment. We
should not be complacent. Our present economic growth rate will have to be
increased, and we call upon all role-players to do something in this
regard.

A number of other factors have had a negative effect on our economy. The
weakening of the rand in relation to the dollar since April has forced us
to pay considerably more for imported crude oil, which has adversely
affected our inflation rate. I would like to conclude.

As dit oor die welsyn van die ekonomie van 'n land gaan, behoort daar nie
goedkoop politieke stellings gemaak te word wat wanpersepsies na buite kan
skep nie. Die privatisering van die parastatale instellings is van
sleutelbelang en dit moet versnel word. Die Nuwe NP versoek egter die agb
Minister dat ons die herstrukturering van ons staatsbates met takt en
oorleg hanteer, sodat ons tog nie sekere sektore van die samelewing
bevoordeel en andere benadeel nie. Hierdie is 'n sleutelvereiste. Ons
staatskuld moet gedelg word en dit kan en moet aanleiding gee tot
volhoubare ekonomiese groei.

In hul voorlegging aan die Portefeuljekomitee oor Finansies het die Buro
van Inkomste getoon dat daar 'n lae belastingmoraliteit bestaan. Dit is ook
'n verskynsel wat kommer wek, en weer eens versoek die Nuwe NP dat ons
hierdie baie betreurenswaardige verskynsel deeglik moet ondersoek. Dit is
'n verskynsel wat hierdie land nie kan bekostig nie en wat ons skade kan
berokken. Ek wil afsluit en sê dat hierdie begroting van sleutelbelang is.
Dit lewer 'n positiewe bydrae tot die verligting van armoede en my party
steun dit. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[When the welfare of a country's economy is at issue, cheap political
statements should not be made which can create false perceptions in the
outside world. The privatisation of parastatal institutions is of key
importance and should be speeded up. However, the New NP requests the hon
the Minister to handle the restructuring of our state assets with tact and
consultation, so that we do not favour certain sectors of society and
prejudice others. This is a key requirement. Our state debt must be
discharged and this can and must give rise to sustainable economic growth.

In their submission to the Portfolio Committee on Finance the Bureau of
Revenue indicated that a low tax morality exists. This is also a phenomenon
which causes concern, and the New NP once again requests that very
deplorable phenomenon be thoroughly investigated. It is a phenomenon which
this country cannot afford and which can damage us. I want to conclude by
saying that this appropriation is of key importance. It makes a positive
contribution to poverty relief and my party supports it.]

Mr C T FROLICK: Madam Speaker, the Appropriation Bill is not only a policy
statement which gives effect to Government policy, but it also indicates
the priority areas for spending the money allocated in this Budget. The
process is taken further in the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework in which
estimates and policy priorities are reflected for the next three years on a
rolling basis.

The UDM wants to give credit to the Minister of Finance, the director-
general and officials from the department who have championed this
transparent process. Few people will disagree that the economic
fundamentals are in place, especially with reference to our fiscal and
monetary policies. The budget deficit is even lower than was anticipated in
the Budget Speech of the Minister, made less than three months ago. Good
progress has also been made to bring inflation down to acceptable levels.
The UDM believes that the greatest challenges for South Africa in the
economic environment currently are to achieve sustainable economic growth
and to create jobs for our people.

Lastly, I want to say a word on the current budget process in Parliament.
We need to review the role of Parliament and its committees in this process
to achieve a more direct impact on the budget, including its capacity, the
budget timeframe and the oversight and monitoring role. We appeal to the
Minister to investigate, in consultation with Parliament, this possibility.
The UDM supports this Bill. [Applause.]

Prof B TUROK: Madam Speaker, it is quite extraordinary how people can see a
glass as being half full or how they can see it as being half empty. It is
quite amazing how people can interpret data in different ways. The hon
Andrew is a member of the finance committee like myself. What I heard in
the finance committee where a paper was delivered by the director-general
on the supplementary estimates on poverty relief, infrastructure spending
and job summits, was that the total spending for those heads was exactly
the figure that Mr Andrew quoted. So, he sees a lack of spending, I see
spending.

Therefore, I ask the House to study the data, look at the books, see the
figures and see what has really happened. The truth of the matter is that
the finance committee, of which the hon Andrew is a member, was told that
R448 million had been spent on issues such as poverty relief, etc. So, let
us be careful in the judgments we make about these figures. We were
extremely fortunate to have a presentation which gave us a lot of detail
about the new situation in which the Government finds itself. We were, for
example, told that the fiscal objectives of the Government have now shifted
and changed because of the improved budget deficit situation and because
the squeeze on spending is not as great as it was before.

Therefore there is no battle between spending on poverty relief and the
budget deficit problem that we inherited. Now we can concentrate on the
question of spending on  poverty relief and so on. The real challenge for
us is to ensure that the money that Parliament approves is actually spent,
and that is a function that we all share.

I would just like briefly, because this is no time to make a speech, to
make an appeal that all the portfolio committees should do as we were asked
to do, and that is to monitor the poverty relief spending and the
allocations that were made to us. Members of Parliament in their
constituencies should monitor where the spending takes place, and even
where the spending does not take place, because, let us be honest, there
are difficulties and logjams in various areas. These logjams have been well
analysed and it is up to us, as members of Parliament, together with civil
society and the NGOs, to do as the President asked us to do at the
beginning of the debate the other day.

He asked us to ensure that we have a strong developmental state that will
bring the people into the process of Government and will make ample room
for civil society to participate in spending. I would like to make an
appeal, not in the terms that come from the DP, but on the positive claims
that come from our Minister, our director-general, our Ministry of Finance
and other departments, because we are clearly in a much better position now
than we were a year or even two years ago. Therefore, let us proceed with
the developmental state and with mobilising poverty relief for our people.
The need is great and let us not listen to the doomsayers from the DP.
[Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, hon Ministers and members, the day has been
long and we are all tired. We have been given sufficient time to make
adequate inputs into the whole Budget and all the Votes, many of which we
have supported, and, of course, three of which we could not support.

We do not need to cover the same points which we have raised during the
First Reading of this Appropriation Bill. We supported the Budget during
the First Reading, we are satisfied with the account given by the Minister,
and we will have ample opportunity to monitor the spending by this
Government. With these words we, therefore, support the Second Reading.
[Applause.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, I want to agree with the hon Turok that
this is not the time to make a speech. It is 10h25.

The Appropriation Bill is structured in a transparent, rolling budget
format which supports effective planning to meet policy priorities of
national and subnational Government. One cannot deny that efforts have been
made to implement the priorities within the country's financial resources.
The economy is dynamic, therefore, the Budget policy framework is also
dynamic. However, the MF is confident that, from year to year, the creative
Budget process will be implemented to circumvent difficulties that affect
the economy. The MF supports this Bill. I have cut my speech short.
[Applause.]

Ms R TALJAARD: Madam Speaker, hon members and Minister of Finance,
regrettably, I am not going to cut my speech short, I am afraid to say.

During the hon Barbara Hogan's speech in the debate on the Finance Vote,
extensive reference was made to the role of our Ministry of Finance in
acting as a bridgehead between the developing and the developed world, the
role we play in reforming global financial institutions, and the
progressive governance debate. Yesterday, in the President's debate, we
again heard of the efforts of South Africa.

But let us look a little more closely at the old and the new Washington
consensus. The old Washington consensus emphasised the following standard
elements; fiscal discipline, unified and competitive exchange rates,
deregulation, financial liberalisation, trade liberalisation,
privatisation, and, essentially, price and market reform, together with
macro stability. The new Washington consensus calls for additional elements
- liberalisation of labour markets, enhanced financial supervision and
credential regulation, orderly opening up of the capital accounts,
transparent governance, and social safety nets.

But as Dani Rodrik, professor of international political economy at
Harvard's John F Kennedy School of Government, points out, the new
Washington consensus has by no means displaced the key terms of the old
Washington consensus. In his book The New Global Economy and Developing
Countries, Rodrik points out that the new Washington consensus has not
dropped any of the elements of the old consensus. What the new consensus is
doing instead is adding other things, not replacing the old Washington
consensus en masse with a coherent new Washington consensus.

As we engage many of these policy questions around privatisation, labour
market flexibility, further trade liberalisation that we have voted on
today ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Order! On what point are you rising, hon member?

Mr K M ANDREW: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: I am sitting three
metres from the speaker ...

Ms N E HANGANA: And so what? [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Order! Proceed, hon member.

Mr K M ANDREW: ... and I would ask you to keep sufficient order or
quietness in the House. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order!

Mr K M ANDREW: Madam Speaker, I do so with great respect, and I also
believe that it is a form of gender discrimination because if people do not
... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Order! Hon member, what is your point of order?
Is it about the noise level?

Mr K M ANDREW: Do you want me to shout at you, Madam Speaker? I am trying
to ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! No, no! Is your point of order about the noise
level?

Mr K M ANDREW: Yes, please. And I think it must not be a requirement of
members of Parliament that they must be capable of delivering their
speeches by shouting in order to be heard in a debating chamber.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Please let the hon member finish
her speech, and let us hear her. [Interjections.] Hon members, please let
us listen to this hon member's speech. Proceed, hon Taljaard.

Ms R TALJAARD: As we engage many of these policy questions around
privatisation, labour market flexibility and further trade liberalisation
we have voted on today, we must bear this ongoing debate between the old
and the new Washington consensus and the cohabitation of the two in mind.
We must bear this in mind when we engage these policy issues at home and
abroad. We must particularly bear this in mind when we engage these policy
issues abroad on behalf of other developing countries.

The other matter that I wish to discuss is inflation targeting. In the
Minister's Budget Speech he said the following (Hansard 2000, col 931):


  Inflation targeting increases the transparency and accountability of
  monetary policy. It provides stability in the value of money which, in
  turn, enhances growth prospects.

The DP supported the adoption of inflation targeting as a key tool of
monetary policy. We supported it because it injects the key principles of
certainty, transparency, accountability, and, above all, policy
credibility.

I need not rehash the spats between the Minister and the Governor of the
Reserve Bank, in both March and May this year. Suffice it to say that in
May, in particularly, the Minister increased the uncertainty in a question
session at the Bureau for Economic Research ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon members! [Interjections.] Order! Please
finish up, hon member.

Ms R TALJAARD: The Minister indicated that we would not make unnecessary
sacrifices to achieve our objective, that we would not make sacrifices just
to reach something that a model has told us is the only correct answer.

However, the DP calls on the Minister to prioritise the key principles of
certainty and policy credibility, instead of escape clauses. This does not
mean that we deny the presence or the impact of external economic shocks on
our target. We must take the short-term pain for the long-term gain of
credible, transparent, monetary policy-making. We must not budge from our
target.

Credibility once lost is credibility not regained. This is particularly
true, given that developing countries' experimentation with inflation
targeting is both limited and varied, and it is early days in our
experiment. We are an emerging market that has to continue to build and
expand its credibility, and we can, quite literally, not afford to miss our
target. [Applause.]

Mr C AUCAMP: Madam Speaker, I prepared a nice two minute speech on this
Bill. But when I said during my speech on the previous order of the day,
that I would not speak again, I got a standing ovation from Mr Manuel, and
since I do not want to disappoint such a good man, I rest my case by
stating that although there are many positive things in this budget, in
view of what I have already said in this House, we cannot support it.
[Interjections.]

Mr B NAIR: Madam Speaker, like the Minister, I have at least half an hour's
speech. But due to the lateness of the hour, I have decided to forego it
until another day. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, I just do not know whom the hon
Aucamp is talking about when he says ``we''. [Laughter.] Is that the royal
``we''? I would like to repeat, for the benefit of the hon Andrew, that, if
he does not accept now that it is soft-headed populism, then he will on
Monday when we debate the Taxation Laws Amendment Bill, because he will
oppose every change to bring our tax policy in line with the rest of the
world. He cannot have his cake and eat it. He must wake up and smell the
coffee. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Bill be read a second time.

Division demanded.

The House divided:


  AYES - 240: Ainslie, A R; Arendse, J D; Asmal, A K; Balfour, B M N;
  Baloyi, M R; Baloyi, S F; Bekker, H J; Belot, S T; Bhengu, F; Bhengu, N
  R; Biyela, B P; Blaas, A; Bloem, D V; Booi, M S; Botha, N G W; Buthelezi,
  M G; Buthelezi, M N; Camerer, S M; Carrim, Y I; Cassim, M F; Chalmers, J;
  Chiba, L; Chohan-Kota, F I; Cindi, N V; Coetzee-Kasper, M P; Cronin, J P;
  Davies, R H; De Beer, S J; De Lange, J H; De Lille, P; Dithebe, S L;
  Dlamini, B O; Doidge, G Q M; Douglas, B M; Dowry, J J; Duma, N M; Durand,
  J; Du Toit, D C; Erwin, A; Fankomo, F C; Feinstein, A J; Ferreira, E T;
  Fihla, N B; Fraser-Moleketi, G J; Frolick, C T; Gandhi, E; Geldenhuys, B
  L; George, M E; Gerber P A; Gigaba, K M N; Gogotya, N J; Gomomo, P J;
  Goniwe, T M; Goosen, A D; Green, L M; Grové, S P; Gumede, D M; Gxowa, N
  B; Hajaig, F; Hanekom, D A; Hangana, N E; Hlangwana, N L; Hlengwa, M W;
  Hogan, B A; Holomisa, S P; Jana, D P S; Jassat, E E; Jeffery, J H;
  Joemat, R R; Jordan, Z P; Kalako, M U; Kannemeyer, B W; Kasienyane, O R;
  Kekana, N N; Kgarimetsa, J J; Kgauwe, Q J; Kota, Z A; Kotwal, Z; Lockey,
  D; Lucas, E J; Lyle, A G; Mabandla, B S; Mabeta, M E; Mabudafhasi, T R;
  Madasa, Z L; Magashule, E S; Magubane, N E; Mahlalela, C C; Mahlangu, M
  J; Mahomed, F; Maimane, D S; Maine, M S; Makasi, X C; Makunyane, T L;
  Makwetla, S P; Malebana, H F; Maloney, L; Maluleke-Hlaneki, C J;
  Malumise, M M; Mangena, M A; Manie, M S; Manuel, T A; Maphalala, M A;
  Maphoto, L I; Mars, I; Marshoff, F B; Martins, B A D; Masala, M M;
  Masutha, M T; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F; Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M; Mbadi,
  L M; Mbombo, N D; Mbongo, P F; Mbulawa-Hans, B G; Mbuyazi, L R;
  Mdladlana, M M S; Mfundisi, I S; Mgidi, J S; Middleton, N S; Mkhatshwa,
  S; Mlambo-Ngcuka, P G; Mnandi, P N; Mngomezulu, G P; Mnumzana, S K;
  Modise, T R; Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, E P; Mohai, S J;
  Mohamed, I J; Mokoena, D A; Molebatsi, M A; Molewa, B G; Moloto, K A;
  Momberg, J H; Mongwaketse, S J; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K; Morkel, C M;
  Morobi, D M; Moropa, R M; Morwamoche, K W; Mothoagae, P K; Motubatse, S
  D; Mpahlwa, M; Mshudulu, S A; Msomi, M D; Mthembu, B; Mtirara, N Z;
  Mtsweni, N S; Mutsila, I; Mzondeki, M J G; Nair, B; Nash, J H; Ncube, B;
  Ndlovu, V B; Ndou, R S; Nel, A H; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngcengwane, N D;
  Ngculu, L V J; Ngubane, B S; Ngubeni, J M; Ngwenya, M L; Nhlanhla, J M;
  Njobe, M A A; Nkomo, A S; Nkosi, D M; Nonkonyana, M; Nqakula, C; Ntuli, B
  M; Ntuli, M B; Ntuli, S B; Nzimande, B M; Nzimande, L P M; Olckers, M E;
  Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G; Omar, A M; Pahad, E G; Phala, M J;
  Phantsi, N E; Phohlela, S; Pieterse, R D; Rabie, P J; Radebe, B A;
  Radebe, J T; Rajbally, S; Rajoo, K; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin, M;
  Ramotsamai, C M P; Ripinga, S S; Schneemann, G D; Scott, M I; Seaton, S
  A; Sekgobela, P S; September, C C; September, R K; Serote, M W; Shabangu,
  S; Shilubana, T P; Shope, N R; Sigcau, S N; Sigwela, E M; Sikakane, M R;
  Simmons, S; Sithole, D J; Skosana, M B; Skweyiya, Z S T; Slabbert, J H;
  Smith, P F; Smith, V G; Solomon, G; Sonjica, B P; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M
  M; Southgate, R M; Swart, S N; Thabethe, E; Tinto, B; Tolo, L J;
  Tshabalala-Msimang, M E; Tsheole, N M; Turok, B; Twala, N M; Vadi, I; Van
  den Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe, J H; Van Wyk, A (Annelizé); Van Wyk, J
  F; Van Wyk, N; Vilakazi, B H; Xingwana, L M T; Zita, L; Zondi, K M; Zulu,
  N E; Zuma, J G.

  NOES - 31: Andrew, K M; Aucamp, C; Bell, B G; Borman, G M; Botha, A J;
  Bruce, N S; Da Camara, M L; Davidson, I O; Delport, J T; Eglin, C W;
  Ellis, M J; Gore, V C; Grobler, G A J; Heine, R J; Kalyan, S V; Lee, T D;
  Moorcroft, E K; Mulder, C P; Mulder, P W A; Ntuli, R S; Opperman, S E;
  Pillay, S; Schmidt, H C; Selfe, J; Semple, J A; Seremane, W J; Smuts, M;
  Swart, P S; Taljaard, R; Viljoen, C L; Waters, M.

Question accordingly agreed to.

Bill read a second time.

The House adjourned at 22:35.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

   1. The Speaker and the Chairperson:


        (1)      The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 14 June 2000 in terms
               of Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bill as a
               money Bill:


               (i)     Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 38 - 2000] (National
                    Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Finance -
                    National Assembly).

National Assembly:

The Speaker:

1.    The following changes have been made to the membership of Committees,
     viz:


     Communications:

     Appointed: Maziya, A M (Alt).
     Discharged: Mohai, S J.

     Correctional Services:

     Appointed: Maziya, A M.
     Discharged: Ntuli, S B.

     Housing:

     Appointed: Douglas, B M; Slabbert, J H (Alt).

     Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Women:

     Appointed: Mbuyazi, L R; Ngubane, H (Alt).
     Discharged: Vos, S C.


     Public Enterprises:

     Appointed: Ntshangase, I B (Alt); Martins, B A D (Alt).

     Public Service and Administration:

     Appointed: Zulu, N E.

     Public Works:

     Appointed: Middleton, N S (Alt).
     Discharged: Slabbert, J H.

     Sport and Recreation:

     Appointed: Moonsamy, K (Alt).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Finance:
     Explanatory Memorandum on the Taxation Laws Amendment Bill, 2000 [WP 1-
     2000].

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Health on the SADC Health
     Protocol, dated 14 June 2000:


         The Portfolio Committee on Health, having considered the request
         for approval by Parliament of the Protocol on Health in the
         Southern African Development Community, referred to it, recommends
         that the House, in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution,
         approve the said Protocol.


     Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs on
     the Meat Safety Bill [B 29 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 76), dated
     7 June 2000:


         The Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs, having
         considered the subject of the Meat Safety Bill [B 29 - 2000]
         (National Assembly - sec 76), referred to it and classified by the
         Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 76 Bill, reports the Bill
         with amendments [B 29A - 2000].

3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs on the Local
     Government: Municipal Electoral Bill [B 35 - 2000] (National Assembly -
     sec 75), dated 12 June 2000:


         The Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs, having considered the
         subject of the Local Government: Municipal Electoral Bill [B 35 -
         2000] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified
         by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the
         Bill with amendments [B 35A - 2000].

