---
title: 'National Assembly - 21 September 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2000-09-21
---

THURSDAY, 21 SEPTEMBER 2000
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:04.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Dr A S NKOMO: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the Government's strategy of prevention, treatment, care
       and support, human and legal rights, monitoring, research and
       evaluation is based on the thesis that there is a causal link between
       HIV and Aids;

  (2) recognises that sub-Saharan Africa is hardest hit by the pandemic
       and, therefore, we have to broaden our strategy to include the link
       between disease and poverty;

  (3) urges the people of South Africa to protect themselves appropriately;

  (4) calls on the scientific community to work together to find a solution
       to HIV/Aids which is throttling our country and our continent; and

  (5) calls on all stakeholders to combine forces to find solutions to the
       pandemic and to strengthen the partnership against HIV/Aids.

[Applause.]

Mr R JANKIELSOHN: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House -


  (1) endorses the motion put forward yesterday in which condolences and
       sympathy were expressed to the families of the two men who died in a
       tragic shooting incident at the Simonstown Naval base;

  (2) urges the Minister of Defence to desist from his now-customary and
       wholly superficial practice of making personal findings and reaching
       conclusions about tragic and unhappy incidents as and when they
       occur, and thus undermining the commissions of inquiry which he
       appoints;

  (3) calls on the Minister of Defence to make public the "extraordinary
       steps" he will take to alleviate the racial tension which he says
       exists in the South African National Defence Force;

  (4) notes that the South African National Defence Union warned Minister
       Lekota, even before the Tempe incident last year, that some of the
       problems experienced by soldiers had the potential to erupt into life-
       threatening situations; and

  (5) urges the Minister to meet with the South African National Defence
       Union urgently to address these issues.

Mrs S A SEATON: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I will move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the announcement by the Minister of Correctional Services to
       the effect that the incidence of HIV infection in South Africa's
       prisons has increased by 300% over the last three years;

  (2) reaffirms the protection afforded by the Constitution to the rights
       of all human beings;

  (3) realises the danger presented to officials in the prison services and
       HIV-free inmates by the increase in the number of infected prisoners;
  (4) notes that the Minister and the Department of Correctional Services
       have already taken steps and have produced a substantial draft policy
       document entitled "Management Strategy: HIV/Aids in Prisons" which
       sets out the purpose, policy framework and principles, including
       guidelines which deal with precautions, treatment and procedures to
       be followed at admission and throughout the incarceration period; and

  (5) commends the Minister and the Department for their initiative and
       would support the implementation of this strategy immediately.

Mrs R R JOEMAT: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that eight members of a family - four children and four adults
       - died after their home burnt down in Frankdale near Table View
       outside Cape Town this morning;
  (2) further notes that the survivors of this tragic incident are ten-year-
       old twins and their elder sister who is in a stable condition in
       hospital;

  (3) expresses its condolences to the family of the deceased; and

  (4) calls on all communities to be extra careful when using candles and
       paraffin stoves.

[Applause.]

Mr J DURAND: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I will move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the remark by Cosatu, at its seventh national congress, that
       those who call for labour market flexibility are in fact defending
       inequality;

  (2) further notes that Cosatu, through its hostile behaviour, is
       responsible for the greatest inequalities in South Africa, in the
       light of the following:


       (a)  the unemployed currently number 5,8 million while Cosatu can
           only boast a membership of 1,8 million, but still insists on
           policies that protect jobs instead of creating jobs ...

[Interjections.]


       (b)  Cosatu boasts of its R62 million contribution to the Job
           Creation Fund, but managed to cost the economy billions of rands
           and consequent job opportunities, through its national strike
           against job losses earlier this year; and


       (c)  the Government, in the interest of the economy, is calling for
           wage restraints, but Cosatu is once again threatening strike
           action if its wage demands are not met; and


  (3) urges the ANC Government, in the interest of the millions of
       unemployed people in South Africa, to refrain from yielding to
       Cosatu's self-centred demands and act in the interest of those who
       are seeking an opportunity to contribute to the economy of South
       Africa.

[Interjections.]

Mr M E MABETA: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I will move:


  That the House -


  (1) welcomes the consideration of a conscription system by the Department
       of Defence; and

  (2) believes that -


       (a)  such a system will promote a culture of ownership and renewed
           pride in the SANDF, and will assist in the constitutional
           obligation of the SA National Defence Force to defend and
           protect our country, its people and our Constitution, especially
           in human right components of civic education for defence new
           personnel;


       (b)  the initiation of new and original training programmes, together
           with practical experience, will empower new recruits to add
           value to the SANDF in promoting professionalism and discipline,
           as well as strengthen it; and


       (c)  an effective conscription system will eventually build and
           strengthen our all-volunteer reserve force.

Mr M RAMGOBIN: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the Deputy President, Mr Jacob Zuma, has been awarded the
       freedom of the city of Prague;

  (2) believes that this affirms an important contribution our leaders and
       the people of our country have made in the human rights discourse and
       efforts and practices toward national reconciliation and nation-
       building;

  (3) further believes that this will strengthen economic, social and
       cultural ties between the people of Prague and South Africa; and


  (4) congratulates the Deputy President on this important award.

[Applause.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the PAC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the Special Review Report on the selection process of strategic
       defence packages for the acquisition of armaments at the Department
       of Defence released by the Auditor-General yesterday;

  (2) further notes that the report recommended a forensic audit of
       processes in the R30 billion arms acquisition package deal, after
       saying that there were material deviations from generally accepted
       practices;

  (3) acknowledges that the PAC has been vindicated and will continue to
       monitor the process; and


  (4) calls on the Minister of Defence to act swiftly on the
       recommendations of the report and to extend the brief of the Auditor-
       General to also investigate all the sub-contractors.

Mr M A MANGENA: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of Azapo:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the steep escalation in the price of crude oil on the
           international market and, therefore, of all petroleum products;
           and


       (b)  that this high price of oil is playing havoc with economies
           worldwide, leading to public protests in many industrialised
           countries;


  (2) observes that there is no clear sign, as yet, of the price of oil
       coming down; and

  (3) urges the Government to consider subsidising the price of paraffin,
       which is used by the poor and vulnerable in our country for cooking
       and lighting.

Mrs B M NTULI: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  former President, Nelson Mandela, will this evening receive the
           World Methodist Peace Award for the year 2000; and


       (b)  former recipients of this prestigious award include
           international luminaries such as Kofi Annan, Anwar Sadat and
           Mikhail Gorbachev;
  (2) congratulates former President Mandela, who is regarded throughout
       the world as a great symbol of freedom, justice and peace; and

  (3) calls on our former President to continue with his excellent efforts
       to bring peace and stability to Africa and other parts of the world.

[Applause.]

Mr G A J GROBLER: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP:


  That the House notes -


  (1) the growing rift in the ANC-SACP-Cosatu alliance in the light of the
       following:


       (a)  that Ministers Kader Asmal and Geraldine Fraser-Moleketi were
           awarded a "worst employer" award by Cosatu ...

[Interjections.]
       (b)  that this goes to show that there are serious differences
           between the Government and its trade union alliance partner; and


  (2) that the Democratic Party wishes to congratulate Ministers Kader
       Asmal and Geraldine Fraser-Moleketi on these awards, since they must
       be doing good work in South Africa's interest if they have upset
       Cosatu to this extent.

[Interjections.]

Inkosi M W HLENGWA: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) congratulates the Bhekulwandle Primary School in Amanzimtoti and the
       Mariannhill Park Primary School in Mariannridge, KwaZulu-Natal, on
       their success in winning the School Computer Centre Award held among
       disadvantaged schools around Durban;

  (2) notes that the winning prize is a fully-equipped computer centre for
       each school together with training and technical support;

  (3) expresses its appreciation for the role played by Unilever and
       McCarthy Retail in sponsoring the competition and the computer
       equipment; and

  (4) calls on the private sector to play a more prominent and active role
       in the provision of computer facilities for disadvantaged schools in
       South Africa.

Mr T L MAKUNYANE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  Cosatu's seventh congress presented awards to comrades who
           played a significant role in the trade union movement;


       (b)  presentations were made in acknowledgement of all Rivonia
           trialists, recognising their outstanding service and sacrifice
           in the struggle for freedom and justice in our country; and


       (c)  the Elijah Barayi Award for outstanding leadership was awarded
           to Comrade Nelson Mandela;


  (2) believes that these patriots made an important contribution in
       building a new nation, democracy and unity amongst South Africans;
       and

  (3) joins Cosatu in thanking these patriots for the sterling contribution
       they made in our struggle for democracy.

[Applause.]

Mrs M E OLCKERS: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I will move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the high levels of air pollution in the industrial areas in
       South Africa, and that industries specifically in the Durban,
       Sasolburg and Table View areas must accept responsibility for
       polluting our environment in the light of the following:


       (a)  that independent testing of air around Sasolburg has found very
           high concentration of 16 very dangerous chemicals, seven of
           which are known to be causes of cancer;


       (b)  that concentrations of these chemicals have been found to be
           eight times higher than the maximum levels allowed in the United
           States of America;


       (c)  that the levels of pollution of some chemicals in Table View
           were found to be seven times higher than the exceptionally
           polluted air in Sasolburg; and


       (d)  that The Mercury, a Durban-based newspaper, found in a door-to-
           door survey that levels of childhood leukaemia ...

[Time expired.]
Dr G W KOORNHOF: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I will move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) supports the Auditor-General's call for a forensic audit of, or
       special investigation into, flaws and deficiencies in certain aspects
       of the arms procurement process;


  (2) notes with concern the Auditor-General's conclusion regarding the
       unsatisfactory explanation provided by the Department of Defence on
       the alleged material deviations from procurement practices; and

  (3) calls on the President to issue an order authorising an investigation
       into these irregularities identified by the Auditor-General as a
       matter of urgency.

Ms N L HLANGWANA: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the perception of many South Africans that some financial
       institutions are biased against black people;

  (2) believes that such perceptions undermine the confidence of the
       majority of South Africans in the financial sector;

  (3) recognises that for the South African economy to grow, the confidence
       of our own citizens in the business sector is as critical as the
       confidence of foreign investors; and

  (4) calls on organised business to desist from its knee-jerk response of
       saying that any attempts to address the rights and concerns of the
       disadvantaged will undermine business confidence, and instead to
       engage creatively in ensuring that prejudice is eliminated in the
       financial and business sector.

[Applause.]

                      CONGRATULATIONS TO TERENCE PARKIN

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr G Q M DOIDGE: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House -


   (1)      notes that Terence Parkin won the silver medal in the 200-metres
        breaststroke event for men at the Olympic Games in Sydney;


   (2)      believes that this achievement despite the fact that he is deaf
        serves as a shining example to all South Africans, especially those
        with disabilities; and


   (3)      congratulates him on his sterling performance.


Agreed to.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL
           GOVERNMENT ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT: MUNICIPAL SYSTEMS BILL

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Madam Speaker, hon
members, I count it an honour to be given the privilege of introducing this
important Bill before the House. The resounding defeat of apartheid and the
1994 democratic breakthrough have created the imperative of identifying
strategies which are appropriate to the ongoing task of deepening democracy
in our country.

Before the House today is the Local Government: Municipal Systems Bill.

Mr A BLAAS: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: What happened to the
consideration of this report of the committee? This is now the second Order
of the Day. What happened to the first Order?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Your point of order is actually in order. I will
request the hon the Minister to take a seat and we will dispense with the
issue of the report which will not take the House long. [Interjections.]

The House should now consider the Report of the Portfolio Committee on
Provincial and Local Government on the Local Government: Municipal Systems
Bill.
Order disposed of without debate.

Report adopted.

                  LOCAL GOVERNMENT: MUNICIPAL SYSTEMS BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Madam Speaker, before the
House today is the Local Government: Municipal Systems Bill, a Bill which
puts planning, community participation, performance monitoring and service
delivery at the centre of its objectives.

The general tenor of the public debate on the Bill suggests that many
amongst us have no difficulty in accepting the importance of a local
government whose performance standards are such that they are seen to be
adequately responsive to local needs. What makes this Bill particularly
important is its recognition that in addition to the council and its
administration, the local community is an indispensable part of the
municipal equation.

It is the Bill's hypothesis that participatory governance is the key to
fostering a harmonious relationship between the council, the administration
and the local community. The Bill makes it mandatory for municipalities to
consult communities when making decisions which have a bearing on local
development and delivery of basic services. In this regard, municipalities
will be required to set aside resources for use in encouraging
participation by members of the community. Not only will this enhance
municipalities' accountability to the people, but it will also ensure that
the needs of the poor are reflected in the policies, practices and
programmes of local government.

As elected public representatives, we do not need to be reminded that
people have a right to expect their government to be efficient in its
dealings with them. The current state of affairs suggests that a revolution
in style of governance has to take place amongst both political
representatives and officials alike. Indeed, across the world there is an
enormous variety of developing practices aimed at finding ways of building
and mastering public participation in matters of governance.

The systems which we are introducing, whilst they are unique in many
respects, are another welcome addition to the global menu of options for
modernising local democracy. I am confident that this Bill will create the
legislative climate necessary to inspire public confidence in the business
of governance, help enhance the quality of public services and keep our
continuing search for a better life on course.

In conclusion, I wish to place on record my profound appreciation to the
chairperson and all other members of the portfolio committee for a job well
done. I have no doubt that the results of their work will inspire our
people's hope for a better society. [Applause.]

Mr Y I CARRIM: Madam Chair, comrades and friends, to put it mildly this is
a fascinating, innovative, truly transformative Bill. It is particularly
apposite that it is being passed today, on the eve of the local government
elections. It is a telling reminder that our local government campaign is
not just about the elections, as important as they are, but is also, very
crucially, about the transformation of local government. The elections are
part, in fact, of overall transformation. So the local government campaign
certainly does not end on election day. The elections merely usher in a
qualitative new phase of the ongoing local government transformation
campaign.

The Local Government: Municipal Systems Bill is a crucial part of the
package of legislation, as explained by the Minister, that defines the new
system of local government which is to come into effect after the local
government elections. While the Local Government: Municipal Structures Act
defines the political structures of the new local government model, the
Local Government: Municipal Systems Bill focuses on the internal systems of
municipalities. Essentially the Local Government: Municipal Systems Bill
gives practical effect to the notion of developmental local government in
the Constitution and the White Paper. It sets out an integrated cycle of
community participation, integrated development planning, performance
management and municipal services provision.

Different speakers from the ANC will deal with different aspects of the
BiIl. I will deal with more general issues. Among the major challenges the
Local Government: Municipal Systems Bill has to respond to are the
following: firstly, the need for municipalities to effectively exercise the
powers and functions allocated to them and, over time, to take on
increasing responsibilities. I hope that the acting DDG, Jackie Manche, is
impressed that it is the first thing I have mentioned, as she was very
strident about this in a different structure yesterday.

Secondly, there is the need to remobilise local communities and ensure
their active and concerted engagement in municipal activities; thirdly, the
need to ensure economically and financially viable municipalities;
fourthly, the need to restructure municipal administrations to make them
more effective, efficient and accountable; fifthly, the need to ensure
proper planning and the speeding up of service delivery, especially to the
poor and disadvantaged; and sixthly, the need to enhance co-ordination
between the three tiers of government and more effectively implement co-
operative governance.

These concerns are addressed not just through the Local Government:
Municipal Systems Bill, but also through the Local Government: Municipal
Demarcation Act, the Local Government: Municipal Structures Act and the
pending legislation on local government finances. The new system of local
government defined through this legislation is a considerable improvement
on the present system. Of course, we will not be able to fully implement
the new system immediately after the elections.

The ability of a municipality to appropriately implement the provisions of
this Bill will depend crucially on issues of capacity, resources and
funding. Therefore, there are provisions for the phasing in of aspects of
the Bill and the need to take into account the differing capacities of
municipalities.

The department has set out its programmes for the transformation of
municipalities. The effective implementation of significant provisions of
this Bill depends crucially on this programme of transformation, and the
committee urges that this programme be appropriately resourced and
implemented.

Obviously, this is a Bill that regulates an entire sphere of Government. It
deals with issues that are also being taken up by several line-function
Government departments and Ministries. As the policies and legislation of
other departments and Ministries are finalised, it may be appropriate in
future to review some aspects of this Bill, especially if practical
experiences in the transformation of municipalities also suggest this.
However, it must be stressed that the core aspects of this Bill will easily
stand the test of time.

The portfolio committee is acutely aware that the appropriate
implementation of the Bill depends on the necessary funding. Municipalities
will have to increase their capacity to raise their own revenue, but the
national and provincial governments will also have to consider reviewing
their financial and other support for local government.

It must also be stressed that the effective implementation of this Bill
also depends on the political will of public representatives in all three
tiers of government. The ultimate success of the implementation of this
Bill depends on the concerted co-operation of all three tiers of
government. Clearly then, we do not have some romantic, idealised view of
the challenges of this transformation.

Of course, the restructuring of municipal services will pose particular
challenges. We recognise that municipalities on their own cannot deliver on
all the basic needs of our people. The Bill requires municipalities to
become more efficient and effective in the delivery of services through
their internal structures. It also provides for municipalities to enter
into a variety of partnerships with both the public and the private sectors
to speed up the delivery of services.

We have found a very good range of partnerships to speed up service
delivery in a way that is sensitive to the needs of the current phase of
our unfolding transition. The Bill certainly provides a framework to avoid
some of the major difficulties of Egoli 2002 and other restructuring
projects. But legislation is obviously not enough. The success of the
restructuring of municipal services will depend significantly on the sense
and sensibility of all the key stakeholders, including the councillors, the
administration, trade unions, business organisations and community
structures.

Because of the transformative nature of this Bill, the Democratic Alliance
will inevitably not support it. They are resorting to the usual empty
mantras. They say that the Bill is too prescriptive and centralist. But the
Constitutional Court has already passed judgment on the parameters of
national legislation on local government. They say that the Bill will
inhibit private-sector involvement in service delivery. But it does not. On
the other hand, the rampant, unfettered free marketism of the Democratic
Alliance will serve only to further marginalise the poor.

They say that community participation will paralyse councils. This comes
from a party that calls itself democratic - the Democratic Alliance.
Nevertheless, if one reads the Bill clearly and holistically, it will not.
The Bill, in fact, seeks to strengthen democracy and municipal government.
It finds an appropriate balance between the need to ensure community
participation on the one hand, and the right, ultimately, of elected
councillors to govern, on the other. It has to be stressed that there is a
mutual interacting relationship between the two.

However, despite their inane opposition, we thank the Democratic Alliance
for their active engagement with this Bill. It must be stressed that the
vast majority of members of this committee are, in fact, new and that they
set out on the course of long hours of debate well into the early hours of
the morning.

The hon Peter Smith of the IFP - the IFP, of course, sensibly supports this
Bill - has been particularly helpful in processing this Bill, and we
express our appreciation for that. Of course, he can be a pain, but he is
also a gain to our committee. I know this sounds very much like Muhammad
Ali's type of poetry, but the fact is that Peter Smith, stripped of his
ideological straitjacket, has been especially useful to our committee, and
we thank him for that.

My thanks also go to Mohammed Bhabha, chairperson of the NCOP select
committee, for his outstanding work in processing this Bill, while
retaining the integrity of the NCOP processes that must surely unfold after
today. My sincerest thanks also go to the Minister and the Ministry, as
well as Jackie Manche and her excellent team in the department, Alroy
Africa, Petro Bouwer, Fanie Louw, the director-general, and others.

Finally, I want to say that whether this Bill succeeds in the way that we
mean it to or not, it is ultimately the responsibility of each and every
one of us, including the Democratic Alliance, to see to it that this works
because at the end of the day the challenges that confront us in local
government are not fundamentally party-political or fundamentally
ideological. It is no use sitting on the side and carping, because we all
have the common responsibility to ensure that local government works,
given, especially, the new model that we are setting out, which is going to
increase the responsibilities allocated to local government. Ultimately,
the test of service delivery, development, nation-building and a whole
series of other issues, not least the economic challenges of job creation,
local economic development and so on, will be the value, the success and
viability of the new model of local government. [Applause.]

Mrs G M BORMAN: Madam Speaker, hon Minister Mufamadi, hon members, reports
from various parts of the country indicate that local government is in a
state of crisis. One wonders how the complete changing of the municipal
system will affect that crisis. Will it solve it or compound it? That is
what this House has to decide.

Let us see what the situation is at the moment. The past six years have
been characterised, at local government level, by gross incompetence,
overspending, insolvency and corruption; nobody can deny that.
[Interjections.] The transitional municipalities created by the ANC have
failed the country, but more notably, they have failed the poor.
[Interjections.]

Take the recent situation in the Umzinyathi Regional Council, where the
councillors voted themselves nice, big, fat pay increases which they had
not budgeted for. So, where did they find the money? They just helped
themselves out of the equitable share. [Interjections.] This means that
they feathered their nests out of the fund provided to enable
municipalities to subsidise services for the poor.

In many places, service delivery is scant on the ground. Often, services
which have been delivered have been substandard. Maintenance costs have
been so high that essential resources have had to be redirected away from
delivery into an abyss of unsustainability and insolvency.

An audit published towards the end of 1999 clearly illustrated this crisis
in local government. Almost half of South Africa's 843 municipalities are
in a financial crisis; 151, or one in six, are destitute. It has been
estimated that municipalities owe a total of some R12,4 billion to their
creditors. That amounts to 19 weeks or nearly five months worth of rates
and service charges.
We live with this legacy today, everywhere - in the cities and the dorps;
in the towns and the rural villages. [Interjections.] It is a legacy of
failed dreams and broken promises. Over the weekend, it was reported that a
voter who was registered arrived at his polling station to demand that his
name be taken off the voters' roll. He was angry with the politicians who
had promised roads and other amenities, but had failed to deliver on those
promises. [Interjections.] This is the legacy of the transitional
municipalities which the ANC forced upon this country.
The new package of legislation designed by the ANC to revolutionise local
government must now not only deal with the legacies of apartheid, but also
the corrupt and bankrupt policies of the ANC's tenure as leaders of this
country. [Interjections.] Today we are to vote on a Bill which defines the
internal mechanisms of municipalities in a new system of government. This,
it is hoped, will effect transformation at the local level.

The DP believes that the proposed legislation contains many positive
features, and please note this: These include the principle of public
participation, integrated development planning, performance management,
service delivery, credit control and debt collection. However, the DP is
convinced that the proposed system is so onerous and stringent that it will
be almost impossible for municipalities to respond to their communities'
needs in a timeous, efficient and sustainable manner. The Government is
saying to municipalities: Whilst you are struggling to crawl and to walk we
demand that you not only run, but bring home Olympic gold in the
pentathlon.

The Local Government: Municipal Systems Bill is characterised by two
contradictory and equally onerous policy prescriptions. On the one hand the
Bill proposes to implement a rigid policy of community participation and
consultation for local government. The close interrelationship between the
community being served and the local authority is at the very heart of the
system of local government. Community involvement in the affairs of
municipalities is therefore not only desirable but necessary if that system
is to be called democratic and accountable. However, the Local Government:
Municipal Systems Bill takes this very noble and essential policy
imperative to a bizarre and far-fetched conclusion.

The Bill creates cumbersome and expensive structures which all
municipalities are required to introduce. These new structures are required
to implement, maintain, develop and promote a culture of community
participation. Such prescriptive and onerous micromanagement of
municipalities will only serve to tie the hands of councillors and
municipal managers. Further, it will divert essential resources away from
real service delivery into meaningless and superfluous bureaucratic
structures.

This emphasis on community participation and grass-roots democracy is,
however, completely negated by another provision in the Bill, ministerial
regulations and guidelines. Towards the end of many of the most admirable
and inclusive chapters of this Bill, the ANC is proposing a mechanism for
ministerial intervention in the most detailed internal affairs of
municipalities. In direct contrast to the spirit of grass-roots
participation, outlined in the White Paper and realised in the chapter on
community participation, the numerous ministerial guidelines and
regulations institute a rigid, top-down, centralised power framework.

The proposals give the Minister wide, sweeping powers to interfere in the
day-to-day affairs of municipalities. The Minister will be able to poke his
nose into everything from the remuneration of municipal staff to the
seizure of property. The ANC has justified the inclusion of these
ministerial measures by referring to the need for guidance during what is
likely to be a problematic and painful transition. The DP believes that
there should be a limited transitional period during which these awesome
powers can be exercised, but past experience has shown that when Ministers
are given the power to override normal procedures, the temptation to use
and abuse them is too great to resist, and many in this House will know
exactly what I am referring to, having themselves been the victims of
ministerial megalomania. [Interjections.]

I now wish to point out a further weakness in the Bill. As we all know,
delivery of essential services is the basic indispensible function of
municipalities. A local council which fails to provide these essential
services is like a cow that yields no milk. On the surface, the Bill
appears to provide for the outsourcing or privatisation of some of these
services, but it then hedges it all by laying down rigid and complicated
procedures to be followed. These are so onerous that they will almost
certainly deter private contractors from tendering for the services.

The Development Bank of Southern Africa is in constructive partnership with
the South African Government. One of the initiatives they are focusing on
is public-private partnerships at local government level. We are of the
opinion that this initiative will find itself utterly hamstrung by the
restrictions imposed by this proposed legislation.

The key to the whole crisis in local government lies not in this or that
piece of legislation. It lies in people. In municipalities, this comes down
to management and professional people. If we get good management and top-
class professionals, then we will have well-run municipalities.

For this to happen along with transformation, infinitely greater attention
will have to be given to the upgrading and training of people and the
provision of adequate support systems. Get poor management and one will get
a Randfontein. There the CEO has had to be suspended because his
professional negligence led to a shutdown of electricity for 181 000
residents. The town owed Eskom R6 million. Eskom repeatedly asked the CEO
to take remedial action, but the CEO was busy having a conflict with the
council and failed to do his duty. It is widely known that this is no
isolated incident.

No amount of legislation can make people competent. Because of the
reservations we have expressed, which in our opinion highlight the serious
defects of the Bill, the DP cannot support it and calls upon this House to
reject it. Just here, I would like to assure the committee and our
chairperson, Mr Carrim, that the DP will be working alongside everybody
else in local government, in order to make it work. We will be playing our
part there, together with everybody else. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mr P F SMITH: Madam Speaker, may I start by thanking the hon Yunus Carrim
for his kind words. They are appreciated.

I think it is important to contextualise this Bill and maybe rather
crudely, juxtapose two notions of what local government is. There is the
old traditional notion. If one thinks of traditional local government of
the old days, one would describe it as rule-driven, hierarchical,
bureaucratic, remote from the people, certainly nonparticipatory and
technocratic in character. It centres on the delivery of services, and
these services are to residents and ratepayers. It is pretty staid and,
frankly, boring.

Over the last 20 years, there has been a revolution. Let us call it the
neoliberal revolution. If one juxtaposes that with what happened before,
what kinds of words do we use to describe it? First and foremost are
notions of competitive, compulsory tendering, by which everything
municipalities do is available to the private sector to do better than the
municipalities. Everything becomes cost-driven. Downsizing, outsourcing and
privatisation are key words. It is customer-focused rather than focused on
residents, it is highly participative, it is developmentally oriented, it
is competitive and dynamic.

That is what happened when the process started 20 years ago, but there has
been a process over the last 20 years of softening that approach, and it
has coalesced over the last couple of years into what is called the best-
value approach to local government. It is that that this Bill seeks to
embody in legislation.

There are key elements that the chairperson has referred to. Public
participation, for example, is a key thing. I think the DA's argument that
that is overdone is totally false. We define the municipality as comprising
three legs. We have the political structures, the administrative structures
and the community. The community is part of the municipality and
participates in it.

There is the whole notion of integrated development planning, which is both
a composite plan, including within it all the other plans, and also a
strategic document guiding vision, guiding one's budgeting process. There
is the whole notion of performance management, setting clear objectives for
delivery and key performance indicators, so one knows where one is going,
measures where one is going and achieves what one is trying to do.

Correcting the problems we have now in council administration relations,
there is a hands-off relationship between the political structure and the
administrative structures, codes of conduct for each and contracts with
senior managers. All these things are designed to improve delivery. Then,
of course, there is a whole lot of options for service delivery itself -
options which are internal, including ringfenced commercialised operations,
and a host of possible external service delivery agreements with other
organs of state, with the private sector or what have you.

Finally, the most important issue referred to by the chairperson is the
notion of phasing this in. The argument that it is too onerous would be
correct if it had to be implemented on day one. The whole point about the
regulations is to phase this thing in over up to 20 years. Who knows how
long it could be before we get the whole Bill going?

I praise it. I think the Bill is very, very good. Having said that,
however, I think of all these things that the Bill tries to do, the biggest
challenge is delivery, and it is on the delivery side that we have the
greatest weakness. If one looks at the infrastructure, there is crumbling
and inadequate infrastructure in the country, and there is a massive need
to roll out huge volumes of infrastructure. In fact, Gugu Moloi, who is
with the department and now heads up the municipal  infrastructure unit, is
quoted as saying that R100 billion is the shortfall for municipal
infrastructure. That is a vast amount.

Municipalities do not have the finance and they do not have the skills to
roll it out, so unless we leverage private sector capital and private
sector expertise, it is not going to happen at the rate we want it to. This
is where the Bill fails to provide sufficient attention to those
mechanisms. We feel that it does not adequately facilitate the provision of
private capital. It does not adequately compel municipalities to explore
alternative mechanisms for service delivery other than those which are
internal and, in the context of promoting private-public partnerships,
which is an environment in which we are still experimenting in this
country, that is, in fact, too prescriptive.

I think there is an in-built suspicion of the private sector. We need to
realise that the private sector is not the enemy. The private sector can
work with the state to deliver. But people are too fond of quoting bad
examples of PPPs. Sure, there are international water companies, for
example, which did not succeed in delivering water, and Bolivia is such an
example. However, by the same token, there are examples where the opposite
occurs and where the partnership works extremely well. I refer hon members
to Buenos Aires.

In 1993 when a contract was entered into between an international private
water company and the city, the contract stipulated an immediate drop of
27% in the price. The company had to invest $3 billion over 30 years and
roll out water to 5 million people in the city. What has happened in the
process over the past few years, is that revenues have doubled, costs have
tumbled and everybody is happy. Those are the kinds of examples we are
talking about.  There are hundreds of examples - some are good, some are
bad.  but let us not throw the baby out with the bath water by saying that
they are all bad. We need to encourage much more of that.

The World Bank itself - I know the World Bank is not very popular on that
side of the House - estimates in a report, using water as an example, that
there are over 1 billion people who currently do not have access to clean
and potable water and that 3 billion lack access to sewerage facilities. It
says in the report, and I quote:


  Unless governments begin spending much more, the number of people without
  clean water will rise to 2,5 billion, and to one person in three by the
  year 2025.

So that is the challenge before us: delivery, money and expertise to
deliver infrastructure. That is where I think the Bill is a bit short.
Otherwise, the Bill is very good, but just in this one area, it is a bit
weak, and I think we will have to revisit this as time goes on.

Perhaps there is no harm in a drop of levity in this House. I would like to
propose a toast. Now, of course members of this House do not normally drink
toasts, and I do not think that they all have glasses. But even if they had
glasses, I would ask them to charge them with H2O, ie water - because of
PPP and all the rest - because we do not have champagne. [Laughter.] This
Bill is so important. It is really an important Bill. It is going to
revolutionise the way in which the entire sphere of Government operates.

Mr D A A OLIFANT: Pick up your glass!

Mr P F SMITH: I have a glass here. I want to propose a toast to the person
probably more responsible than anyone else in the world today for this
Bill, an icon of the 20th century and a revolutionary who stormed the
Bastille of poor governance. I am sure that hon members on that side of the
House will be delighted to join in the toast to Comrade Lady Thatcher.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mr F J VAN DEVENTER: Madam Speaker, the good intentions expressed by the
Local Government: Municipal Systems Bill are seriously jeopardised by the
unreasonable desire of the trade unionists and Communists in the ranks of
the ANC to centralise power in the hands of the Minister. [Interjections.]
In no fewer than eight chapters of this Bill, regulating powers far beyond
what is needed are given to the national Minister for Provincial and Local
Government. There can only be two reasons for this. Firstly, the Minister
has no confidence in the ability of local government councillors and
officials to conduct the business of local government and, secondly, the
Minister is nothing more than an instrument in the hands of the SACP and
Cosatu, in order for them to reach their political and philosophical goals.
[Interjections.] He may even be part of that think-tank.

Ek sien sy beskermheer in die SA Kommunistiese Party sit nou net so twee
sitplekke van hom af daar, sodat hy net nie verkeerd moet praat nie.
[Tussenwerpsels.] [I see that his protector in the SA Communist Party is
now sitting only two seats away from him, so that he does not say the wrong
thing. [Interjections.]]

The democrats in the ANC must seriously start recognising the enormous
dangers for democracy if they keep on allowing the erosion of their
legislative power by ministerial regulations directed at satisfying
pressure groups within their ranks. [Interjections.]

Die agbare voorsitter van die portefeuljekomitee het seker die
``understatement'' van die jaar gemaak ten opsigte van die hantering van
hierdie wetsontwerp. [The hon chairperson of the portfolio committee
probably made the understatement of the year with regard to the handling of
this Bill.]
He said that this Bill was not particularly ideological or party-political,
but when we discussed certain chapters of this Bill, the same hon member
wanted to ignore the opposition parties because he saw this Bill as the
implementation of the policies and ideology of the ANC.

Nou kom daardie agb lede vandag hier en hulle neem ons kwalik as ons vir
hulle sê ons gaan nie stem nie vir 'n wetsontwerp wat die magte in so 'n
mate in die hande van die Minister sentraliseer dat hy plaaslike regering
absoluut kan beheer. [Tussenwerpsels.]

In die tweede plek word daar in artikels 40 en 41 van die Grondwet 'n
bepaalde status aan plaaslike regering toegeken, maar as 'n mens gaan kyk
na al die dinge wat in hierdie wetsontwerp omtrent plaaslike regering
ingebou is, bly daar van daardie status as 'n behoorlik gedefinieerde sfeer
van regering, soos die Nasionale Vergadering en die provinsiale wetgewers,
weinig oor.

Daar moet 'n rede wees daarvoor. [Tussenwerpsels.] Daar moet 'n rede wees
daarvoor, en die rede is niks anders nie as die volgende, en as ek dit sê,
wil ek my in die eerste plek baie duidelik en sterk kwalifiseer. Soos enige
ander politieke party, glo die Nuwe NP in die gemeenskapsbetrokkenheid van
die plaaslike regeringsvlak. As ons dit sê, wil ek vanmiddag vir die ANC
dít sê: hulle het dit gesê voordat hierdie Parlement byeengeroep is. Hulle
het dit gesê voordat die provinsiale wetgewers byeengeroep is.

Nou wil ek vir hulle sê hier sit hope van hulle wat nie eens weet waar
hulle bedieningsgebiede is nie, en dan praat hulle van
gemeenskapsbetrokkenheid en dies meer. [Tussenwerpsels.] Hulle gebruik
hierdie wetgewing om agter raadslede op wie hulle 'n houvas het weg te
kruip om hulle pligte na te kom ten opsigte van die raadpleging van die
gemeenskappe. Waar is die agb lid Salie Manie se bedieningsgebied?
[Tussenwerpsels.] Hoeveel keer kom die agb lid daar?

As 'n mens verder gaan, sien jy by die definiëring van munisipaliteit word
daar verwys na die politieke strukture, na die administrasie en die
gemeenskap as deel van daardie munisipaliteit. As 'n mens kyk na die klem
wat daar gelê word op gemeenskapsbetrokkenheid - ons sê weer ons stem saam
met gemeenskapsbetrokkenheid - dan is dit vir my 'n bietjie onbegryplik hoe
die regsaanspreeklikheid alleenlik op twee van daardie gedefinieerde
entiteite van 'n munisipaliteit van toepassing gemaak word. Terwyl
gemeenskapsbetrokkenheid, ek wil byna sê gemeenskapsdruk, aangemoedig word,
word daar hoegenaamd nie verwys na enige poging om dan daardie einste
gemeenskap medeverantwoordelik te hou as munisipaliteite van die spoor sou
loop nie.

Ten spyte van die belemmerende aspekte in hierdie wetsontwerp, is daar
goeie goed, en hier is vanmiddag na baie van daardie goeie goed verwys.
Beter dienslewering is baie noodsaaklik. Goed opgeleide amptenare is baie
noodsaaklik. So is dit ewe noodsaaklik dat waar munisipaliteite, veral in
die oorgangstydperk, nie voldoende kundigheid gaan hê om te doen wat van
hulle verwag gaan word nie, daar groter klem gelê moet word op privaat-
openbare vennootskappe in die uitvoering van munisipale dienslewering.

Nou kom die agb Regering in hierdie konsepwetsontwerp, en hulle sê hulle
wil darem so 'n effense mate van beskerming kan toepas. In dieselfde asem
is hulle só voorskriftelik ten opsigte van hoe dié ``public-private
partnerships'' moet werk dat geen private entrepreneur dit sal waag om
werklik intens by die diensleweringsaspekte van plaaslike regering betrokke
te raak nie. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Die oomblik wanneer 'n mens voorskriftelik begin raak ten opsigte van die
private sektor, tas jy nie net hul finansiële oorleefbaarheid aan nie, maar
ook hul integriteit ten opsigte van dienslewering. Die Regering sal moet
leer. Die agb Minister van Sport en Ontspanning ry die wêreld vol agter
sportlui aan - die agb Minister kan maar lag! - maar kan hy vir die Huis
verduidelik hoe die Regering dit reggekry het om in ses jaar bykans 1
miljoen werkgeleenthede te vernietig? Kan die agb Minister dit vir die Huis
verduidelik?

Ek wil vanmiddag vir die Regering sê hy kan op sy kop staan, maar met die
voornemens wat in hierdie wetsontwerp opgeneem is, naamlik om plaaslike
regering in 'n soort werkverskaffingsburo te omskep gaan hy verdere
werkgeleenthede inboet in plaas daarvan om dit te skep, omdat hy die
private sektor buite rekening laat in die hele opset. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Wat die nie-betaling van dienste- en belastinggeld betref, het ons nie
beswaar indien daar spesiale maatreëls getref word vir mense wat dit nie
kan bekostig nie. Ons is egter nie bereid om onbepaald te aanvaar dat almal
wat daarop aanspraak maak dat hulle ``disadvantaged'', ``poor'', dit of dat
of inheems is, eenvoudig die reg het om terug te staan wanneer dit kom by
die nakoming van hul verpligtinge as verbruikers van dienste nie.

Wanneer ons na hierdie aspek kyk, sal ons noodwendig 'n middeletoets moet
ontwikkel, anders gaan dieselfde gebeur wat nou met hierdie maatskappye
gebeur wat so oor hul voete val om aandele teen groot afslagpryse aan
agtergeblewenes beskikbaar te stel om hulle ekonomies te bemagtig. Wie koop
daardie aandele? [Tussenwerpsels.] Daardie aandele word opgekoop deur mense
wat ekonomies meer bemagtig is as ek. Nie 'n sent daarvan kom by die gewone
arm mense uit nie. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Mense moet ophou om armoede te definieer uit die oogpunt van swart en
inheems en mense wat, soos die agb Minister dit stel, rykdom het omdat
hulle wit is en weens die kolonialistiese stelsel. Die agb Minister speel
met vuur. Ek dreig nie, maar die agb Minister kan gerus na die wêreld
rondom hom gaan kyk. Hy is gedurig in Amerika ... (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Now those hon members come here today and take exception when we tell them
that we are not going to vote for a Bill which centralises power in the
hands of the Minister to such an extent that he can control local
government absolutely.

In the second place, in sections 40 and 41 of the Constitution local
government is allocated a specific status, but if one looks at all the
things built into this legislation regarding local government, very little
remains of that status as a properly defined sphere of Government, like the
National Assembly and the provincial legislatures.

There must be a reason for this. [Interjections.] There must be a reason
for this, and the reason is nothing other than the following, and when I
say this, firstly I would like to qualify myself very clearly and strongly.
As is the case with any other political party, the New NP believes in
community involvement at local government level. When we say that, I want
to say the following to the ANC this afternoon: They said this before this
Parliament was convened. They said it before the provincial legislatures
were convened.

Now I want to say to them that there are many of them here who do not even
know where their constituencies are, and then they talk about community
involvement and the like. [Interjections.] They use this legislation to
hide behind councillors whom they have a hold over to meet their
obligations with regard to consulting the communities. Where is the hon
member Salie Manie's constituency? [Interjections.] How often does the hon
member go there?

If one goes further, one sees in the definition of municipality that
reference is made to the political structures, to the administration and
the community as part of that municipality. When one looks at the emphasis
which is placed on community involvement - we say once again that we are in
agreement as regards community involvement - then it is somewhat
incomprehensible to me how the legal accountability can only be made
applicable to two of those defined entities of a municipality. While
community involvement, and I almost want to say community pressure, should
be encouraged, no reference whatsoever is made to any attempt to then hold
that very community jointly responsible should municipalities go off the
rails.

Despite the obstructive aspects of this Bill, there are good things, and
many of those good things have been referred to this afternoon. Improved
service delivery is essential. Well-trained officials are essential. In the
same way it is equally essential that when municipalities, particularly in
the period of transition, are not going to have adequate expertise to do
what is going to be expected of them, greater emphasis must be placed on
private-public partnerships in the execution of municipal service delivery.

Now the hon Government comes along with this draft Bill and they say that
they want to be able to apply a slight degree of protection. In the same
breath they are so prescriptive with regard to how these public-private
partnerships must work that no private entrepreneur would dare to become
really intensely involved in the service delivery aspects of local
government. [Interjections.]

The minute one starts becoming prescriptive with regard to the private
sector, one not only tampers with their financial survival, but also with
their integrity with regard to service delivery. The Government will have
to learn. The hon the Minister of Sport and Recreation travels the world
following sportspeople - the hon the Minister can laugh! - but can he
explain to the House how the Government has managed to put paid to nearly
one million jobs in six years? Can the hon the Minister explain that to the
House?

This afternoon I want to tell the Government that it can do what it likes,
but with the intentions contained in this Bill, namely to transform local
government into a type of labour bureau, it is going to lose more jobs
instead of creating them, because it is not taking account of the private
sector in the entire setup. [Interjections.]

As far as the nonpayment of service fees and tax money is concerned, we
have no objection if special measures are taken for people who cannot
afford to pay. However, we are not prepared to accept indefinitely that
everyone who claims that they are disadvantaged, poor, this or that or
indigenous, simply has the right to back down when it comes to the meeting
of their obligations as consumers of services.

When we look at this aspect, we will inevitably have to develop a means
test, otherwise the same thing is going to happen as is now happening with
those companies which are falling over their feet to make shares available
to the disadvantaged at greatly discounted prices to empower them
economically. Who is buying those shares? [Interjections.] Those shares are
being bought by people who are more economically empowered than I am. Not
one cent is reaching the ordinary poor people. [Interjections.]

People must stop defining poverty from the point of view of black and
indigenous and people who, as the hon the Minister put it, have wealth
because they are white and because of the colonialist system. The hon the
Minister is playing with fire. I am not issuing a threat, but the hon the
Minister would do well to look at the world around him. He is constantly in
America ...]
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order!

Mr F J VAN DEVENTER: ... en Europa en orals om beleggings te kry en dan is
dit die soort opmerkings wat hy maak. [... and Europe and all over to get
investments and then this is the sort of comment that he makes.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, your time has expired.

Mr J M NGUBENI: Madam Speaker, hon Ministers and hon members, the
transformation process in the local government sphere since the dawn of
freedom addresses the challenges to enhance and deepen democracy at a level
closest to the people. In preparation for this final phase of local
government transition, the new vision of developmental local government has
been developed and largely implemented through legislation such as the
Local Government: Municipal Demarcation Act and the Local Government:
Municipal Structures Act.

The Municipal Systems Bill before us today is also a significant piece of
legislation which will complement a system of local governance in which
municipalities will play an increasingly important role in service
delivery, the eradication of poverty and the improvement of the social and
economic conditions of our people, especially the disadvantaged
communities. During the dark days of the NP, who are the newborn democrats,
 community participation was never part of their language or practice. The
voice of the majority was deliberately suppressed. Government
accountability and transparency were nonexistent. The Local Government:
Municipal Systems Bill introduces concepts that will shape the system of
local governance to be more efficient, transparent and accountable and to
have effective leadership. The Constitution recognises that participation
and accountability, among other things, are critical for ensuring
sustainable democratic and developmental local government. The Constitution
states that one of the objectives of local government is to provide
democratic and accountable government for communities, and to encourage the
involvement of communities and community organisations in matters of local
government.

Because of this constitutional mandate, the Bill provides for community
participation which is neither negotiable nor a choice, hence it is central
throughout the Bill. The Bill compels municipalities to develop a culture
of municipal governance that complements formal representative government
with a system of participatory governance.

It is interesting and sad to note that the Democratic Alliance that claims
and pretends to be the sole custodian of democracy opposes this democratic
and progressive piece of legislation which extends and deepens democracy at
local level. This makes a  mockery of democracy and demonstrates evident
traits of opposing and delaying transformation.
The Bill, through community participation, will ensure and instil
responsible citizenry, as communities will be actively involved in the
budget preparation processes that will take their needs and priorities on
board. For the first time in the history of local government in our
country, because of the ANC-led Government, communities will be the
planners through the processes of integrated development plans. Communities
will be able to monitor municipalities through the process of performance
management systems. Communities will be strategic decision-makers when it
comes to the provision of municipal services. This is democracy at its
best, understood by men and women who evolved from the structures founded
and guided by true democratic values and principles. In this respect, which
other structure can be more democratic than the ANC?

The prophets of doom, the so-called democrats who are opposed to
transformation, present an argument that allocating resources to capacitate
local communities in a meaningful way will add an extra burden to the
financially cash-strapped municipalities. Firstly, this is not true when
one considers that municipalities are to be reduced and clustered so that
they are financially viable. Secondly, the Constitution qualifies the
provisions of section 152 by saying that local government should meet the
requirement of this particular section within its financial and
administrative capacity. Thirdly, communities are not homogenous. They are
made up of different groups, some of which are more organised and have
better access to resources than others. It is therefore important that the
poor and disadvantaged groups are not marginalised and excluded.

Though the Bill places strong emphasis on community participation, it also
maintains a delicate balance for elected officials to govern. It also
guarantees the rights and duties of municipalities to exercise their
executive and legislative authority without improper interference.

Most municipal councils, throughout the country, are experiencing financial
constraints due to nonpayment for services and poor administration. If
communities are active participants in the affairs of their municipalities,
this problem will be easily dealt with. This will enable municipalities to
effectively implement credit control and debt collection policies. The Bill
introduces the concept of customer care and management with regard to
credit control and debt collection.

This system aims to create a positive and reciprocal relationship between
persons liable for these payments and the municipalities. It further
directs municipal councils to adopt, maintain and implement credit control
and debt collection strategies. This will correct the old practice
currently employed of introducing credit control and debt collection
measures haphazardly and without proper policies. Municipalities will be
able to identify people who can afford to but do not pay for services
rendered by making provision for indigent debtors and also to differentiate
between different categories of ratepayers or users of services.
In conclusion, local government has a critical role to play in
consolidating our new democracy and it is up to each citizen to make their
contribution in the area where they live and work. The Local Government:
Municipal Systems Bill is one of the important and critical building blocks
to facilitate and promote democratic developmental local governments.
According to the hon Bornman, the world started in 1994, but she forgets
the years when they messed up local government, together with their friends
in the NP. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Chief N Z MTIRARA: Mhlali ngaphambili, abaphathiswa ababekekileyo, amalungu
ePalamente abekekileyo nabantwana beenkosi zam abalapha. Kunzima kumasipala
kodwa ke ... [Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon members and all traditional
leaders here, things are bad in the municipalities, but ...]

... in principle we support the philosophy that underpins the municipal
system of local government. Indeed, the system is particularly ideal in
urban areas where it readily blends the local systems of social
organisation that bring together people from diverse backgrounds.

However, the organising of the process of preparation of the groundwork is
so advanced. We would urge that in the not-so-distant future the process of
implementation of local government structures be revisited with a view to
tailoring and adapting it to suit the peculiar specific conditions of the
rural areas which have evolved over centuries and thus acquired a culture
and values of their own and which, in most constituencies, are unique.

In terms of section 81(4) of Act 117 of 1998 the MEC for local government
in a province may by notice in the provincial Gazette, after consulting
traditional leaders, prescribe a role for traditional leaders in the
affairs of a municipality. It is very sad that at this stage the role of
traditional leaders in council affairs has not yet been decided, but that
it will be a subject for negotiation between traditional leaders and the
MEC for that particular province. This state of affairs is likely to cause
great uncertainty for traditional leaders as regards their enthusiastic
participation in the forthcoming municipal elections, when the role they
are expected to play in municipal affairs has not been defined, even at
such a late stage, namely one month before the local government elections
are to be held.
Section 81(4)(a) of Act 117 of 1998 further states that the MEC for local
government in a province may regulate the participation of traditional
leaders in the proceedings of municipal councils. This statement is very
vague and ambiguous indeed. It cannot be assumed that such regulations
would necessary be in the interest of traditional leaders. There have been
so many regulations in Government processes that have caused overregulation
and necessitated deregulation. It is always in the interest of the parties
involved that before regulation takes place, deliberation should take place
between the interested stakeholders and that the regulation should be the
product of consensus.

Whether or not deliberations have taken place to the satisfaction of both
the traditional leaders and the MECs, the province has to agree on the
matter and mode of regulation for the participation of traditional leaders
in the proceedings of municipal councils, of which they are part. Section
81(3) of Act 117 of 1998 states:


  Before a municipal council takes a decision on any matter directly
  affecting the area of a traditional authority, the council must give the
  leader of that authority the opportunity to express a view on that
  matter.

Surely expressing a view on a matter does not amount to an effective
decision-making process? There is a grave danger that the view expressed by
a traditional leader in a council may be overruled, and that a decision
contrary to the interests of the residents of a rural community may be
implemented. Such a state of affairs would make traditional leaders'
subjects feel that they have been sold out by traditional leaders, and
cause untold harm in the relationship between traditional leaders and their
subjects. Such a process is surely a recipe for political instability.

Section 16(d) of Act 117 of 1998 provides for the determination of the
designation of certain councillors to full-time status. What are the
criteria used to reach such status? Does this not amount to the usurpation
of the electoral mandate by the MEC? On what basis will certain other
councillors not be specified as full-time? In terms of what legal framework
is the MEC guided in reaching such a decision? Is there no possibility of
the employment of discrimination or nepotistic tendencies? Does such as an
action in terms of the Constitution of the country not deprive those who
are not declared ``full-time'' of an opportunity to be selected justly and
according to a transparent procedure which is generally known to all
interested parties?

In conclusion, traditional leaders are here to stay, and those who are
sailing with the Western culture will one day realise that this institution
was created by God and will never die.

Mr B M SOLO: Chairperson, Ministers and Deputy Ministers, hon members and
colleagues of the portfolio committee, today marks another critical phase
of transformation. It is a day, in essence, that all South Africans have
been yearning for. The question of transforming local government is long
overdue. As we all know, local government is one sphere of government that
is close to the people. It is charged with the responsibility of
implementing not only basic services, but also, in a sustainable manner,
with dealing with the infrastructural backlog inherited from the apartheid
regime. To do so it will have to be development-orientated.

When the vast majority of people voted for the present Government in the
different electoral periods, they did so consciously, saying clearly:
``Carry on with the good work.  Carry on with the mechanisms, processes and
measures that will improve our quality of life.'' Increasingly, despite
deliberate obstructions, disinformation - as we witnessed today -
disruptions, deceit, lies and distortions from those who cling to the past
or from the prophets of doom, the people spoke recently in loud voices,
saying: ``Carry on with the programme of transformation. Continue to ensure
that South Africa belongs to all who live here'', and ``the people shall
govern.'' This is the mandate bestowed on us by the toiling, ravaged masses
of this country whose interests the ANC Government represent.

The people are saying: ``Break down the apartheid legacy. Do those things
that have to be done to ensure development for a better life for all.''
However, they are also saying that all these things have to be done in a
responsible, disciplined and systematic way. Hence, today, we are to pass
what is called the Local Government: Municipal Systems Bill.

This Bill should be seen as a tool that can be used to deal with the
apartheid baggage in almost all its forms and manifestations. It is a tool
that will deal with problems such as inequality, gaps in social
stratification, overcrowded and impoverished settlements, lack of proper
roads, insufficient infrastructure, and lack of access to potable water,
especially in the rural areas of our country. In short, it will deal with
poor services and fragmented developmental patterns.

I think I would not be doing justice to this debate if I did not address
some of the issues that were raised here. It is very clear that some
members, particularly those from the opposition parties, who serve on the
Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government, do not understand
this Bill. They do not understand what is supposed to take place. They do
not understand that there is a need for transformation.

Both Frik and Gloria really said nothing. What they said has no substance.
Of course, one can understand that because they say very little at
committee meetings and most of the time they keep on going up and down or
sleeping. We are not going to waste time on what they are saying because
there is work to be done.

For us to make progress, it should be realised that development is for the
people. Therefore a Bill such as this one ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Order, hon member. Could you please
take your seat. Let us listen to this point of order.

Mrs G M BORMAN: Chairperson, on a point of order: I would just like to ask
if I heard correctly. Was the hon Solo telling me that I had been sleeping
in the meetings, because not once have I slept in a meeting?
[Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! That is not a point of order, hon
member. Continue, hon Solo.

Mr B M SOLO: Therefore a Bill such as this one needs a socially structured
approach in order to bring about development that will ensure a better life
for all. Thus we have developed clearly defined mechanisms with regard to
integrated development planning.

It is a known fact that up to 1994, development in this country favoured a
specific group in South African society, blatantly neglecting the vast
majority. The system as it exists at present is that municipalities are
generally not planning as much as they should. Where there is planning,
councillors and communities are usually not involved and the planning is
done by officials or external consultants, whose interest is nothing other
than fleecing the council down to the last drop of blood. This results in
volumes and volumes of documents that mostly never get implemented.
Therefore, to avoid that, the Bill deals with how municipalities should
plan and carry out the delivery of services. It promotes a culture that is
responsive to the needs of the people.

To be able to do just that, Chapter 5 of the Bill deals with integrated
development planning. This chapter takes absolute control of development
planning away from technocrats and/or consultants. In fact, Chapter 5 is
one of the elementary chapters that ensure people-driven evolutionary
change. If one looks carefully at and understands this chapter, one can
therefore, through thick forests beyond the mountains, across rivers, see
the light at the end of the dark tunnel.

One of the biggest problems is the lack of consistent development planning.
The apartheid regime failed to deal with development planning in a holistic
way. This has created a lot of uncertainty and a lack of creativity and
vision. As such, Chapter 5 of the Bill deals with how municipalities should
developmentally orientate planning.

Chapter 5 establishes the basic mechanisms and procedures that underpin the
notion of developmental local government set out in the local government
White Paper. Chapter 5 is meant to be a strategic tool for planning medium-
term focus. Therefore, integrated development planning is nothing but a
strategic planning instrument that can be used and show outcomes of local
government.

Maybe to ensure that everyone understands, we need to look at specific
provisions of this chapter. Clause 23 deals with developmentally oriented
planning, so as to ensure that municipalities strive to achieve the
objectives of local government. [Time expired.]

Dr C P MULDER: Chairperson, hon members, the hon Solo, in his speech just
now, made use of the ANC's slogan that says: ``South Africa belongs to all
the people that live in it.'' I think he made a mistake. What he actually
meant was that South Africa belongs to all the people who live in it, as
long as they all support the ANC. [Interjections.]

I have not seen anyone so enthusiastic about an Act or a Bill of Parliament
as Mr Peter Smith today. Mr Peter Smith was very enthusiastic about this
Bill. The fact is that he, in the end, proposed a toast with regard to this
Bill to Mrs Thatcher. Now the question arises: Does the ANC also support
that toast to Mrs Thatcher, derived from the provisions of this Bill, or
not? I do not think that they would agree on the contents in that regard.

The Local Government: Municipal Systems Bill is the third piece of
legislation to give effect to the local government White Paper. The other
two, as we know, are the Local Government: Municipal Demarcation Act and
the Local Government: Municipal Structures Act. On its own, this is one of
the better pieces of legislation. However, one has to see this legislation
also as part of a total package, a package that deals with the ANC's
transformation policy for local government. One cannot see this in
isolation.

Chapter 7 of the Constitution deals with local government. Section 152(1)
of the Constitution deals with the objects of local government and states
as its first object, the following:


  (a) to provide democratic and accountable government for local
       communities.

Now, the question one should immediately ask is: What exactly does this
mean?

Prior to the adoption of the White Paper on Local Government, we in the FF
had negotiations, amongst others, with the hon the President, Mr Thabo
Mbeki. Mr Mbeki, of his own accord, referred to the example of a town like
Carolina. What he said at that stage was that if one took a town like
Carolina, with 3 000 white residents and adjacent to that a black township
with, let us say, 12 000 to 15 000 residents, if one went ahead and put
these two together in one municipality, one would actually be disempowering
that white minority, and that was the last thing that the ANC wanted to
achieve. We all know today that that is exactly what has happened and that
this will happen in each and every demarcated local municipality in South
Africa. I think one should take the ANC seriously in that sense. They are
committed to the total transformation of local government, and that is
exactly what is going to happen. The problem is that there is a positive
aspect in Chapter 4 of this Bill, where it deals with the involvement of
local communities in the whole process.

Daar is egter 'n probleem. As 'n mens luister na die Demokratiese
Alliansie, kry jy die indruk dat hulle bekommerd is oor die betrokkenheid
van plaaslike gemeenskappe, want hulle sê plaaslike gemeenskappe gaan
gebruik word om verkose rade te destabiliseer. Aan die ander kant is die
werklikheid dat die ANC ná die verkiesing feitlik ieder en elke stadsraad
gaan beheer en dat ander gemeenskappe hulle in 'n minderheidsposisie gaan
bevind en gebruik sal moet maak van die beperkte fasiliteite wat daar is om
te probeer om darem 'n inspraak te kry.(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[There is, however, a problem. When one listens to the Democratic Alliance,
one gets the impression that they are concerned about the involvement of
local communities, because they say local communities are going to be used
to destabilise elected councils. On the other hand, there is the reality
that after the election the ANC will be controlling virtually every single
town council and that other communities will find themselves in a minority
position and will have to utilise the limited facilities which exist in an
attempt to have any say at all.]

They will be totally disempowered as part of the whole process. We cannot
support this Bill. [Time expired.]

Mr A G LYLE: Chairperson, local government in South Africa is undergoing a
profound transformation. The profundity of this change will certainly not
only manifest itself in local government, but will also transcend
positively into the daily lives of the citizens of this country, thus
bringing a better life for all.

We take great pride in the way this Bill has been crafted. This, indeed, is
a masterpiece. Its architects were acutely mindful of the deficiencies that
existed in the old order. Chapter 6 of this Bill eliminates that deficiency
- the lack of good management. Gone are the days when municipal managers
would report to work and all one would see for the duration of their
working hours would be a jacket hanging over an empty chair, and gone are
the days when municipalities operated in a void.
Appropriate key performance indicators must be set by municipalities as a
yardstick for measuring performance, outcomes and impact with regard to the
municipalities development priorities and objectives. What does this mean
for a municipality? It means that a municipality must establish a
performance management system, a system that is commensurate with its
resources, best suited to its circumstances and in line with the
priorities, objectives, indicators and targets contained in its integral
development plan.

It is important to know that performance management has never been a
characteristic of local government in South Africa. This ANC-led Government
is introducing a performance management system as part of local government
legislation - a system that is visionary and practical, and that will
maximise productivity and make a positive impact on the life of every
citizen in this country, especially the poor. Amongst other things, a
municipality must promote a culture of performance management in its
political structures and administration.

Currently municipalities do not have an early warning system. We attribute
this to a system inherited from the apartheid regime, a system that is
archaic, lacking in foresight and not developmentally orientated. This
piece of legislation will certainly serve as an early warning indicator of
underperformance. The Local Government: Municipal Systems Bill in its
performance management system, for the first time in the history of this
country, makes provision for the meaningful participation of  local
communities in the development, implementation and review of the
municipality's performance management system and, in particular, allows the
community to participate in the setting of appropriate key performance
indicators and performance targets for the municipality.

This means that no municipality will work in isolation. Its local community
will become an integral part of the municipality. The Auditor-General will
audit the results of the performance measurements annually. The
municipality must prepare for each financial year an annual report
consisting of a performance report reflecting the municipality's and
service providers' performance. The MEC for local government must annually
compile and submit to the provincial legislature and the Minister a
consolidated report on the performance of the municipalities in the
province.
We believe that this piece of legislation, together with other pieces, will
place local government in South Africa in the realm of international
standards, having taken note of our unique situation in this country. May I
take this opportunity of registering my profound and heartfelt gratitude to
our charismatic and inimitable chairperson, Comrade Carrim, for patiently
and diligently taking our study group and portfolio committee line by line
through this Bill. [Applause.]

Mr G E BALOI: Chairperson, when the Government of this country opted for
wall-to-wall municipal governance, hence ensuring that every square
centimetre of this country would be ruled by elected people, the Government
should have seen to it that issues on the system were addressed at that
stage to avoid a situation that has had people sitting in meetings for
hours.

The Bill makes provision for community participation and the hope is that
this will not be done so as to lure the electorate into believing that they
will be caused to participate in the municipal forum. The steps set out on
integrated development planning are most welcome, as long as municipalities
are given support in raising funds and trained in how to achieve the
intended goals.

It is striking that the Bill goes out of its way to single out the
traditional leaders and their treatment when it comes to the code of
conduct. If traditional leaders were elected in a fair way, they could be
readily taken as ordinary members. This is done because they come to serve
on the municipal councils at the pleasure of the MECs. One would expect
that those of them who accept nominations to serve on the municipal
councils would subject themselves to the same code. On the question of the
code of conduct, there is no need to have a different set of rules for
people who serve on the same municipal council.

The code of conduct for employees of the municipal council is a step in the
right direction. We hope that whoever is charged with this will discharge
their duties well.

Mr S A MSHUDULU: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members of this House, hon
guests, the department and South Africans at large, it is my wish today
that on behalf of the ANC I confine my debate to local government, public
administration and human resources and municipal service delivery as
contained in the Local Government: Municipal Systems Bill.

It is also important that before I elaborate on the above, I bring to the
attention of this House symptoms of the apartheid problems that were
identified in service delivery, and these include the following.
Communities and users of services were not consulted about the level and
quality of the public service they received. Communities and users of
services were not expected to know about the level and quality of these
services. There was unequal access, or nothing at all in some rural areas,
to services which communities were entitled to. Those in power did not care
to treat the poor women and the disabled with courtesy and consideration.

Citizens - predominantly the poor - had no right to know about how local
government handled its affairs, as there was no full and accurate
information. There was no speedy and effective remedy to the problems and
complaints of communities and users. There was no consideration for a
public service ethos. The then municipalities did not have sound safety
practices. There were no capacity-building programmes put in place for
employees working in municipalities.
The ANC-led Government further strengthened its research capacity towards
transforming local government and addressing the abovementioned imbalances
of the past by adopting the RDP general principles that lay the foundation
for developmental local government; by demonstrating the will to implement
the basic values and principles governing public administration as
enshrined in the Constitution and to implement the objects of local
government as enshrined in the Constitution; by accepting Government's
obligations to its citizens with regard to provisions in the Bill of Rights
relating to environment, property, housing, health care, food, water and
social security; by having the will to implement the National Framework
Agreement entered into by Cosatu, Salga and Government on restructuring
local government for better, efficient and effective public service
delivery, by consulting broadly through the Portfolio Committee on
Provincial and Local Government; by, as the ANC, consulting the masses
during constituency work, that is during the ``talking to the people''
campaign; most importantly, by auditing all councils on service delivery,
performance and capacity; and, lastly, by having the will to implement all
other legislation mentioned by my comrades earlier.

It is therefore against this background that the ANC-led Government adopted
a bold problem-solving stance aimed at uplifting the social standards of
all South Africans, with special emphasis on the poorest of the poor, and
the transformation of our local government system.

Chapter 7 of the Bill addresses public administration and human resources
by referring, under ``Basic principles'', to the following, which, I think,
I need to mention to empower our opposition: local public administration
that is governed by democratic values and principles, including the
maintenance of a high standard of professional ethics; promotion of the
efficient, economic and effective use of resources; public administration
that must be development-oriented; the provision of services in an
impartial, fair, equitable and unbiased manner; responsiveness to people's
needs and the encouragement of public participation in policy-making,
which, of course, is the ANC culture; to remind the opposition, accountable
public administration; transparency fostered by providing the public with
timely, accessible and accurate information; the cultivation of good human
resource management and career development practices aimed at maximising
human potential; and, lastly, the fact that public administration must be
broadly representative of the South African people, with employment and
personnel management practices based on ability, objectivity, fairness and
the need to redress the imbalances of the past to achieve broad
representation.

The clause further includes the following regarding the objects of local
government in administering its affairs. A municipality must strive to
achieve its constitutional objectives, which are to ensure democratic and
accountable government for local communities; to ensure the provision of
services to communities in a sustainable manner; to promote social and
economic development; to encourage the involvement of communities and
community organisations in the matters of local government; and to comply
with its duties in general.

The powers of local government, which include the exercise of executive and
legislative authority and use of the resources of the municipality, must be
exercised in the best interests of the local community to strive to ensure
that municipal services are provided to the local community in a
financially and environmentally sustainable manner; to give members of the
local community equitable access to the municipal services to which they
are entitled; to promote gender equality in the exercise of the
municipality's executive and legislative authority; to contribute, together
with other organs of state, to the progressive realisation of fundamental
human rights; and to respect the rights of citizens.

To this end, the Bill balances rights with responsibilities, whereby the
local community in return contributes to the decision-making process of the
municipality and when exercising its right to observe the mechanisms,
processes and procedures of the municipality.

This Bill provides that, in the event of any inconsistency with the
applicable labour law, the labour law shall prevail. It outlines the roles
and responsibilities of political structures, councillors and municipal
managers regarding service delivery. It provides for a code of conduct in
an endeavour to fight corruption on the part of both councillors and staff.

We in the ANC, therefore, believe that in promoting partnership, the option
of the private sector cannot be ruled out, but should be a last resort.
Public sector delivery has the following to offer: Meeting social needs and
providing services; democratic accountability; sustainable and legitimate
planning; minimising of direct costs; improving social relations between
workers and users; implementing affirmative action; implementing training
programmes; protecting the environment and improving conditions for
workers.

Because of time constraints, I would prefer to focus on specific areas of
interest in this Bill. Chapter 7, as I mentioned earlier, deals with how
the administration is organised to meet the objects of the municipality.
The Bill also identifies key role-players. [Time expired.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Mr Chairperson, the Local Government: Municipal Systems
Bill aims:


  To provide for the core principles, mechanisms and processes that are
  necessary to enable municipalities to move progressively towards the
  social and economic upliftment of local communities, and ensure universal
  access to essential services that are affordable ...

The Bill further states that it aims -


  ... to empower the poor and ensure that municipalities put in place
  service tariffs and credit control policies that take their needs into
  account ...

This is commendable, and the PAC welcomes and supports this aspect of the
Bill.

But, is there a guarantee that this Bill will achieve these noble ideals
for the poor? The reality is that the colonial and capitalist mode of
economic development in this country has not changed. The practice of
developing the traditionally developed areas where whites live has not
stopped. Areas where Africans live continue to be underdeveloped, and
Africans are still third-class citizens subjected to a Third World economy
in a country endowed with all kinds of mineral wealth.

Rural areas and African townships have inferior schools, hospitals and
roads, even police stations. They suffer severe unemployment and poverty,
lack of education and technical skills. Illiteracy is high, and millions of
Africans live in filthy squatter camps unsuitable for human habitation.
Many are in arrears on payment of services. They have lately become victims
of sheriffs.
The other factor that must be noted regarding this Bill is that a
substantial gap remains between the Government and traditional leaders
about the structure and powers of local government. Traditional leaders
have reiterated their opposition to the demarcation of new boundaries to
President Thabo Mbeki.

Will this Bill achieve its purpose in the rural areas without the co-
operation of traditional leaders? Some leaders in this country seem to have
no sense of history. Unfortunately, history often repeats itself. Laws such
as the Native Land Act of 1913, now replaced by section 25(7) of the
Constitution, created massive poverty and destroyed African economic power.

The rural areas are in need of more land and a rapid agrarian revolution to
restore the economic power to the African people there. The eurocentric
approach of turning rural areas into dependent municipalities may cause
more problems for this country in future.

African royalty is related to the land question. The land question was the
basis of the liberation struggle against colonialism and apartheid. It will
not be swept under the carpet for ever. [Time expired]

Rev A D GOOSEN: Mr Chairperson, the Local Government: Municipals Systems
Bill provides, among other things, for a system of co-operative governance,
and my contribution in this debate will be on sections dealing with this.

We have had provincial and national elections, and we are heading for the
municipal elections which will complete the transformation of governance in
all spheres. The transformation of the third tier of government is going to
be of the utmost importance, because this is where the delivery to
communities actually occurs.

I now want to refer the House to section 41 of the Constitution, which
provides for a system of co-operative governance which municipalities must
adhere to whilst exercising their executive and legislative authority. This
entails, amongst other things, preserving national unity and securing the
wellbeing of the people. Provision is also made for effective, transparent
and accountable government. It goes without saying that for co-operative
governance to be really effective, we need to have some degree of
uniformity.
This Bill clearly does that, and it seeks to address the fragmentation
which was deliberately aimed at dividing communities in the past. In the
context of co-operative governance, the national and provincial tiers of
government have a duty to empower local government.

Reading through the Bill, one can appreciate that communities and organised
local government are integral parts of a municipality. Communities are now
an official component of the municipalities in terms of clause 2 of the
Bill. In fact, the Bill provides for communities to be active participants
in the affairs of a municipality.

Organised local government, and in our case, Salga, has a responsibility to
bring about uniformity amongst municipalities. The Bill recognises that
some municipalities have the expertise and resources to be effective, while
others do not. This Bill therefore provides for organised local government
to do three things: firstly, to develop common approaches to local
government affairs; secondly, to find solutions to problems;  and, thirdly,
to facilitate compliance with the principles not only of co-operative
governance but of intergovernmental relations as a whole.
The Local Government: Municipal Systems Bill also provides for another
dimension to co-operative governance, and this is the  requirement that a
municipality's planning must be compatible  with the planning of other
municipalities and organs of state. Municipalities will thus not be
carrying out their functions in isolation. No, there will be uniformity,
and this will be to the benefit of all citizens.

Besides the fact that municipalities must co-operate with one another in a
spirit of co-operative governance, section 153(b) of the Constitution also
requires them to participate in both national and provincial development
programmes. It therefore goes without saying that if municipalities are
required to comply with national and provincial legislation, the onus is
therefore placed on the organ of state concerned to consult with the
affected municipality as well as with organised local government if and
when the need arises for a particular function to be assigned to a
municipality individually or to municipalities generally.

Having said that, may I add that when a Cabinet Minister or MEC assigns a
function to a municipality, that particular Minister must ensure sufficient
funding and capacity-building to ensure the successful execution of that
particular function. Each municipality will be completely autonomous. It
therefore goes without saying that a municipality has the right to govern
on its own initiative, and to exercise executive and legislative authority
without interference.

In conclusion, I want to say this. Now is the time to move ahead speedily.
Now is the time to make life worthwhile for the people. Now is the time to
take local government, especially delivery to the people of South Africa,
to a yet higher level. [Applause.]

Mnr C AUCAMP: Mnr die Voorsitter, dit is welbekend dat die AEB ernstige
probleme het ...

Mnr J H MOMBERG: Al weer?

Mnr C AUCAMP: ... met oom Jannie! ... met die totale strukture en
afbakeningswette van die munisipale bedeling. Ons is egter bereid om
positief te kyk na wetgewing binne hierdie struktuur, en hierdie is een van
die beter wetsontwerpe. Ons het die openheid. Ons weet dat die totale
pakket wetgewing op munisipale gebied op 'n ramp afstuur. Indien hierdie
wetsontwerp egter daartoe sou bydra dat hierdie rit na die ramp aangenamer
sou wees, sou ons dit selfs steun.

Daar is positiewe aspekte in hierdie wetsontwerp. Kom ons gee erkenning
daaraan. Die eerste is die betrokkenheid van die gemeenskap, iets wat baie
mooi aanklank by ons vind. Eie ervaring is dat 'n mens verder kom met
gewone mense as met politici, en dat die leiers van 'n gemeenskap meer die
gemeenskap se belange op die hart dra. Dit is positief.

Verder kan dit ook 'n verdedigingsmeganisme wees teen 'n politieke agenda
wat afgelaai word op plaaslike owerhede. Ook die probleem van ``careerism''
by plaaslike raadslede, waarvan gepraat is, kan aan bande gelê word deur
die magte aan die gemeenskap. Dit bied ook geleentheid vir groter
selfbeskikking waar 'n kultuurgroep hom inpresteer. Daarom kan ek verstaan
dat die IVP ook opgewonde is oor hierdie wetsontwerp. Verder is dit in pas
met die afwenteling van gesag.

Daar is egter ook in hierdie saak ernstige probleme. Die eerste is die
kiesstelsel. As ons hierdie ding van gemeenskapsbetrokkenheid wil laat
werk, moet ons die verkiesings ook depolitiseer. Ons kan nie in die
verkiesing ons gemeenskappe mobiliseer en sê hulle moet ANC of DA stem, en
dan wil hê die gemeenskap moet self die verantwoordelikheid aanvaar nie.

Verder vereis gemeenskapsbetrokkenheid gemeenskapsverantwoordelikheid,
anders kan dit ontaard in populistiese anargie. Ek sien nie die riglyne wat
werklik die verantwoordelikheid van die gemeenskap onderstreep nie. Wat
hier wel staan, is 'n klomp voorskrifte van hoe die gemeenskap homself moet
organiseer, en dit is geen waarborg vir verantwoordelike besluitneming nie.

Ten spyte van hierdie probleme wat ek genoem het, sou die AEB hierdie
wetsontwerp wil steun ter wille van die geleenthede vir plaaslike
bemagtiging, maar, soos die Afrikaanse liedjie lui, ``agter alles, wie
laaste lag, is skoppensboer''. Wie is skoppensboer in dié geval? Die
Minister. Die Minister kan by feitlik elke saak ingryp. In wese het ons
maar nog 'n gesentraliseerde opset. Die wetsontwerp verleen magte aan die
plaaslike gemeenskappe, maar hulle is soos 'n bobbejaan aan 'n ketting, en
die Minister hou hierdie ketting vas; jy kan nie verder beweeg nie, jou
vryheid is ingeperk.

In dié verband 'n woord aan die DA. Hulle het gevra vir die uitfasering van
die Minister se bevoegdhede. Hulle het in die verlede al gevra vir 'n
sonsondergangklousule vir regstellende optrede. Die vraag is tog hoekom dit
nie beding is nie. Is 90% van ``Fighting Back'' nie dalk teen wat hulle
self in die Grondwet beding het nie?

Die AEB, daarenteen, vra 'n ander grondwetlike bestel wat werklik magte
verleen aan gemeenskappe, vry van die finale band en hand van Big Brother.
Die AEB is gunstig ingestel teenoor die wetsontwerp, maar kan dit om
hierdie rede nie steun nie. [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans
speech follows.)

[Mr C AUCAMP: Mr Chairperson, it is well known that the AEB is experiencing
serious problems ...

Mr J H MOMBERG: Again?

Mr C AUCAMP: ...with Uncle Jannie! ... with the total structure and
demarcation laws of the municipal dispensation. However, we are prepared to
look positively at legislation within this structure, and this is one of
the better Bills. We have the openness. We know that the total package of
legislation in the municipal sphere is heading for disaster. However, if
this Bill were to contribute to making this ride towards disaster a more
pleasant one, we would even support it.

There are some positive aspects in this Bill. Let us acknowledge that. The
first is the involvement of the community, something which really appeals
to us. Our own experience indicates that one gets further with ordinary
people than with politicians, and that the leaders of a community pay more
attention to the interests of the community. That is positive.

Furthermore, this can also be a defence mechanism against a political
agenda which is dumped onto local authorities. Also, the problem of
careerism on the part of local councillors, which has been discussed, could
be curbed by the powers given to the community. It also presents an
opportunity for greater self-determination where a cultural group can come
into its own. Therefore, I can understand why the IFP is also excited about
this Bill. In addition, this is in line with the devolution of power.
However, there are also serious problems in this regard. The first is the
voting system. If we want this concept of community involvement to work, we
must also depoliticise the elections. We cannot mobilise our communities
during the elections and say to them that they have to vote for the ANC or
the DA, and then expect of a community to accept the responsibility
themselves.

Furthermore, community involvement requires community responsibility,
otherwise it can develop into populist anarchy. I do not see the guidelines
which really underline the responsibility of the community. What does, in
fact, appear here is a host of regulations regarding how the community must
organise itself, and this is no guarantee for responsible decision-making.

In spite of these problems that I have mentioned, the AEB would like to
support this Bill for the sake of the opportunities for local empowerment,
but, as the Afrikaans song says, ``agter alles, wie laaste lag, is
skoppensboer'' [after everything, the one who laughs last, is the jack of
spades.] Who is the jack of spades in this instance? The Minister. The
Minister can intervene in practically every matter. In essence, we still
have a centralised setup. The Bill grants powers to the local communities,
but they are like a baboon on a chain, and the Minister is holding this
chain; one cannot move any further, one's freedom is limited.

In this regard a word to the DA. They asked for the phasing out of the
powers of the Minister. They have, in the past, already asked for a sunset
clause for affirmative action. The question is why this was not negotiated.
Is 90% of ``Fighting Back'' not perhaps against what they themselves
negotiated into the Constitution?

The AEB, in turn, asks for another constitutional system which truly gives
powers to communities, free from the final bond and hand of Big Brother.
The AEB is favourably disposed towards this Bill, but for this reason we
cannot support it. [Time expired.]]

Mnr D A A OLIFANT: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek wil net graag vir die agb mnr
Cassie Aucamp sê dit is baie belangrik dat hy hier kom erken dat hy 'n
nikswerd politikus is. Dit is natuurlik ook so dat hy alreeds lank voor hy
hier kom sê het dat hy dit nog sou oorweeg om die wetsontwerp te steun,
geweet het dat hy dit nooit sou steun nie.
Nie lank gelede nie het die agb Frik van Deventer hier gestaan en hom
vreeslik uitgespreek teen die DP wat hulle so ondermyn het.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Nou kom hierdie einste man en hy kom sê vir ons ons speel
met vuur en ons het probleme! Daardie agb lid het ernstige probleme!
[Tussenwerpsels.] Hy is so ongelukkig in hierdie samesmelting, hy is
gefrustreerd en hy gaan nie baie lank hou voor hy gaan aftree nie.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr D A A OLIFANT: Mr Chairperson, I would just like to tell the hon Mr
Cassie Aucamp how important it is that he has admitted here that he is a
useless politician. Of course, it is also true that long before he stated
here that he would still consider supporting the Bill, he already knew that
he would never support it.

Not long ago the hon Frik van Deventer stood here and expressed vehement
disapproval of the DP, that had been undermining them so much.
[Interjections.] Now this very same man comes here to tell us that we are
playing with fire and that we have problems! That hon member has serious
problems! [Interjections!] He is so unhappy in this merger, he is
frustrated and will not last too long before he resigns.]

Mark my words! [Laughter.]

Ek wil net verder sê dat Gloria ... [In addition I just want to say that
Gloria ...]

... is coming here to teach us as if we are school children. We are not
school children. [Interjections.] It is true that we were never ...

Mr T D LEE: Chairperson, on a point of order: The hon Mr Olifant referred
to this lady next to me as ``Gloria''. I do not think that that is
parliamentary. [Interjections.]

Mr D A A OLIFANT: Chairperson, I withdraw the reference to ``Gloria''. I
just want to say that, before coming to ... [Interjections.] I said that I
withdraw that reference. I will refer to her as ``hon Gloria''. If that
will elevate her status, it is fine with me. I do not have a problem.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, just withdraw that
reference nicely and then continue with your speech.
Mr D A A OLIFANT: Chairperson, I nicely withdraw the reference, and I am
now calling her ``hon Gloria''.

Mr C AUCAMP: Chairperson, on a point of order: That hon member referred to
me as ``Cassie'' but I did not mind. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

Mr D A A OLIFANT: Chairperson, I just want to say that the hon Frik van
Deventer stated here that the majority party has been so ignorant of their
input. Let me just tell hon members that he is spreading disinformation in
this House. We have painstakingly gone through this Bill, night after
night. We have established task and technical teams which worked for three
weeks and on an average of four nights a week. We kept them here until one
o'clock in the morning, and we knew that their brains would switch off by
nine o'clock in the evening. [Laughter.] So we kept them here.

I must tell hon members just how democratic we were. The hon Minister must
also listen to this. We were so democratic that we did not receive this
Bill from the Cabinet and simply put it on the table and say: ``That is the
Bill''. We have debated this Bill amongst ourselves as the ANC. Obviously,
they were out of the picture because they did not understand at all, as
they still do not understand at this point in time. [Interjections.]

So we are saying that when we came to the finalisation of this Bill,
everybody had been brought on board, even the hon Gloria. [Laughter.] She
comes here and tells us that ... [Interjections.] The amazing thing is that
every single speaker ... [Interjections.]

Mr T D LEE: Chairperson, on a point of order: The speaker referred to this
member as the hon Gloria. She is the hon Mrs Borman. [Interjections.]

Mr D A A OLIFANT: Chairperson, that is the essence of the DP - sheer
stupidity! [Interjections.]
 
The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon Olifant, let me just make a
ruling on this. The member is not out of order. He referred to Mrs Borman
as ``hon Gloria''. That is fine. There is no problem with that.
[Interjections.]

Mr D A A OLIFANT: Well, Chairperson, that is the quality that they are
producing here. One can see where they are going with their Disastrous
Alliance. [Interjections.]
I just want to say that I think it is important to stress that right
through the debate and right through this whole process of this Bill this
afternoon, every single speaker has referred to the importance of community
involvement. Why is it important? For so many years, local government was
for the advantage of a certain sector which was 3% of the community, and
not to the advantage of the entire community.

Mrs G M BORMAN: We agree with you!

Mr D A A OLIFANT: I must also emphasise to the hon Mrs Borman that life did
not start in 1994. She has so conveniently forgotten we had unsafe
townships for so many years. Why is that so? Why do we not have these
wonderful established residential areas? Because she was living off the fat
of the land at the time and everything was hunky-dory. [Interjections.]

Now we are saying that with this Bill we are trying to change everything.
That hon member has forgotten where she comes from. She must look in the
mirror every day and check what the colour of her face is. [Laughter.] She
must just check that ... [Interjections] ... because I know what my colour
is. [Interjections.] Everybody in this country has been yearning for a
better life under local government.

We have been saying that the hon Borman and the DA - the New NP and the DP
- do not understand this Bill. Nowhere in this Bill have we said that the
community can prescribe. We have said that we must bring in a framework
within which communities can actively participate in the operations and the
management of local government. We are quite serious about that and we are
not shy to say it.

I would like to tell the hon Frik van Deventer that we are not shy to go to
Cosatu and say that we need support from them, because they are our allies.
We do not have a bed that we cannot make. That hon member is too scared of
getting up in the morning and coming out of Houghton, because he does not
want to be seen in Houghton with Tony Leon. I am not scared of being seen
with Cosatu. I am happy to be with them, because that is an alliance that
has come a very, very long way. It is an alliance that neither that hon
member nor anybody else is going to break. [Applause.] We will decide when
and how that alliance is going to function. We just want to say ...
[Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: Koel af, Olifant! [Calm down, Olifant!]

Mr D A A OLIFANT: Dankie, ek gaan afkoel. [Tussenwerpsels.] [Thank you, I
am going to calm down. [Interjections.]]

We just want to bring to the House's attention the fact that  over the last
registration weekend they had placards on lampposts saying: ``Oppose unfair
rates''. Do hon members know where they put up these placards? It was in
Manenberg, Atlantis, Delft and all these areas. They are saying to people
in Athlone, Manenberg and Atlantis: ``You must keep on paying higher rates
so that we, in Constantia, can enjoy the low rates and so that our stable
lives can continue.'' [Interjections.] [Applause.] That is what they are
saying.

Let me give the hon Mrs Borman a fact: In Atlantis we are paying higher
rates than those paid by the residents of Camps Bay; in Athlone, we are
paying higher rates than Constantia. And she is saying to those very people
of hers: ``Keep it up, keep it up.'' [Laughter.] That is not on.
[Interjections.] We are in the process of changing this whole country with
local government.  We are in the process of totally revolutionising the
whole question of local government. Therefore, we thank with pride Yunus
for his leadership and the Minister for his inspiration, as well as the
committee and the department. [Applause.] [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, could we please give the
Minister a chance to reply to the debate.

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, hon members,
the DP's hon Mrs Borman, thanks to the democracy for which our people
fought so hard, has a democratic right to say things which do not make
sense. [Laughter.] [Applause.] She describes with alacrity what she calls
``the crisis in local government''. [Interjections.] She not only doubts
the efficacy of what we are putting forward as solutions, she resents them.

In her view, the emphasis on public participation is negated by ministerial
intervention. If she was the democrat that she professes to be, she would
have understood that whilst there is indeed an inherent tension between the
two, the solution does not lie in opting for one to the exclusion of the
other, but, rather, in the dialectic between the two. [Applause.]
Where the debate is about democracy, the DP member, the hon Mrs Borman
clearly needs an interpreter. The hon Mr Van Devénter ...

An HON MEMBER: Van Deventer.

The MINISTER: ... however it is pronounced, does not believe in the
importance of saying things which are relevant to the matter under
discussion. He uses the platform to confess to the fact that the New NP is
still haunted by the spectre of deepening democracy in our country. Tired
arguments about communists and trade unionists attest to this.
[Interjections.] When he wants to say things which are particularly
irrelevant and naughty, he resorts to the use of Afrikaans.
[Interjections.]

I want to assure the hon Mr Mtirara that I noted everything which he said
about traditional leaders and their relationship to local government. I do
not know whether to attribute this to a poor state of organisation or to
the fact that he is possibly circumspect. Clearly, he read a script which
was intended for an intervention in the next debate.

Having said this, I wish to thank all the hon members who participated in
this lively discussion. [Applause.]
Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time (Democratic Party, New National Party, Freedom
Front and Afrikaner Eenheidsbeweging dissenting).

            LOCAL GOVERNMENT: MUNICIPAL STRUCTURES AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson and hon
members, since the passage by Parliament of the Local Government Transition
Act, Government has put in place a substantial architecture of policy and
institutional mechanisms for purposes of enabling the local government
sphere to discharge its constitutional mandates.

Looking back we can be proud of the distance we traversed within this
relatively short period of six years. The distance traversed thus far
enables us to make a clean break with the negotiated phase of local
government transition, and to break away from the old dispensation within
the constitutionally prescribed timeframe.

In the last few months we have established in all provinces municipal
facilitation committees which have since been engaged in the process of
disestablishing old municipalities and creating conditions for the creation
of new municipal entities. In the course of this process it became clear
that the Local Government: Municipal Structures Act had sections which
retarded rather than facilitated the process. The proposed amendments are
informed by the practical experience of the various practitioners who have
been attending to this task. They had to tackle a task which, in many ways,
was without precedent.

It goes without saying that this democratically elected Parliament is
committed to the deepening of local democracy. The Bill before the House
offers us the opportunity to put that commitment into practice. I wish to
take this opportunity to commend the MECs for local government affairs,
leaders of organised local government, as well as the officials of the
Department of Provincial and Local Government for their co-operation in
helping to smooth the path towards the creation of a new local government
dispensation.

A word of thanks goes to the many traditional leaders who not only worked
with the Municipal Demarcation Board to facilitate the redemarcation of
municipal boundaries, but also participated fully in the work of the
municipal facilitation committees. The participation of traditional leaders
in the establishment process augurs well for their future enhanced role in
the governance of the country. It was with this idea in mind that
Government initiated a process of consultation with traditional leaders and
other interested parties. As we were conducting these consultations, we
proceeded from the given reality that, whilst it provides for the creation
of three tiers of government, our Constitution does recognise the
traditional structures of governments.

We took it as a given that the law enjoins us to design institutional
arrangements which will facilitate co-operation between all the tiers of
government, and between the tiers of government and the institution of
traditional leadership. We are also mindful of the fact that recognition of
traditional structures is not expected to present an excuse for blocking or
even reversing the hard-won democratic rights of our people. Government has
taken steps to immediately improve the level of representation of
traditional leaders within structures of local government. This will,
hopefully, go a long way towards stabilising governance in the hitherto
marginalised rural areas of our country.

The arrangement proposed in the Bill throws up a big challenge to elected
public representatives and traditional leaders alike - the challenge of
mastering the art of peaceful coexistence. Those who are custodians of the
institution of traditional leadership are being called upon to realise
that, in order for the institution to be embraced by democracy, the
institution itself must embrace the reality that democracy is here to stay.

Yesterday, the Minister of Home Affairs and I met with the Independent
Electoral Commission and the Municipal Demarcation Board. After that
meeting, it became clear to me that we are still on course, as planned, to
proclaim the election date next week. A favourable consideration of the
Bill by this House can only give the necessary impetus to the process of
further democratising our country, and we look forward to it. [Applause.]

Mr Y I CARRIM: Mr Chairperson, comrades and friends, the magnitude of the
local government transition under way should not be underemphasised. It is
a mammoth and gigantic transformation. It is unique, creative and power-
breaking. In fact, many experts, both in this country and internationally,
tell us that it is one of the most ambitious transformations of local
government in recent times. They also point out that it is almost universal
that it is far more difficult and challenging to transform local government
than provincial or national government or what are called state governments
elsewhere in the world.

Given the complexity and magnitude of the transformation, it is inevitable
that, while the fundamental aspects of the Bill are constantly retained
through the Local Government: Municipal Structures Act, certain other
aspects might have to be reviewed, based on practical and other
considerations that cannot always be foreseen. The amendments to the Local
Government: Municipal Structures Act have to be understood in this context.

Essentially, the amendments seek to provide greater legal certainty on some
issues, and take into account certain practical needs in establishing the
new municipalities. The Bill provides greater clarity on the distribution
of functions and powers between district and local municipalities. The
different functions and powers have now been disaggregated or broken down
through consultation with various line-function departments and Ministries.
Also, it has now been decided that the district and local municipalities
will be allocated the functions and powers that are due to them,
respectively, in terms of the Constitution and legislation.

Where the district councils cannot exercise a particular function or power
because of a lack of capacity or for other reasons, they will authorise the
local councils to exercise this function or power. There will now be a
separation between the allocation of a function or power and the exercise
thereof. Needless to say, the reverse can also apply, but the aim,
essentially, is to reduce the gap between this over time, so that there is
coincidence between capacity and the exercise of function and power.
Various consequential amendments - they are highly technical and they do
not need to detain us here - flow from this, relating to the establishment
of the new municipalities. These include issues around the transfer of
assets, staff and liabilities in particular.

What flows from this essentially is a two-year transitional period as part
of the longer-term transformation of municipalities. These amendments, it
must be stressed, do not detract from the fundamental values and politics
of the new local government system. In fact, they advance it. If the Bill
is appropriately implemented, the process of ensuring, for example, strong
district councils, will be enhanced.

In fact, if one looks at the new system, the district councils are meant to
provide for regional planning, redistribution, capacity-building of local
municipalities and bulk infrastructure. This particular concept we now have
in the new amending Bill will actually enhance that in time with the rural
integrated development strategy that the Deputy President's office is
preoccupied with. Of course, the Minister has dealt at some length with
this and I need hardly say much about it. But this Bill does increase the
percentage of representatives on municipal councils from 10% to 20% in
respect of traditional leaders.

Of course, there are sections of the traditional leadership who are not
happy with this - indeed the IFP is not. But, as the Minister indicated and
as the portfolio committee has repeatedly said, there are ongoing
discussions between traditional leadership institutions and traditional
leaders and the Presidency and the Minister. A Green and White Paper
process is unfolding. This matter must be seen in the context of the
overall review of the role and function of traditional leaders in our new
democracy.

I want to end by thanking the many people that contributed to processing
this Bill very, very expeditiously, in particular Fanie Louw and Jackie
Manche from the department. I also want to take this opportunity to say
that if there are many issues that do divide the different parties in the
portfolio committee, there is one that certainly does not, and this is that
we have an outstanding committee secretary, Llewellyn Brown - I hope he is
in the auditorium. We are deeply grateful to him for all that he does to
process our work. I want to take this opportunity to express our deepest
gratitude to him. Also in the gallery Debbie Hene who, in the absence of a
researcher for the portfolio committee and with the co-operation of the
opposition parties, serves to play that role. I want to express my
heartfelt thanks to her. [Applause.] Thanks to all the committee members.
Finally, I want to say that in our committee of about 14 to 15 people, only
three of us, the old guard, were in this committee before June 1999. But if
one were to observe our committee, one would doubt that very much. I want
to thank particularly the members of my own party for their excellent work.
[Applause.]

Mrs G M BORMAN: Chairperson, Minister Mufamadi, hon members, we are all
anxiously awaiting the date of the elections. When that is all behind us,
the restructuring process will reduce 843 municipalities to 284. Much of
the apartheid legislation will be replaced with new legislation aimed at
developing and uplifting those who were previously disadvantaged. There
will be a reduction in the number of councillors from 12 000 to 8 000. But
megacities will come into being, taking local government, I am afraid, away
from the people.

These amendments to the Local Government: Municipal Structures Act will
provide for transitional arrangements necessary to ensure that services
will not be interrupted. That is extremely important. The Bill also
contains a chapter which allows for prescribed intervention from national
Government during a specific timeframe for a limited period of transition.
However, we remain concerned about the expense that this period of
restructuring will exact on the fiscus, and more specifically on
municipalities.

As we emphasised in the previous debate, many municipalities are already in
dire financial straits. This legislation promises to aggravate an already
parlous situation.

Pierre Uys, the MEC for Provincial and Local Government in the Western
Cape, has estimated that it will cost in the region of R500 million to
restructure each of the Category A megacities. This means a total of R3
billion, and on top of that comes the expense of restructuring another 237
municipalities. We must also consider this figure, knowing full well that
municipalities collectively owe more than R12 billion to creditors already.
As we all know, in exercises such as this, there are invariably cost
overruns. This all points to one massive financial nightmare. Good luck to
the Minister when he goes cap-in-hand to the Minister of Finance to bail
him out of the mess.

We also remain concerned about the process the Government has decided on
for rationalising merging municipalities' staff remuneration packages. As
it stands, staff moving from one municipality to another will earn as much
as their highest paid equivalent colleague in the new municipality. It has
to do with the grading system. Salary bills are going to skyrocket. Who is
going to pay for this? Is there a budget allocation for all these as-yet-
unknown expenses, or will our new-look municipalities be doomed to chaos
and bankruptcy from the word go?

This week we also heard that the proposed Johannesburg megacity has begun
to refurbish its offices at the not-so-bargain price of R6,3 million. In
most of the transitional councils, huge expense was involved in providing
lavish accommodation for themselves within the last five years. For
example, in the inner-west of the Durban Metro, where I served as a
councillor, R650 000 was spent on a new council chamber, which now becomes
redundant. In the new dispensation, this process will presumably be
repeated, not only in the six megacities at some R6 million a throw, but in
all the rest as well. If municipalities are left to carry the can, as they
were forced to in the last transition, we can expect nothing less than
further municipal indebtedness, insolvency and ineffectual governance at
local government level.

I would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate the IFP on its
decision to support the DA in its rejection of the executive mayor option
for the Durban metro. [Interjections.] The DA remains convinced that the
proposed system of executive mayors will institute a system of distant and
unaccountable government, unresponsive and out of touch with the real needs
of their communities.

The ANC, no doubt, will manipulate and exploit their self-designed
centralist mechanism to entrench power in the hands of national Government
and the Minister through the deployment of ANC cadres to local government.
We have even heard a speculative rumour - maybe I am mistaken - that the
hon the Minister may even find himself heading up a municipality somewhere
come next year.

The ANC has legislated for yet another expensive, painful transition for
local government. The people who are finally affected by all this, the
residents of our new municipalities, can, it seems, look forward to further
declining service standards, higher rates and crumbling governance. I hope
they prove us wrong.

The DP, despite the serious reservations that I have outlined, will support
the Local Government: Municipal Structures Amendment Bill.

Inkosi M W HLENGWA: Sihlalo namalungu ahloniphekile, labo abathetha amacala
nabaziyo ngokuthethwa kwamacala bayazi ukuthi uma kusabangwa, mhlawumbe uma
abantu bebanga inkomo, umuntu akayithathi inkomo leyo ayinikeze omunye
icala lingakanqunywa.

Kusekhona-ke inkulumo ekhona lapha. Kunombango ophakathi kwabaholi bomdabu
nomasipala. Kodwa sesibona kuthiwa akuqhutshekwe omasipala banikezwe
amandla emisebenzi leyo eyenziwa ngamakhosi.

Udaba lokwenza amakhosi abe yimihlobiso emikhandlwini yohulumeni basekhaya
luthulwe phambi kukaMongameli wezwe, sekulindelwe ukuba amakhosi
noMongameli babambe izingxoxo nabaholi bomdabu kuze kufike ezivumelwaneni,
njengoba uMongameli ethembisa. Uma singazikhohlisa ngokuthi ukukhushulwa
kwenani lamakhosi emikhandlwini yomasipala kungukuphendula udaba
lwamakhosi, angixheguli ukuthi lokho ngabe ngukusinisa amahleza nje. Lokhu
kukhushulwa kunjalo nje akunawo namalungelo okuvota.

UmThethosisekelo waleli zwe ubonakala ububhuqa ubukhosi uma uthi
uyabuhlonipha kodwa bube buphucwa ubuholi namandla okuphatha izindawo zabo.
Kimina, lesi senzo sifana naleso sokuzingela kanye nezinja ube ubaleka
nezinyamazane. Lo mThetho wenza ubukhosi isichuse sohlobo lombuso owafika
nabezizwe. Akusilona iqiniso ukuthi umsebenzi wamakhosi awunikwa yimibuso
yamakoloni kanye nombuso wobandlululo ngoba ngisho nengane encane, esanuka
ibele, kufanele ngabe iyazi ukuthi amakoloni ephuca ubukhosi amandla
okuphatha. (Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[Inkosi M W HLENGWA: Thank you, Chairperson. Hon members, even judges and
prosecutors know that if there is a dispute, possibly over a beast, the
judge does not give the beast to one of the disputants while the case is
still being tried.

There is an outstanding issue here. The dispute is between traditional
leaders and municipal councils. Now we hear that municipalities should be
granted powers to perform the duties that were previously performed by
amakhosi.
This notion of regarding amakhosi as waxwork images in local government has
been reported to the President. Now the President and traditional leaders
should have a meeting so that they can reach an agreement as the President
has promised. We would be fooling ourselves if we believe that the increase
in the number of traditional leaders in municipal councils is a solution to
the problem faced by amakhosi. I am quite certain that taking such a step
will be a joke because that increase does not include voting rights.

The constitution of this country appears to be mocking the system of
traditional leadership while it says it respects it. It deprives the system
of traditional leadership of its power to govern in the areas of amakhosi.
I liken this action to hunting with the hounds while at the same time
running with the hare. This Bill makes traditional leadership a figurehead
type of leadership, which was introduced by colonialists. It is not true
that amakhosi were given their duties by colonialists and the apartheid
regime. Even a baby who still smells his mother's milk should know that the
colonialists were the ones who deprived traditional leaders of their power
to govern.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, it appears that we
have a problem. The interpretation is not coming through. I can make out
that there is someone trying to interpret, but it is not coming through. I
wonder if we could arrange for the interpretation to come through so that
members can hear what is being said. You may take your seat, hon member,
until we sort out the problem. [Interjections.]

Hon members, we have not been able to get someone from technical services
to deal with the problem. I think the hon member should continue, and we
hope to be able to hear the interpretation. [Interjections.] Yes, let us
try one more time. Hon member, you may continue.

Inkosi M W HLENGWA: Ngiyabonga Sihlalo, bengithi-ke nengane esanuka ibele
nayo kufanele ngabe iyazi ukuthi amakoloni ephuca amakhosi amandla
okuphatha nokubuswa kwezwe kanye nomhlaba. Wona amakhosi aphenduka aba
yizakhamuzi zombuso wamakoloni ezingenawo amalungelo; kangangoba iqembu
elibusayo, i-ANC, lasungulwa nawo amakhosi eyingxenye yomzabalazo, kodwa
namhlanje kubhalwa le mithetho esizithokozisa ngayo ekwenzeni amakhosi
inhlekisa.

Sekuphele iminyaka eyisithupha abantu baseNingizimu Afrika beqalile
ukuvota, kodwa mayelana nodaba lwamakhosi kusathungathwa ukuthi
bangafanelwa yini abaholi bomdabu. Kepha lokhu okungesikhona okwakithi
yikho esesiphenduke saba ngongqeqe ngakho, esesikwazi kangcono.
(Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[Inkosi M W HLENGWA: Thank you, Chairperson. I was saying that even a small
baby who still smells his mother's milk should know that the colonialists
deprived amakhosi of their power to rule over their own areas and to
resolve land issues. Amakhosi became mere citizens as they did not have
rights under colonial rule. The ANC as it is ruling now, was founded with
the assistance of amakhosi as they were part of the struggle. But today
legislation is passed so that we can please ourselves by making amakhosi a
joke.

It is six years since the people of South Africa voted for the first time.
But the issue of amakhosi is still unresolved, and amakhosi do not know
whether they are recognised or not. What is traditionally not ours, is what
we have become expert in. We know it better than our own legacy.]

I would like to conclude by reading from a letter containing the
Government's response to the submissions by traditional leaders on their
role, powers and functions, which was signed by the President, and I quote:


  The challenge we are faced with at this moment in time is to find a way
  of stabilising our system of governance in the rural areas by creating a
  climate within which the institution of traditional leadership and
  elected institutions of Government can co-exist. This is a challenging
  task, but it is achievable.

I submit that converting traditional leaders into zombies and then
increasing the number of those zombies to 20% is not addressing the
concerns raised by traditional leaders and their communities. [Time
expired.]

Mnr F J VAN DEVENTER: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek wil graag van die geleentheid
gebruik maak om te sê dat die Nuwe NP hierdie wysigingswetsontwerp sal
steun, deels omdat dit te doen het met die oordragmaatreëls na die nuwe
munisipaliteite, maar ook deels omdat die voorsitter van die
portefeuljekomitee hierdie wetsontwerp op 'n baie billike manier in die
portefeuljekomitee gelei het. Aan hom baie dankie daarvoor.

Die oordrag van funksies van die ou of bestaande munisipaliteite na die
nuwe munisipaliteite gaan noodwendig 'n klomp groeipyne hê. Daar gaan baie
onsekerheid ontstaan omtrent die personeelsituasie - die hantering,
oorplasing en aflegging van personeel - wat 'n geweldige ruimte kan skep
vir inmenging in die sake van plaaslike regering, wat op sy beurt eindelose
laste kan plaas op die belastingbetalers en finansiële bronne van plaaslike
bestuur.

In die tweede plek is dit ook nodig dat ons in gedagte moet hou dat dit
plaaslike regering se doelwit is om regering so na as moontlik aan die
mense te hou en dat ons baie versigtig moet wees met die oordra van
funksies van die B-munisipaliteite na die C-munisipaliteite. As ek dit sê,
het ek begrip daarvoor dat baie van die funksies beter uitgevoer kan word
deur sommige C-munisipaliteite, maar daar is B-munisipaliteite wat wel die
kapasiteit en die vermoë het om op 'n gedesentraliseerde wyse dienste te
lewer op grondvlak aan die publiek en die mense rondom hulle.

Omdat hulle nader aan die mense is, glo ek, is dit noodsaaklik dat daar in
die hele oorgangsproses en in die hele proses van die vestiging van die
nuwe munisipaliteite baie noukeurig daarop gelet moet word dat ons nie in
'n poging of in 'n strewe om beter dienslewering te bied hierdie soort
regering wegskuif van die mense af na 'n punt toe waar hulle nie daarby kan
uitkom nie.

Wat die nuwe Hoofstuk 2 betref wat in die wysigingswetsontwerp opgeneem is
en wat handel oor die oorgangsfunksies, is dit so dat daardie hoofstuk ná
twee jaar verval. Indien die Minister dit goeddink, kan dit ook ná 'n
korter tydperk verval wanneer die oordragfunksies plaasgevind het.

Ons gaan 'n nuwe bedeling binne wat nuwe eise gaan stel. Ons gaan 'n nuwe
bedeling in wat vir baie raadslede en amptenare 'n vreemde situasie gaan
skep. Die manier waarop raadslede en amptenare hierdie onbekende pad gaan
aanpak, gaan ook in 'n baie groot mate afhang van hoe hierdie Nasionale
Vergadering en die provinsiale wetgewers sake gaan hanteer waaroor hierdie
twee sfere van regering beheer het.

Ek wil vanmiddag in hierdie vroeë stadium 'n pleidooi lewer dat ons nie
sommer waar daar 'n probleem mag ontstaan hardhandig op hierdie mense moet
afkom nie. Ek dink ons moet werklik intens daarna kyk om eerder by wyse van
opleiding en die uitbreiding van vaardighede raadslede en amptenare te
bemagtig om goeie dienslewering op grondvlak te beskerm.

Ek steun graag hierdie wysigingswetsontwerp. (Translation of Afrikaans
speech follows.)

[Mr F J VAN DEVENTER: Mr Chairperson, I would like to take the opportunity
to say that the New NP will support this amending Bill, partly because it
deals with the transitional measures to new municipalities, but also partly
because the chairperson of the portfolio committee has piloted this Bill in
a very fair manner in the portfolio committee. Thank you very much to him
for that.

The transfer of functions from the old or existing municipalities to the
new municipalities will of necessity experience any number of growing
pains. Many uncertainties will arise regarding the staff situation - the
handling, transfer and retrenchment of staff - which will create tremendous
room for interference in the affairs of local government, which in turn may
place endless burdens on the taxpayers and financial resources of local
government.

In the second place it is also necessary for us to bear in mind that the
objective of local government is to keep government as close as possible to
the people, and that we should be very careful with the transfer of
functions from the B municipalities to the C municipalities. Having said
this, I understand that many of the functions can be performed better by
certain C municipalities, but there are B municipalities that do in fact
have the capacity and the ability, in a decentralised manner, to render
services at grassroots level to the public and the people around them.

Because they are closer to the people, I believe it is essential that in
this entire transition process and in the whole process of the
establishment of the new municipalities, great care should be taken that we
do not, in an attempt to deliver better services, remove this kind of
government from the people to a point where they cannot reach it.

Concerning the new Chapter 2, which has been incorporated in the amending
Bill and which deals with transitional functions, it is true that the
chapter in question lapses after two years. If the Minister deems it
desirable, it may also lapse after a shorter period once the transitional
functions have taken place.

We are entering a new dispensation that will make new demands. We are
entering a new dispensation that will create a situation which is alien to
many councillors and officials. The manner in which councillors and
officials tackle this unknown course will, to a great degree, depend on how
this National Assembly and the provincial legislatures are going to deal
with issues controlled by these two tiers of government.

This afternoon I want to appeal, at this early stage, that we do not just,
wherever a problem may arise, adopt a harsh stance towards these people. I
think we should instead really take an intensive look, by means of training
and the development of skills, at empowering councillors and officials to
protect sound rendering of services at grass-roots level.

I take pleasure in supporting this amending Bill.]
Mnu I B NTSHANGASE: Sihlalo, oNgqongoshe kanye neNdlu yonke,
ngiyanibingelela. Sekungokwesithathu izigatshana zalo mthetho,
esiwuchibiyela namhlanje ziza lapha phambi kweNdlu ukuthi kuzoxoxwa ngazo.

Kunezigatshana ezine ezibalulekile engizothanda ukukhuluma ngazo namhlanje,
ngaphambi kokuthi ngiphendule kwezinye zezinkulumo esezike zenziwa
ngaphambili. Isigatshana sokuqala ngese-14 esenza ukuthi imikhandlu ekhona
njengamanje ikwazi ukuthi ibe sokhethweni ezinyangeni ezimbalwa ezizayo,
ngokuthi isebenzise lezo zinombolo eyanikezwa zona ngenkathi imingcele
iklanywa, kungasasetshenziswa amagama ngoba amagama azothatha isikhathi
eside ukuba enziwe ngoba uKhongolose, okuyiwona ohola imikhandlu eminingi,
uyathanda ukuthola kubantu ukuthi magama maphi azosetshenziswa
emikhandliwini ezayo.

Lesi sigatshana se-15 sibeka nemigomo ezosetshenziswa, esemthethweni,
ezokwenza sikwazi ukuthi sakhe imikhandlu emisha kanjalo futhi sichithe
nemikhandlu emidala. Siphinde futhi senze kukwazi ukuthi kushintshwe
abasebenzi bomasipala, basiwe kwimikhandlu emisha, ngokulandela umThetho
wezabasebenzi. Lesi sigatshna futhi siphinda senze kube khona ukuguqulwa
noma ukuhanjiswa kwamafa nezikweleti, kususwa komasipala abakhona kusiwa
komasipala abasha, kanjalo nokuqhubeka kwemithetho yomasipala ezobe ikhona
sesiyisusa kohulumeni abadala, siyisa kohulumeni abasha.

Siphinde futhi lesi sigatshana sibeke nemigomo ezolandelwa ukuze sikwazi
ukuthi sivikele izimpahla zohulumeni basekhaya, njengokushintshwa
kwezabasebenzi kanjalo futhi nokukhethwa noma ukusungulwa kwezikhundla
ezintsha ukuze kube khona ukuvikeleka. Sike sabona ngaphambilini ukuthi uma
sekuza okhethweni, sekuzoshintshwa uhulumeni, labo abaphethe baye
bazisikele amaqatha amakhulu, bezinikeza izikhundla. Kuzophinda kongiwe
nezimpahla zikahulumeni ngokuthi kungathengwa izimpahla ezingenasidingo
kunqandwe futhi nokunyamalala kwazo. Yiso lesi sigatshana esizokwenza
ukuthi nezimali zingachithwa, ikakhulukazi lezo ezigodliwe.

Kukhona nesigatshana sesibili, sona esikhuluma ngesibonelelo esenziwe
nguMongameli sokwandisa inani lamakhosi azobe ekhona emkhandlwini kusuka
eshumini kuya kuma-20%. Lokhu kuzothi kwenzeka, ngaso leso sikhathi, sibe
futhi silindele izingxoxo ezizobe zenziwa zeNcwajana yoHlu lweNqubo engahle
ilandelwe ekubunjweni kwemithetho (Green Paper) kanye neNcwajana yoHlu
lweNqubo ezosetshenziswa ekubumbeni umThethosivivinywa (White Paper)
mayelana nodaba lwamakhosi. Siyakuqonda kahle-hle ukuthi lolu daba
lwamakhosi wudaba olubucayi, ngakho-ke kubalulekile ukuthi lwenziwe futhi
luphathwe ngesinono kanjengoba singakaqedi nanokuthi ngempela, kahle-hle,
ngobani abangamakhosi ngoba siyazi ukuthi imibuso engaphambilini
yobandlululo neyamakholoniyali yasikela abanye abantu ababeyizincelebana
zayo, yabenza baba ngamakhosi. Kubalulekile nokuthi nalo lolo daba
singaluqali phambili, emandleni, kodwa siluqale ekutheni ngobani ngempela
labo abangamakhosi oselwa angempela. Kubalulekile-ke ukuthi lolu daba, uma
siluxoxa, siluxoxe ngendlela okuyiyona futhi enobunyoninco ezokwazi ukuthi
ithathe zonke izingxenye ezibalulekile.

Kubalulekile futhi ukuthi, uma sibheka isigatshana 3, sibone ukuthi
sikhuluma ngamandla okufanele ukuthi anikezwe ohulumeni bomasipala,
ikakhulukazi labo abasezingeni lezifunda, ukuze kungabi khona ukungqubuzana
phakathi komasipala abazobe bengaphansi kohulumeni bezifunda. Esinye futhi
isigatshana esilandelayo esibalulekile ngesesi-4, okuyisigatshana
eselulekayo ngokuthi amandla kufuneka ukuthi ehlukaniswe kanjani lapho
kufakwa khona ibhodi ezimele, okuyiyona eklama imingcele, kanjalo
noNgqongqoshe bezifunda.

Okunye okubalulekile ngukuthi kunodaba lwabaphathi bamadolobha obeluke
lwabekwa ngaphambili. [Kwaphela isikhathi.] [Ihlombe.] (Translation of Zulu
speech follows.)

[Mr I B NTSHANGASE: Chairperson, it is a pleasure to salute you, hon
members and the House at large. This is the third time that sections of the
Bill that we are amending are being tabled in this House.

There are four important clauses that I would like to talk about today
before I respond to other speeches that have already been delivered. The
first clause is clause 14, which enables the present municipal councils to
vote in a few months' time by using the numbers that they were allocated
during the demarcation period. They should not use names because that will
take too long. The ANC, as it leads many of these councils, wants to find
out the names that will be used by the future municipal councils.

Clause 15 provides the legal policies that will be used and will enable us
to elect new councils and disband the old ones and transfer municipal
workers from the old municipal councils to the new ones. It provides
policies that will enable us to transfer the existing by-laws to the new
councils. This clause also stipulates the procedure to be followed so that
the property of the local governments will be protected. Human resources
will be transformed and the creation of new posts will be protected.

We have seen before that when it comes to elections, this means that there
will be a change of government. Those who are in power go to extremes when
they award themselves positions. Government property will be saved by
ensuring that no unnecessary property is bought and that what is there does
not disappear. It is this clause that will make it impossible to spend
money unwisely, especially the reserved funds.

Clause 5 of this Bill talks about the example that has been given by the
President which will increase the number of amakhosi who will participate
in the municipal councils from 10% to 20%. While this is taking place we
will also be waiting for the report which will be printed in the Green
Paper and in the White Paper with regard to the issue of amakhosi. We
understand that the issue of amakhosi is serious. We know that the
colonialists and the apartheid regime appointed their spies as amakhosi. It
is important not to overlook this point and also not to be emotional about
it. We should first look at who the indigenous amakhosi were. It is
important that when we discuss this issue, we discuss it well and in such a
way that every important fact is considered.

It is also important to look at clause 6 which talks about the powers that
should be given to municipal councils, especially those that are at local
level, so that they will not conflict with those of provincial governments.
Another important clause is the clause which clarifies how powers should be
distributed and when to include Ministers and an independent body that will
demarcate the boundaries.

Another important issue that was put forward is that of mayors. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! The technical support team is
attempting to make it possible for us to hear the interpretation. In the
meantime, I have communicated in writing to Madam Speaker that there has
been a general deterioration in the quality of sound that we have been
experiencing. If that is so from all quarters of the House, I think it
would be imperative for this matter to be dealt with expeditiously, in
order that each one of us is in a position to hear clearly what is being
said by the speaker at the podium. [Interjections.] So I hope that that
matter will be resolved in due course.

Chief N Z MTIRARA: Mhlali ngaphambili, ifani yam nguMtirara. ke Ngoko
ndiyaqiniseka ukuba kwithuba elizayo uya kuyibiza ngohlobo olufanelekileyo.
Mhlali ngaphambili, nawo onke amalungu eNdlu ... [Chairperson, my surname
is Mtirara and I hope that next time you will pronounce it correctly.
Chairperson, hon members ...]

... to build our country, we must all accept that traditional leaders have
an important and integral role to play in this country. This institution of
amakhosi needs to be transformed so as to achieve full legitimacy,
democracy and, accordingly, respect and acceptance by all.

In order to achieve a clear definition of roles between elected councillors
and born leaders of royal blood in our country, local government in rural
areas must be restructured in a manner that removes the existing
uncertainty and friction that has led to the performance of municipal
functions being the responsibility of elected councils. Traditional leaders
should play a vital role for their people, and their roles should be
related to category B municipalities.

There must be an interaction of both district and local municipalities in
terms of projects or programmes within the traditional leaders'
jurisdiction. The demarcation authority should have taken into account the
existing boundaries of traditional leaders when the demarcation process
kicked off. In the light of this, section 12 in Chapter 2 of the principal
Act makes mention of demarcated areas, but does not outline the process of
incorporation of traditional authorities into a municipal council in the
process of the establishment of municipalities.

A problem arises in Schedule 5 to the Act, where traditional leaders are
included in disciplinary proceedings for misconduct against them, for
contravening or not observing provisions of the Local Government: Municipal
Structures Act of 1998, viz failure to attend three consecutive municipal
council meetings, disclosure of information, pecuniary interests, etc. This
matter was not discussed with traditional leaders at all.

Nowhere in the Act is mention made of the recognition of traditional
authorities being expressed. It would appear that the status of traditional
leaders is equated to that of councillors. A traditional leader's status in
African custom, and even by Western standards, cannot rank equal to that of
his subordinate.

The Act does not address the matter of disparities between urban and rural
infrastructure, and how the integration of the administration of these
diametrically opposed segments can be effectively maintained. During the
past five years, the effectiveness and practicality of the structure of
rural councils have been merely symbolic as they did not command any
semblance of authority or financial muscle to satisfy the basic needs and
requirements of the residents of rural communities.

There is no evidence in the Bill of significant structural changes being
enlisted to transform the present pathetic and gloomy financial outlook and
image of rural communities. There is no point or reason why, on our soil,
African customs and traditions should be seen to be at war with the demands
of new democratic governance. We need to follow a constitutional
arrangement which combines both traditional leaders and elected local
government councillors to build and develop rural communities.

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister, the concept of wall-to-
wall municipalities has been around since 1994, but has yet to be perfected
and presented in an acceptable form to the populace. The patchwork being
done on this Act clearly gives the impression that it was not well thought
through to start with.

The fact that the representation of the dikgosi in each district council
municipality is being raised to 20% indicates that this is one level of
leadership that was taken for granted at the beginning. Their participation
as ex officio members is still insufficient. Members of any council should
have the right to vote, and not only sit without decisive votes.

The Bill comes across as unfortunate because it will assist in
marginalising traditional leadership, something which will make service
delivery and sustainable development in their areas difficult to achieve.

The continued delay in the tabling of the proposed property rates Bill
spells uncertainty for the people. The electorate is being forced to buy a
pig in a poke by rushing into the elections and, later Government will come
up with a shocking surprise in the form of the piece of legislation on
property rates when the system will have been entrenched and that will be a
point of no return.

Realising that a newly established municipality will supersede the existing
ones is welcome and acceptable. [Time expired.]

Mfh M C LOBE: Mohlomphehi Motsamaisi wa mosebetsi, ke batla ho nka motsotso
ona bakeng sa ho lokisa ditho tse ntseng di bua, haholo-holo ba mokga o ka
sehlohong wa kganyetso, tse bontshang ho hloka kutlwisiso ya hore na
bothata bo tjametseng mebuso ya selehae ke bofe.

Mohlomphehi Mmusisi mona, o sa ile a bolela dinthonyana tse mmalwa tseo a
hopolang hore di tla etsa hore ho be thata bakeng sa hore re tswellise pele
leano lena la rona la ho ntlafatsa maphelo a batho, mme o bolela hore
dintho tsena tseo re buang ka tsona di bitsa tjhelete e ngata haholo mme
bommasepala ba keke ba kgona hore ba di phethise.
Jwale ke batla ho re ho mohlomphehi mona, ka mehla, rona ba mokga wa ANC,
ha re leka ho ntlafatsa maphelo a batho, batho ba tshwanang le yena,
majelathoko, ba re jwetsa hore dintho tseo re batlang ho di etsa di bitsa
tjhelete e ngata mme ha di kgone ho etsahala. Ke batla hore ke mo tsebise
hore ntshetsopele ya maphelo a batho ha ho na hore re ka e tlohela hobane
yena a nahana hore e bitsa tjhelete e ngata haholo. Re e etsa re tseba
hantle hore e bitsa tjhelete e ngata.

Empa, hore ke mo etsetse bobebe, hobane ke a bona hore o tshwere bothata
mono, ke tla sebedisa puo ya hae. (Translation of Sesotho paragraphs
follows)

[Ms M C LOBE: Chairperson, I want to take this opportunity to correct what
has been said by some of the previous speakers, especially those from the
main opposition party, who showed a  lack of understanding of the problem
facing local government.

The previous speaker referred to a number of things which he felt would
make it difficult for us to promote our programme to improve the lives of
our people, and he said that the issues which we are discussing would cost
a lot of money and, therefore, the municipalities would not be able to
implement them.

Now I want to say to the hon member here that every time we, from the ANC,
try to improve the lives of our people, people like him, rebels, keep
telling us that it will cost a lot of money and it will not be possible to
implement it. I want to inform him that there is no way we are going to
stop improving the lives of our people simply because he feels that it is
too expensive. We do it with full knowledge of the cost implications.

So, in order to make things easier for him, because I can see that he is
experiencing difficulties here, I will speak his language.]

Local government has been given a new constitutional mandate to create and
sustain humane, equitable and viable human settlements. This developmental
mandate requires fundamental transformation of both the political and the
administrative system and structures of municipalities.

The White Paper on Local Government provides a framework in terms of which
radical transformation of the existing municipalities will take place. As
part of this process, Parliament passed two major Acts on local government
in 1998, that is, the Local Government: Municipal Demarcation Act, and the
Local Government: Municipal Structures Act. Today, we are dealing with a
very critical piece of legislation - the Local Government: Municipal
Systems Bill.

These pieces of legislation form part of a comprehensive plan to provide
for structural and institutional transformation of local government on its
path to viability, delivery and good governance. This Bill provides for a
transitional arrangement - which I think the hon member does not understand
- which ends two years from the date of the forthcoming local government
elections. Amongst other things, this includes the naming of the new
municipalities. Clause 14 of this Bill is redesigned to accommodate the
disestablishment of the existing municipalities and the establishment of
the new municipalities in terms of section 12 of the Act.

A number of concerns have been raised by numerous people on the issue of
traditional leadership. I think it is very important to know that, with
these amendments, we are giving a 100% increment in the representation of
traditional leadership, because it is our belief that there is no reason
why African customs and traditions should be seen as being in conflict with
the demands of modern governance.

The co-operative model proposed here provides a constructive role for
traditional leadership at local level, and in the governance and
development of rural communities. I hope Ntate Mtirara is listening. A
municipality has powers and functions assigned to it in terms of the
Constitution. These powers and functions should be exercised in a way that
has maximum impact on the social development of communities, in particular,
in meeting the basic needs of the poor majority, such as Africans and
women.

These powers and functions should be divided, in the case of category C and
B municipalities, within an area of the district municipality. Section
84(1) is therefore aligned with sections 156 and 229 of the Constitution
and other related regulations within the system of intergovernmental
relations.

We also propose that section 84 of the Act be amended to allow the
Minister, after consultation with key stakeholders, to authorise a local
municipality to perform a function or exercise a power which has been
allocated to the district council due to capacity-related considerations.
This, however, does not negate the vital role that district municipalities
should play to integrate their areas. The district is the most central
level of local government in ensuring that services and local government
resources are redistributed equitably across all the municipalities in a
particular district.

In conclusion, the future developmental local government must play a
central role in representing communities, protecting human rights and
meeting basic needs. It must focus its efforts and resources on improving
the quality of life of our communities, especially historically
disadvantaged groups. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, before I call the
Minister, take note that we are dealing with matters municipal this
afternoon, and between one municipality and others there are demarcation
lines. Such lines are also to be found in this House, where hon members may
have many conferences with those who are immediate neighbours, but not
across boundary lines. All those members who are having conferences outside
boundary lines must please confine themselves to the demarcated boundary.
[Laughter.]

Mrs S A SEATON: Mr Chairman, on a point of order: Does that mean that I
cannot have a conference across the way here?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Yes. These are very strict
demarcations: Neither across nor behind. It is only a limited degree of
horizontal conferencing that may take place. Anything outside that will not
be permissible. [Interjections.]

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Mr Chairperson, I wish to
thank all those who participated in this debate, especially those who spoke
in favour of the Bill.

Local government elections are around the corner. We cannot be sitting here
in this House indulging in discussions about rumours on who is going to be
deployed where. The hon member who showed a passion to discuss rumours did
say that she once served in the Durban council. I hope that her being here
has increased the prospect of improved local governance in Durban.

Those who oppose what they call megacities which have the prospect of
taking government away from the people cannot expect us to join them in
perpetuating the legacy of divided cities which condemned the black
majority to residential areas cut off from the revenue base which the
majority of our black people helped generate. We do not see how this can be
said to be a recipe for worsening the financial problems currently faced by
municipalities. In short I am saying: We will not join hon members who
think in this way in advocating policies which are appropriate for times we
no longer live in.

I also want to place on record - given the time constraints, I am not
intent on debating all the issues raised about the ongoing matter of
traditional leaders and local governance - the fact that another meeting
between traditional leaders and Government is scheduled for 26 September
this year. So there is also no need for us to use this House as a dress
rehearsal for that meeting. We will meet at the meeting on 26 September.
Once more, thank you to everybody who participated in this debate.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time (Inkatha Freedom Party dissenting).

   CHALLENGE FACING GOVERNMENT IN EFFECTIVELY UTILISING STATE AND NATIONAL
                       RESOURCES TO ALLEVIATE POVERTY

                          (Subject for Discussion)

Mr K MOONSAMY: Chairperson and hon members, this is a very timeous debate
because half of the world's population lives in grinding poverty. Poverty
is degrading and humiliating to any human being. It is also a poor
reflection on society itself because no one wants to be a beggar.

The destructive nature of poverty defies any adequate definition and
measurement of poverty itself. Poverty is characterised by low incomes and
a poor standard of living reflected in inadequate access to nutrition,
health, water, sanitation, housing, education, culture, a clean
environment, communication, technology, sports, transport, jobs, land and
finance.

Scientists struggle to define it. Serious scientists try to define it on
the basis of arbitrary assumptions, such as ``those who earn less than US$
2 a day''. Poets may define it as ``the squalor of the soul''. While
different professions may disagree on its definitions, human beings all
over the world should agree on the need for the eradication of poverty.
This is a challenge facing not only the Government, but also the corporate
sector and organs of civil society.

It is well known that we inherited from apartheid enormous problems of
poverty and inequality. These were perhaps summed up by the fact that our
country ranked 39 places lower on the UN human development index in 1994
than it would have been on the basis of income per capita. By contrast Cuba
was ranked several places higher. Our democratic Government has accepted
responsibility to effectively use state and national resources to eliminate
the source of poverty.

We are having to do this in the context of the process known as
globalisation. Whatever benefits the technological developments of ICT
potentially hold out for poor people in developing countries, none can deny
that its record to date is one of widening differentials between and within
countries, with many poor communities threatened with marginalisation.

The G7 countries control 72% of world GDP, while South Africa's share of
world GDP is less than half a percent. Globalisation has accordingly been
thus far associated with growing inequalities within and between countries.


Ten years ago, the world had 147 US-dollar billionaires, five years ago
there were 274, and today there are 447. These 447 billionaires have a
combined wealth greater than the annual income of half the world's
population. Fifty-one of the 100 largest economies in the world are now
transnational corporations, rather than countries. This, I think, is a
naked plunder and robbery by the TNC - transnational corporations - of
mainly the Third World economies.

Today in South Africa, 46% of our population remains rural, 52% are women
and 34% are children under the age of 14 years. The social inventory of
poverty is horrendous in a 21st century South Africa, which has the most
vibrant economy in Africa. Of the total 9 million households in South
Africa, 5 million have pit, bucket or no latrines and 3 million have no
refuse removal facilities. About 47% of our population still use wood, coal
and paraffin as sources of energy for cooking, heating and lighting. This
is a clear indication that poverty, by its very nature, defies definition
and measurement.

The first interrelated priorities are job retention and job creation as a
means to create and redistribute wealth through the wage system. There is a
need for Government, while adopting appropriate fiscal and monetary
measures, to stimulate the economy to achieve these priorities in the short
term.

The provision of basic health care is a fundamental right and includes free
primary health care such as immunisation, prevention of diseases, maternity
and child care, youth health care services, family planning and oral
hygiene. In terms of its drugs policy, Government is committed to making
available essential drugs of good quality, safety and efficacy to all South
Africans.

Since more than 70% of the poor live in rural areas, the Government
utilises clinics, community health care centres and local governments to
distribute its health care services. An essential part of this distribution
network is foreign doctors, for example, Cuban doctors, in the rural areas
of our nine provinces.

By 1999 the Government had built 474 clinics, upgraded 212 clinics and had
99 313 beds in public hospitals. As there are pressures on these public
facilities, these facilities need to be increased and made accessible to
people who have historically been deprived of them. There is spare capacity
in South Africa's 357 private hospitals, and I call on their owners to make
facilities more accessible to the poor and the hungry.

The Government needs to continue its allocation of resources to fight
preventable diseases such as malaria, TB, HIV/Aids, STDs and preventable
deaths such as infant mortality. In this regard, we should note that the
scourge of malaria was eradicated in Europe after World War II by using
DDT. We need to revisit our stance on this issue. Currently, there are 35
000 households directly exposed to the risk of malaria. Needless to say,
they are the rural poor in KwaZulu-Natal, the Northern Province and
Mpumalanga - three of our poorest provinces.

Another preventable scourge which needs eradication is TB, which has been
with us for the past 200 years. Its spread follows the pattern of mining,
industrialisation and urbanisation. It is rooted in poverty and has an
annual growth of 20%. Its treatment is complicated by Aids and the failure
to cure it at the first attempt. About one third of 103 000 TB patients are
linked to HIV. About R500 million was spent in 1996 in fighting this
scourge and an eight-person national team was set up together with nine
provincial co-ordinators. Treatment at all public hospitals and clinics is
free of charge.

The mother of all scourges which this nation, Africa and the world is
facing is HIV/Aids. In our country there are more than 3,2 million people
infected by this scourge and daily there is an increase of 1 500. About 50%
of the sufferers are between the ages of 15 and 24. Business, media, trade
unions and all civil society organs need to join Government in this fight.
While we acknowledge that HIV is the basic cause of Aids, we also need to
acknowledge that environmental factors such as poverty and preventable
diseases exacerbate the development of HIV, resulting in full-blown Aids.

The Government needs to allocate more resources to fighting child
mortality, pregnancy, related deaths, violence against women, birth
defects, polio, measles, chronic diseases, disabilities, leprosy,
occupational health hazards and problems of mental health. The most
vulnerable group in our nation are the children. There are about 9 million
children below the age of nine years. About 23% of our children are
stunted, and 5,5% are abnormally underweight, which is symptomatic of
malnutrition. The Government's integrated nutrition programme is therefore
appropriate. Its national nutrition and social development programme, the
protein energy nutrition scheme and the primary school nutrition programme
are meant to overcome malnutrition.

This nation cannot transform itself without addressing the problems related
to the poverty of the mind. Educating the nation is embedded in the twin
priorities of job retention and job creation. It is critical to creating
self-reliance and resourcefulness. There are about 32 000 schools with
pupil enrolment figures reaching 12 million learners and there are
approximately 360 000 educators. At a physical level, there are shortages
of classrooms, and of maths, science, design and technology educators.
About a quarter of these schools do not have a proper supply of drinking
water and about one third of them are in a state of decay.

In this regard, our Government is taking vigorous steps in eradicating the
legacy of the past. As a part of this process, the Department of Education
has embarked on a campaign which is called ``Culture of Learning and
Teaching Science''. We should allocate more resources to early childhood
education in which the foundations for mathematicians, scientists,
designers and technologists are laid.

Cognitive education theories, strategies and instructional models need to
be developed further and implemented. The support of various newspapers,
the SABC, businesses such as Iscor and Liberty Life and nongovernmental
organisations are invaluable. More nongovernmental organisation involvement
is encouraged. In order to achieve equity, 60% of nonpersonnel and
noncapital resources are allocated to the poorest 40% of schools. There are
now new national norms and standards for school funding.

Sectoral education and training authorities are now emerging as a new force
in education and training. Through the Skills Development Act they will
access levies of about R1,2 billion this year and utilise them to achieve
national skills strategy targets of a labour force which is 80% black, 54%
women and 4% disabled. These levies are raised from the private sector's
wage and salary bills, and not from our national budget.

As part of a basic necessity, the Government is committed to overcoming the
housing backlog. Between 1994 and 1998 the Government spent R9,3 billion on
housing. The provisions of the Housing Act and the Rental Housing Act are
being effectively used to address this problem.

I touched on only a few items on the long inventory of poverty merely as an
illustration of the mammoth historical challenge to eradicate poverty. I
might also add that to crush poverty and eradicate it is a herculean task,
and for such a task we need herculean people. [Applause.]

Mrs P W CUPIDO: Mr Chairperson, South Africa is facing the biggest
challenge ever in utilising the state and national resources to alleviate
the poverty of millions of its people, to substantially reduce unemployment
and to uplift the standard of living of all. Failure to alleviate poverty
will result in disastrous consequences for our very fragile democracy.

South Africa's economy is characterised by a dichotomy. On the one hand,
sustained monetary and fiscal discipline has resulted in some of the
economic fundamentals being in place, and on the other hand, poverty and
unemployment have continued to increase.

South Africa has to increase its growth rate to 6% per year if unemployment
is to be substantially reduced. The challenge for this Government is to
look at the deficiencies in our economy which inhibit our ability to
achieve a 6% growth rate and to improve our domestic and foreign fixed
investment.

We do not have much more room for destructive social spending. We have to
become smart spenders and target our poverty relief expenditure. It was a
total disgrace earlier this year to discover that the Government had been
unable to spend over R500 million allocated for poverty relief. This means
that the Government suffers from maladministration as well as major
corruption.

There is also an alarming lack of confidence in the Department of Welfare,
which is a key role-player in the poverty relief programme. The turnover of
directors-general and Ministers in strategic portfolios breeds despair and
hampers investment confidence.

Furthermore, no country was ever created rich. Few have succeeded in having
wealth thrust upon them. Many have tried, but most succeed in dissipating
capital flows faster than it can be received. Let us look at the following
example. Africa has received more capital in the form of aid and small
investment over the last 60 years than ever before. What result did these
donations have? It resulted in a loss of agricultural self-sufficiency and
a general increase in poverty in many of the recipient countries, of which
South Africa, luckily, was not one. [Interjections.]

This shows that, when countries rely on donor funds instead of tax
revenues, they tend to act irresponsibly towards the needs and conditions
of their own citizens, especially the poorest of the poor. This Government
must therefore aim to achieve greater fixed investment and job-creating
growth, and specifically focus on the reduction of personal income so that
people have more disposable income and are able to save.

Incentives need to be granted to encourage people to save. The DP therefore
proposes that the first R12 000 or 10% of an individual's taxable income,
whichever is the greatest, be tax free and that donations tax and estate
duty be abolished. The DP further proposes a sincere gesture by the state
to assist the millions of poverty-stricken people. This proposal is as
follows: That a basic subsistence grant be paid to every person with an
income of R7 000 per year or less, the income tax system be used to make it
uneconomical for people who do not qualify to apply, there be a maximum of
R400 per month for any one family, the cost be financed by a 1% increase in
VAT, and the scheme come into operation after allowing six months for
people to register. No person who qualifies for any other state pension or
grant would be eligible for the basic subsistence grant.

The six-month period would be used to register applicants and to get an
indication of how many people would be on the scheme, so that the monthly
amount could be determined. I suggest that an amount of not less than R100
per month per person is affordable. It is, however, important that this
grant, which is essentially survival assistance, be administered as cheaply
as possible and not be a deterrent to obtaining employment. This
supplementary income will give people some assistance in feeding their
families on a daily basis.

We cannot be satisfied with growth rates of 3% to 4%, because that will
simply cause unemployment and poverty to increase. We must be determined to
ensure that our economy grows at 6% or more per year on a sustainable
basis. For that to happen, the key areas identified in these proposals must
be addressed.

In attacking poverty we must ensure that we address opportunity,
empowerment and security, as contained in the World Bank's World
Development Report 2000-2001. The report recommends that the governments of
developing countries at all levels, donor countries, international
agencies, NGOs, civil society and local communities mobilise behind these
three priority areas.

Regarding opportunity, economic opportunities for poor people should be
expanded by stimulating economic growth, making markets work better for
poor people and working for their inclusion, particularly by building up
their assets such as land and education. Regarding empowerment, the ability
of poor people to shape decisions that affect their lives should be
strengthened and discrimination based on gender, race, ethnicity and social
status should be removed.

Regarding security, we should reduce poor people's vulnerability to
sickness, economic shocks, crop failure, unemployment, natural disasters
and violence and help them to cope ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, your speaking time
has expired.

Mrs P W CUPIDO: ... when such misfortunes are felt. [Interjections.]

Mr N S MIDDLETON: Chairman and hon members, it is an undisputed fact that a
large section of our South African population suffers every day under the
scourge of abject poverty. No one can argue or dispute that South Africa's
poorest of the poor are in that situation due to the historic and
institutionalised racial discrimination and neglect of the past.
[Interjections.]

We have no doubts about what South Africa's number one priority should be.
It should be the immediate, comprehensive and sustained alleviation of
poverty. Some might say that we have other priorities on which we should
concentrate, such as fighting crime and the spread of Aids, as well as
addressing other social and economic ills. These matters are, indeed,
priorities, but we have to recognise the fact that the causes of all these
are related to poverty and the incidence of crime. Poverty provides a
tremendous and fertile breeding ground for these problems in our society.
Yes, there will still be crime. We will still have Aids and unemployment
when poverty has been eradicated, but there will be so much less of it. We
simply have to make poverty our public enemy number one. This is where the
real challenges lie.

In turning more specifically to the matter being discussed here today, the
challenge of eradicating poverty is not and should not be limited to the
Government only. Yes, the Government is vitally important when it comes to
deciding the appropriate policies to deal with poverty, the proper
allocation of resources and in implementing successful programmes on the
ground. That is not in dispute. However, the challenge to eradicate poverty
belongs to all South Africans, all political parties in this House, all
institutions of state, organisations, individuals and civil society. Even
the business sector and the poorest of the poor must help in this regard.
We have to develop a collective acceptance of the need to fight poverty and
we have to collectively pull together, as one, to realise our ultimate
objective which is to eradicate poverty in the shortest possible time and
to ensure life and dignity for all people.

What can the Government do to effectively use our national resources in the
alleviation of poverty? Firstly, I would like to suggest that it must
allocate the bulk of available resources to where it is needed most at this
time - in the communities that were marginalised and neglected by
apartheid. Secondly, it must ensure that the allocated resources are
actually spent. To hear, for instance, that there are hundreds of millions
of rands that were not spent on welfare services is an indictment against
the ability of the Government to fight poverty. It is an indictment against
the commitment and ability of Public Service officials to manage and
successfully implement service delivery programmes and to assist the poor.

It must implement drastic measures to assist the poor, such as further zero
rating of VAT on basic foodstuffs and sources of household energy like
paraffin. It must make full use of the limitless opportunities afforded the
so-called new world economy. In order for our economy to grow, it must
embrace the opportunities inherent in increased competitiveness.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, please take your
seats. You may continue, hon member. [Laughter.]

Mr N S MIDDLETON: It must recognise that no government will be able to
eradicate poverty on its own. It must accept that success will only be
achieved in partnership with the people of South Africa. What all South
Africans do ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, your speaking time
has expired.

Mr N S MIDDLETON: Chairperson, may I, under section 15 of the Rules, be
allowed ...
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Unfortunately, no.

Mr J DURAND: Chairperson, after five years as Minister in charge of
privatisation, Stella Sigcau failed to deliver and had to make way for
Minister Jeff Radebe. [Interjections.] Everyone thought that a practical
President Mbeki and an effective Jeff Radebe would be able to do a good
job. Mr Radebe made the right noises and we all thought he would jolt the
privatisation of state assets out of its slumber.

South Africa is burdened with a collection of state enterprises on an
almost communistic scale. They cost the taxpayer billions and they do not
deliver effectively, and they provide services at extortionate prices.
Whether the ANC-led Government is serious about privatisation is not clear.
Our current budget assumes revenues of R4 billion in public companies and
R120 billion in state-owned property. We need much more to address the
plight of the poor.

There are many obstacles. Most public firms are in a mess, over-staffed and
in deep debt. Transnet is over-staffed by 27 000 jobs and Telkom needs to
lose 1 000 jobs. In a country with an unemployment rate of over 30%, we
understand Government's reluctance.  Over 1 million jobs have been lost
since the ANC came into power, and the number will increase unless the ANC
changes its policies and its way of dealing with the unions. Most union
leaders oppose privatisation on principle. When the Government offered them
preferential access to shares in privatised firms in the hope of breaking
down their resolve, they took the bait but failed to come up with the cash.


Privatisation of state assets will do the following. It will raise money
for infrastructure and services in critical areas such as crime prevention,
welfare, health and education - all areas where this Government is failing
dismally. It will bring in foreign exchange and expertise. Foreign direct
investments mean jobs, training and international markets at our disposal.
The markets that multinationals have captured become accessible at no extra
cost, provided we allow them to buy in.

The ANC-Communist Party-led Government has conflicting aims.
[Interjections.] It wants money but it also wants to use public firms and
state assets to capture votes. It wants to use privatisation as a means of
black empowerment. The bulk of the shares of Transnet, for instance, must
go to black investors. That may mean they sell for much less than at a
public auction. Who will benefit? Who will benefit by this? A small slice
of the black elite who are ANC-aligned and who have already largely
overcome the results of past discrimination. The masses, the really poor -
most of whom are black - will lose in two ways. Firstly, they receive worse
services - black-owned firms can charge higher prices and still win
Government contracts. Secondly, less money for the state means less houses,
less schools, fewer water pipes, no medicine at hospitals, less clinics and
much, much more taxes.

We need funds for education. In the past blacks were deprived of a decent
education. [Interjections.] The first five years of ANC rule has done
little to improve the situation. [Interjections.] South African schools are
in a mess after Bengu's term and are lacking textbooks, classrooms and
discipline. [Interjections.] Although Minister Asmal is trying to knock
them into shape, the results might only be seen on the marketplace after
many years.

Ons is geseën met 'n ryk natuurlike erfenis. Toeriste vloei jaarliks na ons
land om die pragtige plant- en dierlewe te aanskou. Die miljarde aan
buitelandse valuta [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[We have been blessed with a rich natural heritage. Tourists flock to our
country annually to view the beautiful flora and fauna. The billions in
foreign exchange ... [Interjections.]]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order, hon members! Yes, hon Mbulawa-
Hans?

Dr B G MBULAWA-HANS: Chairperson, I would just like to know, because the
member is talking about previous education, whether ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, are you rising on
a point of order?

Dr B G MBULAWA-HANS: Chairperson, I just wantd to find out if ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, answer my
question. Are you rising on a point of order?

Dr B G MBULAWA-HANS: My point of order is to ask whether the hon member has
...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member you may not use a
point of order to ask a question. I therefore ask you again: Are you rising
on a point of order?

Dr B G MBULAWA-HANS: No, not a point of order.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Thank you then, hon member.
[Laughter.] You may continue, hon Durand.

Mr J DURAND: Thank you, Chair. South African schools are in a mess after
Bengu's term, and are lacking textbooks ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order, hon member, did you say:
``Bengu's term''?

Mr J DURAND: Yes, sir.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: I think it would be preferable if you
said: ``Minister Bengu'' to show respect to the Minister. Thank you.

Mr J DURAND: Chairperson, I am sorry, I will do so. I withdraw, and I will
say again that South African schools are in a mess after Minister Bengu's
term as Minister of Education. [Interjections.] Our schools lack textbooks,
classrooms and discipline. [Interjections.] Although Minister Asmal is
trying to knock them into shape, the results might only be seen on the
marketplace after many years.

Ons is geseën met 'n ryk natuurlike ... [We have been blessed with a rich
natural ...]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, are you rising on
a point of order?

Mr T M GONIWE: Chairperson, I would like to ask if the member will take a
question.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon member, do you want to take a
question?

Mr J DURAND: Chairperson, at my office tomorrow morning. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Thank you. Hon member, you may sit
down.

Mnr J DURAND: Ons is geseën met 'n ryk natuurlike erfenis.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Toeriste vloei jaarliks na ons land om die pragtige plant-
 en dierlewe te aanskou. [Tussenwerpsels.] Die biljarde aan buitelandse
valuta wat 2006 se Wêreldtoernooi om die Sokkerbeker sou bring hoef nie
verlore te wees nie. [Tussenwerpsels.] As toerisme met dieselfde energie,
geesdrif en rande bemark sou word wat aan die wêreldbekerbod bestee is, kan
Suid-Afrika meer as vergoed vir dié toernooi.

Satoer se bemarkingsveldtog het vanjaar in ses lande afgeskop. Daar was
ongelukkige tydsberekening met die Zimbabwe krisis en die vloede, en die
feit dat daar weinig koördinering by die buitelandse reisbedryf was. In
Brittanje, Suid-Afrika se belangrikste buitelandse mark, is reisagente nie
ingelig nie. [Tussenwerpsels.] Reisagente en Satoer personeel kon nie die
navrae na aanleiding van die advertensies hanteer nie. [Tussenwerpsels.]
Geen reispakkette is beplan om saam met die veldtog te val nie.
[Tussenwerpsels.]

Die Wêreldraad vir Reis en Toerisme voorsien dat toerisme binne die medium
termyn 1,6 miljoen ekstra werkgeleenthede kan skep. [Tussenwerpsels.] Dit
sal die meer as 1 miljoen werkers wat onder ANC-bewind hulle werk verloor
het, help. [Tyd verstreke.] [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Mr J DURAND: We have been blessed with a rich natural heritage.
[Interjections.] Tourists flock to our country annually to view the
beautiful flora and fauna. [Interjections.] The billions in foreign
exchange which the 2006 Soccer World Cup tournament would have brought in
need not be lost. [Interjections.] If tourism were to be marketed with the
same energy, enthusiasm and money as was invested in the world cup bid,
South Africa could more than make up for that tournament.

This year Satour's marketing campaign kicked off in six countries. There
was unfortunate timing with the Zimbabwean crisis and the floods, and the
fact that there was little co-ordination in the foreign tourist industry.
In Britain, South Africa's most important foreign market, the travel agents
were not informed. [Interjections.] Travel agents and Satour staff were
unable to handle the enquiries prompted by the advertisements.
[Interjections.] No travel packages had been planned to coincide with the
campaign. [Interjections.]

The World Travel and Tourism Council foresees that in the medium term
tourism can create 1,6 million extra job opportunities. [Interjections.]
This will assist the more than 1 million workers who have lost their jobs
under ANC rule. [Time expired.] [Applause.]]

Miss M N MAGAZI: Chairperson, hon members, poor black women, especially
those in the rural areas, feel the legacy of apartheid neglect the deepest.
In a rural village of about 100 people, at least 53% of households do not
have enough money to buy the minimum amount of food, clothing and fuel
necessary for their survival.

Poverty is not equally spread among men and women. In fact, almost half of
all South African women live below the poverty line, compared to 44% of
men. This situation is not only a legacy of apartheid, it is also the
result of poor relations between men and women, which more often than not
reduce women to second-class citizens.

The lack of power that women experience in their own homes is then
translated into a lack of power when it comes to reducing poverty. Not only
are women lagging behind in training opportunities, they are also
systematically denied access to capital, land and markets. When we try to
address poverty we cannot look at it as low income levels only, but also as
the result of a complex set of political and social interactions. Poverty
targeting must therefore be an integrated, coherent project.

I have no doubt that our Government has put the eradication of poverty and
the development of all its people at the heart of its programmes. We must
recognise these efforts, given the background of an economy severely
hampered by the results of apartheid legislation and underdevelopment. I
need to look, however, at how women especially are targeted through our
interventions.

Poverty amongst women often means limited power to make choices concerning
their own health and that of their children. In the light of this reality,
the importance of measures such as the Choice on Termination of Pregnancy
Act, cannot be overemphasised. What becomes critical then, is to ensure
that we provide access to safe termination for all women, as choice about
family size is intrinsically linked to the quality of life we create for
our children and their children.

This may require us to appeal once more to medical personnel not to
frustrate women's right to choose a safe termination of pregnancy. This is
especially important where the women are reliant on public medical services
and cannot afford to make use of private clinics for such services.

Another aspect of poverty in terms of which women are still being
disadvantaged is the issue of land. The apartheid system took land away
from the African masses and the process of returning land to those who have
been dispossessed for decades is progressing slowly. Without access to
land, rural women, who may have gained farming skills, still have great
difficulty escaping the poverty trap.

Giving women access to land must be part of our integrated rural
development strategy, as must training programmes and access to credit. In
fact, linking access to land and credit has made it possible for a group of
women in the Piketberg area, for example, to start a commercially viable
business exporting their farm produce. But now I am telling hon members
about a project fairly near the urban centre of Cape Town. We must, in our
development programmes, also ensure that there is a clear bias towards
women in the deep rural areas. Those areas are underdeveloped and
underserviced, where poverty is felt the most.

Let me turn to an issue that has been in the press very often in the past
few months: the issue of HIV/Aids. Black women are the most vulnerable to
Aids and the devastating consequences it has on whole families and
communities. In fact, prevalence is highest amongst women in the 20 to 24
years age group and amongst teenage girls.

Studies also reveal a racial difference in the prevalence of HIV, with
prevalence highest among black women and men. Again, this relates to
women's power in their families and communities. And so, when we address
the eradication of this scourge, we must take cognisance of the links
between the disempowerment of women, poverty and disease.
The President stated very clearly yesterday that the problem of HIV/Aids is
exacerbated by poverty and that we would require a multipronged approach to
fight it, apart from our approaches of prevention in which we have to focus
on the most vulnerable - women. We must also focus on other levels of
empowerment to ensure that women are heard when they make their choices.

Other speakers today have referred specifically to economic aspects of
poverty. However, it will have to become clear to all of us that poverty is
about more than unemployment or low income. Reducing poverty means
transforming the way we think about everything we do as Government, from
the way we budget to the way we listen to women in the poorest of the rural
villages. Reducing poverty has to go hand-in-hand with distribution of land
and wealth. This means also that when we commit ourselves in any Government
institution to transformation and to the empowerment of women, we commit
ourselves to making sure that the budgets we produce are gendered and
targeted specifically to poor women and children.

We must make sure that the political language of our development strategies
speaks to, for and about women. This approach must filter down to the
developmental level closest to the poor women, and that is their local
authority. It is therefore encouraging to see the efforts of Government to
formulate coherent local antipoverty strategies from the perspective and
capacities of local government.

Local economic development is essentially about generating economic growth
that is sustainable and rooted in the local economy. Thus it is argued that
local economic development can fulfil an important antipoverty function.
The level of local government makes it ideally suited to possess an
intimate understanding of who in the locality is poor, why these identified
groups are poor, where the poor are located, movement and mobility
patterns, the viable sources of survival and the sources of information and
influence within communities.

As we approach the local government election it is important to ensure that
we elect councillors who really have transformation at heart and
councillors who have the interest of poor women at heart. In this way we
will ensure that the local communities are empowered to a level where they
play a meaningful part in decisions about their own lives and livelihood.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COUMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, I think you owe
the speakers at the podium the courtesy to listen to their contributions. I
have been trying to catch the attention of some people, but I think I have
been failing. So if you could give the speakers at the podium the
opportunity to make their point, I would be grateful.

Mr M E MABETA: Chairperson, I take this opportunity to commend the hon
member who proposed this motion for inviting discussion that focuses on the
burning question of addressing the needs of the historically marginalised
section of our population. However, I must hasten to point out that Mrs
Cupido's thesis that the poor can be helped through hand-outs of portions
determined by the rich is not going to help anybody. I am sure Mr Durand
will agree with me on this.

I want to say to the hon Middleton that, yes, I agree as a Christian that a
partnership is very important. But a partnership that leaves total control
over one's life and what one owns to someone else, and where one enters
into a partnership with nothing, is not going to help anybody either.

The Reconstruction and Development Programme was designed in recognition of
a colonial apartheid legacy which had distorted our sociopolitical
relations, in such a way that all wealth and means of production are
concentrated in the hands of a minority super racial-class, whilst
relegating the majority to an impoverished state of servitude under the
dominant caste.

This is the historical structural basis of poverty in South Africa which
continues to be reproduced over and over again. The mission statement of
the RDP envisaged the correction of that historical distortion and the
reordering of the economic and social order along egalitarian lines that
would see the eventual economic liberation of the disadvantaged sectors of
our population. This is what 1994 was about.

We respectfully submit that our economic policy has erred in blindly
embracing globalisation as a sacred cow whose dictates are sacrosanct and
must therefore be given free rein. Voluntary acquiescence to globalisation
decrees privatisation of state assets as one of its cardinal pillars. The
argument is that a fully fledged market economy is the panacea for all our
social and economic evils.

On the contrary, we know that reliance on the operation of market forces to
correct historical imbalances is erroneous, because globalisation and its
attendant privatisation strategies subsist on the perpetuation of global
and national economic inequities and these, in South Africa, were not only
introduced through economic legislation, but were accompanied by very
cohesive and crude legal and military police control mechanisms. [Time
expired.]

Dr P W A MULDER: Mr Chairman, if one looks at South Africa's problems, it
seems as if we are caught in an endless cycle.  Because of South Africa's
high unemployment rate, people without jobs are stuck in permanent poverty;
because of poverty South Africa's crime rate is as high as it is; because
of our crime rate, we do not get the necessary foreign investment; because
we do not get the necessary investment, South Africa has a high
unemployment rate, and so we can continue. [Interjections.] Unemployment,
poverty, crime, no investment - back to unemployment. How does one break
the cycle? That is the question.

Dit kan gedoen word. Ander lande het daarin geslaag om dit te doen, en Suid-
Afrika het nie 'n keuse nie, ons moet ook daarin slaag om dit te doen. Dan
moet ons egter vorentoe kyk en, anders as die opmerking wat van daardie
kant af gekom het, nie altyd terugkyk en terugblameer nie.

As apartheid dan alles veroorsaak het, soos die bewering daar gemaak is,
kan 'n mens as teenvraag vra waarom daar dan soveel armoede in Afrika is.
Dan kom die antwoord dat kolonialisme al Afrika se moeilikheid veroorsaak
het. As kolonialisme dan die probleem in Afrika is, wat van Liberië?
Liberië het nooit onder 'n koloniale bewind gestaan nie. Dan is die
antwoord dat dit uitbuiting deur Europa is. As uitbuiting deur Europa die
probleem is, hoe is dit dan moontlik dat Zambië in die sestigerjare
welvarender was as Suid-Korea, en vandag is Suid-Korea 28 keer ryker as
Zambië?

So kan ek voort argumenteer op hierdie verlede-gerigte trant. Dit word 'n
urelange argument sonder dat ons by oplossings uitkom, en op die ou einde
is ons almal saam in hierdie bootjie. As hy sink, sink ons almal saam, nie
rykes en armes apart nie. Afrikaners gaan saam onder, want ons is deel van
Afrika.

Hierdie konsepbesluit handel oor die Regering se uitdaging om armoede op te
los. Natuurlik het regerings 'n verantwoordelikheid, maar ek is bekommerd
dat ons die klem te sterk op die Regering plaas en van die Regering goed
verwag wat 'n regering nie kan doen nie, wat nie binne sy vermoë is nie.

Regerings kan nie welvaart skep nie. Hulle kan en moet omstandighede skep
waarbinne die private sektor die werkgeleenthede kan skep. So word daar
welvaart geskep en dan kan 'n mens armoede begin verlig. Natuurlik het
regerings 'n taak ten opsigte hiervan, en daar is verskillende maniere om
dit te doen, maar aan die einde van die dag op die lang termyn is dit die
enigste manier.(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[It can be done. Other countries have managed to do it and South Africa
does not have a choice, we must also manage to do it. But then we must look
forward and, in contrast with the comment from that side, not always look
back and level accusations about the past.

If apartheid caused everything, as was alleged, one can then ask in
response to that why there is so much poverty in Africa. The answer then is
that colonialism caused all of Africa's problems. If colonialism is the
problem in Africa, what about Liberia? Liberia was never under colonial
rule. The answer then is that it was exploitation by Europe. If
exploitation by Europe was the problem, how is it possible that in the
sixties Zambia was more prosperous than South Korea, and today South Korea
is 28 times more prosperous than Zambia?

I can continue in this manner by constantly referring to the past. It
becomes a lengthy argument without our reaching any solutions and in the
end we are all together in the same boat. If it sinks, we all sink
together, not rich people and poor people separately. Afrikaners will also
go under, because we are part of Africa.

This draft resolution deals with the Government's challenge to solve the
problem of poverty. Of course governments have a responsibility, but I am
concerned that we are placing too much emphasis on this and are expecting
the Government to do things which it cannot do, which do not fall within
its capabilities.

Governments cannot generate wealth. They can and must create conditions in
which the private sector can create job opportunities. In this way wealth
is generated and then one can start alleviating poverty. Of course
governments have a duty in this regard and there are different ways to do
this, but in the long term this is the only way to do this.]

At the ministerial conference on security, stability, development and co-
operation in Africa on 8 and 9 May this year in Abuja, Nigeria, 11 general
principles were accepted. Principle eight reads, and I quote:


  Democracy, good governance, respect for human and people's rights and the
  rule of law are prerequisites for security, stability and development of
  the continent.

Democracy and good governance are seen as prerequisites for development. It
sounds strange maybe that we talk about democracy again in this sense of
the word, but hon members can go out in the world and check where there is
prosperity and where not.

In die afgelope eeu het daar geen groot hongersnode plaasgevind in lande
waar daar demokrasie is nie. Ek het gister na Indië verwys, wat 'n
demokrasie met heelwat beperkings het. Agb lede sal opmerk Indië het geen
hongersnood gehad nadat hy in 1947 onafhanklik geword het nie. [Tyd
verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[In the last century no major famine occurred in countries in which there
was a democracy. Yesterday I referred to India, which has a democracy with
quite a number of limitations. Hon members will notice that India has had
no famine since it became independent in 1947. [Time expired.]]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Mr Chairman, our country has immense wealth. Almost every
kind of mineral is found here - chrome, uranium, platinum, gold and
diamonds - and it is blessed with an ideal climate - temperate, tropical
and Mediterranean. Almost every agricultural product can be grown in our
country.

An American Senator, Jesse Helms, once commented on the riches of our
country. Among other things he said:


  South Africa is the source of over 80% of America's mineral supply and
  86% of platinum resources. South Africa has 90% of the world's chrome
  reserves. Without South Africa's chrome, no engines for modern jet
  aircraft, cruise missiles or armaments could be built, the United States
  Air Force could be grounded,  surgical equipment and utensils could not
  be produced, and our hospitals and doctors would be helpless.

The paradox is that, rich as our country is, its owners are the poorest in
the world. Africans are victims of poverty, disease, ignorance and
atrocious living conditions.

A Nedlac report released in October last year revealed that 60% of African
households live in abject poverty, compared with less than 5% of white
households. Africans have the highest percentage of households with no
access to basic amenities such as water, houses, sanitation and
electricity. Ninety-seven per cent of white households have access to safe
piped water, compared to 47% of rural African households. Ninety-eight per
cent of rural African households draw water from dams, rivers and streams,
compared to 2% of all other groups.

Of course, as a result of poverty, to which Africans especially are
exposed, there is high child mortality and short life expectancy among
Africans. Five per cent of the people of this country are said to own 88%
of the country's wealth. Fifty thousand white farmers own 85% of the
agricultural land. If this is not national suicide for the majority
population, what is it? One thing is certain, and that is that this should
not be allowed to continue.

Poverty dehumanises; poverty degrades; poverty is the mother of
revolutions; and poverty must be eradicated. How must this be done? This
country must adopt an economic system of sharing resources.

The colonial system of education which we have inherited is too academic.
We must provide an education which teaches at least two technical subjects
from Grade 7. This will enable students to acquire skills long before they
pass matric. This will increase their chances of employment or self-
employment.  Examples of technical subjects that must be taught are
plumbing, carpentry, electricity, computers and agriculture.

The inherited colonial education will sink us deeper in the quagmire of
poverty and economic dependency. I must emphasise that it is technological
economic power that determines the places of nations in the world. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Mr E SALOOJEE: Mr Chairperson, let us reflect. When democratic
transformation occurred in our country, at what point were we then? We want
to say that we inherited an economy that was devastated. We inherited a
land that was deeply divided. And we are literally talking about millions.

There are members from the New NP who joined the DP, and the DP found it
very comfortable to take them in. [Interjections.] Mr Durand comes from the
New NP. [Interjections.] They want to completely ignore the fact that
literally millions of people were devastated and had to live a life of
misery, poverty, and a lack of education. Families were separated.
[Interjections.]

Now ... [Interjections] ... this is the thing that we are saying: We will
never let the New NP forget that because, today, we are living with the
consequences of that. [Interjections.] Now, when I tell members ...
[Interjections.]

Gen C L VILJOEN: Mr Chairperson, I would like to ask the speaker whether he
will take a question.

Mr E SALOOJEE: No, I am not going to take a question.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon member, you may take your
seat. Hon member, you may proceed.

Mr E SALOOJEE: Mr Chairperson, those members have to be reminded of the
result of that legacy. Let us look at some figures. Sixty per cent of all
black people in South Africa live in poverty, compared to only 2% of
whites. Changing that is not going to happen overnight. [Interjections.] I
want to say that this Government has made heroic efforts and dramatic
results have been achieved. [Interjections.] I will give members evidence
of ... [Interjections] ... black people living in rural areas.

This is what apartheid did. Sixty-four per cent of Black people living in
rural areas have incomes which are too low to enable them to afford minimum
necessities such as food, clothing and fuel. [Interjections.] Almost half
of all women live below the poverty line, compared to 44% of men. This
difference is even greater in the rural areas. Sixty-three out of every 100
women are poor, compared to 57 out of every 100 men. [Interjections.] This
is the kind of existence and conditions ... [Interjections] ... under which
those who were historically deprived and oppressed had to live.

How has this Government responded? This is information that members might
be aware of but is something we must restate. The Government has
acknowledged that poverty ... [Interjections.] Yes, I will tell hon members
where the ANC is now. The South African Government has, since 1994, placed
poverty and inequality at the centre of its development agenda.
[Interjections.] It has prioritised the lack of access to basic social
services, particularly for the rural poor. [Applause.]

Since 1994, 4,5 million people have gained access to clean water. The DP
knows it. [Applause.] They could never ever do that. This Government
provided 700 000 houses while 200 000 units are under construction.
[Applause.] This is undeniable, no matter what the opposition says. There
are children, especially in the rural areas, who were condemned to growing
up without an education. There is compulsory education for 10 years, and
free medical care for expectant women and children under six years of age.
[Interjections.]

What I am actually saying is that when one looks at some of these
achievements, and if one takes the impact that this Government has made on
the majority of our people into account, I would say that, in the history
of our country, there has never been a government that has been able to
improve the conditions of the vast majority of our people in the way this
Government has done in the last six years. [Applause.] And, in real terms
... [Interjections] ... not only have they empowered them politically, but
they have also provided them with all that.

On the one hand, elements on the left-hand side of the House have been
harping on all the time about the poverty alleviation programmes of our
Government. [Interjections.] First of all, they do not even inform
themselves properly. They are irresponsibly and recklessly throwing out the
figure of R500 million, and some would say R800 million. In actual fact it
is R150 million that is being applied at the moment. [Interjections.]

When they left people under conditions in which they could not even
establish organisations of their own, when they did not have the resources
to take any kind of initiative at all, it is this Government that gathered
the funds relating to NGO' ... [Interjections] ... and that prepared the
different provinces of our country and then our Ministers ...
[Interjections.] Wait! None of these hon members' Ministers ever went to
the rural areas and actually examined ... [Interjections.]

Our Minister for Welfare and Population Development, over the past six
weeks, has been on a voyage, interacting with organisations of civil
society to see exactly what is happening to people there. Based on genuine
information he has made arrangements that money must be channelled. A
development agency has been put in place to empower people, so that the
money that they receive can be applied and they are able to enhance the
lives of our people. Those hon members did exactly the opposite. They
intensified the misery and poverty of the majority of our people.
[Interjections.]
Even when it comes to jobs, some members on the left-hand side of the House
pretend to be very sophisticated economists who understand the world
economic order and all that. So they should know that we are operating
under very difficult circumstances in spite of that.

Under white rule, in the last years, they were sinking. We have, at least,
maintained a level of stability that they were never able to do in the
years before the end of apartheid. We are accepted internationally in every
country. We are able to succeed in developing trade relations which are
beneficial to us. In spite of what those hon members say, we have been able
to inspire investors from outside. We are no longer the polecat of the
world. [Interjections.] People are coming here and we are interacting with
the world. That is something. The hon member says ``concretely''. These are
the concrete achievements of our people.

Mr D V BLOEM: Ask them where Abe Williams is. [Interjections.]

Mr E SALOOJEE: So I say our Government is tirelessly engaged in developing
a coherent and integrated strategy for the emancipation of our people from
the throes of poverty - not only those in and near urban centres, but
women, children and the elderly in the deep rural areas.

In this regard we believe that strengthening partnerships between
government, the private sector, the NGOs and communities plays a vital role
in making antipoverty initiatives work more effectively and more
efficiently. This partnership of civil society and government was
nonexistent. It is a novel idea. It is those of us who are committed to a
genuine democracy who are, today, showing what can be done if people work
together. There has to be a partnership between civil society and
government if we are going to enrich the lives of our people.

We are actually succeeding. We welcome the participation of different
sectors of the South African business world in development programmes. We
urge them to commit themselves to multiyear relationships that will ensure
sustainability and that a measurable impact can be achieved. For the first
time there is more than a reasonable relationship between a government ...
[Interjections.]

It is not in the days of apartheid. Within living memory, it was only a
certain class of people who were being empowered and there was a monopoly
of a minority. Now, if one reads one's newspapers, if one reads about
empowerment, if one reads about the trade relations, if one reads about the
whole concept of a Southern African Development Community, all this is the
achievement of this Government. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon members, a long weekend is
in the offing. I trust that hon members will enjoy quality time with their
families and their constituents. I trust, also, that you will be able to
cheer on our athletes who are taking part in the Sydney Olympic Games, even
though you will be doing so in front of your television sets.

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 18:03.
                                  ________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson:


     1.     The Speaker of the National Assembly and the Chairperson of the
         National Council of Provinces withdrew their decision of 1
         September 2000 establishing an ad hoc joint committee on the
         General Intelligence Law Amendment Bill [B 36 - 2000].

     2.     The Minister of Health on 29 August 2000 submitted a draft of
         the Chiropractors, Homeopaths and Allied Health Service
         Professions Second Amendment Bill, 2000, as well as the memorandum
         explaining the objects of the proposed legislation, to the Speaker
         and the Chairperson in terms of Joint Rule 159. The draft has been
         referred to the Portfolio Committee on Health and the Select
         Committee on Social Services by the Speaker and the Chairperson,
         respectively, in accordance with Joint Rule 159(2).


     3.     The following Bills were introduced in the National Assembly on
         21 September 2000 and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
         (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160:


         (i)     South African Reserve Bank Amendment Bill [B 62 - 2000]
                  (National Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on
                  Finance - National Assembly) [Explanatory summary of Bill
                  and prior notice of its introduction published in
                  Government Gazette No 21513 of 29 August 2000.]


         (ii)    Judicial Matters Amendment Bill [B 63 - 2000] (National
                  Assembly - sec 75) - (Portfolio Committee on Justice and
                  Constitutional Development - National Assembly)
                  [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
                  introduction published in Government Gazette No 21492 of
                  22 August 2000.]


         (iii)   South African Rail Commuter Corporation Limited Financial
                  Arrangements Bill [B 64 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec
                  75) - (Portfolio Committee on Finance - National
                  Assembly) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
                  of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
                  21547 of 29 August 2000.]


         (iv)    African Renaissance and International Co-operation Fund
                  Bill [B 65 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75) -
                  (Portfolio Committee on Finance - National Assembly)
                  [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
                  introduction published in Government Gazette No 21514 of
                  29 August 2000.]

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Education:


     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Qualifications
     Authority for 1999-2000, including Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for 1999-2000.

     Referred to the Portfolio Committe on Education. The Report of the
     Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the South African
     Qualifications Authority for 1999-2000 is referred to the Standing
     Committee on Public Accounts.

2.    The Minister of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology:


     Report on the National Advisory Council on Innovation for 1999.

     Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Arts, Culture, Science and
     Technology and to the Select Committee on Education and Recreation.


