---
title: 'National Assembly - 10 October 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2000-10-10
---

TUESDAY, 10 OCTOBER 2000
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Dr S C CWELE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with dismay the labelling of Members of Parliament, Cabinet and
       the President as hypocrites in a lead story in the Sunday Times last
       weekend;
  (2) believes that the article was mischievous, irresponsible and was
       aimed at creating confusion amongst the public about Government's
       stance on HIV/Aids and AZT;

  (3) wishes to put it on record that the decision to allow MPs to access
       AZT is a prerogative of Parmed and not Members of Parliament and
       Cabinet, as the article implied; and [Interjections.]

  (4) condemns the continued sensationalism and distortion by the media on
       issues of national importance.

[Applause.]

Mr M WATERS: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP and the DA:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the Government has still failed to announce the date for
       the local government elections;

  (2) is of the opinion that the Government has failed in its duty to make
       use of the months and years at its disposal to solve the outstanding
       problems, including those with the traditional leaders; and

  (3) further notes that the Government failed to honour its undertaking to
       initiate international mediation, therefore censures the Government
       and also the Minister for Provincial and Local Government, Mr
       Mufamadi, for incompetence, slackness and failure in this regard.

[Applause.]

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the potential danger to health in the form of headaches, mental
           confusion and brain tumours, allegedly posed by microwave
           cellphone radiation; and

       (b)  the absence of available information on microwave cellphone
           radiation from cellphone manufacturers and on the Worldwide Web;
           and


  (2) calls on the Minister of Health and the Minister of Communications to
       -


       (a)  introduce legislation or regulations that make information about
           levels of microwave radiation from cellphones sold in South
           Africa freely available; and

       (b)  sponsor research or release research data from elsewhere
           clarifying whether cellphone radiation is more dangerous when a
           phone is used with an earpiece or when it is hand-held.

Mr L J MODISENYANE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that -


       (a)  the claims and accusations of the DP leader, Mr Tony Leon, on
           Government policy and its handling of HIV/Aids have been proved
           to be grossly inaccurate and misleading; and [Interjections.]

       (b)  in his failed attempt to discredit and make a mockery of the
           President's view on this subject, Mr Leon has made a fool of
           himself and totally misrepresented Glaxo Wellcome's offer to the
           South African Government; and


  (2) calls on Mr Leon and the DP to retract their unfounded accusations,
       and admit that their views on HIV/Aids and AZT and related matters
       are unscientific and opportunistic.

[Applause.]

Mrs S M CAMERER: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:
  That the House -


  (1) takes note of the ANC's election manifesto launch over the weekend,
       which is once again based on promises, promises and even more
       promises; [Interjections.]

  (2) warns that history will not take kindly to the ANC as it made the
       same promises in 1994, 1995, 1996 and 1999, and then failed to
       deliver; and

  (3) calls on the voters not to be fooled by the promises in their 2000
       election manifesto, because the 1994 ANC slogan "A Better Life For
       All" became a "Better Life For a Selected Few", and instead of "Jobs,
       Jobs, Jobs" it became "Jobs and Positions For Friends, Family and
       Cronies".[Interjections.]

[Applause.]

Mr T ABRAHAMS: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UDM:


  That the House -


  (1) bears in mind the stated commitment of the Government to promote the
       creation and development of small and medium-sized business;

  (2) notes the critical need for Government to do everything possible to
       prevent any further losses in jobs and to act against those in
       authority who are careless about the employment of people; and

  (3) calls upon the Government, and specifically the Minister of Trade and
       Industry and the Minister of Public Enterprises, to address the
       discriminatory practices and exclusionary acts (as defined in section
       1(1)(viii) of the Competition Act of 1998) of short-term insurers
       with regard to the motor body repair industry.

Mrs J CHALMERS: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -
  (1) notes the statement by the President of South Africa, the hon Thabo
       Mbeki, that the ANC will ensure that the poor get some water and
       electricity for free and that those who can afford it will pay;

  (2) further notes that the DP and the New NP are opposed to affluent
       people subsidising less affluent communities;

  (3) believes that this statement sends a clear signal of the commitment
       of the ANC to ensuring that Government policy and programmes will
       target the poor and will improve the standard of living of this
       segment of our population; and

  (4) calls on all South Africans to work towards an overwhelming victory
       for the ANC during the local government elections.

[Applause.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the PAC:
  That the House -


  (1) takes cognisance of the fact that the issue of traditional leaders is
       creating a crisis in the country;

  (2) notes that the announcement date for the local elections has been
       delayed as a result of the impasse between traditional leaders and
       the Government;

  (3) urges the Government to clarify the status, role and authority of
       traditional leaders once and for all;

  (4) notes that the PAC believes that traditional leaders can play an
       important role in the development of the rural areas when properly
       treated and their traditional role respected in the context of
       preserving positive values in the African culture;

  (5) urges that traditional leaders be consulted in future on issues
       concerning their traditional authority so that the country can
       establish a democracy based on African democratic values;

  (6) supports the traditional role of African royalty as custodians of
       African culture and progressive African customary law; and

  (7) further urges that sections 211 and 212 of the Constitution be
       revisited ...

[Time expired.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the UCDP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with dismay how political intolerance is rearing its hideous
       head in the North West Province, ahead of the local government
       elections;

  (2) deplores the assassination of Mr Ernest Mashile Maleke, a UCDP
       candidate in Ward 18, Jouberton, Klerksdorp, by unknown trigger-happy
       prowlers last night;

  (3) urges political parties to take it upon themselves to educate their
       supporters and members to accept that there is always the other
       version;

  (4) supports the SAPS in all their efforts to bring the perpetrators to
       book; and

  (5) expresses condolences to the Maleke family and their next of kin.

Mr K W MORWAMOCHE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the recent political tensions in Zimbabwe;

  (2) further notes that these tensions are precipitated by irresponsible
       statements made by Mr Morgan Tsvangirai, the leader of the opposition
       party, the Movement for Democratic Change, threatening the President
       of the country with violence if he does not resign;
  (3) calls on the people of Zimbabwe to work together in dealing with the
       social and economic problems in the country; and

  (4) reiterates its call to the Movement for Democratic Change to use its
       official opposition status and significant presence in parliament to
       strengthen democracy in that country.

[Applause.]

Ms J A SEMPLE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DP and the Democratic
Alliance:


  That the House -


  (1) notes the achievements of the schools participating in the Eskom
       EduPlan 2000, the national schools' Permaculture programme;

  (2) congratulates Baraneng Primary from Atteridgeville and the Harding
       Special School from KwaZulu-Natal for jointly winning the advanced
       category;
  (3) encourages all schools to join this programme which develops food
       gardens, providing enough food not only to feed the learners but
       often indigent people in the surrounding area as well; and

  (4) encourages schools and communities to learn about the advantages and
       benefits of recycling and reusing waste such as grey water from baths
       and sinks, peels and paper for compost and mulch, and tin cans.

Prince N E ZULU: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:


  That the House -


  (1) notes with shock the startling media report that the IFP was
       defrauded in the 2 June 1999 election of hundreds of thousands of
       votes;

  (2) believes that the defrauded votes could have shifted the balance of
       power in KwaZulu-Natal if the IFP electoral agents had reported the
       fraud timeously;

  (3) acknowledges that the IEC pronouncement of a free and fair election
       in the Province of KwaZulu-Natal thus becomes a farce and a political
       mockery engineered by criminals and sinister forces; and

  (4) regrets the twisting of the will of the people of KwaZulu-Natal and
       therefore calls on the IEC to double its effort in monitoring future
       elections.

Mr A C NEL: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:


  That the House -


  (1) notes -


       (a)  the intransigence of Israeli Prime Minister, Ehud Barak, to work
           towards the restoration of peace in the Middle East;

       (b)  his refusal to take responsibility for the violent actions of
           Israeli security forces against Palestinians; and

       (c)  that the United Nations Security Council has condemned Israel
           for its excessive use of force;


  (2) believes that Prime Minister Barak's attitude is a setback for the
       peaceful resolution of the Middle East crisis;

  (3) joins the international community in condemning Israel; and

  (4) supports initiatives by United Nation's Secretary-General, Mr Kofi
       Annan, to work towards a peaceful resolution of the Middle East
       crisis.

[Applause.]

Mrs M E OLCKERS: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the New NP:


  That the House -


  (1) notes that the President, all Members of Parliament and provincial
       legislatures and all members of Cabinet as well as judges of the
       Constitutional and High Court are fortunate enough to have access to
       antiretroviral drugs through Parmed;[Interjections.]

  (2) further notes that pregnant women who are HIV-positive and rape
       victims in the Western Cape also have access to antiretroviral drugs
       - a province governed by the Democratic Alliance where all the people
       are put first, even if they are not wealthy;

  (3) commits Parliament to assuring the public that they will also be
       afforded the same life-saving opportunities, irrespective of their
       income; and

  (4) urges the ANC Government to start providing their so-called "Better
       life for all" by following the example of the Western Cape.
       [Interjections.]

[Applause.]

Mr S ABRAM: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I will move:


  That the House -
  (1) appreciates the role of our veterinarians in attempting to contain
       the spread of foot-and-mouth disease;

  (2) acknowledges that our veterinary services are lagging behind due to
       shortages of vets and budgetary constraints;

  (3) takes note that, in the USA, eight to ten vets carry out the
       responsibilities assigned to a single vet in South Africa; and

  (4) calls upon Government to institute an urgent inquiry into these
       aspects with a view to remedying the situation before irrepairable
       harm is done to our agricultural economy.

      ORIGIN OF AIDS AND ITS IMPLICATIONS FOR TREATMENT IN SOUTH AFRICA

                          (Subject for discussion)

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, I thank you and the
Speaker for affording us the opportunity of debating this important,
although blindingly self-evident, issue.

Let me start by saying, on behalf of the DA and the DP, that for too long
now, South Africa and the world have been witness to a Government
imprisoned by a misplaced intellectual arrogance; a  government that, in
effect, even though that is not its intention, sacrifices lives rather than
its own pride; a  government that stubbornly refuses to admit that it has
erred: a  government beset by contradiction and obfuscation on the biggest
single national health crisis that has ever faced this country;  in short,
a government at war with itself and its own allies, namely the Communist
Party and Cosatu, and, indeed, with the respectable scientific world, when
it comes to the question of informing and explaining.

It has actually happened on the watch of this Government, and, since the
issue of the treatment of Aids goes to responsibility, why does not this
Government take responsibility ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon Leon! On what point are you rising, hon
member?
Mr N J GOGOTYA: Madam Speaker, is it permitted to advertise in Parliament
in the manner the DP is doing over there? Is that permissible in
Parliament?

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, that has nothing to do with me
or my speaking turn.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, please take your seat.

Mr N J GOGOTYA: Is it allowed?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Take your seat, hon member. There is no rule against
it. [Interjections.] Order! Order! Hon members, I do think, though, that in
terms of the decorum of the House, it really is not to be encouraged for us
to be carrying stickers advertising our public ...

Mr N J GOGOTYA: Is it right?

An HON MEMBER: It is a shame.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: A shame? Is it a shame for people to stand up
and shout and cheer if ...
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Please take your seat, hon Gogotya.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Interventions of that type are also shameful.

In fact, what happened was, I think it is described ... [Interjections.]
May I please have your protection and proceed, Madam Speaker?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! On what point are you rising, hon member?

Mr M RAMGOBIN: Madam Speaker, by imputation, are you therefore ruling that
we on this side of the House can walk in with our ANC ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon Ramgobin, please take your seat. I have
already said that the hon members are not encouraged to do what they were
doing [Interjections.]

Mr M RAMGOBIN: But they are doing it in defiance of your ruling.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, please, I have asked that, for the sake of
the decorum of the House, you desist from raising those stickers.

Mr M RAMGOBIN: It is still visible, Madam Speaker, and I think it is an
abuse of this House ...

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Do we have two sets of rules here, Madam
Speaker.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, please take your seat.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, I believe that it was well
summed up ... [Interjections.] ... Am I going to be allowed to speak, Madam
Speaker?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please proceed, hon Leon.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: I believe that the hon the Minister has a
speaking turn.

Churchill said the following. It applied, he said, to the Baldwin
government on the question of rearmament, and I believe it applies with
vigour to this Government on the question of Aids:


  So they go on in strange paradox; decided only to be undecided, resolved
  to be irresolute, adamant for drift, solid for fluidity, all-powerful to
  be impotent.

[Interjections.] We have heard today - and I know we will hear it again in
this debate - that somehow everyone else is to blame for the confusion that
exists. Somehow, it is the opposition, which does not govern this country,
but not the Government, which has caused disrepute to set in in respect of
the policy.

The hon the Minister of Health should not wave her hands. She should
actually do something with them and get stuck in. [Interjections.] That is
about the coherence of our Aids policy. That is about as clear as it is.
[Interjections.] It was not the opposition that indicated that there was
some kind of conspiracy afoot. It was not we who took issue with the
international community. Let me quote for hon members what happened when
our hon President went to the United States of America in May this year.
[Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: What did you do, then?

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Much more than youb have ever done!

Writing in The New York Review of Books, Helen Epstein said, and I would
like to read the quotation:


  On May 23, President Mbeki was interviewed on The Newshour with Jim
  Lehrer, and he was asked specifically about his controversial Aids
  policies.

The author writes that his replies were ``a series of evasions''. He said
that he had never said that HIV was not the cause of Aids - which is the
standard refrain of this Government - but then, she adds, ``he did not deny
that he had questioned the link between them''.

He was then asked why he refused to make AZT available in public maternity
wards for the prevention of HIV transmission from mother to child. He
answered, and I quote again, that -


  ... the state could not afford to make antiretroviral drugs available for
  life to all HIV-positive people in South Africa.  But he was not
  answering the question that had been put to him. He had not been asked
  why he didn't provide all HIV-positive South Africans with antiretroviral
  therapy for life. He had been asked why he didn't provide it only to HIV-
  positive women for a month ...

Let me say this. We are now dealing with public policy ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order!

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: ... as it has been for six years in this
country.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Order, hon Leon! Is that a point of order, hon
member?

Mr T M GONIWE: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: We are discussing the
origin of Aids. [Interjections.]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: We have a President who denies its origins!

Mr M T GONIWE: As the hon the Leader of the Opposition is speaking, with
all due respect, he is not displaying a ribbon to show that he cares about
the subject that we are discussing. [Interjections.]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: He is misusing the rules.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon Goniwe, please take your seat and let the
hon member develop his case. Let us hear what he is saying! Let us give him
a chance. [Applause.]

Mr T M GONIWE: Madam Speaker, the starting point is to put on a ribbon.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: If only the blind would see, Madam Speaker!

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Please proceed, hon Leon.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: I think we have a first-hand demonstration of
why the debate on HIV/Aids does not move on in this country. I think it is
actually time that the debate moved on and this Parliament led South
Africa, because it is very easy to win the HIV/Aids debate against the ANC
Government. But the real losers of the past years are not the pampered
participants in the Parmed Medical Aid Scheme, sitting on that side of the
House. The real losers are out there in our suburbs, in our townships and
on our farms - the men, women, children and the unborn babies whose lives
are being cut short by a killer disease even as the politicians debate its
causes nit-picking over precise definitions and proper terminology.

Therefore, I would like to make a sincere offer to this Government today.
Let us declare a truce over the battle on HIV/Aids, on the basis of an
unambiguous Government commitment to accept the best wisdom that science
has to offer; let us form a mighty coalition against HIV/Aids together with
every party in this House and every leader and popular personality.
[Interjections.] The hon the Minister of Health is shaking her head in
disagreement. That, I must tell the House, is a great pity. From the worlds
of sports, business, glamour and civil society, let us all stand shoulder
to shoulder and send out a clear message to the people of South Africa -
yes, HIV does cause Aids; HIV is transmitted primarily through sex and its
prevention is only secured through abstinence, monogamy or the safe use of
condoms. Let us make use of every available platform to drive this message.
But let us go beyond that. Let us use the public broadcasting media to
preach that message. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS: Madam Speaker, on a point of order:
Is it parliamentary for the Leader of the Opposition to waste our time by
talking such nonsense? [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! That is not a point of order. Please proceed,
hon member.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, there you have it! The
Government is saying that the received international scientific wisdom on
HIV/Aids is rubbish. There you have it, from a member of the executive!

But I want to say that the financial implications in the treatment of Aids
are an obstacle, but we can overcome them. I hope that the hon the Minister
of Health will use the debate this afternoon to tell us whether or not she
has taken up or intends taking up the offer by international drug companies
to make Combivo available to the developing world at a cost of $2 a day.
This offer will allow us to go beyond using antiretrovirals simply for
pregnant HIV-positive women and rape survivors, and it will allow us to
assist more and more people who are living with HIV. That is what we need
to do.

I want to say that wherever the Democratic Alliance wins control of a local
government in South Africa, we will do everything in our power, subject to
normal ethical and legal regimes, to make those antiretroviral drugs
available to HIV-positive people, particularly the categories of pregnant
women and rape survivors. [Applause.] I am not making that promise lightly!
One province - the only province in South Africa that is not governed by
the ANC - actually has such a public health programme available for HIV-
positive women, to prevent mother-to-child transmission. [Applause.] Can
the ANC explain why this is so in only one province? What about the other
eight? And when are we going to have a jointed up government, so that all
of us can use all our resources in the fight against the HIV/Aids? [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Ms N E HANGANA: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: I think that you have
made a ruling regarding those stupid posters over there, and I think
members must respect your ruling.
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, may I request you again to please
desist from waving your stickers.

Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order: I would like to
suggest to you that the display in the House during the Leader of the
Opposition's speech was disgraceful. [Interjections.] Hon members of the
Government in particular should be told to behave themselves in this
Parliament. The people of South Africa are watching what is going on.
[Interjections.]

Dr A S NKOMO: Madam Speaker, It is unfortunate that the Leader of the
Opposition did not revise his speech after this article was puiblished in
the Cape Times. [Applause.] Perhaps I need to teach a little epistemology,
which is the science of knowledge, after what we have heard this afternoon.
[Interjections.]

The medico-scientific establishment, of which I am a member, has a
particular take on knowledge. It is mechanistic, stresses the dualism
between the mind and body, is often physically reductionist and sees
disease as located in the body, and follows what is called the doctrine of
specific etiology, which, to the uninitiated, means origin.
[Interjections.]

The disadvantage of this approach is that it rarely provides a complete
account, in other words, a holistic etiology, which would include issues
such as poverty, nutrition, stress, oppression and so on. Unfortunately.
this etiology results in a constant quest for an over-reliance on
pharmaceuticals and the armamentarium of medicines. This is evidenced by
the DP which sees antiretrovirals as stock of weapons ...

Mrs S M CAMERER: Madam Speaker, is the speaker, as a member of the medical
scientific fraternity. Prepared to take a question? [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Are you prepared to take a question, hon member?

Dr A S NKOMO: No, I shall not take a question now. Cameran can see me
outside afterwards.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Proceed, hon member.

Dr A S NKOMO: Madam Speaker, this is evidenced by the DP which see
antiretrovirals as a stock of weapons and the only solution in halting the
HIV/Aids pandemic. What time and experience has shown us is this: HIV/Aids
is a complex disease entity and that there are major gaps in our knowledge.
All the scientific brains in the world agree on this. Those of us who have
seen people affected by its course can only share this observation - I am
talking about those who visit hospitals and live in the neighbourhoods of
people living with Aids and who we do not theorise about in the southern
suburbs. But perhaps one could add value to this occasion if one started
with some fundamental facts and reflections.

Firstly, a key lesson of the twentieth century is that the major advances
in public health and life expectancy have been largely a consequence of
socieconomic improvements and the provision of the basic amenities of life.
Western Europe during or just before the times of Charles Dickens to those
members who have heard of such a person - serves as an example. [Laughter.]
Witness what happened to John Keats and Percy Bysshe Shelley who were
victims of consumption.

The successes in the fight against TB in western Europe stand as a good
example. This, of course, does not mean that the introduction of
chemotherapy in the fight against TB in the 1940s was not efficacious.
Rather, it is an assertion of the fact that significant improvements
predated this scientific advance and resulted from apparently simple
interventions ... [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: I really must ask whether
what the hon Dr Nkomo is saying has anything whatsoever to do with this
debate. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon member Ellis, please take your seat. Let Dr
Nkomo finish his speech, please. Proceed hon Nkomo. [Interjections.]

This is an assertion of the fact that significant improvements have
resulted from apparently simple interventions such as adequate sanitation
and housing. It is partly this approach that has informed the
recommendations of those who gathered in Alma-Ata in 1978, leading to the
international movement in support of the primary health care approach.

Secondly, it is common knowledge that there is a strong correlation between
the preponderance of the severity of disease and illness, and poverty and
deprivation. Needless to say, therefore, in our context which is
characterised by high levels of poverty and deprivation, HIV and Aids will
exist against the background of other diseases, each influencing the other.
Therefore any appropriate response to this epidemic must try to understand
these interactions so as to inform our interventions.

Thirdly, HIV and Aids are not simply medical problems. They are
fundamentally social problems. In this regard, it is important for us to
remember that inasmuch as all of us are not immune to HIV and Aids, we also
know that this scourge hits out with greater ferocity against the poor, the
socially deprived and marginalised. Consequently, the predominant picture
of Aids in South Africa today is African, it is rural and it is poor. The
ravishes of globalisation have placed us at the epicentre of this pandemic,
with the clock ticking with relentless inertia.

Finally, we have learnt from scholars such as Foucault, Derrida, Dubois and
many others that power produces knowledge and that knowledge is relative.
[Interjections.] This applies even more so to scientific knowledge,
especially, in this time of rapid scientific and technological advances. We
need to be humble in our claims of what we know at all times and try to
marshall our collective wisdom. As they say in Malawi: ``Nzeru ka Pengua' '
[knowledge is collective]. Therefore, we need to marshall this collective
knowledge and make use of the widening borders of knowledge in order to
inform and improve our actions, and this is why we established the
presidential panel on HIV and Aids because `nzeru ka Pengua' - knowledge is
collective. [Applause.]

Whilst we need to make the best possible use of the information available
to us at any given point in time informed by the best evidence available,
we should simultaneously not cease asking the questions that would help
inform more comprehensive response.

When we are arrogant about knowledge, when we think knowledge is gospel,
our knowledge or little knowledge ...

Mr M J ELLIS: You have no knowledge.

Dr A S NKOMO: When we do not interrogate information at our disposal, it is
inevitable that we will make mistakes.

Anyone who read the Cape Times today will agree that the hon Tony Leon has
made such a mistake. [Interjections.] The hon Mr Leon insisted that the
President has declined to buy AZT at cut-price from Glaxo Wellcome SA (Pty)
Ltd. This is blatantly untrue. So is the hon Leon's contention that the
Government refuses to provide AZT to rape victims, and so is his entire
scientific argument which is nonscientific.

The LEADER OF THE OFFICIAL OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, on a point of order:
May he, the hon member, mislead Parliament by saying something which is
true is blatantly untrue? May he also accuse me of saying a blatant untruth
when it actually appears in an official state document? [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Honourable member, I will make a ruling only
after looking at the Hansard. [Interjections.]

Mr A J LEON: Read what the document says. Here it is.

Dr A S NKOMO: In other words, the hon member was essentially wrong and the
President was right. The hon Leon has known about this incorrectness for
more than two months but has chosen not to come clean. He has not said it
in Parliament or anywhere else in the country. His silence has done
irreparable damage to the image of South Africa and the Government. The
reason why he has, up to now, failed to apologise to the hon President and
our nation for his stubborn and inaccurate accusations might be ascribed to
``foot-in-mouth syndrome'. [Applause.]

The Leon gospel shows that, indeed, knowledge is relative.

This understanding informs our national response, as encapsulated in the
Government's HIV/Aids/STD Strategic Plan for South Africa 2000-2005. As has
been said a million times before, this strategy is premised on the causal
link between HIV and Aids. Consequently, the strategy advocates a series of
measures that will help stop the spread of the infection and simultaneously
pay attention to those already affected or infected. At the core of these
measures is the ABC message, which is abstain, be faithful and condomise.
[Interjections.]

We have also ensured, in legislation, that treatment for opportunistic
infections is part of the mandated basic minimum package, fully funded by
medical aid schemes, to all members. Members must witness the Medical
Schemes Act of 1998, if they are so ignorant.

I want to remind the House that the strategy that I referred to was
launched by the Minister of Health just a few months ago in June 2000, at
exactly the same time that our detractors would have the whole world
believe that we changed course, simply on account of an attempt to
rigorously understand the true nature of this epidemic in our country so
that we could improve our own capacity to respond.

Let there be no doubt that the ANC stands firmly behind the successful
implementation of the strategy. What we shall not stop doing, is to call on
all the scientists of the world to work together and try to answer the many
unanswered questions to this complex problem. To us, this is not a luxury
we can afford to postpone indefinitely. Rather, it is a critical part of
what we experience in our daily work as we advance the agenda of a better
life for all, because poverty is not academic, it is not intellectual, it
is experiential! [Time expired.] [Applause.] [Interjections.]
The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: Is it in
order, two minutes into the hon Dr Nkomo's speech, for the hon Leader of
the Opposition to say: ``What have you been smoking since you gave up
cigarettes?'' [Laughter.] Members may laugh. This is an allegation of
substance abuse, because it has credibility. [Laughter.] The schoolboys may
laugh.

Madam Speaker, I want you to ask the hon Leader of the Opposition if he
uttered the words: ``What have you been smoking since you gave up
cigarettes?'' If it is so that he did say that, then I want you to make a
ruling as to whether such an imputation can be made against the sobriety
and demeanour of a member of Parliament. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Order!

Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Speaker, may I address you on the point of order?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon Gibson. Before you address me I just want to
address the hon Leader of the Opposition. The hon Leader of the Opposition,
did you say those words, and who were you saying them to?
The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, I was saying them to Dr Nkomo.
Indeed, I did say them.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! What did you mean, hon member?

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, I asked him a question. He did
not answer it, and I left it at that. There are many things one can smoke.
Mr Asmal is an expert on smoking, he should know. [Laughter.]
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! The hon Leader of the Opposition could mean any
of many things under the sun. [Interjections.] He could, and we could
actually spend an afternoon trying to go through each of them. I have a
feeling that if I asked him what he meant ... I have asked him that
question. [Interjections.]

Prof B TUROK: No. Point of order ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: He says that he asked a question. [Interjections.] Now,
I do not want us to spend time trying to probe the meaning of what the
Leader of the Opposition said. [Interjections.]

Prof B TUROK: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: The phrase that was used
is commonly known. It is commonly used to refer to people who smoke dagga
or some similar substance. [Interjections.] It is a common ... Madam
Speaker, please allow me to finish. It is a common expression, it is well
known and it refers ....

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are saying the same thing you said before.

Prof B TUROK: Madam Speaker, may I please finish?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

Prof B TUROK: We are very upset about that allegation. It is a very serious
allegation against a senior member on this side of the House.
[Interjections.] And, it is an implication that the speaker was suffering
from hallucinations or the effects of some drug. [Interjections.] It is a
serious allegation. [Interjections.] I would ask ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Turok, ...

Prof B TUROK: I would ask, Madam Speaker, that the hon Leader of the
Opposition be expelled from this House for a full day. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon Turok, you will note that I allowed you to
speak even though I had not finished speaking. You stood there and insisted
on a point of order while I was speaking. [Interjections.] I do not think
that that is something that I would like to encourage in this House.
[Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: Expel him from the House!

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! On the question of the question that was asked
by the Leader of the Opposition to hon Dr Nkomo, I hear and I understand
the feeling from the majority party. However, I that this House allow me to
handle the matter with the Leader of the Opposition after this sitting.

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Madam Speaker, every disease has a historical, scientific
and political component. The history of most diseases is shadowy,
speculative and difficult to confirm. In this respect, ... [Interjections.]
... perhaps I should wait for the microphones. [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, I really do want to say that the sound this
afternoon is absolutely appalling. [Interjections.] When Dr Nkomo was
speaking, it was not bad, but when the hon the Leader of the Opposition was
speaking, it was very soft ... [Interjections] ... and we cannot hear a
word of ... [Interjections] ... what Dr Rabinowitz is saying ...
[Interjections.]

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Madam Speaker, I think ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Can you hear the speaker?

Dr R RABINOWITZ: When I tap them, they are dead.

Mr M RAMGOBIN: Madam Speaker, on a point of order, may I know what drinks
the hon Mike Ellis have had during his lunch and how many of them?
[Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Dr Rabinowitz, can you just check the
microphones. Hon members, can you hear the speaker? [Interjections.]
Dr R RABINOWITZ: Can hon members please listen to me! [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Can we have some order! Please take your seats.

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Madam Speaker, every disease has a historical, scientific
and political component. The history of most diseases is shadowy,
speculative and difficult to confirm. In this respect, Aids is no different
from influenza, hepatitis and a host of others.

Good medical science observe signs and symptoms, chemical and biological
changes, proposes hypotheses to the cause and tests these by
experimentation. Only when verified by a large body of researchers does a
hypothesis stand until replaced by a more accurate one.

Pseudo or fake science starts with conclusions and juggles facts and
evidence to fit those conclusions. Many of the dissidents belong in this
category. Politicians enter the arena in deciding how to spend the
country's money to maximise every one's health and happiness. In a Utopia,
everyone would be treated. Here, in the real world, it is a juggling game.
Who do we prioritise and how?

Political decisions may be independent of science or follow it. But it
would be folly for them to dictate science, because then science becomes
the tool with which politicians manipulate perceptions. Instead, science
should be a tool to assist politicians in the art of the possible.

Thousands of scientists have done Aids research, providing a vast body of
information about the disease. However, as Dr Nkomo correctly pointed out,
I must agree that there are still many puzzling elements about Aids.

We cannot postpone an all-out assault on the virus that causes Aids while
we seek the missing pieces of the puzzle. Nor should Government deflect
attention from its failures in the Aids war to cover up for incompetencies
in the health service. If we are unable or unwilling to cope with orphans
and treatment regimes, let us take the public on board and say so, and let
us decide what we are willing or competent to do.

As regards the source of HIV, it is claimed that the most likely source in
humans is the closely related HI- virus in chimpanzees. Other theories such
as those related to the polio vaccine and kidney tissue cultures are
spurious. The polio vaccine was taken orally, while the HI-virus is killed
in the acid stomach.

As for all other conspiracy theories, there is not a shred of evidence to
support them, whereas thousands of researchers have isolated the human
immune eficiency virus from people with Aids, seen it, photographed it,
replicated it, classified it into HIV types 1 and 2, and subdivided it into
clades A to J. Clade C, as we all know, has been used to create a vaccine.

It differs from other viruses in that most viruses invade tissues in the
body such as the throat, the kidneys, the lungs or the brain, but the HI-
virus invades the immune cells themselves. Using an enzyme called reverse
transcriptase, it makes clones of itself, and paralyses the CD 4T cells
which are pivotal to immune function.

Initially the body remakes them, up to a billion a day, but eventually it
collapses under pressure, giving way to a host of other diseases. Here,
again, I must agree with Dr Nkomo. Poverty does play a role. The stronger
the immune system, the longer the body endures.

Before the virus had been identified, the acquired immune eficiency
syndrome was so named. Now that all the types of HIV have been classified,
the disease could be renamed ``human immune deficiency type 1 clade A'' or
``acquired immune deficiency type 2 clade J'', for example.

According to Prof Schaub who heads the SAIMR, with the Western bloc tests
done in the Western world, and the ELISA rapid screening and confirmation
tests done here, the results are 100%  reliable. However, because science
cannot presume to be perfect, he says one can allow room for a O, 005%
error margin. Neither pregnancy, nor malaria, nor TB gives false positives.
Properly done, the tests here are as reliable as those done anywhere in the
world, according to several scientists employed by the South African
Government.

Therefore the big question must be: Why do we not test people more
vigorously? Knowledge is power and where Aids is concerned, knowledge is
also safety. The vast majority of people who transmit HIV do not know that
they are positive. It spreads more rapidly in the heterosexual community in
Third World countries because of the prevalence of sexually transmitted
diseases.

Therefore, to remove the stigma, provide widespread testing for many
infectious diseases, including Aids. Offer pre- and post-test counselling,
confidentiality and various forms of support, and we will roll back denial
and make a dent in behaviour. If Government cannot afford to treat
everyone, let us prioritise. Rape victims, pregnant women or anyone who can
be supported by NGOs or donor funds should be first in the pool, which will
widen as our capacity increases.

Then, let us vigorously embark on programmes to look after children
orphaned by Aids. Why? Because they are stigmatised, whereas communities do
embrace children orphaned for other reasons.

There is a perception that Africa needs drastic measures to cope with Aids.
Not so. It requires practical measures, Government will and partnerships
with the private sector and the international community. By adopting
defensive, politically correct tactics we are marooning ourselves on a
sinking ship. [Applause.]
Dr S J GOUS: Mevrou die Speaker, dit is miskien nodig dat ons eers vandag
'n paar definisies opklaar. Die eerste een is dié van die term
``sindroom''. Die definisie sê dit is diverse simptome en tekens as gevolg
van 'n gemeenskaplike oorsaak.

Kom ons neem griep as 'n eenvoudige voorbeeld van 'n sindroom. Dit word
deur 'n virusinfeksie veroorsaak en gee aanleiding tot 'n verskeidenheid
tekens en simptome, byvoorbeeld koors, hoofpyn, spierpyn, gewrigspyn, toe
neus, seer keel en hoes, wat kan lei tot sinusitis, oorontsteking,
longontsteking, hartspierontsteking en selfs die dood, en dit alles as
gevolg van 'n enkele virusinfeksie! Dit is dus baie duidelik dat 'n virus
'n sindroom kán veroorsaak, en daar is baie voorbeelde daarvan.

'n Vraag wat dan nou ontstaan, is hoekom ons ons kinders teen masels,
pokke, polio en al dié goed laat inent. Die rede is dat die wetenskap ons
vertel ons moet dit doen. Dit is presies hierdie einste wetenskap,
dieselfde tegnologie en dieselfde tegnieke wat ons vertel dat MIV vigs en
die dood veroorsaak. Nou het ons skielik 'n probleem daarmee.

Armoede was nog nooit op sy eie 'n oorsaak van enige siekte nie. Daar
bestaan geen mediese toets of medisyne om armoede te voorkom nie. Wat wel
waar is, is dat armoede 'n bydraende faktor kan wees om mense meer vatbaar
te maak of meer blootstelling te gee of om 'n siekte vinniger te laat
ontwikkel. Om egter te sê dat armoede op sy eie 'n oorsaak van enige siekte
is, is eenvoudig blote onsin en nie wetenskaplik verdedigbaar nie.

Ek stel dit dus onomwonde: armoede veroorsaak nié vigs nie! Vrae wat kan
ontstaan ... [Tussenwerpsels.] Ek sê wéér vir daardie agb lede, armoede
veroorsaak nié vigs nie! [Tussenwerpsels.] Daar is vrae wat kan onstaan.
Wanneer ons kondoomgebruik en veilige seksuele omgang propageer, is dit om
die virus se oordrag te voorkom of om armoede se oordrag te voorkom?

Dit is baie duidelik dat die sogenaamde vigs-afvalliges die President op
sleeptou geneem het. So het hulle vir hulle 'n podium geskep om ongekende
skade aan te rig nadat hulle reeds jare gelede gediskrediteer is. Hierdie
inmenging het gelei tot dubbelsinnige boodskappe van die President en die
Minister van Gesondheid ten opsigte van vigs.

Die gewone mense is siek en sat vir al die syfers en argumente wat
gewoonlik totaal bo-oor hulle koppe gaan. Hulle is nou al so verward - net
soos daardie agb lede - dat hulle nie meer enige boodskap wil glo nie. Om
enige seksuele gedragspatroonverandering teweeg te bring is moeilik genoeg.
Met die verwarring wat daar nou heers, begin dit haas onmoontlik word om
enige boodskap tuis te bring.

Die skade wat berokken is, is reeds so groot dat die Regering dit nodig ag
om 'n R2 miljoen-advertensieveldtog te loods om hulle MIV/vigs-boodskap te
verduidelik. Hierdie veldtog sou totaal onnodig wees as die President en
die Minister van Gesondheid net onomwonde wou sê dat MIV verreweg die
grootste oorsaak van vigs is, soos ons dit tans in Suid-Afrika beleef.

Dan is daar die presidensiële advieskomitee oor vigs wat tot dusver R2,3
miljoen gekos het. Hieruit gaan geen nuwe feite of aanbevelings kom nie, as
gevolg van die onverstaanbare belading van die paneel met vigs-afvalliges.
As ons nou Sarafina se verkwiste geld by hierdie geld tel, is daar nou al
genoeg geld om 640 000 dosisse antiretrovirale middels aan MIV-positiewe
swanger vroue te gee.

Hoekom is die SA Nasionale Vigsraad so stil? Wat het geword van die
interministeriële komitee oor MIV/vigs? Waar is die risikovoordeelverslae
oor antiretrovirale middels van die Medisynebeheerraad, wat reeds sedert
April in die Minister van Gesondheid se besit is? Meer spesifiek, waarom
word al die oorweldigende wetenskaplike bewyse dat antiretrovirale middels
die vertikale transmissie van die virus van MIV-positiewe swanger vroue na
hulle kinders voorkom, doodeenvoudig geïgnoreer? [Tussenwerpsels.]

Die Nuwe NP en die Demokratiese Alliansie aanvaar sonder voorbehoud die
Durban-deklarasie van meer as 5 000 vooraanstaande wetenskaplikes, wat dit
duidelik en onomwonde stel dat MIV vigs veroorsaak, gebaseer op
wetenskaplike navorsing wat voldoen aan die hoogste en aanvaarbare
standaarde. Die Nuwe NP en die Demokratiese Alliansie se MIV/vigs-beleid
stel dit dan ook onomwonde en duidelik: ons steun die gebruik van
antiretrovirale middels, beide vir die voorkoming en behandeling van die
siekte.

Elkeen van ons, soos ons hier sit, ken ten minste een persoon wat MIV-
positief is, vigs het of reeds daaraan gesterf het. Elke keer as 'n persoon
aan vigs sterf, sterf 'n deel van ons verlede en ons toekoms saam met hom.
Dit is moeilik om in woorde te omskryf hoe 'n vigsdood lyk. Dit is 'n
stadige en uitmergelende proses. Geen persoon wat dit ooit meegemaak het,
kan afsydig teenoor hierdie bedreiging staan nie. [Tussenwerpsels.]
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr S J GOUS: Madam Speaker, it is perhaps necessary that we first of all
clarify a few definitions today. The first concerns the term ``syndrome''.
The definition says it is diverse symptoms and signs as a result of a
common cause.

Let us take influenza as a simple example of a syndrome. It is caused by a
virus infection and causes a variety of signs and symptoms, for example,
fever, headache, muscular pain, joint ache, blocked nose, sore throat and
coughing, which could lead to a sinus infection, ear infection, pneumonia,
heart muscle infection and even death, and all this as a result of one
single virus infection! It is therefore very clear that a virus can cause a
syndrome, and there are many examples of that.

A question that may arise now is why we have our children inoculated
against measles, smallpox, polio and all those things. The reason is that
science tells us to do so. It is precisely this science, the same
technology and the same techniques, that tell us that HIV causes Aids and
death. Now all of a sudden we have a problem with that.

Poverty in itself has never been the cause of any disease. There is no
medical test or medication to prevent poverty. What is in fact true is that
poverty is a contributary factor to rendering people more susceptible, or
to expose them more, to a disease developing faster. However, to say that
poverty in itself is the cause of any disease is quite simply nonsense and
not scientifically defensible.

I therefore say unequivocally: Poverty does not cause Aids! Questions that
may arise ... [Interjections.] I am saying, once again, to those hon
members, poverty does not cause Aids! [Interjections.] There are questions
that arise. When we promote the use of condoms and safe sex, do we do so to
prevent the transmission of the virus or of poverty?

It is very clear that the so-called Aids renegades have won over the
President. In that way they created a podium for themselves for doing
untold damage after they had already been discredited years ago. This
interference led to the ambiguous messages of the President and the
Minister of Health as far as Aids is concerned.

The ordinary people are sick and tired of all the figures and arguments
that usually go right over their heads. They are now so confused - just
like those hon members - that they do not want to believe any message.
Bringing about a change in any sexual behaviour pattern is difficult
enough. With the confusion that there is now it is becoming almost
impossible to get any message accross.

The damage that has been done is already so extensive that the Government
deems it necessary to launch a R2 million advertising campaign to explain
their HIV/Aids message. This campaign would be totally unneccesary if the
President and the Minister of Health would just state frankly that HIV is
by far the greatest cause of Aids, as we find in South Africa at present.

Then there is the presidential advisory committee on Aids that has cost
R2,3 million thus far. No new facts or recommendations are going to come
from this because of the incomprehensible loading of the committee with
Aids renegades. If we add the wasted Sarafina 2 money to this amount of
money there is enough money to provide pregnant women who are HIV positive
with 640 000 doses of anti-retroviral drugs.

Why is the SA National Aids Council so quiet? What has become of the
intermininsterial committee on Aids? Where are the risk benefit reports on
anti-retroviral drugs of the Medicine Control Board, which has already been
in possession of the Minister of Health since April? More spesifically, why
is the overwhelming scientific proof that anti-retroviral drugs prevent the
vertical transmission of the virus from HIV positive pregnant women to
their children simply ignored? [Interjections.]

The New NP and the Democratic Alliance without reservation accept the
Durban Declaration of over 5 000 eminent scientists, who state clearly and
unequivocally that HIV causes Aids, based on scientific research that
complies with the highest and most acceptable standards. The HIV/Aids
policy of the New NP and the Democratic Alliance states unequivocally and
clearly: We support the use of anti-retroviral drugs, both for the
prevention and treatment of the disease.

Each one of us, as we are sitting here, knows at least one person who is
HIV positive, has Aids or has already died of it. Every time that a person
dies of Aids a part of our past and our future dies with him. It is
difficult to describe in words what dying of Aids looks like. It is a slow
and emaciating process. No person who has ever shared this experience could
remain detached from this threat. [Interjections.] [Applause.]]

Mr S NAIDOO: Madam Speaker, hon members, one wonders whether this debate is
a case of too little too late. South Africa today is a developing country,
and the cold war facing us cannot be attributed to the legacy of
colonialism or that of apartheid anymore. South Africa is a country with a
large portion of its population reflecting a typical Third World situation.
I hope that this debate today will be able to place equal emphasis on the
promotive, preventative, curative and rehabilitative services.

The UDM supports a balanced and comprehensive approach to the pandemic in
our country. I do not believe that this debate should stagnate only on the
issue of whether the HIV causes Aids. We now must accept that HIV is
definitely linked to Aids.

Our Constitution has inherent in it an enshrined guarantee to every South
African to the right to medical care. It is undeniably the responsibility
of the state to provide basic health services. Our Government is indulging
in shenanigans to detract and abrogate this very responsibility.

It is no more the thesis of the Aids syndrome; it is now the thesis of the
``burning Rome'' syndrome because whilst the diabolical HIV scourge wreaks
havoc and devastation in our communities, our society and in our land, our
President is indulging in worthless semantics. I quote two reports:


  Lately Government spin doctors have denied that the President has ever
  disputed the link between HIV and Aids. But they have stopped short of
  saying that he has ever endorsed it. Denial, which has long characterised
  the psychological response of most people to HIV/Aids, has become
  Government practice. If Mbeki and his Cabinet really believe that HIV
  causes Aids and that the ABC of prevention is the ideal strategy to
  tackle it, they should get up in public and say so unequivocally. Also
  the contradictions from the President in the National Assembly last week,
  Mbeki re-affirmed that Government efforts to curb the spread of Aids were
  based on the belief that HIV caused Aids. However, in the same speech,
  Mbeki also challenged the thesis that a virus could cause a syndrome such
  as Aids.

It is time that this Government acted responsibly. It is indeed activating
the self-destructive mode if it continues to play Russian roulette with the
lives of our people. The mixed signals have made our country lose
credibility. What is required is an honest effort such as that demonstrated
by Brazil, which has initiated a turnaround in its fight against the
devastating onslaught of HIV/Aids.

We cannot any longer afford to have Government playing mind games while
generations of our people are being decimated.

Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Speaker, I will be most grateful if someone will
answer a simple question: If there is no link between HIV/Aids, why is it
called HIV/Aids? Nobody talks about athlete's foot/dandruff or
enteritis/glaucoma - quite clearly, because there is no link between the
two. When somebody explains this HIV/Aids anomaly to me, I will listen
carefully. Until then, I serve notice that I am not interested in debating
this issue, now or at any other time in the future. [Interjections.]

I am not interested in esoteric debates with the President or any of his
Ministers or supporters. I am interested in the ordinary people of South
Africa. While the President and the Minister of Health and other Ministers
are indulging in intellectual debates and evasions and are playing with
words in order to show how clever they are or how loyal they are to their
beloved leader, millions of our people, mainly our young people, are living
with HIV/Aids. Too many of them are dying of Aids.

To me, the HIV/Aids question must come down from where the elite live to
where ordinary South Africans live. [Interjections.] The President has
stated that he and the hon Leader of the Opposition live on separate
planets.

The problem with the President is that he interrupts his overseas tours in
order to travel in his spaceship to some or other stadium, somewhere in
South Africa. The spaceship lands and he alights in a stadium where there
is a rent-a-crowd that has been brought there to make it look good for
television. They applaud in all the right places, and then he gets back
into the spaceship and travels off overseas.

The difference between the President and Mr Tony Leon is that Tony talks to
people - ordinary people - and listens to them. [Interjections.] Members of
the DP and the DA do not yet have majority support in South Africa. What we
do have, is public representatives who are prepared to put themselves out
and who are prepared to go to the schools, the police stations, the
hospitals and the Aids sanctuaries to talk to ordinary people and hear what
they want.

Too many of the new elite sitting in this House and in provincial
legislatures have become far too important to service the needs of the
people and they have become remote from the concerns of ordinary South
Africans. What some of this new elite - our new lords and masters, ladies
and madams - need to do is to go to a rape clinic and talk to women who are
anguished because of the degradation and the humiliation of rape, and who
are also petrified that they have been infected with AIDS.

Members of the new elite need to come along with DA representatives and
talk to the mothers and fathers of the young men and women who are HIV-
positive, or those who are dying from Aids. They need to go and visit Aids
babies and experience the shock, the pain, and the sadness and the wastage
of so many young lives.

The deaths are increasing, but they have nowhere nearly reached their
height. When the deaths really start, our people will not be able to afford
to spend R3 000, R4 000 or R6 000 on the funeral of a loved one. They do
not have the money and they also know that another family member will
follow soon and will also have to be buried. It is this stark situation
which faces our country and our subcontinent.

Let us not debates issues such as those they are trying to debate. That hon
stupid Deputy Minister should ask why after six years he has not been
entrusted with a Ministry? [Interjections.] Why is he still a Deputy
Minister after six years? My heart bleeds when I think of the youth who
will die or who are at risk. We need to reach out to those who are already
infected. We need to do whatever it takes to protect our young from being
infected. Anything less, and we all as a nation will have blood on our
hands. [Interjections.]
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! hon Gibson!

Mr J H MOMBERG: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: Is it parliamentary for
the hon Gibson to call the Deputy Minister ``stupid''?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! It is impolite, but it is not unparliamentary.

Mr D H M GIBSON: And it is the truth as well, Madam. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is unfortunate.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, my thanks to the FF for the extra time.


  ... lack of a common national vision and the persistent  racialisation of
  issues have often lead to heated furores and a failure to act for the
  common good. The current HIV/Aids mudslinging, often refered to as a
  debate, is such an example.

These are the words of the President of the SA Medical Research Council.
The Mail & Guardian refered to this debacle as a mad fight against science
that is costing thousands of lives and causing unimaginable suffering.

The fact is that we are currently simply rehashing a controversy that took
place in the developed countries more than ten years ago. In terms of human
and financial resources, Government has, indeed, put our money where their
mouths is. But their strategy has failed dismally as 1 700 new infections
are added daily to the 4,3 million already infected.

According to Makgoba, a number of carefully conducted experiments and
clinical case studies have shown HIV to be the cause of Aids. HIV/Aids has
fulfilled all four postulates of Koch raised by Aids dissident Dr Duesberg
in 1987. In addition, new developments have allowed researchers to document
and isolate HIV in virtually all cases of Aids.

Case studies of accidental HIV-exposure in lab workers, occupationally
acquired HIV infection, haemophiliacs, mother-to-child transmission and
injection drug use have all provided excellent scientific proof and have
demonstrated further the chronological association between HIV and Aids.
While conditions such as poverty, malnutrition and many chronic infectious
and noninfectious diseases, including TB and malaria, may be aggravating or
contributing factors, there is ample scientific data to demonstrate that
they do not cause Aids.

The enormous impact of antiretrovirals on HIV/Aids, supported by
outstanding scientific and clinical evidence, confirms the irrefutable link
between HIV and Aids. Antiretrovirals have increased life expectancy and
improved the quality of life of many Aids sufferers in the developed world.
Good scientific evidence exists to show that AZT and Nevirapine reduce
mother-to-child HIV transmission, and the benefits of treatment outweigh
the risks.

Our Government's response to this is to threaten to imprison doctors if
they bring onto hospital premises the inexpensive antiretroviral,
Nevirapine, which is capable of saving the lives of about 8 000 children of
HIV-positive pregnant women each month.

The effects of the current furore over HIV/Aids have much broader
implications than some are prepared to admit. The mixed signals we are
sending are having a negative impact on patients and families, undermining
scientists and eroding foreign investor confidence in South Africa.

Makgoba has said, ``If we do not heed these implications, history may judge
us to have collaborated in the greatest genocide of our time.'' However, he
then forgets for just a moment that genocide is currently politically
correct in this nation, as we callously and unashamedly murder our unborn
children, simply because they are inconvenient. Are we insane?
[Interjections.]

It is, of course, a fact that the well-known conditionalities attached to
IMF and World Bank loans have included population control. Is it possible
that this has impacted Government policy on both Aids and abortion? Is it
possible that these lunatic policies are being dictated, and South Africans
are gullibly embracing them?

God help us. [Applause.] [Interjections.]

Mrs M A A NJOBE: Madam Speaker, I want to correct the widely published
misconception that Government is doing nothing for those who are infected
and affected by HIV and Aids. Unfortunately, this propaganda is fuelled by
those who only see Government intervention as being equal to the large-
scale provision of antiretroviral drugs such as AZT.

What we need here are facts and not just propaganda. May I now inform this
House about what the ANC-led Government is doing in the area of treatment,
care and support for those who are infected and affeced by HIV and Aids.

Firstly, to manage HIV infection, we must be able to identify those who are
infected with the virus in a nondiscriminating and nonthreatening way. To
address this, the Government is increasing access to voluntary counselling
and testing at health facilities and nonmedical sites.

To implement this policy, Government is promoting the use of rapid tests
that have proved to be accessible, reliable and cost-effective. The
National Institute for Virology was commissioned to validate these tests
for HIV screening. The Department of Health is now in the process of
training staff in the use of these tests and the interpretation of results,
especially in rural areas where there are no trained personnel and
complicated laboratory equipment.
The second area of our focus is the treatment of opportunistic infections,
such as pneumonia, diarrhoea, skin infections, fungal infections, and so
on. It has been shown in many countries that if opportunistic infections
are diagnosed early and managed rigorously, people who are HIV-positive do
become well, and can lead longer and productive lives.

The Department of Health has developed clinical guidelines for the
management of opportunistic infections, guidelines based on drugs that are
currently available on the essential drug list. Our health care providers
are familiar with the use of these drugs, and are best positioned to
counsel patients on issues of compliance, side effects and the monitoring
of any complication.

The dual epidemic of HIV and TB presents a complex challenge for the
country. Let me emphasise, though, that TB is curable, even in people who
are HIV-positive. The incidence of TB in South Africa is very high: 283 per
100 000 people. However, at present, nearly 50% of those with TB also have
the HIV virus.

We are acutely aware that failure to control the TB epidemic will seriously
undermine any intervention to control the HIV and Aids epidemic.

As the epidemic matures, more and more people will be presented for care at
our facilities. Worse affected provinces like KwaZulu-Natal are already
reporting high rates of bed occupancy by people seeking treatment for Aids
and related illnesses. Occupancy is as high as 50% in some medical wards.

This has major implications for future health planning, therefore there is
an urgent need for us to find creative and sustainable ways of providing
care for people in their families and communities. In order to prevent the
collapse of the health system, we must strengthen communities to ensure
that home-based care does not translate into home neglect. To ensure this,
the Department of Health has been working with several NGOs to design and
pilot a system of home-based care in South Africa, not only for those who
are infected or affected by HIV and Aids, but also for those who need
chronic care.

These models have been partially costed by the department, which is now in
the process of refining them. Provinces will adapt these models to their
own circumstances. Home-based care is not inferior care for those who
cannot take care of themselves. Rather, it is a system designed to ensure
continuity of care from the home up to the highest level. In fact Canada,
which is a highly developed country, has a highly developed network of home-
based care that is totally integrated into the health care system.

The national HIV Aids unit spends about R20 million annually, funding NGOs
who provide health education, life-skills training, home-based care
programmes and so on. The challenges of providing the antiretroviral drugs
in the public health system are manifold. Apart from the prohibitive costs,
several key areas need to be developed.

The use of these drugs - and I would like this side to listen more
carefully now - requires competence in accurately diagnosing Aids-related
illnesses, laboratory support to monitor patients' response to the drugs on
a regular basis and a supportive environment that promotes adherence to
therapy, as well as early recognition of complications.

Asazi ke nokuba abo babhobhozayo bayayilandela na le nkqubo. [We are not
even sure that those who have a lot to say are actually following the
procedure.]

We also need a good laboratory infrastructure, to monitor and evaluate the
use of antiretroviral drugs. Currently, we do not have the infrastructure
to provide voluntary counselling and HIV testing, measurement of CD4 counts
and viral loads in every corner of the country.

It would, therefore, be foolish to introduce a comprehensive antiretroviral
programme without this infrastructure. These are significant considerations
because, quite clearly, the premature introduction of this drug, as we see
in the Western Cape, into an ill-equiped health care system, can easily
lead to poor compliance and the emergence of resistant virus strain.

I would like to highlight the fact that Aids is more than a medical
condition, hence its proper management needs a broader outlook. The fourth
priority is to deal decisively with the discrimination that continues
against those who are living with HIV and Aids. There is deep-seated
prejudice among our people against those who are infected with HIV as a
result, our communities - and even families - do not know how to deal with
those who are living with Aids.

The strategic plan recognises this fact and identifies the need to educate
our communities, not only about the disease and its causal link with HIV,
but to teach our people about how to treat fellow South Africans in a
humane manner, regardless of their HIV status. Therefore, we will continue
to promote a human rights culture in the treatment of those who are
infected and affected by HIV and Aids.

Unless we prepare the societal environment to accept those amongst us who
are living with Aids, there will be no safe environment for anyone to
declare their HIV status and hope to be treated in a compassionate manner.
I am sure that the House will agree with me that working together, we are
well placed to meet this challenge.

This year the Cabinet approved R75 million for the Departments of Health,
Education and Welfare to, amongst other things, develop and implement a
life-skills programme at schools, to empower young people with skills that
would assist them to overcome peer pressure and take decisions to prevent
the spread of HIV.
Young learners will also be encouraged to volunteer as peer counsellors
because this method, where young people counsel one another, has proved to
be very effective.

In conclusion, our message to our people is: Abstain from sex for as long
as possible; be faithful to one partner; if you must have sex, use a condom
to protect yourself from sexually transmitted diseases and HIV infection.
That is what we mean. [Applause.].

Mrs S V KALYAN: Madam Speaker, I would like to start off my address in
today's debate by quoting a story I read in the newspaper about two weeks
ago. It is a story about a snake. [Interjections.]

A Ugandan person said that in the African culture when there is a snake in
the house, we first kill the snake and then worry about whether it was
poisonous or not. But in South Africa, in handling the HIV/Aids pandemic,
the snake is already in the house and we are still debating whether it is
poisonous or not. [Interjections.]

The HIV/Aids debate has been sensationalised ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! What is your point of order, hon Hangana?

Ms N E HANGANA: Madam Speaker, it is that the hon member must not
misinterpret my culture, because according to my culture I do not kill a
snake, I respect a snake. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! That is not a point of order. Proceed, hon
Kalyan.

Mrs S V KALYAN: For the hon member's benefit, I was using an analogy, a
fact she obviously does not understand.

The academic debate has sown seeds of confusion, and if one adds to this a
fragmented anti-Aids campaign, the focus is one of distraction away from
coherent prevention and management of the pandemic. This epidemic is
spreading like wildfire, and the most important lesson that we can all
learn from it is that we should rather seek political leadership and
support, as opposed to political interference. A good starting point would
be to re-establish partnerships. Our hon President spoke about a
partnership in 1998. Unfortunately, it has now fallen away.
We should look at re-establishing it, and the starting point should be
SADC, which is now becoming a political football. The Thailand example
demonstrates that a programme stands the greatest chance of success in its
development and implementation. The Government must rethink its strategy
and depoliticise the pandemic.

The other strategy would be to dispell myths. HIV causes Aids. Other hon
members can object as much as they like to the stickers we have, but in
everyone's mind, HIV causes Aids. Work from that premise, then the rest of
the plan to curb infection becomes relatively straightforward. There are so
many illiterate people, and indulging in academic debate on what
constitutes a syndrome does not reach the person at grass-roots level.
[Interjections.]

With regard to testing, there is a myth that HIV tests are not accurate. In
fact, the Elisa test is 99% accurate. What more is needed? The poor people
who are HIV-positive or who are living with Aids are double-damned, both by
their poverty and by the Government's attitude that it will not provide
antiretroviral medication.

With regard to vaccination, the Medical Research Council has recently
announced that human trials are set to begin soon. It is rather ambitious
in that they are setting themselves a three-to-five-year target. It is
unfortunate - and I would like to address this directly to those persons
who are HIV-positive and living with Aids. They have seen our Minister of
Health wave her hands and shake her head dismissively at any suggestions of
working in co-operation to curb the pandemic. Her childish antics and lack
of serious commitment are one of the main reasons the HIV/Aids andemic is
spiralling out of control.

It is also quite shocking to note the reaction of the majority party
towards the debate. I honestly do not know how those who support the
dissident view, or are in agreement with withholding antiretroviral
therapy, face their constituents and families that are facing death.
[Interjections.] I will not sit down just because I am told to do so!
[Applause.]

Dr M S MOGOBA: Madam Speaker, HIV/Aids is a complex phenomenon or problem
which should be approached with caution. Simplistic formulas or answers
should be avoided.

However, the question of what causes Aids cannot be avoided. There is
clearly overwhelming evidence that HIV causes Aids. It is, however, the
responsibility of scientific and medical researchers to establish what
causes Aids. It is not the work of politicians to establish scientific
theories and to try and defend them. Politicians have the overall
responsibility to save lives. I do not understand why our President has
become the chief spokesman for one of the schools of thoughts, whilst our
population is being decimated by this vicious HIV/Aids pandemic.

The estimates and forecasts about our future are frightening. The HIV/Aids
pandemic continues to sweep through our people at an alarming rate. We have
over four million HIV-positive people and approximately 1 700 people who
get infected every single day. Death rates are escalating, and, every year,
100 000 babies, most of whom die within five years, are are infected at
birth through their mothers.

Fifty thousand babies per year could be saved by two tiny drugs, AZT and
Nevirapine. The PAC suggests that we abandon the R32 million arms deal and
develop the infrastructure needed to fight poverty, deprivation,
malnutrition, unemployment, and HIV/Aids. We should abandon the odious
apartheid debt, and import cheap generic drugs from Thailand, India and
Brazil. This will be used to help millions who are HIV-positive and have
been left, at present on the battlefield to die.

We intend to help the youth to develop a new Africanist morality as a long-
term answer to conquering this pandemic.

Mnr C AUCAMP: Mevrou die Speaker, in die jaar 1859 het 'n sinode van die
Gereformeerde Kerk die volgende besluit geneem: ``Heden besloten dat de
aarde voortaan niet meer draaien zal.'' In Engels beteken dit: ``Today we
have decided that in future the earth will rotate no more.'' Gaan ons
vandag ook iets soortgelyk notuleer? ``Heden besloten dat MIV voortaan nie
meer vigs sal veroorsaak nie''! Wat was die fout? Die manne op daardie
sinode het gefouteer omdat hulle buite hulle terrein beweeg het, omdat
teoloë hulle lyf fisikus gehou het.

Vandag gebeur dieselfde omdat politici hulle lyf wetenskaplike hou. Vir 'n
parlement om te debatteer oor wat dit is wat 'n bepaalde siekte veroorsaak,
grens aan die absurde. President Mbeki het 'n nagtelike wandeling of twee
deur die Internet onderneem, en nou moet 'n wetgewende vergadering oor die
oorsaak van 'n siekte debatteer.

Ja, daar kan in die wetenskap verskil van mening wees, want ook die
wetenskap is nie volmaak nie. Wat is dan die taak van ons as politici? Dit
is eenvoudig om die heersend geldende standpunt te aanvaar, wetenskaplik en
deskundig te laat kontroleer en dan daarvolgens te handel. As Lyndon B
Johnson eers besluit het om 'n privaatstudie oor die hemelligame te
onderneem en sy besluite daarop te grond het die Amerikaners nooit 'n man
op die maan gekry nie.

Natuurlik is daar eksterne faktore wat kan bydra tot die verspreiding van
vigs, naamlik armoede en 'n lae lewenspeil, maar dieselfde is waar van
ander siektes soos malaria en cholera. Gaan ons daarom nou sê een muskiet
kan nie 'n epidemie veroorsaak nie, en ons moet die oorsaak op 'n ander
plek gaan soek?

Ja, in die stryd teen vigs moet lewensomstandighede verbeter word, maar
boweal moet lewensmoraal verbeter word. As nie-wetenskaplike hou ek my by
my lees. Ons moet die heersende wetenskaplike teorie aanvaar, en daarmee
saam ook dat seksuele losbandigheid die teelaarde vir MIV en daarom vigs
is. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)
[Mr C AUCAMP: Madam Speaker, in the year 1859 a synod of the Reformed
Church took the following decision: ``Heden besloten dat de aarde voortaan
niet meer draaien zal.'' In English this means: ``Today we have decided
that in future the earth will rotate no more.'' Are we going to place
something similar on record today? ``Today we have decided that in future
HIV will cause Aids no more''! What was the mistake? The men serving in
that synod erred because they moved outside their own sphere, because
theologists deemed themselves physicists.

Today, the same thing is happening because politicians are regarding
themselves as scientists. For a parliament to debate about what causes a
certain illness borders on the absurd. President Mbeki undertook a
nocturnal surf or two on the Internet, and now a legislative assembly must
debate the cause of an illness.

Yes, in science there can be a difference of opinion, because science is
not perfect either. What, then, is the task of us as politicians? It is
simply to accept the dominant prevailing point of view, to have it
controlled scientifically and expertly and to act accordingly. If Lyndon B
Johnson had decided to first embark on a private study of the celestial
bodies and to base his decisions on that, the Americans would never have
landed a man on the moon.

Of course there are external factors which can contribute to the spreading
of aids, namely poverty and a low standard of living, but the same is true
of other illnesses such as malaria and cholera. Therefore, are we now
saying that one mosquito cannot cause an epidemic, and that we should seek
the cause somewhere else?

Yes, in the struggle against Aids living conditions must be improved, but
above all the morality of people's lifestyles. As a nonscientist I must
stick to what I know. We must accept the prevailing scientific theory, and
with that the fact that sexual promiscuity is the breeding ground for HIV
and therefore Aids.]

Perhaps the most important answer is not, in the first instance, to
condomise, but to evangelise - to go back to the basic religious principle
of a monogamous marriage between one man and one woman, as the only God-
given sphere for full sexual expression.

I conclude by congratulating Dr Rabinowitz for the best speech of the day.

Mr M A MANGENA: Madam Speaker, at some point in my early twenties, when I
was full of ideas and thought I knew everything, I said something to the
effect that people should not be so convinced about the existence of God,
since no one has seen God and nobody can prove his existance. In shock,
dismay and exasperation my God-fearing mother said: ``Son, you also cannot
prove that God does not exist''. After saying a lot more things, she said
as a parting shot: ``Do you not think it would be a devastating tragedy if
you were to persist with your attitude only to discover after your death
that God actually exists?'' [Interjections.]

There is a sense in which this debate reminds one of that brief encounter.
None of us in this House is a practicing scientist who can go into a
laboratory and prove or disprove any of the assertions we are making. All
we are doing is politicising a deadly medical condition which is
devastating to millions of our people. What practicing scientist, orthodox
or dissident, agrees that there is something called HIV and another
something called Aids? What they are arguing about is whether HIV leads to
Aids. Whatever the case may be, we know that it is very clever indeed to
protect ourselves against HIV. What is cool about this is that when we do
that, we also protect ourselves against other sexually transmitted diseases
and prevent unplanned pregnancies.

Our congratulations go the Medical Research Council and their scientists,
who developed a candidate vaccine against HIV, and to those scientist who
worked on the Pretoria pasteurisation project aimed at reducing mother-to-
child HIV transmission through breast-feeding. We hope the vaccine succeeds
and that their ground breaking work will lead to the defeat of HIV/Aids. In
the meantime, let us all protect ourselves against HIV. [Applause.]

Mrs S F BALOYI: Chairperson, I wish to address the subject of mother-to-
child transmission of HIV. Amongst the many challenges brought by this
pandemic, the prevention of HIV transmission from mother to child is
probably the most complex.

Firstly, let me explain what mother-to-child transmission is. Our goal is
to prevent the transmission of HIV from an HIV-positive mother to the
child, and to assist the mother to sustain the HIV-negative status of the
child until the child has been weaned.

In South Africa there are approximately 1,2 million babies born every year.
The HIV prevalance amongst pregnant women is approximately 24%. Out of
every 10 HIV-positive mothers, approximately three will give birth to an
HIV-positive child. To my mind the prevention of mother-to-child
transmission goes beyond the use of drugs that prevent the virus from being
transmitted to the child during birth. The mother must be supported in
order for her to bring up a healthy baby and to maintain the HIV-negative
status of her baby.

This is a significant challenge because although drugs such as Nevirapine
do prevent the transmission of HIV when given during labour, these babies
can subsequently get infected during  breast-feeding, which may result in
the reversal of the gains made by the provision of the drug in the first
place. Therein lie our concerns. We have looked at various options to
prevent transmission of the virus from mother to child. The two candidate
drugs we are looking at are AZT and Nevirapine. However, Nevirapine seems
to be more affordable. The latest reports from trials in Uganda and South
Africa on the use of Nevirapine have brought some hope to developing
countries. The relatively low cost of the drug, as well as its ease of
administration, makes its an ideal option for us.

The challenges relating to the use of Nevirapine, however, are not confined
to cost only. Several questions still remain unanswered. These include the
long-term safety profile of the drug, the development of resistance from
even a single dose of the drug, and the challenge of finding sustainable
infant feeding options for HIV mothers.

In order to show that this Government is concerned about the plight of HIV-
positive women, we have expanded the current research sites on the use of
Nevirapine to prevent the transmission of HIV from mother to child by a
minimum of two sites per province.

Njengamanje izikhungo ezimbili zalolu cubungulo zizoqala eMpumalanga,
eNkomazi nasesifundeni sase-Highveld, okukhona kuso iSecunda, iBethal
neMbalenhle. Kanti-ke nezinye izifundazwe nazo zizokwenza kanjalo maqede
kukhulunyiswane nezigungu zongqongqoshe bazo. (Translation of Zulu
paragraph follows.)

[At the moment two research sites regarding this investigation will be
opened in Mpumalanga, Nkomazi and in the district of the Highveld, under
which Secunda, Bethal and Mbalenhle fall.

Other provinces will do the same, after which there will be discussion with
Ministers in those provinces.]

Furthermore, from 11 until 13 October 2000, the World Health Organisation
will be holding a meeting to discuss the use of nevirapine in the
prevention of mother-to-child transmission. This will provide further light
to the developing countries on that drug with regard to the unanswered
questions that I referred to.

We are equally aware that the Medicines Control Council is still reviewing
the application for the registration of Nevirapine to prevent mother-to-
child transmission. We believe that this process must take its course and
that neither Government nor civil society should interfere in this
scientific process.

I would like to bring to the attention of this House the fact that merely
providing the drug Nevirapine will not deal decisively with the problem of
mother-to-child transmission. What we must focus on is providing a package
of care in order to ensure that the mother stays well and asymptomatic for
a long time, and that her baby is HIV-free and healthy.

The Department of Health has developed guidelines on management of pregnant
HIV-positive mothers. These guidelines focus on effective obstetric
interventions which can reduce the transmission of HIV. Some of these
include the rigorous treatment of opportunistic infections with a special
focus on sexually transmitted diseases, keeping the woman's membranes
intact during labour in order to limit the chances of infection and
prohibiting routine use of invasive interventions such as routine
episiotomies as well as invasive monitoring of the foetus. This is merely
to prevent tissue damage that can cause the transmission.

As mentioned before, we are concerned about the effects of breast-feeding
by an HIV-positive mother on her child. Therefore, we must address the
challenges relating to instant formula feeding. To some, the provision of
infant formula to HIV-positive mothers may seem to be an easy option, but
the reality is that not all South Africans have access to clean water and
sanitation. Despite Government's effort to tackle these problems, there are
still eight million South Africans who have no easy access to water.
Members will appreciate that any strategy to provide instant formula feed
has to be complemented by the provision of clean drinkable water,
especially, in the rural areas, and this does not even take into account
financial problems.

We also need to develop support systems for HIV-positive mothers to give
them the best advice on breast-feeding and allow them to make the best
choices, given their circumstances.

These women also need to be supported within the families and communities
where they live because some may suffer persecution in their own cultural
environment. Many of the members know that women who choose not to breast-
feed their babies are given names in some African societies. One also does
not want to create a situation where women who give their children instant
formula feed are labelled HIV-positive.
We are monitoring our TV programme carefully because we think that the
implementation of this programme will have lessons for us in the delivery
of an antiretroviral programme to prevent mother-to-child transmission. Any
mother-to-child prevention programme must also promote equal access to
health services for all women, regardless of race, colour, creed or
geographical location.

Finally, we must realise that a mother-to-child transmission programme is
an attempt to fix what has already been broken.

Let us remember the old adage that prevention is better than cure.

The ANC has a special programme and a special message, especially for young
people. The message is: Abstain from sex. Young boys and girls must delay
engaging in sexual activity. Everyone, young and old, must be faithful to
just one partner and condomise. They must please remember to use a condom
in order to prevent the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases. They
must remember that real men use condoms. [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Chairman, I want to say that, quite frankly, listening to
this debate has reminded me of the classic quote from Gen Foch, after the
first battle of Marne in 1914. He said: ``My centre is giving way, my right
is retreating, situation excellent, I am attacking.'' This is exactly what
the situation is with regard to the ANC's HIV/Aids policies and stance.
Their position is weak, they have been criticised throughout the world and
throughout this country, and yet they continue to propagate vague and
dangerous arguments and dig themselves deeper and deeper into the mire
which will eventually swallow them. [Interjections.]

The ANC in this debate, quite frankly, have been shocking, led by that
academic genius, Dr Nkomo, and aided and abetted by ANC members in this
House who have, quite frankly, behaved atrociously. [Interjections.] The
ANC will reap what they sow. The nation would have seen, on television
today, a ruling party trying to defend themselves against an indefensible
policy in an unruly and meaningless fashion, which is a little better than
mob rule.  I want to say to Dr Nkomo's after his speech today, that if he
went back to medical school today, he would undoubtedly fail. That is
absolutely clear. [Interjections.]

However, the hon Dr Nkomo said that what the hon Leader of the Opposition
had to say about AZT being offered at cheap prices was false. The hon
Leader of the Opposition made it quite clear that AZT is offered at cheap
prices in this country. I want to tell Dr Nkomo that I have a letter here
which states quite clearly that ``there was a UN initiative in which five
drug companies, including Glaxo Wellcome, offered drugs at a reduced rate,
and they are offering a combination of AZT plus free TC at two dollars a
day''.

I want to ask Dr Nkomo whether that is not cheap? Let me tell him that he
must make no error about the fact that the DP will continue the fight for
cheaper drugs in this country. [Interjections.] But Dr Nkomo has misled the
House again by indicating or suggesting that the hon Leader of the
Opposition did not say this. [Interjections.] I hope he is not going to
waste his time by asking me a question, sir. [Interjections.] I want to say
to Dr Nkomo to put that in his pipe abnd smoke it. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order, hon members!

Dr A S NKOMO: Chairperson, Mr Ellis deliberately presents the wrong
information. We are not talking about cheap prices, we are talking about
the matter of AZT and victims of rape. He must not run away from the
matter. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon Nkomo, please take your seat.
Proceed, hon member. [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Chairman, I have noticed with concern that my time has been
going on while Dr Nkomo has been wasting it. I sincerely hope you will give
me a few more minutes, sir. But I want to be honest about this matter. The
reason for the behaviour of the ANC today is because they are embarrassed.
They are embarrassed by their President's views on HIV/Aids and they are
embarrassed by the lack of leadership that the hon the Minister of Health
is giving to this fight against HIV/Aids. [Interjections.]

I want to say to the hon the Minister that when she became Minister of
Health the nation was delighted. We were all aware of the stance she had
taken against the previous Minister of Health and her innocuous and
meaningless plans to fight the spread of HIV/Aids. She was her own person
and we respected her for it. But I want to say to her that she has been a
great disappointment. She has become a little more than a messenger, and a
messenger bearing bad news. We want her to be her own person again. We want
her to become the President's adviser on health matters, including
HIV/Aids. [Interjections.] We do not want her to be his messenger, we want
her to be the Minister of Health. We want her to be at the forefront of a
positive proactive campaign against the spread of HIV/Aids in this country.
She must please do this country a favour. She must get out and lead and,
she must please, for the sake of the nation, stop being led. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Mr Chairperson, if I was not a disappointment to
the DP, something would have been drastically wrong with me!

I am surprised at how the DP is clamouring for the ANC to pronounce itself
on the subject of Aids, when they have been warming the benches of this
Parliament, as the official opposition to the NP when HIV came to South
Africa. [Interjections.] During those years, they were conspicuous by their
silence. Where were they? Babe phi? Babesenza ni? (What were they doing?)
Siyabuza? (We are asking) [Interjections.] Babesenza ni? (What were they
doing?)

I have just heared, today, that that party, in the very near future, will
be launching its policy on Aids. I say welcome to the party, although they
have joined the bandwagon seven years after sitting on the fence in this
democratic Parliament, except for involving themselves in mad debates and
sensationalising debates in the media.

I sincerely hope that the DP's policy is in line with the strategic plan
for South Africa on HIV/Aids and STDs. There is one plan for our country.
This plan was developed through a democratic and consultative process. I
hope that the DP's plan will not confuse us.

I have the great honour to conclude this debate. I stand here very
conscious of the expectations of the majority of the people of our country.
That expectation is simply that we continue to work hard and remain focused
on the important challenge of confronting the scourge of the HIV/Aids which
has brought so much pain to many in all the corners of our land. For this
multitude, there is no time for petty bickering. [Interjections.] The ANC
refuses to be drawn into that mud. [Interjections. It is to these men and
women that we owe a duty to serve loyally and with honesty.

Our country has just recently had the honour to host the 13th international
conference on HIV/Aids. A key lesson from that meeting is that a strategic
focus on prevention remains the fundamental bedrock of an appropriate and
successful anti-HIV/Aids campaign.

We are encouraged by that message, as it accords with our approach that is
captured in the simple ABC message. [Interjections.] Let me, once more,
clearly spell out that message to the public. It is: Abstain from sex for
as long as possible; be faithful to your sexual partner, and, if you cannot
do any of the two, use a condom.

It is this simple message that should resonate in every corner of our
country. It is a message that needs to be carried, particularly, to our
youth, our leaders of tomorrow.

In the past year, the national Department of Health alone spent around R40
million to support the programme of ensuring easy access to condoms by the
public. [Interjections.] We are, in addition to the male condoms,
continuing to support pilot sites aimed at introducing female condoms
whilst also continuing to support research on other effective microbicides.
These interventions will go a long way in providing women with effective
tools they themselves can use to ensure their necessary protection.

It is also to strengthen this effort that this Government introduced the
HIV-policy for learners and educators which has led to the inclusion of
life-skills programmes as a compulsory part of the curriculum in our
schools. Implementation of this is now extending from secondary schools to
cover primary schools. In excess of R60 million, this year alone, is being
spent on supporting this programme.

We call on all parents to support this initiative as a necessary
intervention aimed at saving the future of our children. It is important
that we all understand that the earlier we start these interventions, the
greater the likelihood of sustained success.

Let us also remember that by heeding this simple message, we shall
simultaneously address two other problems that this Government is tackling
as a matter of priority, and these are: Teenage pregnancies and the spread
of other sexually transmitted diseases.

We are encouraged by the evidence which points to some successes we are
registering since the introduction of syndromes management for the
treatment of sexually transmitted diseases.  This is evidenced by a nearly
50% reduction in the prevalence of syphilis in our country as measured
during our annual antenatal surveys between 1994 and 1999. This is a
reduction from 12% to 6,5%.

To build on this, we recently approached the Health Professions Council of
South Africa with a request to include a module on the treatment of
sexually transmitted diseases as a compulsory component of the continuing
professional development programme system to ensure early and appropriate
treatment of sexually transmitted diseases by our health professionals.

We are also working closely with the mining industry on the very successful
work in Welkom and Carletonville in the management of sexually transmitted
diseases. We are convinced that, through these multipronged efforts, we
shall ultimately break the back of the contribution made by STDs in the
rapid spread of HIV.

Those of us engaged in practical work know that it takes a lot of effort to
convey this simple message. It takes an even greater effort to translate
acquired knowledge into behavioural change. However, we shall go on because
we know that in this battle, there shall be no easy victories. Our comfort
comes from the knowledge that many South Africans have heeded our call to
build enduring partnerships.

The very fact of the existence of the South African National Aids Council
and the reality of the existence of provincial Aids councils, at least in
eight provinces, is an eloquent testimony to the growing movement in our
country inspired by the simple recognition that all our actions count.

Last Saturday I had the privilege of taking part in the inauguration of the
provincial Aids council in the North West, and just yesterday I was in
Welkom for the celebration of the second anniversary of the partnership
which, hon members will recall, was launced by the then Deputy President,
Comrade Thabo Mbeki in 1998.
Neither the New NP nor the DP was present. Where were they? All they know
is how to speak here in the corridors of Parliament. [Interjections.] That
is why hon Kalym? does not even know about the strength of the
partnerships. Please read the hon the Deputy President's speech.
[Interjections.] On both occasions I was part of ...

Mr D H M GIBSON: Chairperson, is the hon the Minister entitled to mislead
Parliament, deliberately? [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! I cannot say that she is misleading
Parliament.

Mr D H M GIBSON: Chairperson, she knows that she is, and if she is honest
enough, she will haul out the letter which she received from the hon the
Leader of the Opposition and she will apologise for telling lies to
Parliament. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon Gibson, that can be sorted out
between yourself and the Minister. [Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson ...

Dr S J GOUS: Chairperson, on behalf of the New NP I wish to put it on
record that we were not invited. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Continue, hon Minister.
[Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, on both occasions, what I was part of
were events demonstrating South Africans at work and mobilising to confront
a major challenge. There was no passing of the buck, no moaning, but simply
a common call to action by people who know clearly what it takes to succeed
- hard work, commitment, and the holding of hands across the divide.

That is my enduring picture of our people, and it is what inspires us,
whatever the difficulties and whatever the pain. Our Government once again
reaffirms its commitment to being a constructive partner in this
multisectoral effort.

Let me deal with an area on which there have been blatant lies and
deliberate misconceptions. It concerns the allegation that we are not
addressing the issue of the treatment of those already infected. The hon
Mrs Njobe has already dealt with this, but let me add a few points, just
for the record.

Firstly, our five year strategic framework, which guides our actions,
identifies this as an area of specific focus for the whole country.

Secondly, we released earlier this year guidelines for the treatment of
opportunistic infections, which are being incrementally implemented in the
country, attended by the necessary training. These guidelines cover all the
main conditions which account for the bulk of the mortality and morbidity
of those living with HIV and Aids.

Thirdly, it is common knowledge that TB is one of the most common
infections associated with HIV infection in our country. We have also
previously reported to this House on progress that we are making and will
continue to make in the care of those with TB in the presence of HIV
infection. The WHO has even recognised this progress of our TB programme.

Yet, in spite of all this effort, we still get the same message that we are
not treating those infected with HIV, quite frankly because we are not
using antiretrovirals within the public health system.

We shall not tire to once more declare the policy of this Government.

In 1998, the World Health Organisation reported that HIV, malaria and
tuberculosis combined claimed 5 million lives. Therefore, we cannot ignore
risk factors such as tuberculosis, malaria, poverty and poor nutrition
which undermine the immune system and predispose people people to HIV
infection.

We shall continue to treat those who present themselves to the public
health system for any condition as best as we can and within the resource
constraints we face regardless of their HIV status. At the same time, we
reiterate that, as a country, we simply cannot afford the use of
antiretrovirals for wide-scale treatment at the current prices. We
reiterate that our approach is consistent with that of many other countries
in the world and is backed by the solid scientific evidence which indicates
that early and aggressive treatment of opportunistic infections leads to a
prolonged good quality and fully productive life.

Our appeal to our people is for them not to be discouraged by the prophets
of doom. They must come early to report any ailment they have, and the
public health system is ready and able to be of assistance to them. I also
take this opportunity to call on our health workers to discharge their
duties with a consistent approach and in a nondiscriminatory manner.

My department has commissioned work on the impact of HIV/Aids on the health
system. Preliminary results will be available during the first week of
November. We shall use this as we proceed to plan for appropriate
interventions, including the role and extent of home-based care
initiatives. At the same time, we shall continue to engage the major
pharmaceutical companies, as part of the international effort, to ensure
affordable access to drugs by people in the developing world. Also,
contrary to the propaganda by our detractors, our discussions with Pfizer
on the provision of Fluconazole for cryptococcal meningitis are progressing
well, indeed.

Finally, let me underline that HIV/Aids is, indeed, a complex disease
entity on which we do not know everything. We shall continue to act on the
basis of what we know and within the limits of our resources. But we shall
also continue to search for answers to the many unresolved questions. To
us, there is no other path. At stake is everything we have fought for.

It is not arrogance that makes us, on occasions such as this, assert, once
more, that no true account of our people's valiant efforts, over nearly the
past 100 hundred years, will fail to locate the ANC at the pivotal centre
of those efforts. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order!

The MINISTER: As always, we shall not fail our country.

Mr G B D McINTOSH: Mr Chairman, is the hon the Minister prepared to take a
question?

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Will you take a question hon
Minister?

The MINISTER: Chairperson, tomorrow is question day. He can then put his
question tomorrow in writing. [Interjections.]

We shall be making a statement in this House on the co-ordination of our
response as a nation to the epidemic through the various councils. We will
also indicate the amount of resources we have mobilised and injected in the
fight against HIV/Aids to indicate that there is no postponement in our
response, as hon Rabinowitz would like us to believe. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Hon Minister, just remain at the
podium.

Mr D H M GIBSON: Chairperson, on point of order: Earlier on, I used an
unparliamentary phrase which I should not have used. You obviously did not
hear me and you did not call me.

The CHAIPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! I heard you. That is why I asked the
Minister to wait at the Podium because I wanted to call you.

Mr D H M GIBSON: Chairperson, I wish to withdraw the word ``lies''
unreservedly.
The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Mr Gibson, furthermore, you know that
it is out of order to refer to a member as deliberately making that kind of
statement.

Mr D H M GIBSON: Chairperson, of course, I was disingenous. I withdraw the
words ``deliberately mislead''.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Thank you, Mr Gibson. Thank you, hon
Minister. He has withdrawn the words and you can now take your seat.
[Applause.]

Order! Hon members, I would like to plead with and request the Table to
request the technicians of Parliament to look at the sound system in the
House. It is very bad.

Secondly, if one looks at the screens inside the Chamber, one can hardly
read the names of the members as they appear on the screen. The pictures
are also very bad. We will definitely appreciate it if the technicians
could look at that.

Debate concluded.

 SOUTH AFRICAN RAIL COMMUTER CORPORATION LIMITED FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Mr Chairperson, I see that hon member looking at
me. I am M E Tshabalala, and not Minister Omar.

The House will recall that, during the debate on the National Land
Transport Transition Bill on 19 June 2000, the Minister of Transport had
indicated that his department, in collaboration with the Department of
Finance, was in the process of addressing the funding crisis in the
transport industry, and that the first step would be the takeover of the
total debt of the SA Rail Commuter Corporation Ltd, for which legislation
would be required. That legislation is before this House today for debate.

The Bill is designed to give effect to an earlier Cabinet decision to take
over the loan debt of the SA Rail Commuter Corporation Ltd, withdraw its
borrowing powers, except for bridging finance, and to put its annual
capital needs on the budget of the national Department of Transport.
Since its establishment in 1990, the corporation has been obliged to fund
its capital needs, and before 1993, also part of its operational needs by
borrowing money. Perhaps I should remind the House that the corporation
provides socioeconomic services on a subsidised basis to the poorest of the
poor. The fare revenue is thus not sufficient to cover operational and
capital costs, and therefore, if the full shortfall is not forthcoming from
Government, it has to make up the difference by borrowing. The amount of
the debt and the nett liabilities of the SA Rail Commuter Corporation Ltd
currently amount to R2 500 million.

As reported previously in this House, the national Department of Transport
and the corporation are involved in a number of initiatives to increase
efficiency, rationalise services and reduce dependency on outside funds.
These include concessioning of certain services and a rationalisation of
all public transport services in terms of the National Land Transport
Transition Act of 2000. It is envisaged that a pilot project will be done
in the Eastern Gauteng Regional Services Council area which will represent
approximately 8% of the total commuter rail business.

The legislation, which will allow Government to borrow the money to cover
the corporation's debt and approve payment and transfer of this money to
the corporation to offset the debt, must therefore be tabled. As indicated,
an amount of R2 281 million will be taken over whilst remainder of the R219
million, representing non-interest-bearing debts such as creditors, will be
appropriated through the normal budget processes.

The Bill also amends the Legal Succession to the SA Transport Services Act
of 1989 by removing the borrowing powers of the corporation on a date to be
determined by the national Minister of Transport in consultation with the
national Minister of Finance. As indicated by the Minister of Transport
earlier, the corporation will retain the right to borrow for the purpose of
bridging finance, but it will be subjected to the maximum amounts approved,
from time to time, by the national Minister of Finance.

I know that certain concerns were raised in the Portfolio Committee on
Transport regarding the fact that no limitation has been placed on the
amount which the Minister of Finance may approve.

In the light of the nature of the SA Rail Commuter Corporation Ltd, being
an entity owned by the state and providing a highly subsidised social
service, it follows that the state will have to decide whether it stands
behind the corporation in the event of circumstances necessitating new
debt.

The Minister of Finance will not approve bridging finance without the
necessary motivation, and if circumstances should necessitate additional
borrowings, the Minister will need to take into account all the surrounding
facts.

The section which was questioned by certain members of the portfolio
committee was only intended to provide for the day-to-day bridging finance
which will be repaid from cash flow sources as reflected in the SARCC's
cash flow projection. In the event that additional debt needs to be repaid
by the corporation, it will only be done with the assistance of the state,
as the corperation would have no resources from which to repay such debt.

Before I close, I would like once again to refer to the Government's
responsibility to provide transport for the poor.  With regard to commuter
rail which is the most affordable of all commuter services, our ability to
deliver is constrained by the fact that the rail system has been starved of
investment for many, many years. The railway stock is ageing and outdated
in design, and even more seriously, the current network does not serve our
fastest growing areas. It desperately needs an injection of new capital and
new commercial skills to enable us to get the best out of the system.

The SARCC should never have been put in a position to borrow, and I see
this taking-over of the debt as the first step in addressing the funding
crisis in the commuter rail industry.

I would like to conclude by thanking the members of the National Assembly
for their lively debates, their constant support and their guidance on
transport issues and specifically on this Bill. I do this on behalf of my
colleague, Mr Omar. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order, hon members! I just want to announce
to the House that the Minister of Health was requested by the Minister of
Transport to introduce this Bill on his behalf. He is not in the House
today.
Mr M J ELLIS: The Minister is doing a better job in Transport than she does
in Health.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: The hon Mike Ellis, order!

Mr S PILLAY: Chairperson, I just wish to begin by pointing out that the DP,
the New NP and the FA constitute the Democratic Alliance. We support this
Bill. In terms of the Bill, the central Government is to take over a debt
of R2,281 billion from the SA Rail Commuter Corporation. This is indeed a
huge sum of money and without the bail-out extended by Government, the SA
Rail Commuter Corporation would not be able to function.

In its mission statement the SA Rail Commuter Corporation boldly declares
that it subscribes to sound business principles. Therefore it is imperative
that the SARCC manages its finances in such a manner that it does not have
to return to Government for another bail-out.

Owing to the skills shortage currently experienced in South Africa the
corporation is exposed to the risks related to the loss of human capital in
a manner similar to other companies in South Africa. Therefore, the SARCC
needs to invest more in the training sector to ensure that its skills needs
are acquired.  Without the necessary skills we are going to have a repeat
of this bail-out process.

We need to point out that the following matters must be considered. Over 2
million passengers make use of commuter trains daily, and for this
enterprise to be successful and profitable, it needs specific skills. I
might point out at this stage that if ever there was an argument for the
privatisation of the SARCC, its current plig ht presents a watertight case.


The amounts allowed by the hon the Minister of Finance for bridging finance
according to clause 1(c), do not create a situation in terms of which the
management of the SARCC can give a repeat performance of wanting and
expecting to be bailed out again. Sound business principles dictate that if
the SARCC incurs any future debt it will need to make provision for its
repayment.

Passengers anticipate a commuter system free from crime and free from all
manner of stress. It is the duty of the SA Rail Commuter Corporation to
provide such a service. We trust that the hon the Minister will ensure that
the necessary mechanisms are put in place to ensure the safety of
passengers from criminals.

An efficient commuter system is highly desirable for several reasons,
including those that affect the improvement of the lives of ordinary
commuters who depend on such forms of transport and those that affect the
general environment. The continual increments in the price of fuel should
also serve as an incentive to ensure that the SARCC provides an affordable
mode of transport, especially for the unemployed and low-wage earners. If
the service provided by the SARCC is user-friendly and safe, more people
will opt to use such a service. It could also, therefore, lead to a
reduction in road accidents.

In conclusion, we trust that the hon the Minister will develop plans for
monitoring the effectiveness of the management systems of both operating
divisions, Metrorail and Intersite Property Management Services, of the SA
Rail Commuter Corporation.

Mr J H SLABBERT: Mr Chairperson, hon Minister, the South African Rail
Commuter Corporation Limited Financial Arrangements Bill before us today
is, to my mind, not a controversial Bill at all. It really needs very
little debate, if any at all.

The Bill was discussed thoroughly in the portfolio committee, backwards and
forwards, and consensus was reached by all parties. Although the Bill has
been introduced by the hon the Minister of Transport, it was developed
jointly with the hon the Ministers of Finance and of Public Enterprises.

Na my mening is die wetsontwerp hoofsaaklik administratief van aard omdat
dit hoofsaaklik bepaal dat die finansiële verpligtinge van die korporasie
nou deur die staat oorgeneem gaan word, en terselfdertyd word die
korporasie se reg om vanself lenings aan te gaan teruggetrek.

Die korporasie sal voortaan slegs met die goedkeuring van die Minister van
Finansies, soos van tyd tot tyd bepaal, die reg hê om slegs vir oorbrugging
kapitaal te leen tot die bedrag deur die Minister bepaal, wat dan daarna
deur die korporasie self terugbetaal moet word.

Die IVP wil net waarsku dat hierdie beleid nie algemene praktyk moet word
nie, want dan kan die situasie dalk hand-uit ruk. Die korporasie sal dus
voortaan vir sy kapitaalbenodighede in totaal afhanklik wees vir wat hy
gaan ontvang uit die nasionale begroting van Vervoer, en ons vertrou dat
die korporasie se dienslewering en prestasies fyn dopgehou sal word.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[In my opinion the Bill is mainly of an administrative nature, because it
mainly provides that the financial responsibilities of the corporation will
henceforth be taken over by the state, and at the same time the
corporation's right to negotiate loans is being withdrawn.

Henceforth the corporation will only be allowed, with the approval of the
Minister of Finance, to borrow money for bridging finance up to the amount
determined by the Minister from time to time, and then the corporation
itself must repay the loan.

The IFP only wants to warn that this policy must not become common
practice, because the situation can get out of hand. Thus the corporation
will henceforth, with regard to its capital needs, be totally dependent on
what it receives from the national Transport budget, and we trust that the
corporation's service delivery and achievements will be watched closely.]

The portfolio committee yesterday paid visits to stations such as Langa,
Khayelitsha, Philippi, Mitchells Plain, Ysterplaat and others, and I must
say that I was very impressed by what I saw. To give one example: At
Mitchells Plain station the whole station complex has been converted into a
shopping mall, which really compares favourably to any other business
complex in the city.

I think I have said enough. The IFP supports the Bill.
Mr T ABRAHAMS: Chairperson ...

Mr J H MOMBERG: Tommy, sê net ``hallo'' en ``goodbye''! [Tommy, just say
``hello'' and ``goodbye''!]

An HON MEMBER: Tommy, sê net jy ``support'' en dis al! [Tommy, just say you
``support'' and that is all!]

Mr T ABRAHAMS: Dis 'n goeie plan, Jannie. [That is a good plan, Jannie.]

... I concur with the previous speaker that there should really not be a
need for us to make heavy weather of this, and I agree with the Deputy
Chief Whip, Mr Jannie Momberg, as well that I should just give our support.
[Interjections.]

We, the UDM, fully support this Bill. We want to express the hope that the
SA Rail Commuter Corporation will become as viable a business as possible.
It has little chance, since its creation in 1990, to make a go of becoming
financially viable. We hope that the removal of its debt - its takeover by
the state - will put it in a position in which it can make progress in the
future.

Like others, we also believe that we must be on our guard. Now that the
budget of the Rail Commuter Corporation will fall under the auspices of the
Minister of Transport, every effort must be made to avoid a recurrence of
incurring such huge debts.

Having said that, I will follow the advice given to me by Mr Jannie Momberg
and simply state that we support the Bill.

Mr S B FARROW: Chairperson, the Bill is designed to take over the loan debt
of the SA Rail Commuter Corporation, withdrawing its borrowing powers
except for bridging finance, and put its annual capital needs on the annual
budget of the national Department of Transport.

In so doing, the national Department of Transport and the corporation will
become involved in a number of initiatives to increase efficiency,
rationalise the service and reduce any further dependency on outside funds.
These include the concessioning of certain services and the rationalising
of all public service within the framework of the National Lard Transport
Transition Act, Act 22 of 2000.

The SARCC is the Government agency responsible for the provision of
commuter rail services throughout South Africa. The corporation's mandate
is to ensure that all rail commuter services in the public interest are
provided within the framework of the designated transport authorities.
These services are currently provided under contract by Metro Rail
Services, in terms of an operating agreement involving rail infrastructure,
railway lines, signals, rolling stock, stations and surrounding land and
property.

Having had the opportunity, only yesterday, to be part of a portfolio
committee tour of some of the stations within the Cape Town metropole, I
find it encouraging to note the effort that Metro Rail and Intersite have
gone to in order to restructure the commuter rail business, through
concessioning and improved efficiency, but they have a long way to go
within the financial contraints and budget.

If this Bill can further improve this process by bringing in additional
private-sector capital and expertise, then I am sure the problem faced by
the SARCC, in terms of both meeting its socioeconomic services subsidies
and closing the gap between fare revenue and operational and capital costs,
will be markedly reduced.

The key to the success of this operation will be the making of rail
transport, once again, attractive and user-friendly to the commuter by a
more efficient service coupled with safety and security for its users. This
will have a marked impact on fare revenue and usage whilst, at the same
time, reducing the need for additional capital to be unnecessarily spent on
parallel track roads and the ever-increasing backlog of road maintenance
through excessive road use.
The national Department of Transport will be best placed to ensure the co-
ordination of these various activities within its budgetary framework and
ensuring that rail gets its fair share of the cake in order for it to meet
its level of service excellence. It is notable that Metro Rail is
attempting to make its service and stations more acceptable to the populace
- that is, those not able to use services of taxis - but many lessons can
be learned from the various models being used overseas.

I was fortunate to have recently visited Japan as part of a Parliamentary
visit. One of its major assets is its rail transportation systems, which
cover all possible destinations. Japan Railways is a group of six railway
companies, operating throughout the country and in many of the larger
cities. It is especially renowned for its extreme punctuality and user-
friendly ticket vending systems. It carries just under 400 billion
passengers per kilometre, which is the highest in the world.

Whilst we were in Japan, it was noted that an intergovernmental note of
exchange exists, concerning a Japanese loan for an urban rail passenger
transport modernisation project. This was signed in February 1998, and it
would be interesting to know whether the Department of Transport has made
use of this agreement, particularly in terms of finding solutions to our
security problems, dwindling train usage and efficiency levels.

Finally, let me once again, reiterate the DP and the Democratic Alliance's
concern about what my colleague the hon Richard Pillay raised, namely the
limits to the amounts of bridging finance which can be determined from time
to time by the Minister of Finance. Such amounts should be strictly used
for ensuring improved efficiency and the viability of the SA Rail Commuter
Corporation and its agents, and, more importantly, on the insurances that
they meet commitments to both the public and any future lenders.

We trust and hope that this Bill will meet those requirements, and we wish
the SA Rail Commuter Corporation good luck in meeting the objectives of
greater efficiency and more concessioning. The DP and the Democratic
Alliance support this Bill.

Mr J P CRONIN: Chairperson, very briefly, because we are approaching the
end of a difficult session, the SA Rail Commuter Corporation was formed in
1990. It is a publicly owned entity, and the corporation basically owns
commuter railway line signals, rolling stock, some buildings, stations and
platforms, the land that adjoins the railway line and the land that
surrounds stations. It has set up a wholly owned subsidiary called
Intersite, which is a subsidiary of the SA Rail Commuter Corporation. That
is a kind of property management corporation, also publicly owned, which
looks after the management and development of railway stations and railway
property.

Then, just to add to the institutional complexities, there is Metrorail,
which does not fall under the Department of Transport budget, but under
Public Enterprises, through the Transnet family, and it operates under a
negotiated concession. It actually runs the commuter rail system in several
cities.

So we have quite a complicated institutional arrangement, and I think in
the coming years we need to look at that also, if we are to sort out and
provide a better commuter rail experience and service to the totality of
people in our country.

The SA Rail Commuter Corporation's principal responsibility at the moment
is to ensure the provision of this essential social and economic service,
subsidised commuter rail services, to the poorest of the poor. Rail
commuting is safer than road commuting, it is environmentally more friendly
and it is generally more efficient. So we need to be able to sustain and
greatly improve on that capacity.

In 1993, that is some three years after it was formed, on the advice of F W
de Klerk's cabinet, the SA Rail Commuter Corporation was advised - in fact,
it was told - to take out a loan. It was told that there was no way that it
could repair and maintain its rolling stock on the government budget, so it
was told to go out and find a loan somewhere. A promise was made that in
the coming year that loan would be repaid off the national budget. The
promise was never kept, and that is what we are now dealing with in the
year 2000.

It is an entity involved in an essential but unprofitable - I direct this
to Mr Pillay - enterprise. One can try and privatise it, but it is not a
profitable enterprise. It is a socially and economically necessary service.
The economies of our major cities, the cities themselves, would grind to a
halt if poor people could not get from Khayelitsha to Cape Town or from
Khayelitsha to the Bellville South industrial area. We need to do this.
They need that service and we as a country and an economy need the service,
but it is not particularly profitable. That is the sad reality of it, and
yet it has to happen.

So good luck to the hon member in his dreams of privatising it, or
rendering it a viable business, as Mr Abrahams said. I am not sure what he
means by ``a viable business''. If he means ``viable'' in the sense of
providing the service that the people require and that our economy
requires, then I am happy to accept that notion of viability. But if he
means something else, I am not sure whether we are talking in the realm of
possibilities.

Now, with this legislation in front of us, we have the agreement of the two
Ministers concerned, the Minister of Transport and the Minister of Finance,
critically. This legislation will now ensure that R2 281 000 000 debt - it
has grown because it was interest-bearing - is consolidated into the
national debt. There is a remaining R219 million, which is non-interest-
bearing, as a loan, and that will now be appropriated through the
Department of Transport budget.

The R355 million that the SA Rail Commuter Corporation had budgeted for
this year to repay interest will now be able to be released into capital
investment in commuter rail, in terms of maintaining, repairing and
upgrading infrastructure and rolling stock.

The DP, particularly, and some of the other parties in the portfolio
committee expressed the concern that in passing this legislation - and they
have repeated this concern today - we will be sending a green light to
every Government public agency, parastatal, local government entity and so
forth, that they can borrow where they like, and they can spend as much as
they like, and we will bail them out. If that is the message we are
sending, we agree with them that we should be very cautious. But I do not
think that that is the message we are sending at all.

The message we are sending is that an entity such as this, which has to
operate as a subsidised service, should not really have got into the
borrowing game. It cannot turn a big profit and, therefore, pay off its
loan. Therefore, other means have to be found to fund this thing. I,
therefore, agree with some of the speakers who said that the appropriate
route is to use Government and the Department of Transport, so that we have
a co-ordinated and a coherent approach to meeting the needs of the poorest
of the poor in terms of transport.

Our concern is less about sending a green light message to Government
agencies that they can spend and borrow and they will be bailed out. Our
concern is that we must not send the message, in passing this legislation,
that the problems of commuter rail systems are over, that the R355 million
is sufficient to sustain, that they are now saving by not having to pay
interest, and that that is sufficient to see them through.

In fact, there is a massive shortage of infrastructural spend on the
maintenance of commuter rail carriages, the railway lines, and the general
upgrade of the system.

On 18 September 2000, I asked the Minister of Transport here in the House
if there was sufficient spending in our budget on economic and,
specifically, transport infrastructure. His answer was ``No''. He assured
me in his answer that with the MTEF, the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework,
and the Minister's 4x4, as they call them, they are looking at
infrastructural spending, and that we will see a much greater emphasis, in
coming years, on this essential thing, because the less we spend, the more
we are going to pay in the end because as the road and rail infrastructure
deteriorates, progressively so the cost of repairing them grows
incrementally.

The Minister also assured us that they are looking at institutionalising
the co-ordination of infrastructural investment. I am not quite sure what
that means, but maybe it suggests that we will look to some kind of agency
capable of accessing international loans and other loans so that we could,
in a co-ordinated and strategic way, spend money on transport
infrastructure and other critical infrastructure.

This legislation must be, as the Minister said - as read by the Minister of
Health - just the first step in addressing the urgent capital needs of
commuter transport in our country.

We thank the other parties for their support, the Department of Finance,
Department of Transport, and the Minister of Health for reading on behalf
of the Minister of Transport. The ANC supports the South African Rail
Commuter Corporation Limited Financial Arrangements Bill. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

Agreed to.

The House adjourned at 16:28.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           MONDAY, 9 OCTOBER 2000

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister of Correctional Services:


     (1)    Proclamation No 819 published in the Government Gazette No 21482
         dated 25 August 2000, Establishment of the prison at Kokstad,
         KwaZulu-Natal Province, to be known as the Ebongweni Correctional
         Centre, made in terms of section 5(1) of the Correctional Services
         Act, 1998 (Act No 111 of 1998).

     (2)    Proclamation No 820 published in the Government Gazette No 21482
         dated 25 August 2000, Establishment of a new prison at Empangeni,
         KwaZulu-Natal Province, to be known as Empageni Qalakabusha
         Prison, made in terms of section 5(1) of the Correctional Services
         Act, 1998 (Act No 111 of 1998).

2.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry:


     Report and Financial Statements of the Department of Water Affairs and
     Forestry for 1999-2000 [RP 101-2000].

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:
1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Bills of Exchange
     Amendment Bill [B 47 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 3
     October 2000:


         The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the subject
         of the Bills of Exchange Amendment Bill [B 47 - 2000] (National
         Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified by the Joint
         Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with
         amendments [B 47A - 2000].

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Transport on the South African
     Rail Commuter Corporation Limited Financial Arrangements Bill [B 64 -
     2000] (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 4 October 2000:


         The Portfolio Committee on Transport, having considered the
         subject of the South African Rail Commuter Corporation Limited
         Financial Arrangements Bill [B 64 - 2000] (National Assembly - sec
         75), referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism
         as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill without amendment.

         The Committee further reports that it has rejected the following
         amendment:


              On page 2, after line 22, to insert:


              "(e)any such debt to be repaid by the Corporation  and not
                  deferred for repayment by the State;"


         The Committee also wishes to point out that, in the objects
         memorandum attached to the Bill, the word "million", wherever it
         appears, needs to be replaced by the word "billion".

3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Education on Visits to Northern
     Province schools, dated 3 October 2000:


     A.     Introduction


         The Portfolio Committee on Education, having sent two delegations
         to Northern Province schools from 2 to 5 May 2000, reports as
         follows:


         1. Objectives
              In a meeting which was held on 13 October 1999, the Committee
              decided that two delegations visit the Northern Province
              during a constituency week in March 2000. As the province is
              one of the largest provinces, the Committee agreed that the
              delegation of eight members would divide itself into two
              groups (four members each) to visit as many schools as
              possible in all areas, primarily the most disadvantaged rural
              communities, with a mandate to -
               
              (1) co-operatively examine, along with the provincial
                  education standing committee, the capacity of the
                  province to deal with the demands set by national Acts,
                  regulations and policies, and other challenges spelled
                  out in     the first priority of the Minister of
                  Education's Tirisano ("Call for Action") document, which
                  intends to make our provincial systems work by making co-
                  operative government work;
              (2) examine conditions of physical degradation in schools in
                  areas listed by, and according to, the objectives of the
                  President's rural strategy programme;

              (3) investigate the implementation of funding norms and
                  standards emanating from the South African Schools Act;

              (4) examine ways of effecting greater synergy between
                  education at provincial and national levels;

              (5) construct a co-operative relationship between the
                  Committee and the provincial committee to deal co-
                  operatively with challenges constraining the effective
                  development of our education system;

              (6) develop a rural development strategy in respect of the
                  building and renovations of schools and the provision of
                  resources like textbooks and teaching aids in rural
                  schools; and
              (7) address the challenges of the allocation and management of
                  provincial budgets in respect of education.


              In view of the fact that the Committee plays a vital role in
              promoting co-operative governance between the provinces and
              the government and in improving the quality of life of every
              citizen on the ground, the delegations focused on all
              educational infrastructure affected, damaged and destroyed,
              also assessing the need for repairs and renovations and for
              the building of new schools in areas visited.


         2. Tirisano


              The delegations based their visits on Tirisano. A document
              outlining the objectives thereof was distributed by the
              Department of Education (the Department) to MPLs, education
              directors, school principals and the media.

              The delegations emphasised that since Tirisano was based on
              extensive consultation by the Minister with a large variety of
              stakeholders, there was no need to reinvent the wheel by
              searching for other criteria on which to base their visits.

              In particular, the first priority identified in Tirisano - "to
              make our provincial system work by making co-operative
              government work" - was clearly in line with the purpose of the
              visits. The Minister pointed out in Tirisano that three of the
              largest provinces, KwaZulu-Natal, the Eastern Cape and the
              Northern Province, were also the poorest, with the largest
              backlogs in respect of school buildings, infrastructure and
              services. For this reason those three provinces were
              identified for visits. Similar visits have been already
              undertaken to schools in KwaZulu-Natal and the Eastern Cape,
              from 2 to 4 November 1999, and that report was published in
              the ATCs on 9 March 2000.

              Other issues identified by Tirisano were -


              (1) the inability of many provincial education departments to
                  manage education efficiently;

              (2) the empowerment of provincial departments to fulfil their
                  statutory responsibility; and

              (3) dealing effectively with challenges in respect of the
                  allocation and management of provincial budgets.


         3. Rural development strategy - culture of learning and teaching
              (COLT)


              The delegations emphasised the importance of establishing a
              rural development strategy for a vast province such as the
              Northern Province. The resourcing of proper schools in rural
              areas with regard to establishing classrooms and proper school
              infrastructure conducive to learning and teaching, adequate
              textbooks, teaching aids and other learning materials must
              become a priority.

              During the visits to rural schools, the delegations saw
              vandalised school buildings, no proper infrastructure (in some
              schools no infrastructure at all), destruction of school
              property, overcrowded classrooms, no textbooks, a lack of
              water and sanitation and a lack of libraries and laboratories
              as main problems of rural education.

              In many schools ineffective management by principals has a
              major impact on the success, or lack thereof, in cultivating
              an atmosphere conducive for learning and teaching. Some
              schools are without principals, due to problems and conflict
              among teachers and principals. Numerous principals have left
              their schools, fearing for their lives.

              The COLT is the centre of life of the department. It is
              committed to discipline in schools, to make everyone
              understand the hard work needed. Parents, teachers and
              learners are also motivated to work hard. On numerous
              occasions departmental officials pay surprise visits to check
              whether the standard and discipline are maintained in schools.

              There is infighting between teachers, principals and learners.
              The department intervenes to try and resolve such problems.

              In certain rural schools, teachers have many complaints about
              principals, whilst doing very little themselves to improve the
              situation. Traditional leaders, councillors, parents and
              political party leaders were seen as interfering in the
              management of rural schools. Such schools were generally
              vandalised, most windows were broken and there were poor
              attendance of teachers and learners.

              The management capacity of principals has to be urgently
              investigated at rural schools.


         4. Delegations


              As the group was divided into two delegations, Group A was
              under the leadership of Prof S M Mayatula, while Group B was
              led by Ms P K Mothoagae. Both groups were accompanied by
              members of the provincial education standing committee and
              departmental officials. The groups were constituted as
              follows:

              Group A:

              Prof S M Mayatula (leader of the delegation); Ms I Mutsila; Mr
              S B Ntuli; Mr S J de Beer; Ms N C Manjezi (Committee
              Secretary); Mr A Nevhutanda; Mrs S Mangena; Mr R Mashaba; and
              Ms I X Chauke (Provincial Committee Secretary).

              Mr M M Motshekga left the delegation at an early stage due to
              prior commitments and engagements.

              Group B:

              Ms P K Mothoagae (leader of the delegation); Mr B G Molewa; Mr
              M A Mangena; Rev M S Mogoba; Ms A T Tatana (Committee
              Secretary); Ms T J Ndimande (Chairperson: Provincial education
              committee); Mr M S Burgers; and Mrs Matlala (Provincial
              Committee Secretary).

              An attempt was made to obtain a balanced view, with input from
              departmental sources, principals, teachers and school-
              governing bodies (SGBs).


     B.     Start of visit


         On arrival in the province on 2 May, the delegation was warmly
         welcomed by the provincial education committee, led by the
         chairperson. Constructive and open discussions were held at the
         Pietersburg Holiday Inn. Prof S M Mayatula gave a brief overview
         and objectives of the visit.


         1. Department of Education - Pietersburg


              The Northern Province is one of the three provinces identified
              by Pres Mbeki as the poorest, in need of extra financial
              assistance. On 3 May, the delegation was welcomed by the MEC
              for Education, Mr E Mushwana, and discussions with top
              management were held. The following were some of the areas
              covered:

              There are 2 250 000 pupils and 66 000 civil servants in the
              province. The department serves 5 000 schools, of which almost
              65% are rural and farm schools.


              (1) Grade 1 admission


                  In terms of the new age requirement admission was done in
                  accordance with the new admission policy for 2000. The
                  process started in September 1999 and was finalised in
                  the first week of January 2000.

                  The general trend was that there were fewer learners in
                  Grade 1 this year because of the age requirement of
                  seven. District managers control this process and the
                  department is satisfied that Grade 1 learners meet the
                  requirements of the admission policy.


              (2) Delivery of textbooks and stationery


                  Orders for textbooks were issued from October to mid-
                  November 1999. Delivery started in mid-November, and is
                  still continuing. There are two categories of textbooks
                  to be supplied - those already printed and those to be
                  printed.

                  Stationery orders were issued in November 1999. Delivery
                  started in the last week of November. By 30 January 2000,
                  90% of the suppliers had completed delivery.
                  Supplementary orders were issued and delivery was
                  completed on 15 January.


              (3) Attendance by learners and educators


                  This exercise was conducted on the first day of school by
                  the whole range of officials, from the Premier and MEC to
                  first education specialist. Most secondary schools
                  registering learners, with no plans of working that day.
                  Few secondary schools had an attendance rate above 70%,
                  with even fewer schools engaged in actual teaching.

                  Educators' attendance was not good, with most schools not
                  adhering to the directives of maintaining time books.
                  There was literally no sense of business in respect of
                  most educators. Primary schools were disciplined and the
                  majority of them were running well.

                  Monitoring teams in the districts were immediately
                  constituted to conduct operations on a daily basis. The
                  situation gradually improved from day two, and it is
                  pleasing to report that most secondary schools are
                  running well. Principals are beginning to be firm.


              (4) Implementation of outcomes-based education (OBE)


                  There is an indication that facilitators do not have the
                  necessary skills to effectively transfer knowledge to the
                  consumer. The cascade model also has limitations,
                  particularly when the department is dealing with a
                  sophisticated model like the current one.

                  Workshops will not be effective if they are conducted a
                  few months before implementation or when implementation
                  is in progress. A review is thus necessary to look at the
                  best strategies to convey curriculum changes to
                  consumers.


              (5) Success schools and success factors


                  Most successful schools were those located in urban or
                  semi-urban areas. They had a planning meeting and enjoyed
                  support of trainer facilitators. Success factors included
                  the following:


                  (a)  Good management of schools - positive behavior by
                       both educators and learners.
                  (b)  Commitment on the part of the educator.


                  (c)  Regular cluster meetings after school.


                  (d)  Regular support by facilitators from districts and
                       regions.


                  (e)  Quality training.


                  (f)  Availability of transport for facilitators to visit
                       schools.


              (6) Struggling schools and inhibiting factors


                  Struggling schools are mostly those in the rural areas.
                  Educators share common transport from home to schools,
                  which makes it difficult for them to meet regularly in
                  the afternoon. The inhibiting factors are:


                  (a)  Poor school management.


                  (b)  Inadequate training of managers and educators in
                       OBE.
                  (c)  A lack of success in respect of supporting
                       materials.


                  (d)  A lack of planning in school clusters.


                  (e)  Resistance to change.


                  (f)  The cascade model as mode of delivery.


                  The department has some improvement plans for struggling
                  schools:


                  (i)  Retrain principals, SGBs, district managers and
                         circuit managers.


                  (ii) Encourage clusters to work together on OBE.


                  (iii)      Recommend school-based inputs on approaches.


                  (iv) Demonstrate facilitation and other skills.


                  (v)  Provide teaching and learning materials.


                  (vi) Develop a practical guide for educators.


                  (vii)      Develop districts monitoring plans.


              (7) State of preparedness for administration of Grade 12 exams
                  in 2000


                  The departmental management plan has been developed and
                  entries have been received on 17 March 2000. Capturing
                  commenced on 21 May 2000 via a private agency. The
                  October/November timetable will be available by August
                  2000.


              (8) Analysis of successful schools in 1999 and success factors


                  The majority of schools with a pass percentage of between
                  95% to 100% were found to be historically advantaged.
                  This was an indication of the commitment and dedication
                  of those involved in educational change. Although the
                  former model C schools still reflected the largest number
                  of distinctions, they reflected a decline in terms of
                  quality of results. The success factors included:


                  (a)  Availability of action plans geared to the
                       attainment of set targets.


                  (b)  Availability of work programmes which interpret the
                       syllabi.


                  (c)  Guidance and counselling support for learners.


                  (d)  Evaluation reports for learners and educators.


                  (e)  Strong management teams.


                  (f)  Quality and quantity of written work.


                  (g)  Control systems for administrative and professional
                       matters.


                  (h)  Commitment of educators, learners and parent bodies
                       to achieve excellence.


                  (i)  Good discipline at all top schools.


                  (j)  Extra classes offered for enrichment.


              (9) Analysis of struggling schools in 1999, and inhibiting
                  factors


                  Struggling schools are found all over and are not
                  restricted to a particular geographical area. They
                  operate without plans, and communities do not take
                  ownership of them. Work ethic is very low, and there is
                  no sense of responsibility and accountability. The
                  inhibiting factors are:


                  (a)  The principal and some educators are not at school
                       most of the time.


                  (b)  Principals do not carry out their responsibilities,
                       as agreed in the Education Labour Relations Council
                       (ELRC).


                  (c)  SGBs do not contribute towards management.


                  (d)  Lack of discipline.


                  (e)  Educators do not finish the syllabi, and go to class
                       unprepared, reading lessons from a textbook.


                  (f)  The quality and quantity of written work is very
                       poor.


                  (g)  Absence of control systems and action plans.


                  (h)  The seven-hour school day is not fully utilised.


                  (i)  There is no management at all and no bench-marks are
                       set to realise targets.


              (10)Improvement plans for senior certificate examination in
                  2000


                  Improvement plans should address all aspects of school
                  development, rather than be confined to a particular
                  grade. Grade 12 is seen as an exit point, where efforts
                  accumulated through the system can be objectively
                  assessed. A plan and strategies have been developed to
                  improve on the 1999 performance:


                  (a)  Analysis of school performance


                       Schools have been categorised according to
                       performances, so as to systematise the support
                       relevant to the critical areas. The categories range
                       from between 0% and 20%, which the department views
                       as critical, to 21% to 30% and finally to 31% to 39%.
                       An analysis was done on the weakness of these school
                       categories.

                       Regional and district offices have developed
                       intervention strategies, ranging from management
                       support to general planning of schools affected.
                       Clustering, or twinning, of weaker schools with
                       schools performing well in each circuit has been
                       done, so planning of tests and other curricular
                       issues are done jointly.


                  (b)  Support to teachers


                       Special funds were made available for school support
                       programmes. The following activities took place:


                       (i)   Subject committees were resuscitated to provide
                             the necessary support.


                       (ii)  School visits, focusing on developed
                             checklists, must be conducted as a supporting
                             strategy rather than as routine work.


                       (iii) Each region has a continuous professional
                             development centre (rationalised college of
                             education) to primarily target the improvement
                             of Grade 12 results. Curriculum support
                             services (subject advisers) are located there
                             to run courses at the centres and provide
                             classroom support to educators.


                       (iv)  Class visits by principals are restored to the
                             system, and preparation is a prerequisite to
                             effective lesson delivery.


                       (v)   Deployment of head office officials to support
                             poorly managed schools on administrative and
                             professional matters.
                  (c)  Textbooks


                       Textbooks, except commercial stationery, were
                       delivered in almost all schools. Some areas were
                       inaccessible due to recent rains and bad roads.

                       Approximately 98% of textbooks were delivered to
                       schools by the end of the first quarter. Fraud also
                       occurred with delivery of books, which caused delays
                       in some areas.


                  (d)  Farm schools


                       There are challenges facing them, like status and
                       ownership, rental and their existence on certain
                       farms.

                       The department still has difficulty in staffing them.
                       They are seen to be equal to black schools, not meant
                       to admit the farmer's children, but black children.


                  (e)  Rationalisation and transformation


                       Racism still exists in schools, primarily with
                       parents. Some schools still experience racial
                       grouping - one section for blacks and another for
                       whites. Although racism exists in some of the
                       schools, learners are motivated to learn, share and
                       live together, and as a result in some schools black
                       pupils share dormitories with white pupils.


                  (f)  Poverty alleviation


                       The Department of Social Welfare is providing a
                       feeding scheme in numerous schools, and it is
                       progressing well in most.


                  (g)  Pre-schools


                       There are 3 400 primary schools and 690 pre-schools.
                       Looking at the statistics, not all children will
                       start in Grade 1, hence Grade R was introduced. It is
                       envisaged that all primary schools should have Grade
                       R to accommodate children from pre-schools.

                       Pre-schools are perceived as a luxury for the rich,
                       and are most organised in the urban areas and
                       townships, not in rural communities. The government
                       does not subsidise the building of pre-schools.


                  (h)  State of tertiary institutions


                       Big problems are still experienced, as tertiary
                       institutions are the competency of the national
                       Department - the provincial department spends more
                       time on schools. Even though there have been
                       constructive and open discussions with the management
                       of tertiary institutions in solving problems, there
                       is still need for a debate on this.

                       A perception exists that students who attend black
                       tertiary institutions are those who cannot afford.
                       The University of Venda has undergone transformation
                       and the University of the North is following suit.


                  (i)  Staff provisioning and staffing


                       There are enough good teachers and they produce good
                       quality teaching in many schools.


     C.     Group A visits


         1. Haneartsburg Combined School


              The school is a former model C school and has an enrolment
              figure of 181 learners (Grade R to Grade 9) and 11 educators.
              About 120 learners stay in the hostel, and most of them are
              black. English and Afrikaans are the main mediums of
              instruction. It is a multilingual school, and they intend to
              bring African languages into the system. The history of the
              school started as early as 1887.

              The school is a brick structure, partly prefabricated. The
              school is well-managed, controlled and disciplined, with good
              grounds which are well-kept.

              They have already adopted OBE, and are operating very well.
              They also have programmes with other schools in the region,
              and working relationships seem very good. The SGBs are always
              represented in these programmes.

              As this is a government school, any child can be enrolled, but
              learners are selected according to language, as English is the
              main medium of instruction. The hostel determines and limits
              the number of pupils to be admitted to the school.

              At present there are 40 white learners; many were removed by
              their parents and admitted to other schools in Tzaneen.

              There is one black teacher, 10 white teachers and 12 general
              assistants, including the gardener. The government subsidies
              five educators, while the SGB contributes to the salaries of
              six other educators. Every pupil has to pay a school fee of
              R300 per month.

              There is good co-operation between and participation of the
              SGB and parents; they are happy about the quality of
              education. They do a lot of fundraising to keep the school's
              standard high. Three parent meetings are held per year to
              constructively discuss school matters.

              Even though there are five farm schools in the district, they
              have many pupils, in relation to the population in the area,
              and thus there is a need to incorporate these farm schools
              into other schools.

              Mr Smith has been acting principal since 1 March 2000. The
              post has been advertised, and 47 applications were received.
              The shortlisting process were to have commenced by not later
              than June 2000. No redeployment of teachers has been
              considered by the department.

              There are still finance and staffing problems. A submission
              has been made to the department for more teachers. Urgent
              assistance and additional teachers are needed to overcome
              problems.


         2. Seboni Primary School, Ga-Mokgoloboto


              The school has an enrolment figure of 813 learners (Grades R
              to 7) and 10 educators (81:1). There is no proper building or
              infrastructure; schooling takes place under the trees. Part of
              the structure is made of wood and is badly damaged,
              delapidated, in a state of collapse, and may cause injury to
              learners and educators. Nevertheless, it is still in use.

              There are three classrooms, five classes being held under a
              tree. On rainy days there is no formal schooling. The weather
              controls the school, not the principal.

              The informal settlement in the area gave birth to the school
              on 15 January 1996. It started in 1997 with six teachers
              voluntarily giving service, with no salary and no assistance
              from the government.

              At present there is one permanent teacher and nine temporary
              teachers. The nine temporary teachers are paid by the
              department and will soon be replaced as a result of
              redeployment. The department has utilised the temporary
              teachers to fill vacancies.

              There is no electricity, no sanitation, no fencing, no
              furniture and no learning materials (like writing boards).
              Funds are urgently needed to improve the quality of the
              damaged infrastructure and to build a new, decent school.

              Although the school is on the priority list of the department,
              one cannot predict when the new school will be built. A new
              school has been budgeted for by the provincial department. The
              government needs to intervene to alleviate the problems and
              build a new, decent school.


         3. Zivuko Senior Secondary School, Nkowankowane


              The school has an enrolment figure of 680 learners (Grades 8
              to 12) and 21 educators (32:1). The school building is a brick
              structure, with no broken windows.

              The school was started in 1993, and between then and 2000 it
              managed to change the mindset of teachers, realising the need
              for maximum effort, winning the support of teachers when it
              comes to the good of learners.

              Learners at this school are relatively orderly and
              disciplined, and most of them come from the township and
              commute to school on a daily basis. The school management has
              made great strides in getting the community to own the school
              and to change attitudes. Parents, teachers, learners and SGBs
              are striving for excellence. As a result, there is team work.
              The school is well managed and well controlled.

              There is a shortage of classrooms. Three classes (Geography,
              Agriculture and Physical Science) are held under a tree, and
              this creates difficulty on rainy days and during cold weather.
              This shortage has had a disastrous effect, causing a low
              understanding of learners. This could cause problems - a lack
              of individual attention from teacher to learner.

              Due to the classroom shortage, 90 learners in certain grades
              are cramped in one classroom, which results in difficulty for
              the educator when endeavouring to attend to each individual
              learner. Some learners are accommodated in the nearby church
              hall, one km away from the school.

              Several letters have been forwarded to the department to
              request additional classrooms, but until now no response has
              been received. The school has no desks and chairs. Learners
              are taught while they are standing on their feet, because of
              the absence of furniture. Textbooks were received, but
              delivery was very late.

              There is a great need for science laboratories and an
              administration block. A request was put to the department, but
              was "withdrawn", and they were told that the focus was on
              primary schools.

              The school needs teaching aids such as videos and computers,
              which will store and keep school management information and
              serve other purposes. There is no proper sanitation, toilets,
              electricity and fencing.

              Grade 12 results are: 1997 - 27%; 1998 - 39%; 1999 - 56%. This
              improvement clearly shows dedication and commitment from
              educators, learners and parents.


         4. Matimu High School, Tabina district


              The school has an enrolment figure of 800 learners (Grades 8
              to 12) and 24 educators (33:1). The school is a brick
              structure with louvre windows. Approximately 90% of the
              windows are broken. There are 13 classrooms, of which one has
              been converted into a store room. Roofs and ceilings of two
              classrooms are extensively damaged and need urgent repairs and
              maintainance.

              There is no fence. Funding for building proper clean and
              working toilets was donated by the European Union. Many
              successes could be focused:


              (1) Professional area


                  Professionalism has turned the corner, towards a better
                  deal for all, like the fully-fledged plan, and clear and
                  directive policy on professional procedure - an
                  instrument that imbues management and the general staff
                  with what is expected in terms of performance measuring.
                  This therefore makes it easy to evaluate the work of an
                  individual input.


              (2) Professional administrative jurisdiction


                  There is demarcation of the school curriculum into
                  streams: Languages, social science and natural sciences,
                  with a departmental head in each case co-ordinating the
                  activities of all educators. This approach provides an
                  individual head with autonomy, development, expansion,
                  and dynamism. Ultimately, the work of these various
                  streams are synchronised and approved by the principal.


              (3) Professional discipline
                  This has been introduced and entrenched into school
                  policy, and finds expression through the establishment of
                  sectional heads of grades levels (i.e. Grades 8 to 12).
                  Their duties will include controlling grades on
                  discipline, for both educators and learners of that
                  grade; collecting mark sheets from educators; controlling
                  score records by educators in respect of learners; and
                  compiling a monthly report of the grade, to be tabled for
                  consumption by management council in its monthly
                  meetings. A unit whose duties will include assessment,
                  teaching strategies, approaches on preparations and
                  quality and standard of tests and compiling reports on
                  the above, for presentation to management council on its
                  monthly meetings.


              (4) Discipline in general


                  There is a delegate from the chief of discipline of the
                  school in general, whose duties include punctuality. This
                  person is an educator that facilitates decisions in the
                  absence of the principal in conjunction with the
                  professional head, and who co-ordinates all professional
                  matters, from subject allocation to practical teaching.
                  This educator has the same status as the chief of
                  discipline.


              (5) Staff development


                  There is unity regarding staff development in respect of
                  education and training.


              (6) School buildings


                  The structure on site comes from a donor, who has already
                  spent R16 000 for materials and R5 000 for labour. The
                  donor could not continue due to a lack of cash-flow. The
                  assessment of a layperson estimated an amount of R100 000
                  to complete the unfinished job. The administration block
                  has been renovated.


              (7) Parental support


                  Parents have begun to assume responsibility and ownership
                  of the school. Meetings held with them, as well as their
                  parental support, are encouraging.

                  There is no proper office for the principal and a staff
                  room. Important documentation are taken home by
                  management members due to inadequate storage facilities
                  at the school. The need exists to build an administration
                  block.

                  The school was established in 1982, and since then it has
                  been exposed to vandalism and theft on a daily basis. The
                  entire premises is extensively damaged and needs urgent
                  repairs. Nevertheless, teaching is continuing.

                  The provision of well-trained and professional securities
                  are required to reduce vandalism and safeguard the
                  building and its property, as most classrooms have broken
                  windows and no doors. The department promised to renovate
                  the school, but up to now it has not been fulfilled; the
                  process is still in the pipeline.

                  As this school is on the priority list of the department,
                  three classrooms have been built and six additional
                  classrooms will be erected to overcome the problems of
                  shortage and overcrowding. Textbooks were never
                  delivered; they only received stationery.

                  Political conflicts within the community affected the
                  schooling process. There were a number of strikes, the
                  sources coming from the community, as learners and
                  community members are influenced by teachers to
                  contribute to conflict. These conflicts have affected the
                  Grade 12 pass rate, which dropped drastically, due to
                  absence of learners during normal school hours.
                  Reports were sent to the Director, explaining the
                  problems and nature of conflict. The delegation was
                  informed that the MEC for Education, Mr E Mushwana, was
                  aware of the conflict in these communities and that he
                  was still arranging a meeting to try and solve the
                  conflict problems.

                  Since the establishment of SGBs in 1998, there has been a
                  great change in attitude; the parents are involving
                  themselves in all school affairs.


         5. Thubisang Primary School, Sekororo


              The school has an enrolment figure of 285 learners (Grades R
              to 7) and eight educators (36:1). It is a brick structure with
              six classrooms, including a shack built to overcome
              overcrowding due to the shortage of classrooms. One classroom
              is held under a tree. The school is well-managed, well-
              controlled and well-maintained.

              There is proper fencing and toilets. There is no water and
              electricity in the village - water is pumped from the mountain
              and is not hygienically clean.

              The shortage of classrooms remains. Three more classrooms and
              a staff room need to be built. The school has received a
              donation of R14 000 from the King, which were used to repair
              leaking roofs.

              Due to bad roads and time constraints, the delegation could
              not visit Tjaltjala Primary School, Timamogolo Primary School,
              Lepono Secondary School, Malebolong Primary School and Diputi
              Secondary School. The Committee wishes to apologise to these
              schools and their communities.


         6. Seagutla Secondary School


              The school has an enrolment figure of 550 learners (Grades 8
              to 12) and 27 educators (20:1). It is a brick structure of
              good quality.

              In previous years, the school was a finishing school, but in
              the past three years it was changed to a normal school. There
              are 16 classrooms, including damaged classrooms hit by a storm
              in 1999. Most of the damaged classrooms' roofs are leaking.
              The Department of Public Works has already started repairing
              the damaged classrooms.

              The school has proper fencing and electricity, and pit
              toilets, which are a health hazard. Although the school is
              situated away from the village, vandalism and theft is not
              common, as there is full-time security on the premises.

              Grade 12 started in 1998, and the pass rate in 1999 was 28%.


         7. Madondo Secondary School, Belfast


              The school has an enrolment figure of 561 learners and 14
              educators (40:1). It is a brick structure with no broken
              windows. This community-driven school started in 1989. There
              are nine classrooms, of which one is a staff room and another
              one has been converted into a storeroom.

              As this is a well managed and controlled school, funding is
              needed to effect some community-driven initiatives aimed at
              maintaining it in a proper environment conducive to learning
              and teaching.

              There is a serious shortage of classrooms. Due to this
              shortage, a tuck shop has been converted into a science class.
              There is no privacy between teachers and the principal, due to
              the unavailability of offices and an administration block.
              There is not enough furniture - beer boxes are used as chairs.

              In 2000, through its efforts, the school received a donation
              of R36 000 from the RDP committee, which was utilised to erect
              a fence around the building in order to safeguard the school
              and its property. The damaged roofs have been repaired by
              Public Works.

              Previously, the school experienced problems with delivery of
              textbooks. They had to borrow textbooks from neighbouring
              schools. Some learners had to continue with the learning
              process without any textbooks. However, in 2000, textbooks
              were received on time.

              Learners at this school are well-disciplined and well-
              mannered. There is good working relationship between teachers,
              learners and SGBs. Parents still maintain that learners should
              be punished, even though corporal punishment has been outlawed
              by the government.

              School fees amount to R50,00 per child per annum, and parents
              are co-operating by paying these fees. The Grade 12 pass rate
              in 1998 was 37%, while in 1999 it was 48%, with eight
              exemptions. The school is committed to work hard in trying to
              improve its standard. There is no proper sanitation and
              toilets.
         8. Malavutela Secondary School, Marite


              The school has an enrolment figure of 413 learners (Grades 8
              to 12) and 10 educators, including the principal (41:1). It is
              a brick structure, and almost all the windows are broken.

              There is no fencing around the school premises to safeguard
              school property. There is a serious shortage of classrooms -
              at present there are only three classrooms, with two offices
              which serve as staff room and principal's office,
              respectively.

              The school officially started in 1991 (in the neighbouring
              school) with one classroom. Firstly, the Grade 10 class was
              established in one classroom, but in 1994 the classroom was
              burnt down. Due to a shortage of classrooms, there was no
              initiative to start Grades 11 and 12.

              No problems have been experienced in terms of delivery of
              textbooks and stationery. Pupils are well-controlled and well-
              disciplined. The school has a history of being incorporated
              from the Lebowa government. An automatic promotion was not
              good for the pupils because it did not test their abilities.

              The school also managed to obtain third position in Grade 12
              pass rates in the region, which was as follows: 1996 - 38%;
              1997 - 8%; 1998 - 4%; 1999 - 21% (improvement of 16,7% over
              1998).

              The principal emphasised that accommodation and overcrowding
              may be the cause of poor results. This was evident during our
              visit there: The Grades 8 and 9 classes were held under trees,
              due to the shortage of classrooms.

              Schools with the lowest pass rates are timeously visited by
              district managers, regional managers and circuit managers, to
              monitor progress and to ascertain problem areas. There is
              great co-operation of staff to improve pass rates and academic
              records by upgrading standards. Teachers and learners are co-
              operatively committed to improve standards by doing the
              following:


              (1) Conducting after-school studies until 16:00.


              (2) Grade 12s will have morning classes every weekday.


              (3) Monthly tests, where the best students will be rewarded
                  with gifts like pens and stationery. This is seen by the
                  school management as a form of motivation for learners.


              (4) During June holidays, winter classes are held.


              Parents are timeously informed about learners' performances.
              Teachers are committed and dedicated to achieve a 100% pass
              rate in 2000.

              There are five toilets with no roofs. The school urgently
              needs two additional staff members (one HOD and one educator).
              The request was forwarded to the department, and one educator
              was promised.

              There is a serious shortage of English, Zulu and Mathematics
              educators.

              Regular meetings are held on a monthly basis with community
              structures to give feedback on all school developments. The
              community does not want to take ownership of the school, and
              the high rate of vandalism undelines this, which is committed
              by people from the community.


         9. L L M Mokwena Secondary School


              The school has an enrolment figure of 89 learners (Grades 8 to
              12) and 24 educators (29:1), two of whom are awaiting
              redeployment. Another two are temporary.

              The building is a brick structure, with almost 90% of windows
              broken. The other part of the brick structure, which has been
              extensively damaged by fire and with rusted window panes with
              no roofs, needs urgent repairs and renovations.

              The school was initiated as the result of the need of the two
              communities (Tsakane and Jim Brown), it is situated at the
              Marite settlement and has proper fencing. The poor pit toilets
              are a health harzard, but are still in use by both teachers
              and learners.

              The school started in 1985 with two educators and very few
              learners. Enrolment and staff complement increases yearly.

              There are 12 classrooms, nine of which are standard, and three
              which were meant to be laboratory and home economics centres,
              but with no equipment they ended up being converted into
              regular classrooms.

              Vandalism, burglary and theft are rife, and it is believed
              that it is committed by learners and by the local community,
              as this school is situated at the lower end of the two
              villages. The community does not want to take ownership of the
              school. The delegation was informed that the crimes are
              reported to the police, but that nothing is being done to
              prevent vandals from entering the school premises.

              The relationship between teacher and learner is good. The
              learners wear their school uniform at all times and are well-
              disciplined. Corporal punishment, according to the acting
              principal, is still regarded a good corrective measure to
              discipline and punish learners.


              (1) Poor pass rate and Grade 12 results


                  The reasons for poor and low pass rate were presented as
                  follows:


                  (a)  The shifting of good and excellent educators to
                       other schools is seen to be the cause of the low pass
                       rate. This is also evident by a decline in the Grade
                       12 results: 1997 - 34,7%; 1998 - 26,2% 1999 - 16,9%.


                  (b)  The school does not receive good pupil material from
                       primary schools, worthy of being in Grade 8. They are
                       promoted to secondary school without good
                       performance.


                  The school has been run without a principal since July
                  1999. According to the circuit manager, the previous
                  principal alleged that he had received death threats,
                  mainly from educators, learners and the community. The
                  principal on one instance was nearly killed by learners
                  on his way to school. The matter was referred to the
                  region, in fear of his life.

                  He was refused a VSP (Voluntary Severance Package), as
                  principals do not qualify for VSPs.


         10. Bushbuckridge Secondary School


              The enrolment figure is 247 learners and seven educators
              (35:1). At present Grade 11 is the highest Grade; they hope to
              present their first Grade 12 batch in 2001. The school
              building is a brick structure, which is well-maintained and
              has a fence around the school premises. None of the windows
              are broken. Almost all classroom doors and windows are burglar-
              barred. The school is well-managed and well-controlled.


              The school was established in January 1996, through the
              concerted efforts of the great sons and daughters of Maviljan
              Township, College View in Bushbuckridge Midland. It was
              started with the special purpose of providing quality
              education in science and commercial subjects, with only 42
              learners; now it has 247 learners.

              A four-classroom block was built by the provincial education
              department, and in January 1997 they moved to the permanent
              site. One of the classrooms is still being used as the office
              and the staff room.

              In 1998 the parents supported the school to erect one
              additional classroom. The school has two Grade 8 streams,
              while other grades have one stream each.

              In 1999 a fence was erected around the school with the help
              and support of parents. The school also has electric
              connections, tap water, telephones and toilets facilities. It
              is about to finish a hall, to be used as a classroom.

              School starts at 07:50, with morning devotion for 10 minutes,
              and ends at 14:50, with a short break and a long break in
              between. Apart from languages, only science and commercial
              subjects are offered. Mathematics is a compulsory subject for
              all grades. Guidance is taught as a non-examination subject in
              all grades.

              Extra-curricular activities are equally important. They have
              training in and/or facilities in respect of sports, the School
              Christian Movement (SCM), interclass debates, quiz shows,
              music and symposiums. Learners have won several prizes in
              interschool competitions. In 1999, three learners participated
              in the provincial mathematics olympiad competitions. They also
              received an area trophy for cultural activities. Educational
              tours are conducted every year. In 1997, learners participated
              in the provincial science expo, and also won two trophies in
              the circuit for COLTS and Masakhane.

              There is high level of co-operation between educators and
              learners. The learners are well-disciplined and well-mannered,
              and are participating in all activities. There is no
              vandalism. Parents as well as learners are engaged to take
              ownership of the school.

              As a growing school, they are also faced with lot of
              constraints:


              (1) Textbooks and prescribed books were never received, except
                  for a few prescribed books for Grades 8 and 9 in 1997.
                  Not every learner can afford to buy textbooks. The books
                  were never delivered due to departmental financial
                  constraints, as the focus was on Grades 1, 2, 7 and 12.


              (2) There is great shortage of furniture in the school. The
                  Grade 8 learners are sharing seats in classrooms. The
                  Rector of Mapulaneng College of Education has lent the
                  school 40 chairs and 40 tables to alleviate the furniture
                  problem.


              (3) To be a fully-fledged science and commerce school, there
                  is need for a laboratory, a computer laboratorium, an
                  administration block, a library, a decent sports field,
                  and electronic equipment like a television, a video, a
                  fax machine, an overhead projector and screen,
                  typewriters and a photocopier to boost teaching and
                  learning. The mission of the school is also to get
                  learners acquainted with all modern equipment so that
                  they do not feel inferior or disadvantaged when they
                  encounter advanced job requirements anywhere in the
                  country.


              (4) At the end of 1998 it was regretfully decided that
                  learners passing Grade 10 had to look for admission in
                  Grade 11 in other schools, due to a lack of
                  accommodation.


              The school started with a difference - "Just another mushroom
              school". It was not what the initiators had in mind. Rapid
              advancement of qualitative education in the right direction
              was the motto when the elite of the place embarked on an
              effort to establish this school. The school needs firm
              commitment and funds to assist it to attain its goals.


         11.     Nkothasi Primary School, Bushbuckridge


              The school has an enrolment figure of 570 learners (Grades 1
              to 7) and 21 educators (27:1). The school building consist of
              10 classrooms, which are of a brick structure, with no broken
              windows. All doors and windows are burglar-barred. Part of the
              building has many cracks, which have been aggravated by recent
              storms.

              The site where the school building was erected, is very swampy
              and marshy. Some floors are breaking down horribly because the
              soil underneath is saturated. Parents were summoned to come to
              observe, and they recommended that -


              (1) a new structure be erected;


              (2) a different site for construction be used; and


              (3) the existing structure be used for other developments.


              The department was therefore requested to act promptly to
              respond to the recommendation agreed to by the parents and the
              school management. In 1997, assessors were assigned by the
              department, and they also recommended that the site be
              changed. The continued use of some classrooms is extremely
              unsafe and dangerous and will be detrimental to both educators
              and learners.

              Learners are still greatly deprived in respect of extra-
              curriculum activities due to the state of the grounds, which
              are always swampy. The educators and learners find it
              difficult to reach the school during rainy days. Since 1996,
              and until today, the roads have been in a bad state. The
              rivulets around the school regularly overflow during summer,
              resulting in late-coming and absenteeism, which greatly
              hampers discipline.

              In view of the above, continued repairs to the school building
              is seen as a waste of parents' money, which can be fruitfully
              utilised to resource the school in other urgent and
              educational needs. The community needs and deserves a decent
              school.


         12.     Nghunghunyana High School


              The school has an enrolment figure of 330 learners (Grade 8 -
              12) and 13 educators (25:1), including the principal. It is a
              brick structure. All the doors and windows are burglar barred
              and none of the windows are broken.

              There are a number of constraints which make it difficult to
              produce better and quality results:


              (1) Classrooms are on the verge of collapsing, and are not
                  enough to cater for the needs of learners, especially
                  Grades 10, 11 and 12, where there are optional subjects
                  such as History, Geography, Physical Science and Business
                  Economics. This is seen as a very big constraint, in that
                  one or two groups receive lessons under the Moroela and
                  Fig trees. The situation is worse in the rain season and
                  on windy days. Additional classrooms are needed.
              (2) There is no laboratory, which makes it difficult, if not
                  impossible, to do experiments.


              (3) There is no library where learners can develop study
                  skills and do independent research.


              (4) There is no staff room and office to accommodate staff,
                  making it difficult to discuss important issues, and even
                  to reprimand delinquents or counsel learners with
                  learning problems. As a result, one classroom has been
                  converted into a staffroom.


              (5) There are no sanitation facilities. The traditional pit
                  toilets have collapsed as a result of the heavy rains in
                  February this year. The one still in existence is
                  extremely delapitated and can collapse any moment,
                  causing injury to learners and educators.


              (6) The community does not have electricity, which makes it
                  difficult for learners to study in the evening, be it at
                  home or at school.


              (7) There is lack of seating facilities such as chairs and
                  tables, resulting in some learners receiving lessons
                  while standing and some sharing chairs and tables.
                  Furniture had to be borrowed from the neighbouring school
                  to alleviate the serious shortage. Some     learners
                  moved to neighbouring schools with proper facilities,
                  which have a 65% to 70% pass rate in Grade 12.


              According to the principal, Mr P G Mkhombo, the problem of
              accommodation infrastructure has long been known to the
              provincial education department, evidenced by an extract from
              a speech delivered by the former MEC for Education, the Hon Dr
              J Phaahla, when handing over Mkhweyantaba School from the
              local government and traditional affairs department to the
              education department on 5 December 1997 at Orinocco,
              Bushbuckridge.

              It became apparent that the need for appropriate accommodation
              infrastructure was long overdue. An appeal was therefore made
              to the Committee to assist in this regard.

              Parental support for educators is maximal, compared to the
              situation in the past. Parents avail themselves any time when
              the management office needs them to discuss critical matters
              regarding the school. There is strong ownership of the school
              by the community, and there is no sign of vandalism to school
              property. The community is in control of the premises and
              buildings.

              The SGB is incapacitated, as it does not seem to know the
              constraints within which it should operate as a functional
              structure and as part of the school, representing parents.
              They sometimes do not know their rights, constraints and
              limits. This could be attributed to the fact that about 98% of
              the parent component of the SGB is illiterate or semi-
              literate, which makes reading and understanding the material
              on their functions at school level difficult. Not much has
              been done in respect of capacity building.

              The educators are working very hard to improve results,
              especially for 2000. They have moved from 18% (1998) to 35,2
              (1999). This year the school is dedicated towards moving
              beyond 50% in respect of the Grade 12 pass rate. Textbooks and
              stationery were delivered on time.


         13.     Bombani Secondary School


              The school has an enrolment figure of 421 learners (Grades 8
              to 12) and 13 educators (32:1). It is a brick structure, of
              which one classroom has been burnt down and extremely damaged
              (virtually destroyed) in 1995. Until now, no repair work has
              been done.

              Almost all the windows are broken (though burglar-barred),
              destroyed by children who used to play in the premises during
              and after hours.

              The school has a fence and is electrified. There are toilets,
              but they are not in a proper condition and are a health
              hazard. Nevertheless, they are still in use, by both learners
              and educators. There is an extreme shortage of furniture,
              textbooks and classrooms. Due to the shortage of classrooms,
              the school has resorted to use the burnt and damaged classroom
              to accommodate some learners, while other classes are
              conducted under a tree. In cold weather and during the rainy
              season, there is no schooling for those who receive lessons
              under the tree. The school managed to receive its stationery
              on time. There is no library and no laboratory.

              Grade 12 results were as follows: 1997 - 15,1%; 1998 - 31,1%;
              1999 - 48,1%.

              Although the learning process is continuing at this school,
              the slow progress has led to some learners leaving even before
              they reach Grade 12. As a result, the school has been regarded
              as a feeder to surrounding high schools, thereby further
              affecting Grade 12 results.

              Although the teacher/pupil ratio is only 32:1, the two HODs
              have to do all the administrative work and teach as well.
              Limited teaching resources make things difficult for teachers
              as well as learners. A burnt-down classroom, which was
              converted into a staff room, also contributes to the poor
              working conditions. The classroom situation is rendering the
              annual intake of Grade 8 learners unacceptable.

              Despite there being no record of vandalism, an urgent need
              exists to permanently appoint the night-watchman, a principal
              (as at present there is an acting principal) and a school
              clerk. There is need to have additional teachers, as two
              educators have recently left the school in fear of their
              personal safety.

              The school now needs a library and laboratory. Funds need to
              be available for construction of an administration block and
              at least three additional classrooms. Implementation of these
              will definitely bring about a significant improvement in
              respect of learners' progress in all grades.


         14.     Shobiyana High School


              The school was established in 1985, and has an enrolment
              figure of 776 learners (Grades 8 to 12), 30 educators (26:1)
              and 16 classrooms. The school has an electrified fence, and
              consists of a brick structure, part of which is extremely
              delapitated and in need of urgent repair and renovation.

              Almost all the classroom roofs have been blown away or
              destroyed, and ceilings have been damaged and need to be
              replaced or renovated. Despite all this, the schooling and
              learning process is continuing.

              Grade 12 pass rate: 1997 - 17,4%; 1998 - 44%; 1999 - 55,3%.

              The administration block was burnt down in 1990 during an
              uprising, but up to now nothing has been done by the
              department to repair, renovate and rebuild it. There is also a
              serious shortage of accommodation, and it is difficult to
              continue with the learning process in winter.

              There is a serious need for financial assistance in order to
              renovate the damaged and destroyed classrooms and
              administration block. Requests have been made to all local
              businesses to assist so as to rebuild and renovate the school,
              but no funding has been received. The leaking roofs and wall
              cracks may cause the building to collapse, which could mean
              injury to both learners and educators.

              Previously there was no support from the community, but after
              the arrival of some teachers, there was a drastic change in
              attitude.
              Co-operation from teachers is superb. As the community started
              to realise that the school was prosperous and constantly
              striving for excellence, it began to give good support.

              There are no proper toilet facilities; they still use pit
              toilets, which are not in good condition and are a health
              hazard. Urgent attention is needed to repair and renovate the
              school.


         15.     Mahashe Secondary School


              When the school started in 1996, it had an enrolment figure of
              46 learners, but now it has increased to 333 learners and six
              educators (56:1), including the principal. The school is a
              brick structure, partly of wood, with two classrooms. It has
              been electrified, and there are no broken windows. All windows
              and doors are burglar-barred.

              Although there is no fence around the premises, it is well-
              managed and controlled. The learners are very disciplined.

              This year the school's vision is presenting Grade 12 for the
              first time, aiming for a 100% pass rate. However, it needs
              resources to make this possible. Essential support services
              like textbooks and prescribed books for Grade 12 are seriously
              lacking. At present they rely on photocopies.

              There is also a shortage of staff. They did not get educators
              for higher grades, so they hired three educators to assist.
              They also do not have enough classrooms, no laboratory and no
              office for the principal.

              Toilet facilities are not enough, and they need proper
              sanitation. Additional funding is needed to build toilets and
              other urgent facilities. They also need a fence to safeguard
              the premises and property. They have made great strides in
              seeking funding from external donors in order to alleviate the
              problems and to motivate the learners to work hard.
              The school has good sportspeople who are very active in sport,
              so there is a need for facilities.

              Textbooks for Grades 11 and 12 were not delivered. On numerous
              occasions, the principal borrowed textbooks and other learning
              materials from the neighbouring school. Grades 8 to 10 do not
              have textbooks at all.


         16.     Dumazi High School


              The school has an enrolment figure of 742 learners and 22
              educators (34:1). It is a brick structure, one block being a
              damaged, prefabricated structure. About 70% of the windows are
              broken, but they have burglar bars.

              The entire school building is electrified, and it has 17
              classrooms, with no proper sanitation, no toilet facilities,
              no library and no laboratory. Funds are needed to improve the
              quality of the infrastructure, which at present is not
              conducive to teaching and learning.

              The department has already built a block comprising five
              classrooms, and in the past seven years the school has managed
              to get an extra classroom through efforts of the community. At
              present, with the help of the community, there is proper
              fencing to prevent vandals from entering the premises.

              Recent storms have damaged a number of classrooms and thus
              there are many cracks in the walls, which leak when it is
              raining, so learners cannot attend school and educators cannot
              teach.

              Grade 12 pass rate: 1994 - 71,4%; 1995 - 47,3%; 1996 - 36,2%;
              1997 - 29,3%; 1998 - 49,1%; 1999 - 35,1%. The rate is
              declining. Problems and conflict within the community are seen
              as the main reason for this. Disagreement among educators on
              the management plan is also seen as a reason for the decline,
              as it has affected the teaching process.
              For many years, the community was not supportive in improving
              the quality standards of the school. Community members tended
              to change classrooms into toilets. However, over the last two
              years, the community/school relationship has been improving.

              In 1999 the school was exposed to vandalism and theft, but
              this year nothing has been reported. In 1997 there was a break-
              in and a school generator was stolen. Subsequently it was
              found, but the culprits were not apprehended.

              The school did receive stationery, but no textbooks. Due to
              poor roads, suppliers cannot always reach the school to
              deliver textbooks.


         17.     Tshembani Primary School


              The delegation received an overwhelming welcome from both
              learners and educators at the entrance of the school.

              The school has an enrolment figure of 925 learners and 28
              educators (33:1), of which eight are awaiting redeployment.
              The building is a brick structure, which needs urgent
              renovation and maintainance. Few classroom windows are broken.

              The school was started in 1964, under unqualified teachers
              earning about R3,00 a month or nothing at all. It was a one-
              teacher school with 275 learners. The principal, Mr Chivambu,
              joined the school in 1965. In 1966 there were two teachers
              (one unqualified). In 1970 they managed to convince the tribal
              authority to build three classrooms, and it was then that
              Grade 8 classes were started.

              In 1980 enrolment increased, with a considerable number of
              educators and learners. From 1982 to 1986 the school excelled
              in producing the best Grade 7 results in the Giyani Circuit,
              and received a floating trophy for that. In 1984 the school
              convinced the former Gazankulu government to build further
              five more classrooms. In 1991, with the help of the "World
              Vision Project", they managed to build four more classrooms.
              In 1997 the government also assisted in building four more
              classrooms. Nevertheless, there is still a shortage of
              classrooms.

              In December 1999, they also managed to erect a fence to
              protect the building and windows from damage and destruction.

              The school falls under various pilot projects in the province,
              like "READ" (the foundation phase) and the Kgatelopele
              Technology Project. The educators are trained by means of the
              Readathon and also in respect of technology.

              They are now implementing OBE in respect of the foundation
              phase in Grade 7, and are working hard to promote the quality
              of education, but lacks sufficient equipment and materials to
              realise this. Stationery was received in good time last year,
              and this year they did receive textbooks.

              The school at present needs electricity for technology and
              science, six additional classrooms, an administration block,
              furniture (chairs and tables), a library, a laboratory,
              hygienic running water or water boreholes (no water in the
              school and in the community), toilets facilities, fencing for
              the school yard, a typewriter, audio-visual material (like
              computers), television, an overhead projector and a
              photocopying machine.

              Due to floods during February and March this year, damage was
              done to school property: Leaking roofs; damage to floors,
              doors and walls; two toilets collapsed; and roads were
              damaged. The principal informed the delegation that six
              educators residing in Thohoyandou and two from Malamulele
              could not get to school, as bridges they needed to cross had
              been washed away. The school is now used as shelter to
              accommodate families whose houses were damaged by the heavy
              rains.

              As this school is well-managed and well-controlled, and given
              its history of excellence, the government should make funding
              available to further improve the standard.


         18.     Tlharihani Primary School


              The school has an enrolment figure of 1 164 learners and 35
              educators (33:1), with an excess of eight educators. It is a
              brick structure with semi-delapitated classrooms in urgent
              need of repair. In 1998, through negotiations involving the
              RDP, the provincial department and the community, a new block
              of eight classrooms was built. Unfortunately, it did not have
              electricity. The government of Norway has assisted the school
              to electrify some classrooms.

              The school is fenced to prevent vandals and goats from
              entering the premises. They were also supplied with
              chalkboards. The management congratulates the government for
              the developments.

              There is no furniture, and learners bring their own chairs.
              There is need for a new administration block. The roof of the
              old structure could collapse at any moment, which may cause
              injury to learners. Assistance is needed repair the roof,
              build the block and buy furniture.

              There is a serious problem of overcrowding, which makes the
              school ungovernable. At present, there are 18 classrooms
              available to accommodate learners- a shortage of six. The pit
              toilets are very dirty and not in good usable condition. The
              toilet holes are quite big and are kept locked, as they are
              deemed dangerous. These toilets are a health hazard. There
              being no water at the school, attempts have been made to get
              Public Works to attend to the problem.

              Both Grades 3 and 7 received all learning materials, except
              that classes have not started with OBE. There is great co-
              operation and parental support on all school activities.
              A feeding scheme which had helped some learners, was stopped.
              It was seen as very important for learners, because some
              community members are unemployed and very poor. There are also
              refugee learners from Mozambique. The principal has again
              applied for a feeding scheme to the Department of Welfare, but
              no response has been received.


         19.     Risinga High School


              The school has an enrolment figure of 854 learners and 35
              educators (24:1), an excess of 10 educators. It is a brick
              structure with no broken windows. The roof and ceilings were
              damaged by 1999 floods. The leaking roof in the administration
              block is causing further damage to furniture and interior
              walls.

              They have an excellent Grade 12 pass rate; in 1998, they
              obtained 62%, and in 1999 72%. The learners are highly
              disciplined and see education as their key to success.


         20.     Nhlalala Primary School


              The school was started in the early 1980s and has an enrolment
              figure of 560 learners and 15 educators (37:1). It is a brick
              structure with no broken windows and has big school grounds
              which are well-maintained. There are 16 classrooms.

              The foyer ceiling is leaking and causing further damage to
              offices and other classrooms. Most of the classrooms have no
              electricity, and water has damaged light bulbs in classrooms.
              Urgent repairs are needed.

              There are not enough funds to keep the school at a proper
              standard. They receive R30 000 per year in school fees, which
              is not sufficient. Most learners live in squatter camps and
              most of the parents are unemployed.


              There is feeding scheme, provided by the Department of
              Welfare, and parents are assisting with it. The school is
              properly fenced and all the toilets are in good working
              condition.


         21.     Holopondo Secondary School


              The school has an enrolment figure of 416 learners and 17
              educators (25:1), an excess of three educators. A new block,
              built with bricks, has been erected by the community. About
              65% of classroom windows are broken. Some classrooms have
              burglar bars, others have leaking roofs. The community is
              aware of the damages, but at present there are no funds to
              repair the broken windows. They rely on school fees to replace
              or repair broken windows.

              Although the school is operational, there are problems with
              the entire school management. Recently, the female principal
              was evicted, so they have been operating without a manager.
              There are 16 classrooms, but they do not have enough
              furniture; some classrooms have no ceilings. Most Grades do
              not have any textbooks; they use photocopies. There are no
              proper toilet facilities for learners; educators use separate
              toilets, which are in good condition.

              The new block built by the community still needs windows,
              doors and ceilings, and they need money to put in place all
              these before the winter.

              There used to be a lot of stealing of furniture, so the
              community ensured that it took ownership of the school. There
              is no vandalism now.

              In 1998, the Grade 12 pass rate was 64%, but in 1999 it
              dropped to 35,1% because parents were forcing them to enrol
              failing learners from other schools. The management needs to
              be investigated.


     D.     Group B visits


         1. Mamabudusha High School


              The school has an enrolment figure of 704 learners and 32
              educators (22:1), some of whom are awaiting redeployment; they
              still need to be declared as excessive. There is an acting
              principal. They still need four HODs for language, mathematics
              and physical science.

              Teachers' performance is effectively monitored by the
              principal. In previous years, they had a good Grade 12 pass
              rate, but over the past two years it has dropped - the 1999
              rate was only 12%. When the then principal was asked to
              account for this, he decided to go on early retirement. They
              are at present striving for excellence, hoping to achieve a
              rate of above 40%.

              There are 17 classrooms, two fixed public telephones and a
              water tap. The entire infrastructure in delapitated, with
              almost all windows broken and damaged floors, roofs and
              ceilings. They need urgent repairs and renovations.

              There is no proper sanitation, no laboratory, no library, no
              sporting facilities and no administration block. One of the
              classrooms has been converted into a staff room. Educators and
              learners continue to use pit toilets, which are a health
              hazard. The road they use to get to school is bad and partly
              ruined. The only room which has electricity is the office of
              the acting principal.

              The previous administration block, which had a library and a
              home economics facility, was burnt down by learners during a
              demand for a change in school fees. All the computers donated
              by Telkom and solar panels supplied and installed by Eskom
              were stolen.

              Money raised to build toilets and install electricity supply
              was never used for that purpose, which has created many
              problems between learners and the management.

              Reasons for low performance are the following:


              (1) No proper management, and divisions among staff.


              (2) Furniture is stolen by the community.


              (3) The administration block was burnt down.


              (4) Interference by the community in management.


              They have made great strides in trying to resolve their
              problems. Teachers' morale has been directly affected by the
              above problems. Afternoon classes are conducted to eliminate
              the huge backlogs. There is good attendance and co-operation
              among learners.

              Regular meetings are held with the SGB to discuss ways of
              building the administration block. They have agreed to raise
              funds and to assist with the rebuilding, and learners are also
              co-operating.

              The district manager also pay regular visits and try to assist
              and advise them on the curriculum.


         2. Mabotja High School


              The school has an enrolment figure of 775 learners and 26
              educators (30:1). It was started in 1989 with 22 educators for
              Grades 8 to 10. In 1990 the school very proudly introduced
              Grade 11, and in 1992 Grade 12 was introduced, due to a
              student increase.

              This created problems in terms of classroom accommodation.
              Some classes had to be conducted in a shack. The school is
              generally in good condition, although there is no library, no
              laboratory and no sporting facilities.

              There are 12 classrooms, one of which burnt down in 1997. In
              1999, it was renovated.

              The Grade 12 pass rate in 1999 dropped from 23% to 16%;
              learners pass languages more than other subjects.
              Vandalism and theft of property are rife. All the equipment,
              furniture, typewriters and doors were stolen by members of the
              community. The book storeroom was also burnt down.

              They never received textbooks for new commercial subjects. Few
              parents can afford to buy textbooks, as most of them are
              unemployed. The school has to borrow some textbooks from
              neighbouring schools to continue with the process of learning
              and teaching.

              Drug addiction and alcohol abuse by learners during school
              hours on the school premises is very common.

              According to the principal, the weak performance is to be
              attributed to the following:


              (1) No textbooks for the new commercial syllabus.


              (2) The library was burnt down.
              (3) A lack of commitment and dedication from pupils and
                  educators.


              In trying to solve these problems, meetings were held with
              Grade 12 educators to discuss problem areas and motivation
              strategies.


         3. Setotolwane School for the Blind and Kuschke Agricultural
              school


              The delegation could not meet with the educators, as they
              arrived very late at the school. The Committee apologises to
              the school and the community.


         4. Siloe School for the Partially Blind and the Blind


              The school has an enrolment figure of 238 learners and 38
              educators (6:1), three of which have been redeployed to other
              schools. The school is a brick structure, and the grounds are
              very neat and well-maintained.

              One blind educator has recently resigned. 110 learners are
              blind, while 128 are partially blind; most of them are
              albinos.

              This was the first school for the blind in South Africa,
              established by a Father from Belgium in the late 1950s. It is
              a public school, situated on a private property and funded by
              overseas Catholic missionaries who believe in christian
              values. Adv Malatji is the first blind advocate in South
              Africa who studied here. At present there are two vacant
              posts, one for the post of deputy principal and one for the
              post of HOD.

              For the past 10 years, the school has a 100% pass rate. One
              learner who obtained a 100% pass rate in mathematics is at
              present studying physiotherapy at UWC. The learners are highly
              committed and dedicated to strive for excellence, and they see
              education as the key to their success.

              The school caters for three languages, history, business
              economics, typing, biblical studies, and in 1999, mathematics
              was introduced. It also caters for vocational training -
              learners are taught in handcraft, leather belts, weaving mats
              and wall pictures, which are sold to the public to raise
              money. Learners are also trained in sport, and most of them
              are good traditional dancers.

              In 1996 some SADTU teachers refused to supervise learners
              during afternoon classes; even now they still refuse to do
              that.

              The delegation arrived at the school very late, which made it
              impossible to meet learners.


         5. Mogolo Secondary School


              The school has an enrolment figure of 626 learners (Grades 8
              to 12) and seven educators (89:1). There is one block with
              four classrooms, and most of the windows are broken.

              There is a serious problem of overcrowding and a shortage of
              classrooms and educators. Due to the lack of classrooms, four
              shacks with no windows and doors have been converted into
              classrooms, while one classroom is used as a staff room,
              storeroom and library.

              In some Grades 8 and 9 classes, more than 143 learners are
              either cramped together in one class or placed under the tree,
              which makes it impossible for the educator to attend to each
              individual learner. As there is a shortage of educators, some
              learners are left unattended, which makes control and
              discipline impossible.

              As two educators have just resigned and another redeployed,
              the principal was hoping to get four more educators by the
              beginning of June 2000.

              None of the toilets can flush; they have been out of use for
              long. Learners and educators have to use the toilets at a
              neighbouring primary school, which may create another health
              hazard. There are no sporting facilities and the school
              grounds are not well-maintained. There is a problem of leaking
              taps, which need urgent repairs.

              Since establishment, they have never received any furniture.
              As no textbooks were received, they were supplied with the
              surplus of textbooks from the neighbouring school.


         6. Batau Secondary School


              The school has an enrolment figure of 707 learners (Grades 1
              to 12) and 14 educators (51:1). It is a brick structure, in
              need of urgent repair and renovation. All the windows are
              broken, and the fence, toilet doors and the gate have been
              stolen by people from the community. There is a serious
              shortage of educators. Some learners are taught outside under
              the tree, and on rainy days and during cold weather, schooling
              does not take place.

              There is no furniture; some chairs and desks have been
              borrowed from neighbouring schools. There is also a shortage
              of classrooms; two shacks that were built are used as
              classrooms. One classroom has been converted into an office,
              staff room, storeroom and library, as there is no
              administration block. There are no sporting and recreational
              facilities.

              Although farmers in the area have made concerted efforts to
              donate temporary structures, like shacks, the community
              continues to vandalise and destroy them. Vandalism to school
              property are reported to the police station 10 km away. None
              of the reported cases have been solved.

              There is lack of parental support. Only 5% of parents attend
              school meetings. The majority have migrated to cities to find
              work, which makes them unable to attend to meetings to discuss
              matters and problems regarding the school. The Kgosi of the
              village does support the school, but the community does not
              want to take ownership of the school.


         7. Kabishi Primary School


              The school has an enrolment figure of 1 462 learners and 13
              educators (113:1). It is a brick structure with no broken
              windows, and two shacks are also used as classrooms. The
              grounds are well-maintained and clean. The learners are well-
              mannered and disciplined.

              Enrolment figures are: 1995 - 350; 1996 - 631; 1997 - 986;
              1998 - 1 268; 1999 - 1 315; 2000 - 1 462. Grade figures are:
              Grade 1 - 240; Grade 2 - 243; Grade 3 - 193; Grade 4 - 235;
              Grade 5 - 192; Grade 6 - 174; Grade 7 - 185.

              There is serious overcrowding and a shortage of educators and
              classrooms, as enrolment increases annually. 19 posts still
              need to be filled to overcome the shortage.

              There is a great parental support. Parents contribute and
              raise money to pay for fencing to safeguard school property.

              At present there is no furniture and no administration block.
              Teaching aids and textbooks were never delivered. There are
              also no sporting facilities.

              As clean tap water is not available on the grounds, learners
              have to bring water from home. Aids programmes have not yet
              been introduced as part of the school programme.


         8. Phutinare Secondary School


              The school has an enrolment figure of 768 learners and 31
              educators (25:1), including the principal, and offers
              education from Grades 8 to 12. It was established in 1976 and
              enrols learners from six villages. It is a brick structure,
              and almost all the windows have been damaged by learners who
              failed and who demanded to be passed. It took three weeks to
              solve these problems.

              Learners have to travel six km every day to get to school. The
              subjects offered are commercial, natural and human sciences.

              Grade 12 pass rate: 1995 - 36%; 1996 - 2,1%; 1997 - 15,6%;
              1998 - 6,8%; 1999- 40,2% (a great improvement).

              The education department has constantly pressurised the school
              to move learners to higher grades, which has resulted in a
              decline in the Grade 12 pass rate.

              Learners are abusing drugs. They smoke dagga which they get
              from the mountain near the school, where there is a big dagga
              plantation. This results in learners lacking discipline and
              progressing slowly at school. There is also a water shortage,
              and the toilets are not in good working condition.

              At present there is no administration block and teaching
              materials for mathematics and science for Grade 11. Stationery
              was received very late, and only one Economics 2000 textbook
              was delivered. There is no parental support and lack of
              respect amongst learners, as most of them do not live with
              their parents. There is also a lot of absenteeism -learners as
              well as educators. The management should be investigated.


         9. Belabela High School


              The school has an enrolment figure of 674 learners and 40
              educators (17:1), with an excess of 11 educators, and with no
              deputy principal and HODs. It is a double-storey brick
              structure with electricity, a fence, toilets and water, and no
              broken windows.

              Theft is rife: They were forced by the education department to
              buy their own stationery and to pay for electricity. The
              community constantly refuse to co-operate to solve the
              problem. As 70% of the learners live in squatter camps,
              parental support is minimal. Learners refuse to attend
              afternoon classes to improve the poor pass rate.


         10.     Mahlasedi Primary School


              The school has an enrolment figure of 1 000 learners and 24
              educators (42:1). It uses an empty hostel - four blocks with
              18 classrooms.

              There is a serious overcrowding, caused by the transfer of
              learners from a delapidated farm school to this school.
              Although they had a 76% pass rate in 1999 under these bad
              conditions, the process of teaching and learning needs to be
              continued. Interior and exterior walls must be repaired.

              There is no administration block, no sporting facilities, no
              furniture and a shortage of learning materials. They need
              materials like computers, fax machines and photocopiers.

              The structure is not conducive to learning and teaching. The
              community deserves a new brick structure and a decent school.


         11.     Mohlakamotala Secondary School
              This public school on private property has an enrolment figure
              of 470 learners and 17 educators (28:1), three of whom are
              temporary. The contract for the property has not been signed
              due to disagreement on the regulations.

              Since its establishment in 1993, it has had a top matric pass
              rate. In 1999, the Grade 12 pass rate was 93,6%, compared to
              the 1998 rate of 1,4% less. It offers various vocational
              subjects like science, mathematics, technology, travel and
              tourism, technical drawing, hotel catering, business economics
              and various languages. With the efforts of the educators, a
              new administration block was built.

              Textbooks and stationery were not delivered on time. There is
              a lack of communication between the department and the school,
              the circuit office is not well-equipped with materials to
              facilitate effective communication between school and
              department. There is also a shortage of classrooms - three
              additional classrooms are needed by the school.
         12.Noisebosch Secondary School


              This farm school has an enrolment figure of 86 learners and
              four educators (22:1), from Grades 1 to 11. It is situated on
              private property and consists of one classroom block, which is
              not conducive for learning and teaching. At present there is
              no principal, as he was evicted by the landowner. The acting
              principal has been functioning in that position for three
              years without any remuneration.

              There is no electricity and the toilets are not in good
              working condition. They did not even receive enough learning
              material for OBE. Most rural schools have been excluded from
              the OBE process.

              On 10 January 2000, the landowner farmer locked learners out
              of the classrooms, and the educators had to seek a court order
              to re-open them. He also intend to evict three educators and
              does not want to allow children of farmworkers to attend the
              school.
              There is lack of co-operation from the community and the SGB.
              Most parents feel that they have to be remunerated for support
              to the school. There are no proper channels of communication
              with the circuit office to relay problems.

              The school has a serious shortage of classrooms, textbooks,
              stationery and educators, no furniture, no administration
              block, no sanitation and water.

              The management is ineffective. Vandalism is rife, committed by
              the community themselves. The community does not want to take
              ownership of the school. All the problem areas are solved by
              the school management alone, without the support of the
              provincial department of education and communities. Parental
              support is minimal.

              Some schools are forced to pay for electricity and water
              supply themselves, whilst white schools do not have to pay for
              such services.
     E.     Solutions to problem


         Schools, communities, educators and learners should be actively
         involved in taking the initiative to change the schools, and
         communities and SGBs are always encouraged to co-operate and
         participate in the process. There is also a need to implement
         effective school management, and this management should be trained
         to mobilise the community to assist in school matters and to
         attend meetings.

         The evaluation of educators' performance should be conducted to
         identify the potential of those who can be promoted to HOD or
         principal.

         The education department should provide enough classrooms,
         furniture, proper sanitation, clean running water, electricity,
         educators, textbooks and stationery to all schools in need.
         Parliament should address the problem of non-existence of sport
         and recreational facilities in schools.

         There should also be compulsory education enforcers in communities
         to ensure that children attend classes, and legal structures
         should bind parents to ensure that their children are educated.

         All corrupt educators should be brought to book by enforcing
         disciplinary measures.


     F.     Comments and recommendations


         Areas that need urgent attention, are the following:


         (a)     Major repairs and renovations are required in most
              schools.


         (b)     A need to improve and upgrade existing libraries and
              develop mobile libraries.


         (c)     A need to implement effective management in most schools.


         (d)     Capacity-building of SGBs in financial management and
              school governance is needed in most schools.


         (e)     A need for electricity, sanitation and clean running
              water.


         (f)     Provincial departments of education should monitor
              adherence to national legislation, for example adherence to
              the prohibition of corporal punishment.


         (g)     A need to inculcate a sense of ownership of schools by
              communities.


         (h)     A need to encourage co-operation between previously
              advantaged and disadvantaged schools.


         (i)     A need to develop a rural strategy educational plan based
              on the visit and in accordance with the President's integrated
              rural strategy programme.


         (j)     Special budgetary provisions must be made to attend to
              backlogs as well as the present needs and inadequacies.
              Furthermore, provision has to be made to needs caused by
              natural disasters.
         (k)     This Report should be assessed within the broader context
              of the national schools' survey of needs.


         (l)     There is an urgent need to involve public representatives
              in the monitoring of educational issues in their
              constituencies.

         (m)     The role of district officials in giving support to
              schools needs to be evaluated.

         (n)     The Committee should on an ongoing basis monitor the
              implementation of these recommendations and determine the
              necessary time-frames for report-back on progress made.


     G.     Conclusion


         The Committee is satisfied that it had attained most of the
         objectives identified for the study tour.

         The delegations managed to lay the basis for a very constructive
         relationship with provincial governance structures. In the
         Northern Province, open and constructive discussions took place
         between the MEC for Education, Mr E Mushwana, the top management
         of the provincial education department and the delegation from
         Parliament.

         The visit also succeeded in highlighting the principles of
         "Tirisano", the Minister's Call to Action to provincial
         structures. The delegations examined severe conditions of physical
         degradation in the poorest rural areas, according to the objective
         of the tour. They found conditions of immense poverty, dilapidated
         schools and a lack of basic facilities at educational
         institutions. However, even under the worst conditions, the
         delegations found that dedication, discipline and hard work of
         teachers in the classroom had a greater influence on examination
         results than what physical conditions in schools could bring
         about. In most schools, the management needs to be seriously
         investigated.


     H.     List of participants


         1. MEC for Education and Culture: Mr E Mushwana.


         2. Provincial Department of Education.


         3. Mr R Matsana, PRO to MEC's office.


         4. Chairperson (Ms J Ndimande) and provincial standing committee
              on education.


         5. All principals and management of schools visited.


         6. Various communities, including school governing bodies.


         7. Regional, district and circuit managers.


         8. All communities visited, as well as those not visited for
              various reasons.


     Report to be considered.

                          TUESDAY, 10 OCTOBER 2000

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     Letter from the Minister for the Public Service and Administration to
     the Speaker of the National Assembly advising members of the Public
     Service Wage Settlement for 2000-2001.

     The letter has been distributed to members of Parliament.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:


1.    The Minister of Finance:


    Resolutions of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for 2000 and
    replies thereto obtained by the National Treasury - Fifth, Sixth and
    Seventh Report, 2000.


2.    The Minister of Labour:


    Report and Financial Statements of the National Productivity Institute
    for 1999-2000.

National Assembly:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker:


     The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development submitted the
     following letter, dated 26 September 2000, to the Speaker of the
     National Assembly:


     Dear Ms Ginwala

     PROMOTION OF EQUALITY AND PREVENTION OF UNFAIR DISCRIMINATION ACT, 2000

     With further reference to your letter dated 22 May 2000 in the above-
     mentioned regard, I wish to inform you that under section 35 of the
     Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act, 2000
     (Act No 4 of 2000), the President has fixed 1 September 2000 as the
     date on which sections 1, 2, 3, 4(2), 5, 6, 29 [with the exception of
     subsection (2)], 32, 33 and 34(1) of the said Act, came into operation,
     in order to facilitate the appointment of the Equality Review
     Committee.

     I also wish to inform you that I have, under section 32 of the
     Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act, 2000
     (Act No 4 of 2000), established the Equality Review Committee and
     appointed the following persons as members thereof:


     (a)    In terms of section 32(a) of the Act, the Honourable Madam
         Justice T M Masipa, a senior judicial officer.

     (b)    In terms of section 32(b) of the Act, Dr N B Pityana, in his
         capacity as Chairperson of the Human Rights Commission.

     (c)    In terms of section 32(c) of the Act, Ms J Piliso-Seroke, in her
         capacity as Chairperson of the Commission of Gender Equality.

     (d)    In terms of section 32(d) of the Act, Mr V Saldanha, an attorney
         from Cape Town, as representative of civil society.

     (e)    In terms of section 32(e) of the Act, Prof S Gutto of the Centre
         of Applied Legal Studies of the University of the Witwatersrand,
         an expert in the field of human rights, especially the right to
         equality.

     (f)    In terms of section 32(f) of the Act, the Honourable Ms N Botha,
         a member of the National Assembly.

     (g)    In terms of section 32(g) of the Act, the Honourable Mr P D N
         Maloyi, a member of the National Council of Provinces.


     I have also appointed Dr Pityana as Chairperson of the Equality Review
     Committee.
     The Committee's office will be established soon, which will handle all
     queries. In the meantime, queries can be directed to:


     (a)    Dr N B Pityana
     The Chairperson: Equality Review Committee
     Private Bag 2700
     HOUGHTON
     2041
     Telephone number: (011) 484 8300
     Facsimile number: (011) 484 7146

     (b)    Ms T N Madonsela
     Chief Director: Transformation and Equity
     Department of Justice and Constitutional Development
     Private Bag X81
     PRETORIA
     0001
     Telephone number: (012) 315 1024
     Facsimile number: (012) 326 0991


     Thank you for your interest in this matter.

     Kind regards




     DR P M MADUNA, MP
     MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND
     CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Health on the National Health
     Laboratory Service Bill [B 52B - 2000] (National Council of Provinces -
     sec 76), dated 10 October 2000:


         The Portfolio Committee on Health, having considered the subject
         of the National Health Laboratory Service Bill [B 52B - 2000]
         (National Council of Provinces - sec 76), referred to it and
         classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 76 Bill,
         reports the Bill without amendment.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry on the
     Competition Second Amendment Bill [B 41B - 2000] (National Assembly -
     sec 75), dated 10 October 2000:


         The Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry, having considered
         the Competition Second Amendment Bill [B 41B - 2000] (National
         Assembly - sec 75) and proposed amendments of the National Council
         of Provinces (Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, p
         749), referred to the Committee, reports the Bill with amendments
         [B 41C - 2000].


