---
title: 'National Assembly - 22 June 2000'
layout: debate
year: 2000
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2000/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2000-06-22
---

FRIDAY, 22 JUNE 2000
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 09:08.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.
                     SITUATION IN NONGOMA, KWAZULU-NATAL

                                 (Statement)

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Speaker, hon members, on Tuesday afternoon
reports were received about the escalation of violence and lawlessness at
Nongoma. The reports indicated that the combined units of the SA Police
Service and the SA National Defence Force had been attacked. They further
indicated that in another area in the province a similar attack had
resulted in the death of one SANDF member. These reports gave an indication
that the situation was getting out of hand.

Based on these reports Ministers dealing with justice and crime prevention,
Ministers Tshwete, Maduna, Skosana, Nhlanhla and Lekota, had to become
involved as a matter of urgency to help address the problems. Upon arrival
at Nongoma these Ministers received reports from the police about the
situation. They were informed that there were three factors causing
violence at Nongoma and that these were faction fighting, political
intolerance and taxi violence around the Nongoma area.

There is ongoing faction fighting between the Dladla and Zondo clans.
According to police reports the conflict is centred mainly on a land
dispute which has been going on for a long time. This dispute has resulted
in the deaths of a number of people. A new wave of violence erupted after a
letter came from Johannesburg, reporting the death of a member of one of
the clans, who was killed, according to the reports, on 18 April 2000.

It is estimated by the police that up to 200 members of each clan have
retreated into the bush and are armed. Some members have taken refuge at
the Okhukho police station. They report that these two clans are under
Inkosi S Zulu, whose attempts to mediate have not been successful. In one
such mediation attempt, an agreement was reached by both clans. However one
clan was ambushed after leaving that very meeting and violence ensued
again.

The police further reported that on 20 June 2000 they attempted to
apprehend two armed men, who opened fire on them and ran away into the
bush. The police followed them and discovered an armed group of people who
ran away upon catching sight of the police. The police estimate the number
of people they found at 45. The police succeeded in arresting seven of them
and seized a number of weapons, including AK-47s. Security personnel who
undertook this operation form part of the combined force of the SAPS and
SANDF, which numbers 300, including 25 detectives from outside the area who
have been deployed in the area as a result of the current violence.

The police also reported that political intolerance in the area was one of
the factors that had resulted in a number of problems in the area. They
reported that any attempt to establish an ANC branch in the area is always
resented. The area is regarded as an exclusively IFP area. The police
report that they are often accused by both sides of political bias and this
has adversely affected their policing capacity. These allegations have put
a lot of pressure on the police, further eroding an already weakened
command structure in the Nongoma area.

Because of this situation the provincial commissioner, together with the
national headquarters of the police, have evaluated police capacity at
Nongoma and have come to the conclusion that the police station needs to be
restructured and that this restructuring should take priority in the
enhancement of the capacity of the police and policing in the area.

They also reported that taxi violence has been going on for a long time at
Nongoma and has resulted in many people being killed. Police are aware that
even the mayor of Nongoma is one of the people who has been murdered as
part of this raging violence in the area. The Minister has also established
that the member of the SANDF who was killed in an ambush had been attacked
in a different area, at Bambayi in Inanda, during a joint operation of the
SAPS and the SANDF.
Government is concerned that there have been too many killings in the
Nongoma area and the situation seems to be worsening. Government regards
Nongoma as a flashpoint and is of the view that the rule of law is being
seriously eroded there. The Government therefore believes that
extraordinary measures must be taken to stop the escalating violence.
Efforts should be made to assist the Inkosi who is trying to mediate
between the two fighting clans.

The taxi violence must be stopped. The two political organisations that
are, in fact, working together in the province, the IFP and the ANC, must
address the situation at Nongoma. It is, however, pleasing to report that
the leadership of the ANC and the IFP met yesterday and agreed to
reactivate structures put in place to deal with violence in the province.
These structures include, among others, the executive committee that
oversees other substructures; the facilitation committee which deals with
flashpoints; the committee that deals with matters relating to traditional
leaders; and the committee that deals with the code of conduct.

They have further agreed that in their further discussions they are going
to work out ways and means of taking action against any of the members,
from both organisations, who might be found to be involved in such
activities. The leadership has agreed to address the Nongoma violence with
more vigour and with the aim to bring about peace and stability in the
area.

We will continue to monitor developments closely and ensure that measures
to address the violence are implemented. Given the volatility of the
situation in Nongoma, we thought it important for the House to have this
briefing before it rose today. [Applause.]

Mr J SELFE: Madam Speaker, we thank the hon the Deputy President for
informing this House on the events that have taken place. It is entirely
appropriate that he should have made this announcement in this House
because it allows us, as decision-makers in Parliament, to reflect on what
is going on in our country and to take appropriate action. It is also
appropriate that we thank the Ministers who were involved, for their
intervention in the situation on the ground.

The events in Nongoma over the past days and weeks are the latest in a
tragic tale of violence and bloodshed that has affected the people of the
province of KwaZulu-Natal for many years. Literally thousands of people -
over 4 600 - have been killed. Many more thousands have been injured, have
had their houses burnt down and have lost their possessions in the process.
Thousands more have been forced to flee their homes and seek shelter
elsewhere. To these, the unfortunate people caught in the middle, we extend
our deepest sympathy. These people look to us here in Parliament to provide
leadership, solutions and security, and I am not always sure that we give
it.

Violence in South Africa, and in KwaZulu-Natal in particular, is a very
complex issue. In the case of Nongoma itself there is, as we heard,
apparently a mixture of faction fighting, economic competition and
political violence. It is difficult to know what the actual cause is of
each isolated incident, but what is certain is that each incident
contributes to raising the temperature and increasing the misery. Each
incident makes finding a solution more elusive. Each incident adds to the
legacy of bitterness. Each incident leaves widows or orphans and we are
very pleased that the Government is as concerned as we are about it.

But we must find a solution, and the first order of business must be to
provide real security. Without security there can be no political solution,
and we say to the Government: Do what it takes. By this, we do not mean
apartheid style suppression, but we do mean that there must be a strong
enough presence of police and defence force units to allow people to live
their lives and go about their business without fear of death or violence.

Secondly, we must track down, arrest and prosecute those responsible for
the violence and deaths, whoever they may be. Unless there is visible and
effective justice, people will simply take the law into their own hands.
And in this respect it is worrying that there is only a 34% clearance rate
- that is arrest of people suspected of murder with firearms. A solution in
this respect requires resourcing of the justice system. There is a police
station in KwaZulu-Natal in respect of which not a single detective has
received training in ballistics or forensics and from which 355 firearms
have been stolen or lost. We simply cannot carry on like this.

Thirdly, we must look anew at tracking down and confiscating illegal
weapons. I am told that there are enough illegal weapons in KwaZulu-Natal
alone to start a moderate war. A total of 4 111 illegal weapons were
recovered between 1 April and 31 December last year, and that constitutes a
mere drop in the ocean. We all know that the sort of operations needed to
seize weapons are costly and personnel-intensive, but whatever the cost it
is cheaper than ending a war.

Fourthly, we must ensure that the various elements of the security forces
are properly integrated and co-ordinated. The police must work with the
Scorpions, both must work with the SA National Defence Force, all must get
accurate intelligence from the National Intelligence Agency. The question
needs to be asked in the light of what has occurred today: Are we getting
the right or any intelligence from the National Intelligence Agency about
what is actually going on on the ground?

But all these measures, important in their own right, are useless unless
there is a political solution to the violence. A political solution must be
based on tolerance of opposing views and acceptance of democratic outcomes.
We are very pleased that a political structure has now been established to
deal with some of the issues that have been raised, and we wish this
political structure and the people that are involved in it all the strength
and all the wisdom to seek a lasting and durable solution. [Applause.]

Mr M A MNCWANGO: Somlomo, mhlonishwa iphini lika Mongameli, bafowethu
nodadewethu [Madam Speaker, hon Deputy President, ladies and gentlemen], I
ask myself and I am sure my colleagues are asking themselves and the nation
is asking us a simple question: Why are we here? Parliament was due to rise
yesterday and we were scheduled to disperse into our constituencies. We are
now here for a matter which is, in my view, of marginal importance and
which has been blown up out of proportion and out of context.

An HON MEMBER: Bazokubulala abantu. [People will kill you.]

Mr M A MNCWANGO: Ngazalwa kwaNongoma futhi ngihlala khona. I was born in
Nongoma and I am still living there.]

Hon members had better listen to what I am going to say. The facts of the
matter are that this is a small faction fight, which has gone on for
decades, since long before the IFP was ever established. Those
participating in this fight have now taken to the bushes in the mountainous
territory and often come out when their women bring them food and supplies
and right now there is a specialised unit of the Defence Force which has
been assigned to deal with this specific problem. This specialised unit
followed the women - I am now referring to the specific incident - and
ambushed some of the fighters. An armed skirmish broke out in which two
people were injured. They stand a good chance of recovering.

In my view, this incident is now being used and actually blown out of
proportion. Even those people who participated in that skirmish were not
aware that they were actually shooting at the police or soldiers, because
it occurred in the bush. [Interjections.] The incident at Matheni has no
political connotation whatsoever, nor does it point to any involvement on
the part of the leadership of any political party.

EMatheni kade lwaqala udlame. Lwaqala ngo-1973. Kuthangi bengikhuluma
nenkosi yakhona umntwana uSibusiso. Sihlele umhlangano. Sizoya khona
ngeSonto ukuyonqanda loluya dlame olwenzeka laphaya. Okwamanje, induma
uZondo nabantu bayo ... (Translation of Zulu paragraph follows.)

[Faction fighting in Matheni started long time ago. It started in 1973. The
day before yesterday I was talking to the inkosi of the area, Prince
Sibusiso. We had a meeting. We will go to Matheni on Sunday in an attempt
to stop this faction fighting. At the moment the headman of the area, Mr
Zondo and his people ...]

... have taken refuge at Okhukho police station in the Mahlabatini
district. They are actually fleeing from police brutality. Some of iNduna
Zondo's ribs were broken and ...

... sekunedokodo elivulwe yinduna uZondo. [... Mr Zondo, the headman of the
area, has opened a docket on this matter.]

The other faction, which is led by iNduna Dladla, is in the mountains right
now, also fleeing from police brutality. I think that that is the issue
which we should be addressing here.

Udaba lwesibili lumayelana nokuthi kuthiwa kunodlame lwabamatekisi
KwaNongoma. Uma ngisuke ngingekho lapha eNdlini ngisuke ngiKwaNongoma.
[Another issue concerns the assumption that there is taxi  violence in
Nongoma. If I am not in this house it means I am in Nongoma.]

Therefore I know exactly what is happening in Nongoma on a daily basis.
[Interjections.] Secondly ...

... yebo, udlame lwabamatekisi olwathatha isikhathi eside lwaba khona
KwaNongoma. ... yes, at some stage there was ongoing taxi violence in
Nongoma.] together with the local amakhosi, got involved in resolving that,
and it was indeed finally resolved as long ago as 1997. In fact, two months
ago, I had a meeting with the local taxi association, to actually try to
arrange ...

... umcimbi wokubonga ukuthi sikwazile ukunqoba udlame, abantu babuyisana
ematekisini. [... a party to celebrate that we have succeeded in stopping
the violence and we have also brought about reconciliation among taxi
people.]

So there is no taxi violence going on in Nongoma. None. The third point is
about political intolerance.

Kukhona abaholi be-ANC abavela KwaNongoma. [There are leaders in the ANC
who come from Nongoma.]

One of them is Philemon Nduli, a relative of mine, and my neighbour. I have
known him to be an ANC member as far back as 1985. In fact, last year,
during the run-up to last year's election, we were driving together in the
same car, visiting various polling stations in Nongoma.

Manje-ke kuphumaphi lokhu kungabekezelelanani ngokwezepolitiki okukhulunywa
ngakho lapha? Kuphumaphi? Ukungabekezelelanani ngokwezepolitiki
okukhulunywa ngakho lapha ... (Translation of Zulu paragraph follows.)

[Now, where do you get the information that you are talking about in this
House, namely that there is political intolerance in Nongoma? Where do you
get that information from? The political intolerance that people are
talking about here ...]

... started this year when four people at uSuthu were killed. The murderer
of those people took refuge in the house of a leader of a certain political
party in Empangeni, and there was no condemnation of this. There was dead
silence on that.

Ukungabekezelelanani ngokwezepolitiki kuqale ngenkathi kulinyazwa uSombese
Buthelezi, elinyazwa ngabantu angabakhomba namanje ... [The political
intolerance started when Sombese Buthelezi was injured by people whom he
can identify even  today ...]

... but there was no condemnation, only dead silence.
 
Ukungabekezelelanani ngokwezepolitiki kuqale ngenkathi kubulawa u-Ace
Ntshangase ... [Political intolerance started when Ace Ntshangase of the
ANC was killed ...]

... our councillor, by people who are well-known in the community, but
there has been no condemnation. There has been only dead silence.

Ukungabekezelelani kwezepolitiki kuqale ngenkathi kubulawa uSkhonde kusele
imizuzu eyi-15 kushaye elokuqala ngoMsombuluko mhla zi-5 ... [Political
intolerance started when Skhonde was killed at 15 minutes to one on Monday
5 ...]

... in broad daylight by people who are known. There has been no
condemnation and there has been dead silence.

Who is actually involved in this political intolerance? This is a chronicle
of IFP members who have been killed up to the present moment in Nongoma. I
think that those are the issues that we should be addressing in this House.
We cannot afford to go back to the kind of situation that we came from in
the pre-1994 era. We must be serious about peace. We must make peace work.
We must actually refrain from making propaganda capital out of small
things. [Interjections.] That is my assertion.

My proposal here is that we should have a summit on this violence taking
place in Nongoma which will involve all local stakeholders - amakhosi
[chiefs], izinduna [headmen], abafundisi [priests] and local community
leaders. Abahlonishwa oNgqongqoshe [Hon Ministers] should then come and
see, and listen to what the local people have to say about the situation in
that place. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, would you please take your seat.

Mr D A MOKOENA: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: Is the hon member
prepared to take a question?

The SPEAKER: Order! I think the hon member's time has expired, in any case.

Mr M A MNCWANGO: Madam Speaker, I will take that question at the airport.
[Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Madam Speaker, hon members, last week
- or during the debate on the President's Vote, to be precise - I indicated
that the political assassinations in particular, and the violence in
general, in the province of KwaZulu-Natal, and specifically around the
Nongoma area, are a matter of grave concern. No serious thinking politician
can even begin to dream that that situation has been exaggerated, as the
hon member Mr Mncwango wants to suggest. I also indicated during that
debate that Mr Mncwango is a problem. [Interjections.]

What he has just uttered here today is an eloquent expression of what we
consider to be exactly what he is - a disaster incarnate, and part of the
problem that has to be attended to when we are looking for a permanent and
lasting solution to the problems that continue to afflict our people in
that particular area. He is a problem, and he will need to be attended to
as part of that suggestion that I put forward and that we need to have a
look into. [Applause.]

Even before we got there, we were provided with the political statements
that he has made to the media about ``swords being drawn'', as one
screaming headline quoted him. He is not at all a politician who is keen to
see the bloodletting in that province being terminated. He is engaged in
every way conceivable, doing his level best to ... [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon Minister, I must caution you in terms of what you
are saying. Please reflect that you are in the National Assembly, and if
you wish to launch an attack on a member, you should do that by way of a
substantive motion.

The MINISTER: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue here is that there are
over 400 people who are in the bush, not fleeing from police brutality.
There is not a single incident of police brutality as far as the handling
of that situation is concerned. We were with the provincial command
yesterday, and also with the national command. They spent the better part
of two hours briefing us about that situation. There was not a single word
that was referred, by the police themselves, to any element of brutality on
their part. It is completely untrue to say that there has been brutality
there. [Interjections.]

If they were keeping quiet, it is precisely because of the problem that we
feel should be attended to. Nobody, not even the police, said that that
faction fight is politically motivated. Even the Deputy President did not
say that. The crux of the matter is that one cannot say - I am not
referring to the hon member. I would have liked to refer to him directly
because I still contend ... [Interjections.] - when there are 400 people
out there in the bush, and hundreds are seeking shelter and refuge
elsewhere in mid-winter, that that situation is not serious. Absolutely
not.

Added to that, yesterday we said to the police and the soldiers: Do not go
into those bushes and try to flush out those people. Where are you going to
be taking them? Because, indeed, there was truth in what the police said,
that when they venture to intervene, this way or the other, they are
accused by both factions of partisanship. I am saying, as I have said in
relation to the problem in the Western Cape, that the root cause is around
the issue that has been alluded to by the Deputy President - the land
issue. There are no politics about it. We need to reinforce and strengthen
the hand of the iNkosi who is handling that problem, and that should be
done as a matter of urgency.

In so far as political intolerance is concerned, nobody in this House and
outside of this House, specifically from that province and from these two
political parties, would refute the statement made by the police yesterday
and even on other visits that we made to that area, that the degree of
political intolerance seems to be increasing every time there is a election
pending.  And everybody knows that.

We have discussed the matter between ourselves - that is the Minister of
Correctional Services, the Minister of Home Affairs and the Deputy
President - and none of us has denied the reality that there is political
intolerance in that part of the country. The police stated in no uncertain
terms that the idea by the ANC to open a branch there was resented. That is
the term they used. It was an act of provocation on the part of the ANC in
so far as the followers of the IFP were concerned, because that area has
always been seen as an uncontested IFP area. That is what the police have
said, and that is, at any rate, what historical common sense says about the
politics of that province and area.

The political parties, that is the ANC and the IFP, have been engaged in
numerous discussions to address the issue of political intolerance,
specifically in that area. It surprises me that there could be somebody
rising in this House to say that there is nothing of the kind. That is what
the police are saying. They went further to say that at national level,
everything is fine. There is good rapport between the ANC and the IFP. But
they said that what the politicians needed to do was to ensure that that
kind of good relationship that exists at that particular level filters
through to the grass-root supporters of these two organisations.

We accepted that analysis by the police, and we said, as political parties,
that we must take the blame. We must not blame the police. The blame rests
squarely on our shoulders, as ANC and IFP, to address the issue of
political intolerance amongst our grass-roots supporters. The member cannot
deny it unless he does not want to solve the problem. [Applause.] He does
not want to solve the problem so he says it is not there.

We had agreed then that we should reassure the police because, as a matter
of fact, it is very difficult for those police - as the Deputy President
has said - it is very difficult for them to do this. A politician dies and
the police suspend all their core functions. They go and watch the visuals,
the funeral, the marchers and everything else. They are not doing their
work, and hence, in terms of ordinary crime, Nongoma is far below par. But
as regards the issue of violence, gunrunning is central to this issue of
political tolerance. That is the issue we have agreed needs to be addressed
promptly and forthrightly. It cannot only be confined to Nongoma.

If we take the latest faction-fighting episode, we have to go beyond the
province to address the hostels, to address our supporters outside the
province and outside Nongoma around the issue of political tolerance,
because some of the time it is imported from outside the province right
into the province. We also need to address the question of guns that are
flowing from Pongola and Mozambique into these areas. There are so many
guns in that province. That is why we have had to have the presence of the
police and indeed we are making a breakthrough in terms of confiscating the
guns that are there.

As far as the shooting at the SANDF is concerned; in fact, when the
observation post was attacked, it was not attacked because people had been
interfering with women who were taking food and whatever to the people in
the camp. That is not true at all. The police themselves are saying that
the observation post was attacked that morning by people who were moving in
that direction and who, when they were called upon to stop, refused to
stop, whereupon the police opened fire. They then pursued them into the
bush, where they made contact with about 45 other people who were heavily
armed. They took those weapons and arrested seven of them. One of them has
a gunshot wound and one is said to have broken his ankle whilst trying to
escape. Those people have been hospitalised. There was no incident
involving the police and the army harassing people who were bringing food
to those people. There was absolutely nothing of the kind.
The work of the police is to man roadblocks, to intercept those firearms
that are being ferried into that area. In Bambayi, where a soldier was shot
and killed, I gather this took place during a cordoning-off operation by
these two combined security forces. When the soldier was killed, he was
searching a bag containing firearms which belonged to one of those people
who were escaping from that co-ordinated search operation. That is how it
happened. So, everybody agrees that what we need to address is the issue of
political tolerance - the issue of making sure that people are allocated
what they require, namely land. Because that dispute basically centres
around land.

The taxi violence continues to be a menace in that area, and to this day
there is a special taxi unit that is attending to the question of that
violence. This concerns the police because besides ordinary collusion
amongst taxi operators themselves, a taxi driver will always, in some way
or another, be linked to a political party. It makes things difficult for
the police, once that happens. Police say that both these political parties
have a tendency to claim corpses and that in turn results in the escalation
of tensions. That is what the police themselves are saying there.

We received a report from the police on Tuesday and we received another
report from the police yesterday. That is the situation at the moment.
[Applause.]

Mr A BLAAS: Madam Speaker, I had perceived this to be a serious debate, but
I never thought it would be so serious that parts of the national anthem
would be played during this debate. [Laughter.]

Ons wil graag onderskryf wat die agb Selfe teenoor die Adjunkpresident gesê
het. Ons wil ons waardering uitspreek dat ons die geleentheid het om te
luister na wat in Noord-Natal gebeur, asook vir die aksies wat uitgevoer
gaan word. Ons moet ook vir mekaar duidelik sê dat die aanwending van magte
en sekuriteitsmagte vir die onderdrukking van hierdie soort geweld maar 'n
tydelike oplossing is. As 'n mens kyk na die ontleding van die konflik, dan
is dit duidelik dat daar 'n baie sterk politieke oplossing agter hierdie
probleme lê. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[We would like to endorse what the hon Selfe said to the Deputy President.
We want to express our appreciation for the opportunity to listen to what
is happening in Northern Natal, as well as for the action which is going to
be taken. We must also make it clear to one another that the utilisation of
forces and security forces for the suppression of this sort of violence is
only a temporary solution. If one analyses the conflict, then it is clear
that a very strong political solution lies behind these problems.]

This brings me to the comments made by the hon Mncwango. He made the
statement that there was a faction fight behind this whole conflict. My
humble opinion is that if that is the case, he himself has the very serious
responsibility of trying to get involved in that conflict to resolve it,
bearing in mind that we are on the verge of local government elections.

An article which appeared in a KwaZulu-Natal newspaper yesterday, The Daily
News, on the increasing tension and conflict in Nongoma, KwaZulu-Natal, was
headed ``Opening old wounds''. Tragically, this is precisely what is
happening, and developments in the area must be a source of great concern
to all members of this House and also to the citizens of KwaZulu-Natal.
What has happened in recent weeks threatens to drag KwaZulu-Natal back into
the tragic and untenable era of political intolerance and politically
motivated violence in that province.

If that happens, it will be a tragedy for all of us, and it must not be
allowed to reach that point, especially in view of the potential
instability which can occur in a pre-election phase, which we face between
now and 1 November. What is needed now is absolutely cool heads and
absolute impartiality on the part of every single arm of Government.

The message of political tolerance must be carried through to the rank and
file of all political organs. The example set by the President of the IFP,
Mangosuthu Buthelezi, and by hon President Mbeki, should be emulated.
Visits by senior members of the executive to this area must be inclusive.
All statements should be carefully analysed to ensure that they do not
induce provocation. The slightest hint of promotion of a political agenda
by organs and officers of Government, who are there to serve all members of
society, will not only be totally unacceptable, but unforgivable if the
situation deteriorates or spreads further.

Care must be taken not to compromise state organs like the security forces
and the Police Service in political conflicts. It is demoralising to the
forces and it leads to polarisation in the units. This can only result in
inefficiency.

The New NP urges the Deputy President and all political leaders on all
levels in their relevant organisations to ensure that a nonpartisan,
inclusive, tolerant and responsible approach is ensured. [Applause.]

Mr M E MABETA: Madam Speaker and hon members, on behalf of the UDM I would
like to thank the Deputy President for addressing this issue in the manner
that he did - straightforwardly, clearly and sensibly identifying important
aspects of the problem. I would also like to commend the cluster on peace
and security for being able to go there and have an on-the-spot assessment
of the situation.

We agree that political violence - or violence per se - cannot be viewed by
sensible people as resulting from a single factor. One cannot say that it
is just taxi violence, political intolerance, hostilities between one group
and another or a land issue. There is usually a multiplicity of issues that
are exacerbated as competing interests become more focused. This
periodically happens around elections or other such events.

I would like to take a moment and say to the hon member Mr Mncwango that he
seems to have highly privileged information about this matter.
[Interjections.]

Kufuneka ke aze nolwazi analo, aze kusixelela ukuba kwenzeka ntoni phaya.
[Uwele-wele.] [Kwaqhwatywa.] [He should come forward with the information
that he has and tell us what is happening there.] [Interjections.]
[Applause.]

I will be suggesting to the chairperson of the Joint Standing Committee on
Defence that the hon member be called to explain to us what exactly is
going on there. We will not allow him ...

[ukuba athethe isimanga phaya athi incinci laa ngxabano iphaya
[Kwaqhwatywa.] Angathini ukuma phambi kwabantu afike athi ukubulawa
kwabantu phaya yinto encinci? [Applause.] [to tell a strange story and
describe the problem there as a storm in a teacup. [Applause.]] How can he
stand before the people and say that the killing of people there is
insignificant?]

It is ``a minor squabble'' compared to what?

Kufanele ukuba ibe inkulu le nto ayaziyo. [Maybe he knows more than he is
letting on.]

He has to explain it to us. We want those details. [Applause.]

Adv J H DE LANGE: That is exactly why we have requested a summons.
[Interjections.]

Mr M E MABETA: We would like to urge the Government to encourage all the
parties involved there - not just the ANC and the IFP, but even the
amakhosi - not to pay attention to agreements and records of understanding
only when there is tension. It must be an ongoing process that is protected
from being exploited by the likes of the hon gentleman lo tata unesimanga
[who came here with a story]. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

When he goes to Nongoma, he speaks as if he is accompanied by a certain
member of the opposition party. Angathini ukwenza loo nto [How can he do
that] in his own area?

Instead of telling us exactly what is happening, who the people involved
are, how this has evolved, what efforts have been made, what the different
chiefs in the different areas have been saying, the history of the land
disputes, the involvement of the churches, and so on, he simply says that
this is nothing. Compared to what? [Interjections.]

When we come here, we must understand that there are issues which are
serious national issues, particularly violence. [Interjections.]
[Applause.] Let us not be so used to violence that we talk about it so
lightly. Let us honestly demand from Government and interested parties to
mobilise relevant measures and mechanisms in order for people to have their
fears, hopes and interests addressed in a manner which does not allow a
particular group or political formation to manipulate the situation to such
an extent that the interests of the ordinary people are undermined.
[Applause.] We do not want another Vietnam; we do not want another Lebanon.
We want a free South Africa in which all people can exercise their
political rights in a situation that is acceptable by national standards.
We have worked for the situation that we have in South Africa. [Applause.]

Ukuba akazange ayisebenzele makahlale phantsi athule. [Kwaqhwatywa.] [If he
did not work for that he should sit down and keep quiet.] [Applause.]]
Genl C L VILJOEN: Mevrou die Speaker, dit is 'n ernstige aangeleentheid
hierdie en ek is dankbaar dat dit onder die aandag van die Parlement
gebring is. Ek wil van die VF se kant ons simpatie uitspreek teenoor die
Zuluvolk met dié interne stryd wat by hulle aan die gang is.

Drie faktore is genoem wat 'n rol speel, naamlik faksiegevegte, taxigeweld
en politieke onverdraagsaamheid. Wat die faksiegevegte en taxigeweld
betref, is dit 'n gewone taak wat uitgevoer moet word deur die uitvoerende
gesag van die provinsie en op nasionale vlak. Die politieke
onverdraagsaamheid is egter 'n saak wat my hinder en een wat myns insiens
in die Parlement aandag moet kry. Daarom verwelkom ek hierdie bespreking.

Ons weet almal van KwaZulu-Natal en die probleme daar. Die regering op
nasionale vlak is vir ons 'n voorbeeld van hoe die probleem opgelos kan
word. Niemand van ons kan ontken nie dat die spanning wat aanvanklik tussen
die IVP en die res van die Regering - die ANC - geheers het, het op
nasionale vlak in 'n groot mate verdwyn. Ons is dankbaar daarvoor, maar ons
weet ook op provinsiale en plaaslike vlak is die dinge nie so goed soos dit
moet wees nie. Dit is dus 'n politieke probleem wat aandag moet kry, en ek
wil bietjie hieroor praat.

Die stryd op die oomblik in KwaZulu-Natal gaan oor die volk van Zululand se
siel. Die Zuluvolk word uitmekaar geskeur deur politiek. Aan die een kant
kry ons 'n trotse, nasie-georiënteerde volk wat sy geskiedenis hoog ag, wat
graag homself wil bly, wat glo aan identiteit, wat tradisionele gebruike
wil handhaaf en wat graag oor homself wil regeer, en wat graag sê hulle hou
nie van hierdie indeling wat tans op die plaaslike regeringsvlak aan hulle
opgedwing word nie.

Aan die ander kant kry ons weer 'n ander groep wat nuwe liberale swart
denke inbring en vir wie die Zulu-identiteit self nie heeltemal so
belangrik is nie, maar vir wie Suid-Afrikanisme belangriker is. Dit
veroorsaak spanning, maar dit is nie vir ons om op te los nie. Dit is
eintlik vir die Zuluvolk self om op te los, maar ons as Parlement moet
rigting gee hieraan, en ons moet 'n beroep doen op die leiers van die IVP
en die ANC om hierdie saak aan te pak.

Ek wil graag aansluit by mnr Mncwango, wat gesê het daar moet 'n
spitsberaad gehou word om die saak te hanteer. Ek dink dit is noodsaaklik,
want as ons so 'n probleem nie hanteer nie, as ons maar net voortdurend
salf aan die wonde smeer, gaan die wese van die probleem nie opgelos word
nie. Iewers vorentoe, met die volgende verkiesing miskien, gaan dit weer 'n
keer uitbars. Ek wil dus 'n ernstige beroep doen op die leier van die IVP
en ook op die ANC om hierdie saak aan te pak en nou bymekaar te kom.

Hierdie voorval kan dalk baie meer wees as net 'n gewone misdadigheid.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Dit kan 'n opborreling van nasionalisme wees. Ons moet
waarsku dat dit betyds gehanteer moet word voordat die probleme so aangroei
dat daar, soos voorheen gesê is, ook 'n tipe Viëtnam ontstaan. Dit kan ons
nie bekostig nie. Ons wil graag alle mense in Suid-Afrika gelukkig sien.
(Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Gen C L VILJOEN: Madam Speaker, this is a serious situation and I am
grateful that it has been brought to Parliament's attention. From the side
of the FF I want to convey to the Zulu people our sympathy with this
internal struggle.

Three factors that are playing a role have been mentioned, namely faction
fighting, taxi violence and political intolerance. As far as the faction
fighting and taxi violence are concerned, it is an ordinary task that has
to be performed by the executive authority of the province and at national
level. The political intolerance, however, is a matter that concerns me and
it is one I feel that should receive the attention of Parliament. That is
why I welcome this discussion.

We all know about KwaZulu-Natal and the problems there. Government at
national level serves as an example to us of how the problem can be
resolved. None of us can deny that the initial tension between the IFP and
the rest of the Government - the ANC - has to a great degree disappeared at
national level. We are grateful for that, but we also know that at the
provincial and local level things are not what they should be. This is
therefore a political problem that should receive attention, and I want to
talk about this a bit.

The struggle in KwaZulu-Natal at the moment is about the soul of the people
of Zululand. The Zulu people are being torn asunder by politics. One the
one hand there is a proud, nation-oriented people who hold their history in
high regard, who prefer to remain true to themselves, who believe in
identity, who want to maintain traditional customs and to govern
themselves, and often say they do not like this dispensation that is now
being forced on them at local level.

On the other hand there is another group, who are bringing in new, liberal
black ideas and to whom the Zulu identity itself is not quite as important,
but to whom South Africanism is more important. This causes tension, but it
is not up to us to resolve it. It is actually up to the Zulu people to
resolve it, but we as Parliament should give guidance in this regard, and
we should appeal to the leaders of the IFP and the ANC to deal with this
issue.

I would like to associate myself with Mr Mncwango, who said that a summit
should be held to deal with the problem. I think this is essential, because
if we do not deal with such a problem, if we simply carry on putting
ointment on the wounds, the essence of the problem will not be solved. Some
time in the future, possibly during the next election, this is going to
erupt again. I therefore want to appeal in earnestly to the leader of the
IFP and also to the ANC to tackle this matter and to get together now.

There may be much more to this incident than simply ordinary criminality.
[Interjections.] It may be the surfacing of nationalism. We must warn that
it should be dealt with expeditiously, before the problems accumulate to
such a degree that, as has been said previously, a type of Vietnam
develops. This we cannot afford. We would like to see all people in South
Africa happy.]

Rre P H K DITSHETELO: Motlotlegi Mmusakgotla, Motlotlegi Motlatsa Tautona
le batlotlegi Ditona tse di leng teng fa, re lebogela pegelo le
tshedimosetso ya kwa Nongoma. Rere seso se monate se ingwaela, le gone
molelo o fisa moori. Nako e gorogile ya gore bana ba ga Zulu ba
itharabologelwe, ba lemoge gore baba ba bone ba baja setshego. Gape ba
lemoge gore maragana teng a bana ba mpa ga a tsenwe, a tsenwa ke masilo
fela.

Nako e re leng mo go yone ke ya kgwetlho, ya go lepalepana le dilo tsa
botshelo go tokofatsa matshelo a batho ba re ba emetseng mo Palamenteng.
Nako ya dintwa tsa semorafe e fetile, mme ga go maungo ape a a molemo a re
ka ikgatlang ka one, ntle le go gakologelwa matlhotlhapelo ao a tsisitseng
mo bathong.

Aforika e lela selelo sa matlhotlhapelo, sa boeteledipele jo bo lolameng le
go lebosega. Fa motho a reeditse selelo seo, o lemoga tsholofelo ya Aforika
mo go Aforika Borwa go nna motsereganyi-mogolo mo tharabololong ya mathatha
le dintwa tse di mo apereng.

Rona bana ba Sebilo re itse mathata a rarabololwa ka ditherisano le mowa o
o edileng. Re gakolola batho ba kwa Zulu-Natala gore fifing go tshwaranwa
ka diatla, le gone mathata a bone a tla fela jaaka dilo tsotlhe di
tshwanetse go fela, mme ga sala lefoko la Modimo fela.

Ntwa tsa sepolitiki ga dina mosola, ka gonne di a re dia, ebile di dia
tswelelopele. A re tshwaraganeng, re lwe le sera kgatlhanong le ditiragalo
tse di diragalang. A pula e nele bana ba Aforika Borwa. (Translation of
Setswana speech follows.)

[Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Mr Chairperson, Deputy President, Ministers who are
here and hon members, we are grateful for the report on the situation in
Nongoma. We say that it is much better for one to tackle one's own
problems, not losing sight of the fact that a fire can burn the very same
person who is enjoying its warmth. The time has come for the Zulu people to
solve their problems, and to realise that their enemies are laughing at
them. As the saying goes, it would not be wise for us to poke our nose into
their affairs.

We live in challenging times. The time has come for us to tackle our
problems head-on, and improve the lives of those whom we were sent to this
Parliament to represent. The time for tribal warfare is past. In any event,
nothing can come of such conflicts other than the hardship they leave in
their wake.

Africa is crying out for upright and exemplary leadership. It is obvious
that Africa is looking to South Africa to mediate in some of the conflicts
that are bedevilling the continent.

We Africans know that problems can only be resolved through negotiations,
in a calm manner. We wish to remind the people of KwaZulu-Natal that they
should be there for each other, no matter how bad the situation may be.
Like everything else, their problems will come to an end.

Political conflict is not good, because it retards progress. Let us join
hands and fight against this common enemy. God bless the children of South
Africa.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Speaker, the PAC thanks the Deputy President for
briefing this House about what is happening in KwaZulu-Natal. That part of
our country has bled for far too long. A solution to the problem of KwaZulu-
Natal is long overdue.

The PAC sends its condolences to all families who have lost their relatives
and property in that area. There is a time for war, there is a time for
peace, there is a time for funerals and there is a time for weddings. This
is the time for peace among the Africans.

The PAC appeals for peace in the country. Recriminations will not solve the
problem of violence in KwaZulu-Natal. Political thuggery must be uprooted
in this country. It is criminal. Human life is sacred, it is not a cheap
commodity. It must be protected. Enough people died during the struggle for
the liberation of this country. Let all leaders and parties work for peace
in this country. [Applause.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, Deputy President and Ministers, I would
like to thank the Deputy President for coming and enlightening us on this
terrible situation.

It is rather sad that one has to stand here and speak about the brutal
killing of our people in Nongoma. One should be speaking about peace and
progress in our country, not killings. The MF's message to the killers is:
Stop this merciless act and embrace brotherhood. Life is for loving, not
for killing.

The MF conveys its condolences to all the bereaved families that have lost
their loved ones, and prays for the safety of those that have sought refuge
in the bushes and elsewhere. May God be with them.

The MF pleads that we all get together, stop this bickering and fighting
amongst ourselves and stand for peace in our lovely South Africa.
[Applause.]

Mnr C AUCAMP: Mevrou die Speaker, dit is duidelik dat hier 'n konflik
ontstaan het, ook in hierdie Huis, oor hoe hierdie saak wat deur die
Adjunkpresident geopper is, gehanteer moet word. Daar is 'n verskeidenheid
interpretasies daarvan, soos ons vandag ook gesien het. Dit is nie die AEB
se gewoonte om oorhaastige uitsprake te maak en kant te kies voor ons die
volledige feite op die tafel het nie, en daarom sal ek my daarvan weerhou.

Wat ek wel wil sê, is dat een dood een dood te veel is. As een mens sterf,
kan 'n mens mos nie sê 'n saak word opgeblaas nie. Of dit 'n sterfte in
Nongoma is, en of dit 'n plaasboer is wat vermoor word, dit is 'n saak wat
ons almal raak.

Daar is enkele beginsels waarna ons moet kyk. Wat tog vir my dieperliggend
hieruit na vore kom, is die feit dat 'n stryd soos dié daarop dui dat ons
nog nie die ware resep gevind het om die verskeidenheid van belange en
groepe in Suid-Afrika te hanteer nie. KwaZulu-Natal en die Zoeloe-volk is
'n baie goeie voorbeeld daarvan. Hier word pragtig saamgewerk. Die IVP stem
vir elke begrotingspos, maar dit is eintlik 'n kwessie van stille waters
diepe grond, maar onder draai die duiwel rond. Dit is kunsmatige
oplossings. Ons sal moet kyk na hoe ons die verskeidenheid in ons land kan
akkommodeer om hierdie tipe belange te kan hanteer.

Ons vra die Minister om eers die saak te beveilig. Die Minister moet die
saak eers vasvat, maar laat ons ook kyk na 'n politieke oplossing oor die
lang termyn om hierdie sake te hanteer. [Applous.] (Translation of
Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr C AUCAMP: Madam Speaker, it is clear that conflict has arisen, in this
House too, about the way in which this matter, which was raised by the
Deputy President, should be dealt with. There are a variety of
interpretations of it, as we have also seen today. The AEB is not in the
habit of making rash statements and choosing sides before we have all the
facts on the table, and so I shall refrain from doing so.

What I do want to say is that one death is a death too many. If one person
dies one cannot say that a matter is being exaggerated. Whether it is a
death in Nongoma, and whether it is a farmer who is murdered, it is a
matter that affects all of us.

There are a few principles which we have to examine. What nevertheless
emerges from this is the fact that a struggle such as this indicates that
we have not yet found the correct recipe for dealing with the diversity of
interests and groups in South Africa. KwaZulu-Natal and the Zulu people are
very good examples of this. There is wonderful co-operation here. The IFP
votes in favour of each Vote, but it is actually a matter of still waters
running deep. These are artificial solutions. We shall have to look at how
to accommodate the diversity in our country in order to deal with these
kinds of interests.

We want to ask the Minister first to safeguard the matter. The Minister
must first clamp down on the matter, but let us also look at a political
solution for dealing with these issues over the long term. [Applause.]]

Mr M A MANGENA: Madam Speaker, government Ministers did very well by going
to Nongoma and trying to attend to the ugly situation there. But, a lasting
solution in Nongoma and elsewhere will come from politics. The leaders of
the ANC and the IFP are co-operating in government at the national and
provincial levels. They do not murder one another in the Cabinet offices or
in the corridors of Parliament. The challenge facing the leadership of the
two organisations is to take this same spirit to ordinary members in the
branches and to help the members overcome the pain and bitterness
associated with the violence of the past.

We have heard pronouncements by the provincial leaders of the two parties
that they plan to visit their constituencies together to address them
jointly, to demonstrate this spirit of co-operation and to eradicate the
phenomenon of no-go areas. This will help to stop the violence and needless
killings amongst supporters of the two organisations. We hope that campaign
succeeds. Other factors contributing to the violence need different
strategies that other hon members have addressed at this podium. We hope
they too succeed. But above all let whatever needs to be done be done to
bring peace among our people. [Applause.]

Mr H A SMIT: Madam Speaker, we cannot allow incidents like these under
discussion to occur. Our young democracy cannot afford it. The question
then arises: How should it be handled? I am not going to refer to political
intolerance. I am going to refer briefly to the involvement of the SANDF in
KwaZulu-Natal at the moment. I quote from the White Paper on Defence, which
was approved by this Parliament in May 1996, as follows:


  ... to defend South Africa against external military aggression.
  Deployment in an internal policing capacity shall be limited to
  exceptional circumstances and subject to parliamentary approval and
  safeguards.

Furthermore, the White Paper foresaw that the SANDF will only be deployed
in -


  ... the most exceptional circumstances, such as a complete breakdown of
  public order beyond the capacity of the SAPS, or a state of national
  defence.

With this in mind, one must evaluate the situation in KwaZulu-Natal as
outlined by the Deputy President this morning. In principle my party is
opposed to the internal utilisation of the SANDF. If certain support
services are needed, however, especially due to South Africa's current
abnormally high crime rate or in the case of incidents such as those
outlined by the Deputy President this morning, then provision must be made
for a programme of action. But until such times they should be withdrawn.

We must never again allow our National Defence Force - I repeat we must
never again allow our National Defence Force - to become a political
football. Never, never again must we allow, through internal incidents,
that our soldiers become the enemy of certain parts of our community. At
present the SANDF is being utilised for too many operations which are not
part of its primary functions.

In conclusion, we pray for peace and stability, not only in KwaZulu-Natal,
but in the whole of our beloved country.

Dr S C CWELE: Madam Speaker, I was hoping that Mr Mncwango, a person who
comes from KwaZulu-Natal, would join me in thanking the Deputy President
for raising this important matter, and also in thanking the
interministerial committee which went to do an assessment.

The challenge we are facing today demands that we should go beyond just
petty party-political point-scoring and utilise our collective wisdom to
find lasting solutions. We welcome the measures taken by the Government to
enhance the effectiveness of the security forces in Nongoma. As the ANC, we
say that the ongoing violence and killing, of whatever nature, in Nongoma
is totally unacceptable.

It is definitely not of marginal importance when people are dying, when
homesteads are destroyed and when orphans are left roaming around. It has
become even more unacceptable that some of these elements are trying to
undermine the rule of law. They even have the guts to attack the law
enforcement officers. These elements deserve the harshest reaction from and
isolation by the democratic forces. To Mr Mncwango I say that it is no
excuse that they were not aware that they were shooting at the police.
Shooting of whatever nature must stop. [Applause.]

As the ANC ...

... sithi umphakathi awubambisane nabezomthetho ukuze kube noxolo futhi
sivimbe lezi zinswelaboya. Sekwanele ukubulawa kwabantu beSilo, ngakho
makuphele. [... we say people should co-operate with the police so that
there will be peace and perpetrators will be arrested.]

In looking for a solution, the main question is: What are the ANC and the
IFP, as the major political parties, doing to ensure lasting peace and
stability in KwaZulu-Natal? Firstly, we have committed ourselves to peace.
Our comprehensive peace agreement is irreversible, despite what Mr Mncwango
is saying. The ANC and the IFP agreed that the province of KwaZulu-Natal
must never be thrown back to violence again. This agreement derives its
mandate from our two party conferences at Mafikeng and at Ulundi
respectively. It is also blessed and unequivocally supported by our
President, Comrade Thabo Mbeki, umntwana wakwaPhindangene [the prince of
the Phindangene] and iSilo samabandla [His Majesty]. Business and religious
leaders also support it.

Secondly, the peace in KwaZulu-Natal is succeeding. Five years ago,
violence was endemic in that province. It was plagued by massacres like the
ones in Shobashobane, Inanda, Empangeni, etc. Today the violence is limited
to small flashpoints or pockets in areas where backward and retrogressive
elements live. This peace process or move has passed, at least, two
critical tests. We have had two successful and peaceful elections in 1996
and in 1999.

Thirdly, the bilateral peace structures have laid the foundation for
sustained peace in KwaZulu-Natal. Members will remember the signing of the
code of conduct by Sbu Ndebele and Mr Mtshali, witnessed by Msholozi and
Mthethwa before the 1999 elections, in front of thousands of ANC and IFP
supporters in Durban.
The youth of both organisations have taken the lead, as demonstrated by a
crowd of 20 000 proudly celebrating 16 June last week in their colourful T-
shirts. However, the conflict-resolution subcommittee of the peace
structure has not been moving at a desirable pace.

We are pleased that the 10-a-side structure, competently led by Sbu Ndebele
and Rev Mthethwa has injected new vigour in moving the peace process
forward after recent meetings, the latest being yesterday, as mentioned
before. They have agreed to urgently finalise the timetable of joint
briefings to the lower structures of our organisation, including Mncwango,
and joint visits to flashpoint areas to inform the people about our
irreversible commitment to the peace process.

The ANC is fully supportive of these initiatives and hopes that such joint
visits will be prioritised in places like Nongoma to assist with
stabilisation. We also welcome the commitment by both organisations not to
shield or protect those criminal elements fuelling violence under the
auspices of our parties.

Sithi masiyekele emaphoyiseni ahlakule lezi zigelekeqe ezicasha
ngezinhlangano uma zibulala abantu. [We say, let us leave the matter with
the police, who will eradicate crime and arrest these criminals who hide
under the banner of our political parties when they kill people.]

The third force is not going to take this victory for peace initiatives
lying down. They are going to strike out desperately. This is the reason
one finds nonsensical statements like the one which appears in UmAfrika
newspaper. It is mischievous to suggest that the Deputy President is in
possession of some tapes which are supposed to be discussed in bilateral
meetings, with allegations of threats to the King of the Zulus.

Lastly, there are those who come with accusations of hit lists. The ANC
believes that this does not help us to move forward. All organisations can
produce such lists. Clearly, there are some forces feeding in wrong
information in order to fuel this conflict. We strongly recommend that
those who have such lists or such information hand it over to the police,
as agreed in our bilateral meetings. This will help to break the cycle of
impunity.

It is irresponsible, however, for leaders or public representatives, such
as the one who is leaving now, to make such dangerous utterances in public,
without giving the information to the police when they are called on to
submit statements. We call upon the security forces to act decisively
against those who continue to inculcate the culture of fear and killing in
Nongoma or similar areas. We also call on all the people of KwaZulu-Natal
to heed the call by the ANC and the IFP to promote peace, more so because
we face the last leg of the democratisation of local government in our land
with the coming local government elections. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, that concludes the response to the
statement by the Deputy President. We want to thank the Deputy President
for responding to the request by the House to come and brief us, and we are
also appreciative of the presence of Minister Tshwete, to add to the
briefing.

Hon members, to remind you, and I think you probably do not need reminding,
that you have had a number of weeks of very intensive sessions and now go
on to a well-deserved period of leave, followed by constituency work.
Committees dealing with legislation will be allowed to meet from 14 August.
All members will return to Cape Town on 11 September. I wish you both a
rest and a very intensive constituency period. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 10:20.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly:

Papers:

1.    The Speaker:


     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance:
         Regulation No R.556 published in Government Gazette No 21249 dated
         31 May 2000, Treasury Regulations made in terms of section 76 of
         the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).


     (2)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance for comment:


         Regulation No R.562 published in Government Gazette No 21253 dated
         5 June 2000, Draft Regulations published for comment in terms of
         section 5 of the Preferential Procurement Policy Framework, 2000
         (Act No 5 of 2000).

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

Papers:

1.    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government:


     Report and Financial Statements of the Training Board for Local
     Government Bodies for 1998-99, including the Report of the Auditor-
     General on the Financial Statements for 1998-99 [RP 66-2000].

2.    The Minister of Public Works:


     Tiro - Community Based Public Works Programme Publication, June 2000,
     Volume One Number One.

3.    The Minister of Labour:


     Report and Financial Statements of the National Economic Development
     and Labour Council for 1999-2000.

