---
title: 'National Assembly - 05 June 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2008-06-05
---

THURSDAY, 5 JUNE 2008
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:05.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Dr S M VAN DYK: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that I intend moving
the following motion:

  That, in the light of the slowdown in economic growth in the first
  quarter to 2,1%, the House debates the effect of load shedding on the 4%
  annual growth rate predicated by Treasury.

Mr G G BOINAMO: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that I intend moving
the following motion on behalf of the DA:


  That the House debates the ongoing disruption of classes at high schools
  in Khutsong due to learners protesting against being registered for
  Matric examinations under the North West province despite being from
  Gauteng province, and government’s response to this matter.

Thank you.

       SA RUGBY TEAM PLAYING FIRST TEST UNDER COACH PETER DE VILLIERS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

  That the House –


     1) notes that the South African Rugby team will play their first test
        under the new Springbok coach, Peter de Villiers, this coming
        Saturday against Wales in Bloemfontein;

     2) further notes that apart from its entertainment value, the game of
        rugby develops courage, loyalty, sportsmanship, discipline and
        teamwork;

     3) recalls that it is through discipline, ethical behaviour, fair play,
        self control and mutual respect for fellow athletes that the spirit
        of the game flourishes;

     4) believes that our rugby team enjoys South Africa’s collective
        goodwill and support; and

     5) wishes the Springboks success in the upcoming series of matches
        against Wales, Italy, Australia and New Zealand.

Agreed to.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, the Deputy Chief Whip of the ANC is very keen
to lecture us when we don’t do things quite according to his book. I want
to say that the motion, while we have no problem with it, is not the one
that we received earlier today, in which it indicated that this House
should wish the South African rugby team well on its visit to Wales. We are
very pleased that the ANC have changed the wording, but we would appreciate
it if, in future, the hon Deputy Chief Whip of the ANC would give us the
correct wording before it comes to this House. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: It looks like he heard you very well!


                       INSTALLATION OF WOMAN AS CHIEF
                            (Member’s Statement)


Ms C NKUNA (ANC): Madam Speaker, the Constitutional Court gave a ruling
yesterday, 4 June 2008, that Tinyiko Lwandlamuni Phillia Nwamitwa-Shilubana
is the Senior Traditional Leader Hosi of the Valoyi people, a community
near Tzaneen, in Limpopo. [Applause.] Her title is Hosi Nwamitwa II.
[Applause.]

Hosi Nwamitwa II is a South African woman who has been going through
lengthy court challenges preferred against her by a member of her royal
family, whose claim was mainly that Phillia should not be allowed to reign
because she is a woman.

This ruling upholds the decision of the royal family and the people of
Nwamitwa, further strengthening the customary position that it is the royal
family that has the responsibility and authority to confirm traditional
leaders according to the customary rules of succession.

The ruling is a direct reversal of the apartheid-created male primogeniture
in traditional leadership succession, which used to prescribe that only
male descendants of traditional leaders were entitled to inherit the throne
of leadership.

It is confirmation that our democracy, under the leadership of the ANC,
restores the dignity and status of women, even in the institution of
traditional rule. [Applause.]

Hi tlangela xiboho xa huvo.[ Nkarhi wu herile.][We welcome the
decision.][Time expired.]

               DISCRIMINATORY CRITERIA FOR TEACHING BURSARIES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mev D VAN DER WALT (DA): Agb Speaker, die DA vra dat die kriteria vir alle
studiebeurse hersien moet word om gelyke toegang tot studiegeleenthede vir
alle voornemende onderwysstudente te verseker.

Die opstel van studiebeurskriteria, sodat voornemende studente uit sekere
taalgroepe nie meer aan die beursvereistes voldoen nie, is verregaande. In
hierdie tydvak waarin die skaarste aan gekwalifiseerde onderwysers een van
die grootste krisisse is wat die onderwys in die gesig staar, kan nie een
voornemende onderwysstudent ’n studiegeleentheid geweier word op grond van
moedertaaldiskriminasie nie.

Dit is veral skokkend om te let op die bepaling van die Fundza Lushaka-
program, dat slegs studente wat Engels en isiXhosa saam met Wiskunde en
Wetenskap neem vir onderwysbeurse kwalifiseer. Dit sal daartoe lei dat arm
Afrikaanssprekende studente in die Wes-Kaap nie toegang tot leergeleenthede
kan kry nie. Ons praat hier van sogenaamde bruin studente wat in arm, bruin
gemeenskappe wil gaan skoolhou, waar die voertaal oorwegend Afrikaans is.
Ek praat dan nog nie eers van die voornemende onderwysstudente wat graag
ons ander agt landstale deur die onderwys wil laat voortleef en uitbou nie.
Hierdie beursprogramme is veronderstel om die onderwys ’n aantreklike
beroep te maak, nie om ons Grondwet te ondermyn deur bloot net nog deel te
wees van die ANC se ras- en etniesgebaseerde nasionalisme nie.

Minister, ons is nou 14 jaar in ’n nuwe demokratriese bestel. Ons kan nie
bekostig om dieselfde foute van die verlede te herhaal deur mense op grond
van hul taal uit te sluit nie. (Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement
follows.)

[Mrs D VAN DER WALT (DA): Hon Speaker, the DA requests that the criteria
for all bursaries should be revised in order to ensure equal access to
study opportunities for all prospective students in the field of education.

The drafting of bursary criteria in such a way that prospective students
from certain language groups no longer meet the bursary requirements, is
outrageous. In these times, when the scarcity of qualified teachers is one
of the biggest challenges that education is facing, not a single
prospective education student should be refused an opportunity to study
based on mother-tongue discrimination.

It is especially shocking to note the stipulation in the Fundza Lushaka
programme that only students who take English and isiXhosa along with
Mathematics and Science qualify for education bursaries. This will lead to
a situation where poor Afrikaans-speaking students from the Western Cape
will be denied access to study opportunities. In this instance we are
referring to so-called coloured students who would like to teach in poor
coloured communities where the medium of instruction is predominantly
Afrikaans.

I am not even referring yet to prospective education students who would
like to ensure the continued existence and development of our other eight
official languages through teaching. These bursary programmes are supposed
to make teaching an appealing career, not undermine our Constitution by
just being part of the ANC’s racial and ethnic-based nationalism.

Minister, we have had a new democratic dispensation for 14 years now. We
cannot afford to repeat the mistakes of the past, by excluding people
solely on account of their language.]

                       RENAMING OF MANGOSUTHU HIGHWAY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr V B NDLOVU (IFP): Madam Speaker, South Africa’s place names reflect our
history, our culture and, in many respects, our heritage. Changing existing
place names must therefore be approached in a more sensitive way so as not
to demean, belittle or deny any aspect of our past history.

History is history; no amount of rewriting or revision will ever change
that, but that is exactly what the ANC in KwaZulu-Natal wants to do by
changing the existing names to reflect only their history or heroes. One
such example is the decision by the ANC-dominated eThekwini Council to
change the name of the Mangosuthu Highway in Umlazi to the Griffiths Mxenge
Highway. This is a glaring example of the ANC – especially in KwaZulu-Natal
– attempting to undermine the achievements of Prince Mangosuthu Buthelezi,
Member of Parliament, by ignoring his legitimate claims to have contributed
positively to development and progress in KwaZulu-Natal.

The contribution of Prince Mangosuthu Buthelezi during the struggle against
apartheid cannot be ignored. Even now, Prince Mangosuthu Buthelezi, MP,
refuses to condemn those that vilify him, and pities them for their small
minds. This, after all, was the man who fought apartheid for more than 60
years, and steadfastly fought for the release of Nelson Mandela. Thank you.
[Applause.]

                    DECISION BY ANC NEC ON RECENT ATTACKS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N C MFEKETO (ANC): Madam Speaker, the recent ANC National Executive
Committee meeting decided, among other things, that the ANC leadership, led
by ANC President, Jacob Zuma, must visit the areas that have been affected
by the recent criminal attacks.

We commend this decision by the ANC, and believe that it will assist our
leadership further to deepen its appreciation of the causes underlying the
attack, and also to deepen our comprehension of the difficulties resulting
from the attacks.

This work will contribute to the national effort to find short and long-
term solutions to the challenges we face as a country in this regard. We
are also heartened by the ongoing community initiatives aimed at the
integration of the displaced back into communities, as well as gestures of
goodwill and material support that various organisations, public
representatives, branches and individuals continue to spearhead.

We must continue to unite in the national effort to strengthen the wave of
humaneness as we work together to defeat the inhumane violence pulling our
communities apart. The ANC is confident that South Africans will succeed in
changing our country for the better. Thank you. [Applause.]

               NEED FOR NATIONAL DAY OF PRAYER AND REPENTANCE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Rev K R J MESHOE (ACDP): Madam Speaker, at the beginning of this year, I
warned many people that a storm was about to come to this nation. This
storm would be in three parts. We already had a xenophobic storm, we are
going into an economic storm and then there will be a political storm.

It is because of the political storm that is still ahead of us that I want
to appeal to church leaders in this nation to call for a national day of
prayer and repentance. South Africa urgently and desperately needs God’s
intervention. We have sinned against one another, against foreign nationals
and against God Almighty. We have become a nation that rapes children and
burns people alive, as recently happened to foreign nationals in the
xenophobic attacks.

It cannot be business as usual. Our nation is in danger, hence my appeal to
church leaders to call for a national day of prayer and repentance. Those
who are asleep must wake up, and those who have buried their heads in the
sand and have chosen to live in denial of the reality around them must be
warned that dark clouds are gathering around them.

2 Chronicles, 7:14 says:

  If my people which are called by my name shall humble themselves and pray
  and seek my face and turn from their wicked ways then will I hear from
  heaven and will forgive their sin and will heal their land.


Thank you.


        FOURTH TOKYO INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms D M RAMODIBE (ANC): Madam Speaker, Yokohama City hosted the Fourth Tokyo
International Conference on African Development. The conference was held
under the theme ``Towards a vibrant Africa – a continent of hope and
opportunity’’, and addressed three main issues, namely, boosting economic
growth, ensuring human security and addressing environmental issues.

It adopted a programme of action aimed at implementing the recommendations
of the conference. Amongst others, the conference agreed on the following:
to help Africa to build its infrastructure, develop its agriculture,
spreading access to education, access to health and issues pertaining to
international trade. These are issues that present great difficulties at
the World Trade Organisation. The conference agreed to put in place a joint
monitoring mechanism between Japan and the African Union to look at what is
being done in practical terms to implement these agreements.

The ANC supports strategic partnerships aimed at the consolidation of the
African agenda. Thank you. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: The Federal Democrats.

                 DEBT AND ECONOMIC SITUATION IN SOUTH AFRICA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L M GREEN (FD): Madam Speaker, it is with great concern that we note
that more and more South Africans are being caught in a debt trap.

South Africans owe R1,1 trillion in debt. Compared to the total household
income of R1,4 trillion, we are faced with an economic disaster. There is
no relief in sight as the SA Reserve Bank entrenches the debt trap by
periodic hiking of interest rates. The Bureau of Market Research at the
University of South Africa warns that, currently, interest costs alone
amount to R224,4 billion without cutting into capital repayment, and should
there be an interest hike of one per cent, as predicted, the annual
interest cost could rise to R235,8 billion.

The situation is serious enough to demand urgent intervention to cut the
debt cord that is strangling the economic life out of our struggling
households. The National Credit Act may help to contain the borrowing
frenzy of our people, but it cannot raise our people out of debt nor does
it help to build public confidence when it seems that government and the
Reserve Bank are losing control over rising inflation and interest rates.

We need a comprehensive plan that addresses debt entrapment which should
not only look at how to prevent people from spending more, but should also
help to minimise the risk associated with the rising cost of living.
Finally, we need a new economic approach for current times, given that
developed nations are overdeveloped and can diversify while economies in
developing countries are in fact not moving forward. Thank you.

The SPEAKER: May I make a correction? The name of the party is the
Federation of Democrats.


                   SANFORD AND LISBON FARMS IN MPUMALANGA


                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr N T GODI (APC): Madam Speaker, the farms Sanford, between Marite and
Hazeyview, and Lisbon, near the Huntington Kruger Gate, were bought with
millions of rands and given to their claimants with high hopes and
expectations. It is disappointing that a few years later these farms are
deteriorating, are subject to endless disputes amongst claimants and are
thus not fulfilling their set objectives. These two farms epitomise some of
the serious challenges that relate to post-settlement support.

The challenges regarding these two farms revolve mainly around governance,
the issues of transparency and accountability by the trustees and amongst
the trustees. Despite our interaction with the then acting head of the
Department of Agriculture in Mpumalanga, and promises to intervene and
provide information, this has not happened. A month and numerous phone
calls later, we seem no nearer to a resolution than at the beginning. In
the meantime the farms are going to ruin.

We call on the Minister to exert greater political pressure on her
provincial counterparts, especially in Mpumalanga, to ensure that officials
act timeously, fairly and in the national interest.

Land restitution and agrarian reforms are of strategic national importance
to enhance national sovereignty and food security. The APC condemns the
lackadaisical attitude of the Department of Agriculture in Mpumalanga to
the problems on Sanford and Lisbon farms. I thank you.

                           NAME-CHANGING ANOMALIES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr C M LOWE (DA): Madam Speaker, in a most insensitive, hurtful and
illogical manner, ANC councillors in Durban have rammed through the
renaming of 101 streets in the city. They have ignored sound expert advice,
refuted local concerns and failed to take note of successful renaming
exercises in Cape Town and Pietermaritzburg.

Their actions fly in the face of the sensible and measured call last week
by the Minister of Arts and Culture, Pallo Jordan, for the name-changing
process to be about nation-building to accommodate all sections of the
population. Instead of bringing communities together and a shared history
of our city, the ANC’s actions have created distress and anger and have the
potential to reignite violence in the province.

They’ve renamed the Mangosuthu Highway in Umlazi as if, by a stroke of a
pen, they can remove the IFP leader’s place in history. Bizarrely, Durban
North’s main thoroughfare is called Broadway - and I ask you, how
noncontroversial can the name Broadway be? It is to be renamed Swapo. The
mind simply boggles.
Perhaps the name Edith Benson is no longer acceptable because she was a
white woman councillor on a whites-only Durban Council. But she was also a
pathfinder, the first woman to be elected deputy mayor in 1923. So too is
the name of Edwin Swales VC, a heroic fighter pilot who gave his life to
save his crew, removed from history.

A road in the very suburb where Andrew Zondo planted a bomb, which killed
five innocent civilians, is named after him. Now, I personally believe that
he should be remembered for his role in the struggle, but it is disgraceful
to do it in this manner.

Perhaps the greatest irony is that in a city that cannot fill potholes or
repair traffic lights, the new signage is being quickly rolled out with
little of the normal difficulty associated with service delivery in an ANC-
controlled municipality. [Applause.]

                          ANIMAL ACTION WEEK AWARD

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr P S GABANAKGOSI (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC wishes to congratulate hon
Judy Chalmers on having won the Animal Action Week Award from the Education
For All Fund for Animal Welfare (EFA) in the category of lifetime
dedication award.

The EFA is an international nongovernmental organisation, which runs
campaigns that educate and raise awareness about animal welfare issues,
particularly amongst young people. The award recognises the sterling
contribution she has made to the environmental welfare of both people and
animals. She is indeed a worthy recipient and we are happy to congratulate
her on receiving this prestigious award. The ANC salutes her and hopes that
she’ll forever cherish this honour. I thank you.

                         GOLD MINING AND THE ECONOMY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr N SINGH (IFP): Madam Speaker, when the national electricity crisis
turned into an emergency at the end of January this year, the hon Minister
of Public Enterprises was bold enough to state that he did not expect the
week-long shut down of the mining industry between 25 and 31 January to
have much effect on our economy. How wrong he was.

This week the Chamber of Mines announced that South Africa’s gold
production in the first quarter of 2008 fell by more than 15% compared to
the last quarter of 2007. Compared to the first quarter of 2007, gold
production fell by almost 17% in the first quarter of this year.

The industry lays the blame for this massive reduction squarely on the week-
long shut down and the 10% electricity saving forced on it from the
beginning of February. According to figures supplied by the Chamber of
Mines, “the gold mining industry accounted for R40 billion or 7,5% of South
Africa’s merchandise exports and employed 168 860 employees or 34% of total
mining employment in 2007”.

The IFP is of the view that our economy cannot afford a repeat of the late
January electricity fiasco that so badly hurt exports and employment. The
mining industry may be an industry in decline but it is still vital for
Forex earnings, industrial output, the balance of payments and tax revenue;
not to mention, employment levels.

We have no doubt as the IFP that the hon Ministers in the economic cluster
are aware of what has happened in the gold production industry. Thank you
very much.

                    STANDARDISATION OF GEOGRAPHICAL NAMES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs T J TSHIVHASE (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate the Minister of Arts and Culture on the
inauguration of the new South African geographical name changes and also
the announcement of a national programme of action on the standardisation
of geographical names in the country.
We have great confidence in both this council and the Department of Arts
and Culture in taking the responsibility of processing and providing the
name changes. Public hearings will be held throughout the country in all
provinces as the department seeks to restore precolonial names to certain
places or to replace existing names with new ones.

It is crucial to note that in terms of the United Nations Resolutions,
article 4 of the first UN Conference on the Standardisation of Geographical
Names, each country has the sovereign right to standardise its geographical
names, to decide what the appropriate name is for each feature in that
country and how that name should be written. Furthermore, the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission recommended the renaming of geographical features
as a form of symbolic reparation to address South Africa’s unjust past.

The process of name changes and renaming of geographical places should be
viewed by South Africans as a national effort to build a new South Africa,
which is identified by our common destiny. I thank you.

                         FORMER MAYOR MFEKETO AS MP

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr W P DOMAN (DA): Madam Speaker, it is revealing that the ANC has rewarded
an individual with a disastrous record in governance with a seat in
Parliament. Hon Mfeketo’s tenure as mayor of Cape Town was characterised by
allegations of corruption, financial mismanagement and controversy; all of
which questions her suitability to really serve the interests of the
people. Evidence of this is contained in the Auditor-General’s report into
this ...

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, on a point of
order: I think the purpose of members’ statements really is to highlight
issues. This is an unbridled attack on an individual without any
substantiation.

The SPEAKER: Hon Doman, if you want to raise something that deals with the
character of an hon member of the House, you know how to go about doing so.
A member’s statement is not the way in which to deal with it.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, I am afraid to say that, while I would tend to
agree with your ruling, at the same time, regrettably, there have been many
precedents in the past for this kind of statement in the House. Either we
go back to the drawing board and sort this matter out, or I would urge you,
on this occasion, to allow the hon Doman to finish his statement.

The SPEAKER: I will do so, but I won’t allow it to continue. I will look
into it and then the hon member will have to reconsider his options. The
ANC.

Mr W P DOMAN: Madam Speaker, I am ready to change the statement.
Mr R D PIETERSE: No, sit down.

The SPEAKER: Not on the spot. No, hon member; redo the statement. The ANC.

                  ACDP MEMBER ATTENDS RIGHT-WING CONFERENCE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr R D PIETERSE (ANC): Speaker, it is reported that a member of the ACDP
recently took part in a right-wing conference, which sought the annexation
of the West Bank by Israel. This conference was held in Washington and
discussed the proposal by B Elon, which rejects the two-state solution
agreed to by the international community, which includes the United States,
Israel and the Palestinian Authority.

According to this ethnic cleansing plan, Israel would be annexed to the
West Bank and the people who are currently living there would be given
Jordanian citizenship. This member of the ACDP, as a participant at this
conference ... [Interjections.] ... himself a victim of apartheid
colonialism, social exclusion and exploitation, should be ashamed of
himself. Really, he should be ashamed of himself.

It is inconceivable how he would allow himself to be associated with such a
cruel plan, aimed at the violation of the human rights of people in the
West Bank, as well as the internationally recognised position of the
resolution of the Israeli/Palestinian conflict. Indeed, Mr Oliphant, he
should be ashamed of himself.

                     ARTS COUNCIL OF NORTH WEST PROVINCE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G LEKGETHO (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC takes this opportunity to
congratulate ...

Mrs C DUDLEY: Sorry, on a point of order: Could that not be construed as a
personal attack on a member of this House?

The SPEAKER: The issue was not the personality of the member. It dealt with
Israel. [Interjections.] Can I now take the last statement from the ANC?

Mr G LEKGETHO: The ANC takes this opportunity to congratulate the North
West province on the establishment of the North West provincial arts and
culture council. The provincial arts and culture council is meant to
support and encourage the development of all facets of arts and culture.

The North West provincial arts and culture council will be responsible for
the following activities: To promote the development of arts and culture in
the province; to ensure an equitable allocation of funds to arts and
culture activities throughout the province; to foster the expression of
national identity and consciousness by means of the arts; to encourage
excellence in the arts; to advise the responsible MEC on policy matters
relating to the development of arts and culture in the province; to report
to the responsible member on the actual disbursement of grants to artists,
students, cultural organisations and other worthy causes in the field of
arts and culture; to provide and encourage the provision of opportunities
for persons to practise arts; to promote appreciation, understanding and
enjoyment of the arts; to promote and facilitate national and international
liaison between individuals and institutions in respect of arts and
culture. This council will also play a leading role in the promotion of
social cohesion and nation-building. I thank you.

                       INSTALLATION OF WOMAN AS CHIEF
                         XENOPHOBIA IN SOUTH AFRICA

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: Madam Speaker, may I also, on behalf of the
President and the government of South Africa, extend our warmest
congratulations to Hosi Phillia Nwamitwa II on her succession. I agree with
the ANC speaker that this is a significant contribution to the empowerment
of women in South Africa.
Secondly, with regard to the two speakers on the issue of the appalling and
barbaric violence that has taken place against foreign nationals, I would
like to say that the most important thing for us is to ensure that we don’t
party politicise this matter. It is not a fight between political parties.
This is a challenge that all of us face as South Africans. And what is
clearly important right now is that we must do everything possible -
working in partnership with civil society organisations, international
organisations such as the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, UNHCR, and the
International Red Cross, IRC - to ensure the speedy reintegration of
displaced persons back into the communities where they belong. This is the
way we should approach the situation. Thank you.  [Applause.]

                         GOLD MINING AND THE ECONOMY

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Chairperson, it is correct, as has
been reported in the statistics, that there was an impact on the output of
gold and certainly we would have expected that in the first quarter there
would be significant growth.

There are two points I would like to make. Firstly, I once again want to
commend the mining industry for the tremendous efforts they themselves put
into co-operating with us. It is regrettable, as we’ve indicated before,
that, in those early stages after 24 January, the bulk of the savings
burden fell on the mining industry and other big industrial users. It is
for this reason - as you know - that we’ve attempted to spread the burden
and then we entered into the phase of scheduled load-shedding to try to get
savings in other segments of our users.

The position, as you know, is that we stopped that and the savings are
still being achieved by the industrial sector and we are seeing
improvements in the savings in other sectors in the economy. But, as you
know, the position remains very tight. We must do everything we possibly
can to continue to reduce the demands in savings, which is very, very
important indeed. All of us can make that contribution because it is
crucial.

With regard to the growth rate as such, I think the Minister of Finance
dealt with it quite exhaustively in his recent Budget Speech and in many
statements recently because, of course, the situation is more complex. It
is not only the fact that we’ve had the load-shedding; we’ve got this very
rapid rise in primary energy supply.
We will have to expect some increase in the electricity prices and this
matter is before the National Energy Regulator of South Africa, Nersa. As
with other economies in the world there is a serious problem, because food
prices and energy prices are rising, and these are some of challenges all
economies face. But, I share the Minister of Finance’s basic confidence
that the underlying strength of our economy remains positive.
                          ANIMAL ACTION WEEK AWARD
                           NAME-CHANGING ANOMALIES
        FOURTH TOKYO INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Madam Speaker, I would
like to respond to the statement congratulating the hon Chalmers, then the
one on the Yokohama Declaration and the two on place name changes.

I would like to associate myself with the statement congratulating the hon
Chalmers. I don’t see her in the Chamber now. I may just have missed her,
but we know that she is a tireless worker, one of the more active members
in that portfolio committee who is really committed to the cause that she
has been committed to for many, many years and that award is well-deserved.

Then with regard to the Yokohama Declaration, the President represented us
last week and the African Heads of State committed themselves to that
declaration. We welcome the aid announced but specifically that the aid is
more trade-focused and the rationale behind that is to ensure that we have
more free trade between developing and developed countries. But the part of
the declaration dealing with climate change was the one part where African
leaders amended that declaration.
Our viewpoint was unequivocal and very strongly that we are not willing to
commit developing countries to the same targets that developed countries
have. There is a history to climate change. The developed countries have
used up to 70% of the carbon space and they must first fulfil their
historical responsibility. But, obviously, we are willing to do more.
[Applause.]

That TICAD Conference was a very important building block in preparing for
the G8+5, and the Africa Outreach on 8 July, and that is the viewpoint that
South Africa will certainly take in those meetings.

Then, with regard to the statements dealing with place name changes, let me
say that whenever members raise this issue, members on this side take note
of those sentiments. The President has expressed himself on more than one
occasion on this issue, as has the Minister of Arts and Culture.

There are two sides to this. There is the one side that feels that we
cannot go around this country willy-nilly changing place names. But there
is also the strong demand that the place names in our country must reflect
the history of everybody and the country as a whole.

Some of the issues raised must be debated. But when people criticise the
ANC, they must first ensure that they get their own house in order. In Cape
Town, we know that one party in the coalition here, has very strongly
objected to the way that the DA has handled the place name issue in Cape
Town. They believe that the DA wants to get rid of Afrikaans names and
erase Afrikaans history. Before the DA criticises the ANC, they must ensure
that they get their own house in order in this regard. [Applause.]

               DISCRIMINATORY CRITERIA FOR TEACHING BURSARIES
                 DEBT AND ECONOMIC SITUATION IN SOUTH AFRICA
               NEED FOR NATIONAL DAY OF PRAYER AND REPENTANCE

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION:  Madam Speaker, I just want to reply to the
statement concerning the Fundza Lushaka Bursary Programme and say that this
is a very important intervention by government in reintroducing full
bursaries to young people who wish to become teachers in South Africa. The
bursaries have identified key subject areas in which we lack personnel at
the moment.

I am very keen that the hon Van der Walt should give me the specific name
of the student that she has referred to, as well as the institution, so
that I might investigate the reasons, if there are any, for the student not
being given access to a bursary.

However, I would think that I might be accurate in saying her reference to
exclusion on the basis of language or race is mere politicking. She should
assist us with investigating exactly what happened.

Nevertheless, we will investigate and we will ask for an opportunity to
come back to the House and report on this matter.

Finally, I do agree with the statement made by the hon Green that we must
exert maximum effort in ensuring that we address our debt levels in South
Africa.

As political parties, it is incumbent upon us, during the constituency
periods, to engage in some consumer education on debt and really ensure
that our people begin to take more decisions that are in accordance with
their ability to manage debt levels. It is clear from the reports and from
his very own statement that we are all living way beyond our means.

I think the credit Act has been an important law in terms of introducing
consumer protection, education and regulation on credit access in South
Africa. Therefore, it is incumbent on us as members to ensure that we go
out there and, in fact, even as MPs that we ensure that our debt package is
not too high.

Finally, I may say that the hon Meshoe has called for a day of prayer and
repentance. I would say it should not just be a day of prayer but that we
should call on all religious leaders and all leaders in society to become
far more involved in educating our nation on values, in reviving the morals
of our nation and supporting a national action toward moral regeneration in
South Africa. I think that an active role in this regard would certainly
take our country way ahead and while the day of prayer might be useful, the
ongoing engagement in new values and a moral revival in our society is
perhaps a more important role for all religious leaders to play.
[Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Hon members are reminded that the EPCs on Vote No 14 on Health
and Vote No 18 on Correctional Services will start at 15:00 in the Old
Assembly Chamber and in Committee Room E249 respectively.

The House adjourned at 14:46.

