---
title: 'National Assembly - 22 September 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2008-09-22
---

MONDAY, 22 SEPTEMBER 2008
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:16.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 6880.

                            DELAY IN START OF DAY

The SPEAKER: Hon members, may I first of all apologise that we delayed the
start of the sitting of the House by 15 minutes. This was just to allow for
more time for some consultation.


                  RESIGNATION OF PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC


                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I wish to announce that I have received a letter
from the President, which reads as follows:


   Dear Madam Speaker and Honourable Members of Parliament,


   On 23 April 2004 I stood before you to thank you for the honour you
   bestowed upon me by electing me to the high Office of President of the
   Republic of South Africa.


   On that occasion, I asked that we join hands in a popular national
   movement to speed up the process towards the achievement of the goal of a
   better life for all our people.


   I can say without equivocation that all of you, each in your own way,
   responded positively to this call to join hands in the effort to ensure
   that for our people tomorrow would be better than yesterday.


   On 27 April 2004, I took the oath of office as President of this country
   and swore before the entire nation that I would always


      • Promote - all that will advance the Republic and oppose all that
        will harm it;
 • protect and promote the rights of all South Africans;
      • discharge my duties with all my strength and talents to the best of
        my knowledge and ability and true to the dictates of my conscience;
 • do justice to all; and
      • devote myself to the well-being of the Republic and all its people.
   I want to assure the Honourable Members that the promise that I made to
   the millions of our people informed all my actions throughout the period
   that I was privileged to serve as President of this country.


   The leadership of my political organisation, the African National
   Congress, has informed me that they have decided to recall me as
   President of the country.


   This letter serves to inform you, Honourable Members, that I have,
   therefore decided to resign my position as President of the country,
   effective upon receiving your advice that Parliament has finalised this
   matter.


   I have no doubt that the time we spent together in these Houses of
   Parliament were really fulfilling, enriching and in many ways empowering
   to all of us. Indeed, when historians look back at the period since our
   freedom in 1994, they will tell a story of a very rich democratic
   revolution of our society, ably led by this Parliament.


   This is so because while the multi-party negotiations and the first
   democratic elections in South Africa were important, the legislative
   process of dismantling the apartheid legal edifice was critical to the
   entrenchment of democracy. Equally, it was this Parliament that gave
   birth to our Constitution, hailed as one of the most progressive
   Constitutions in the world.


   Together we have contributed to the important legacy of deepening
   democracy in our country.


   Once again, I want to thank the Honourable Members for allowing me to
   serve the country in this high Office. I thank you also for your support,
   and candour, during the time we worked together.


   Thank you very much and continue with the good work.


   Yours sincerely


   Thabo Mbeki

           ACCEPTANCE OF RESIGNATION OF PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –

     1) notes that the President of the Republic of South Africa has
        submitted his resignation to the Speaker of the National Assembly
        on 21 September 2008;


     2) also notes that the letter by the President states that the
        resignation will be effective upon being informed that Parliament
        has finalised the matter;


     3) agrees that the resignation of the President of the Republic of
        South Africa will take effect on 25 September 2008;


     4) takes this opportunity to thank the President for his dedicated
        service to the Nation, both in his capacity as Deputy President and
        later as President.

The SPEAKER: Hon members, the motion has been moved. Is there any objection
to the motion without notice?

Dr C P MULDER: Madam Speaker, this is a motion without notice and, in terms
of the Rules, it has to be accepted by everyone in the House. I object.

The SPEAKER: With that objection having been put before us, what will
happen is that this motion without notice will turn into a notice of motion
and the motion will be put on the Order Paper to be dealt with tomorrow.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Dr C P MULDER: Madam Speaker, the Freedom Front Plus hereby gives notice of
the following motion:

   That the House –

      1) notes the statement by the hon the President of the Republic that
         he in no way interfered with any of the decisions of the National
         Prosecuting Authority;


      2) further notes that the National Executive Committee of the African
         National Congress recalled President Mbeki and that some of the
         things said by Judge Nicholson were given as the reasons for his
         dismissal; and

   (3)      resolves to hold a special debate in order that the President of
        the Republic be afforded the opportunity to put his side of the
        story.

I, therefore, propose that we hold a special debate in this House in which
we afford the hon the President of the Republic the opportunity to put his
side of the story before we take any final decision.

 CONGRATULATIONS TO SOUTH AFRICAN PARALYMPIC TEAM ON ACHIEVEMENTS AT BEIJING
                              PARALYMPIC GAMES

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –

   (1)      notes the achievements of the South African team in the recent
        Paralympic Games held in Beijing, China;

   (2)      recalls that the Olympic Games are of far-reaching significance
        for athletes to open up their international vision and cultivate
        their awareness of comprehensive international affairs and also help
        them to become advocates of a peaceful world and to engage in
        exchange of multi-cultures;


     3) believes that sport goes a long way in uniting South Africa and
        reinforces nationhood and patriotism and that the achievements of
        the Paralympic team, and the determined efforts of all our national
        sportsmen and women, highlight the importance of further developing
        and promoting sports in this country;
     4) further believes that the team’s impressive performance has lifted
        the national mood; and

     5) congratulates the South African Paralympic team on their outstanding
        performance at the Beijing 2008 Paralympics.

   Agreed to.


 CONGRATULATIONS TO NATALIE DU TOIT ON AWARD-WINNING ACHIEVEMENTS AT BEIJING
                              PARALYMPIC GAMES

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –

   1) notes that -


        (a) on Sunday, 14 September 2008, Natalie du Toit won her fifth gold
            medal at the Paralympics; and


        (b) Du Toit’s record in Beijing was 100 per cent gold and she could
            have also won another had she competed in the 100m backstroke
            like she did in Athens;
     2) recalls that Du Toit also received the Whang Youn Dai Achievement
        Award, a medal made out of 75 grams of pure gold, for her
        outstanding performance during the games; and


     3) congratulates Natalie du Toit on her Paralympic achievements and on
        winning the Whang Youn Dai Achievement Award.


   Agreed to.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                         (The late Mr Derrick Moyo)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –

     1) notes with sadness that on 10 September 2008 South Africa’s Deputy
        Ambassador to Washington DC, Derrick Moyo, passed away at Louis
        Pasteur Hospital in Tshwane;

     2) recalls that Moyo joined the African National Congress in the early
        1980s and remained in exile until the unbanning of liberation
        movements in 1990, that he joined the Department of Foreign Affairs
        in 1995 and assumed the position of Deputy Chief of Mission at the
        South African Embassy in Washington DC in March 2005, having
        previously served in missions in Canada and Brazil; and

     3) extends its condolences to the Moyo family and the African National
        Congress.

Agreed to.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                         (The late Mr Bheki Mseleku)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –

     1) notes with a deep sense of pain the death of jazz pianist Bheki
        Mseleku, who passed away on 8 September 2008;

     2) recalls that, like many youths of the time, Bheki left South Africa
        after the 1976 student uprising in defiance of the oppressive
        apartheid system;

     3) further recalls that Bheki Mseleku came from an artistic family and
        taught himself to play various instruments and that the jazz genre
        provided Mseleku with the space for self expression to not only
        shape his individual identity but also to articulate the plight of
        the African people; and

     4) conveys its condolences to his wife, the Mseleku family and his
        friends in the music industry.

Agreed to.

                          HOURS OF SITTING OF HOUSE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move the draft
resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:

   That, notwithstanding Rule 23(2) which inter alia provides that the hours
   of sitting on Tuesdays shall be 14:00 to adjournment, the hours of
   sitting of the House on Tuesday, 23 September 2008, shall be 9:30 to
   adjournment.

Agreed to.

                             SUSPENSION OF RULES
                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:


   That, for the purposes of disposal of the Financial Management of
   Parliament Bill and the Draft Money Bill Amendment Procedure and Related
   Matters Bill, the House -


     1) subject to the concurrence of the National  Council  of  Provinces,
        suspends Joint Rule 15(3), which provides that  if  a  proposal  to
        establish a joint  committee  is  contained  in  draft  legislation
        before a  portfolio  committee,  a  select  committee  or  a  joint
        committee referred to in Joint Rule 111, that committee must  first
        refer the proposal to the Joint Rules Committee for  a  report  and
        recommendation before that committee considers the proposal; and


     2) suspends  Rule  121(3),  which  provides  that  if  a  proposal  to
        establish a committee is contained in draft  legislation  before  a
        portfolio committee, that committee must first refer  the  proposal
        to the Rules Committee for a report and recommendation before  that
        committee considers the proposal.

Agreed to.

                      UN INTERNATIONAL DAY OF DEMOCRACY

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –

     1) notes that Monday, 15 September, marked the United Nations
        International Day of Democracy and that the Parliament of South
        Africa celebrated this day with approximately 150 other parliaments
        that are affiliated to the Inter Parliamentary Union (IPU), an
        institution aimed at ensuring lasting democracy by forging closer
        links between parliaments and the people;



     2) further notes that the International Day of Democracy coincides
        with the day on which the IPU, in 1997, adopted its Universal
        Declaration on Democracy and, while the existence of a parliament
        may not in itself guarantee democracy, there surely cannot be
        democracy without a parliament;





     3) further notes that it is significant that in the week of the
        International Day of Democracy, members of the National Assembly
        and National Council of Provinces met with citizens at the People's
        Assembly in Bushbuckridge, Mpumalanga, on 17 and 18 September;





     4) recognises that Parliament, as the true and legitimate
        representative of the people, has an obligation to provide citizens
        with information about its work, and parliamentarians have a duty
        to be fully informed of citizens' circumstances and concerns by
        interacting directly with them and empowering communities to
        address issues such as poverty eradication;





     5) is satisfied that at the People's Assembly in Bushbuckridge,
        Members of Parliament accounted to citizens on how the institution
        has incorporated their will and needs into its programmes and
        policies, thereby ensuring effective government of the people by
        the people; and





     6) resolves to ensure that we, together with our fellow IPU members,
        continue to entrench the core democratic values of representivity,
        transparency, accessibility, accountability and effectiveness in
        both national and international affairs.


Agreed to.
               PROVISION OF LAND AND ASSISTANCE AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Madam Speaker, Ministers,
Deputy Ministers, hon members, allow me to borrow the words of wisdom used
by the veterans of our struggle and the heroes and heroines in the Congress
of the People some 53 years ago:


  Restrictions of landownership on a racial basis shall be ended, and all
  the land redivided among those who work it to banish famine and land
  hunger.

Since 1994 our new land laws have helped to create an enabling environment
to address the racial land dispossession of the past. They have assisted us
to achieve some of our goals, yet we still need to do a lot to reverse the
legacies of past inequalities. This statement made by the Congress of the
People on banishing famine and hunger is even more relevant today in the
light of the high food prices. It underlines the need for the masses of our
people to be given land and resources to grow their own food.

This Bill will enable us to effectively implement our Land and Agrarian
Reform Programme, Larp, being the seventh of the 24 Presidential Priority
Projects. Like the Congress of the People, we strongly believe that –
  The state shall help the peasants with implements, seed, tractors and
  dams to save the soil and assist the tillers ...

This Bill constitutes our shot in responding to this powerful statement.
Our people need those moveable assets which will enable them to make a
success of farming the land that we make available to them.

We never intended to just transfer landownership to our people, but we
wanted to see such land continue to be productive in the hands of the new
emerging black farmers. Mindful of the responsibility and trust that our
people placed in us, we have decided to identify and correct gaps in our
policies and programmes to ensure sustainable land reform.

We have looked at what is constraining us from delivering to our people the
better life that we have promised them. Through this amendment we have
ensured that we will deliver going concerns that will make us a more
efficient and prosperous agricultural sector.

Our diagnosis tells us that land reform will not yield the desired results
unless our legal framework and policy funding instruments acknowledge and
respond to the reality that agriculture has become more modernised and
sophisticated. We have to appreciate that a massive investment in
agriculture is necessary and required to increase the contribution of
agriculture to the creation of wealth, employment and prosperity. Our
competitiveness in global markets will remain a dream, unless we do
something now to support agriculture.

We have been criticised heavily for not immediately acquiring land that
becomes available on the market, since our approach to land redistribution
has been mainly dependent on demand as opposed to supply. To respond
comprehensively to this in a manner that does not result in a wholesale
acquisition of marginal land, we have had to adopt a proactive land
acquisition strategy together with area-based planning. This allows us to
approach a geographical area within a municipality on the basis of a local
development vision and to have a better sense of the current and future
status of the supportive physical and transport infrastructure necessary
for agriculture to flourish.

It further allows us to determine land needs and also scientifically
identify suitable agricultural land. As we continue to identify suitable
land at scale, it will become necessary for us to acquire such land
proactively, even in circumstances where we either have not identified
potential beneficiaries or identified beneficiaries that have the necessary
skills.

Our land acquisition component, Larp, will focus on the beneficiation of
farms and also ensure that farmworkers acquire the necessary skills. To
date we have ensured that 17 267 ha have been transferred to labour tenants
and farmworkers in the 2007-08 financial year. This Bill will enable us to
help these beneficiaries to operate these farms immediately on land
transfer.

The historical “racialisation” of almost every aspect of our social and
economic life had the effect of condemning farmworkers to being mechanical
beings that only did, and in some cases continue to do, what “die baas”
[the boss] tells them to do. The concept of the division of labour was not
just applied to promote specialisation and profit-making, it was also meant
to create disconnection between farmworkers. The effect of this was that
the only nexus among different farming activities was the farm owner,
without whom farming operations would collapse.

The net effect of this historical reality is that no matter how much
farming experience farmworkers have accumulated, they still cannot
independently run successful operations, as they’ve never had a chance to
experience the connectedness of their activity with that of others. This
Bill creates the possibility of skilling and capacitating our land reform
beneficiaries so that they are not condemned to being career subsistence
farmers. It is in the interests of all that our emerging black farmers are
not only successful, but become prosperous farmers.

The Constitution requires of us to take reasonable legislative and other
measures to foster conditions that enable citizens to gain access to land
on an equitable basis. The foundations that we have laid down, and continue
to lay down through legislation like this Bill, constitute a firm
commitment and acknowledgement that we cannot do less than deliver on the
promises that we made in 1996 when we passed our Constitution into the
supreme law of the land.

I would like to thank all hon members, particularly the members of our
portfolio committee who, in their diversity, were unanimous in supporting
this Bill and gave us guidance and better insight into going forward. I
recommend this Bill for adoption by this House. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr D M DLALI: Madam Speaker, I want to raise two issues in relation to the
Amendment Bill before this Chamber today. It is one of the pieces of
legislation which is critical to the ANC’s efforts to revolutionalise land
reform. The land issue is one of the most important parts of our struggle.
Without land, there is no nation, food or dignity whatsoever.

Therefore, agrarian transformation is most important in this regard. People
out there want land, implements, seeds, fertiliser and many other things,
in order for them to work the land.

The White Paper on South African Land Policy makes it clear that underused
farm land should be expropriated; there should be restrictions on the size
and number of farms that an individual can own; and the situation
pertaining to absentee landlords needs to be investigated. Therefore, on
the basis of the above, the agrarian revolution is critical to address most
of the red tape and to unlock the blockages delaying land reform.

This is an amending Bill, which seeks to amend the Provision of Land and
Assistance Act of 1993, the principal Act. This Act makes provision for the
designation of certain land; regulates the subdivision of such land and the
settlement of persons thereon; provides for the rendering of financial
assistance for the acquisition of land; and to secure tenure rights.

The principal Act was amended by the Development Facilitation Act, Act 67
of 1995, and later by the Provision of Certain Land for Settlement
Amendment Act, Act 26 of 1998, because of a number of gaps in it. The
current amendment, therefore, takes place within the context of the number
of amendments that have taken place in the past in relation to this
principal Act.

As such, the current amendment seeks to provide for clarity and to extend
the application of the provisions on the acquisition, planning,
development, improvement and disposal of property; the provision of
financial assistance for the land reform processes; and the maintenance of
property for land reform.

The Provision of Land and Assistance Amendment Bill is located within the
broad political imperative of ensuring agrarian transformation. The
political imperatives of agrarian transformation are a range of fundamental
tasks that relate to the restructuring and dislodging of the current
agrarian accumulation logic located in the agrarian business paradigm,
towards a more inclusive agrarian path for self-sustenance and to ensure
food security.

Agrarian transformation is not simply about the production of the
agricultural products in order to gather export earnings and accumulate
wealth, but is largely about sustainable food security, ensuring tenure
rights and altering the ownership pattern of the agricultural sector. In
this context, agrarian transformation also ensures that the policy
harmonisation between all spheres of government on land ownership and
disposal are adhered to. Most importantly, the political objective of
agrarian transformation is to ensure that agricultural sector and other
policies have a positive impact on household food security, food prices and
environmental sustainability.

Central to the ANC outlook of agrarian transformation is the elaboration of
a clear agenda to implement the integrated food security strategy, as
adopted by the Cabinet in July 2002; and to further develop a sustainable
food policy strategy that ensures food security at all times, especially in
times of vulnerability as a consequence of natural disaster, price hikes
and so on, which impact directly on food prices for the poor, with a
specific focus on women, the elderly, people with disability and children.

These aspects of agrarian transformation for South Africa were further
emphasised by the 52nd National Conference of the ANC. Challenges to
agrarian transformation, which concerns rural areas, are: The lack of
infrastructure, which entrenches the problem of chronic poverty and limits
the potential of communities to sustain economic growth, rural livelihoods
and social development. As such, and in essence, agrarian transformation is
about poverty eradication to ensure sustainable rural livelihoods. The
current amending Bill facilitates the very essence of land reform as an
integral part of the broader agrarian reform.

The amending Bill seeks to resolve certain interpretation problems and
critical deficiencies in the principal Act, especially with regard to
ministerial powers to acquire movable and immovable property; acquire
economic enterprises; acquire shares or rights, title or interest in or to
juristic persons; and grant financial assistance for the acquisition,
planning, development or improvement of various types of property including
economic enterprises, which are clarified and extended in the process.

The objects of the Bill seek to deal with the following issues: to give
effect to the land and related reform obligations of the State in terms of
section 25 of the Constitution; effect, promote, facilitate or support the
maintenance, planning, sustainability, use, development and improvement of
property contemplated in this Act; contribute to poverty eradication; and
promote economic growth with regard to the agricultural sector.

The most important aspect of the Bill is the insertion of the objects in
the principal Act. These specifically speak to giving effect to land and
related reform obligations in terms of the Constitution, as referred to
above - to give, promote, facilitate or support the maintenance, planning
and sustainability of rural development as such.

Another critical area is the provision of property for land reform purposes
set out in the clauses which substitute section 10 of the principal Act.
Accordingly, the clauses that make provision for property for land reform
purposes empower the Minister to acquire immovable property, including
land; movable property, including corporate property; acquire businesses or
other economic enterprises as a going concern; or shares in or the right,
title or interest in or to a juristic person, other entity or a trust
owning, controlling or administering property. These clauses also make
provision for financial assistance by way of an advance subsidy, grant or
otherwise, to any person for their acquisition, maintenance, and so on.

In addition, the amending Bill also speaks to issues of land expropriation
in the context of section 25 of the Constitution of the Republic of South
Africa which states that:

     2) Property may be expropriated only in terms of law of general
        application -

     a) for a public purpose or in the public interest; and

          b) subject to compensation, the amount of which and the time and
             manner of payment of which have either been agreed to by those
             affected or decided or approved by a court.

This Bill is critical because of the political challenges that the ANC is
facing with regard to agrarian reform and changing the current agribusiness
accumulation of logic that still remains located in the power relations of
the special architecture of apartheid social engineering. There is also a
social basis for the ANC to be more robust in altering the ownership
patterns in the agricultural sector due to a number of problems faced by
farm dwellers and the evictions that continue to undermine people’s basic
human rights. This is central to ensuring tenure rights and fast-tracking
emerging farmers, who will be central to food production for domestic
consumption and food security.

Because land is a highly contested terrain and because of the fact that
agriculture and land owners are predominantly the white elite, the
opposition parties are going to ring alarm bells on this. The social basis
for expropriation and provision of land assistance is at the centre of
meeting the national development goals as well as meeting the challenges of
poverty in the context of the millennium development goals. The ANC has a
revolutionary obligation to make sure that we do realise this goal. Thank
you.

Mnr A H NEL: Dankie, Speaker. Hierdie wetgewing maak dit vir die
Departement van Grondsake moontlik om nie net grond aan te koop vir
doeleindes van grondhervorming nie, maar ook lewende hawe, implemente en
moontlik besighede wat direk met die spesifieke boerdery te doen het.
Sodoende sal die begunstigdes van die transaksie beter daaraan toe wees om
volhoubaar te produseer en die boerdery beter te bestuur. Dit stel ook die
departement in staat om grond, wat in die besit van ‘n maatskapy of ‘n
trust is, aan te koop.

Hierdie amendemente verbeter die oorspronklike wet en daar is redelik
algemene instemming daarmee. Ons het egter sekere voorbehoude oor twee van
die doelwitte van die wetgewing, naamlik om armoede te verlig en om
ekonomiese groei te bevorder.

Daar is geen probleem met die doelwitte op sigself nie, maar as die wye
magte van die Minister en die Minister se mag om te kan onteien, ingesluit
en in ag geneem word, dan word dit problematies. Ons het daarop gewys dat
sulke doelwitte eintlik die gevolg sal wees as die Minister en die
department die wet reg toepas. Dit sal dus onnodig wees om sulke doelwitte
in die wet te sit. Dit kan net daartoe lei dat dit in die verkeerde hande –
en dit is iets waarvan u miskien meer sal weet as ek, deesdae – misbruik
kan word om onteiening te gebruik vir redes wat niks met grondhervorming te
doen het die. Ons betoog is egter nie aanvaar nie. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr A H NEL: Thank you, Speaker. This legislation enables the Department of
Land Affairs not only to purchase land for the purpose of land
transformation, but also livestock, implements and possible businesses
which are directly related to these specific forms of farming. In this way
the beneficiaries of the transaction will be better off to produce in a
sustainable manner and to manage farming better. It also enables the
department to purchase land that is in the possession of a company or a
trust.

These amendments improve the original Act and there is reasonably general
agreement on this. However, we have certain reservations about two of the
goals of the legislation, namely to relieve poverty and to promote economic
growth.

There is nothing wrong, as such, with these goals, but when the broad
powers of the Minister and the Minister’s power to expropriate are included
and considered, then it becomes problematic. We pointed out that such goals
will eventually be the result when the Minister and the department apply
the Act correctly. It will therefore be unnecessary to include such goals
in the Act. It can only have the result that, in the wrong hands – and this
something that you may know more about than I, nowadays – it can be abused
to use expropriation for purposes that have nothing do to with land reform.
However, our argument was not accepted.]

There was a section in this Bill which tried retrospectively to approve
anything that the Minister had done before, which she could not have done
under the present Act. To my surprise, this was scrapped because of ANC
members who did not trust their Minister and who said, correctly, that one
cannot make legislation which retrospectively approves action which is
unknown to the legislators.

This is just one example of how members of the ruling party have conducted
themselves in holding the executive authority to account. It seems that
there is a healthy questioning of the executive and officials with regard
to the execution of power by members of the ruling party which, of course,
is what Parliament is about. I sincerely hope that this is not only because
of Polokwane and the ANC infighting, but that it is also because they have
come to accept the oversight role of Parliament as it should be. For South
Africa’s sake, don’t let this Prague Spring collapse into a winter of
discontent. Thank you. [Applause.]
Mr N SINGH: Madam Speaker, the dramatic events over this weekend still
occupy our minds, and I think they also occupy the minds of many South
Africans and people abroad.

Yes, we need a revolution; but we need an agricultural revolution. As the
IFP, we believe that this Bill is geared towards ensuring that agriculture
takes its rightful place in ensuring that economic growth and development
take place in our country.

The land reform process has been dragging on for a long time and has not
been very effective and efficient during that time. Many farmers and
beneficiaries who were placed on land were doomed to fail. They were doomed
to fail because they were given land, which was very necessary, but they
were not given the implements and the technical expertise that were
required for them to cultivate that land efficiently and properly. This
Bill will, no doubt, go a long way towards ensuring that would-be
beneficiaries will have the necessary capacity, financial resources and
human resources to make agriculture viable once again.

A concern that we have, though, is the slow pace of the land claim process.
The gazetting of land claims ended in 1998. But even until today, 10 years
later, thousands of claims have still not been gazetted. The fears of
landowners and the aspirations of beneficiaries are brought into question
and fuel unnecessary tensions. We do hope that the department will give all
its attention to ensuring that all outstanding land claims are resolved as
quickly as possible.

In allocating land and in providing these grants, we certainly hope that
proper evaluation of all farms is done and that economic viability is of
the greatest concern. Farmers must not be set up to fail. They must be able
to get out of the trap of poverty and deprivation. We trust that this Bill
will contribute to many, many poor people out there making some sort of
sustainable and viable living. As the IFP we will support this Bill. Thank
you.

Mr J BICI: Madam Speaker, hon members, the Bill before us seeks to amend
the Provision of Land and Assistance Act. The core of the Bill is found in
clause 4, which provides for a new section 10 that defines the powers of
the Minister more clearly. As always, one needs to caution against too much
executive power, even whilst acknowledging that a certain amount of power
is required in order to implement the policy.

Land reform remains one of the most emotive and potentially explosive
issues in South Africa today. It is vital, therefore, that this issue be
handled with the utmost sensitivity. It is absolutely critical that we
ensure that existing and emerging farmers are supported and allowed to
flourish. The UDM will support the Bill. Thank you.
Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, the ACDP acknowledges the need to undo the
legacy of unequal land distribution, and the critical importance of
ensuring that there is continued productive use of agricultural land once
it has been transferred. This Bill amends the Provision of Land and
Assistance Act of 1993 by increasing the powers of the department in order
for it to acquire movable and immovable property as well as economic
enterprises and shares. It also grants financial assistance for the
development of various types of property and commercial enterprises.

The ACDP is hopeful that these amendments will ensure that the obstacles
presently experienced are more efficiently and effectively dealt with. For
example, until now the department has been unable to buy a fully
functioning farm and is limited to land only. This has been detrimental to
both the prospective new owner and the farmer wanting to sell the going
concern.

The ACDP notes the concerns that have been expressed regarding the
provisions that enable government to take transfer of expropriated land
before a suitable farmer is identified, but is satisfied that both new and
existing farmers’ interests are served by this new arrangement. The ACDP
will support this Bill.

Mr R B BHOOLA: Madam Speaker, if anything, the MF is well aware of the
challenges the Department of Land Affairs has been experiencing in
delivering on land redistribution since the birth of democracy. We are,
however, encouraged by the department’s identification of a potential
problem and the introduction of the amending Bill to address the shortfall
and speed up delivery.

The MF also believes that as a people we do not realise how cumbersome it
is to obtain land and to distribute it, nor do we realise the number of
people waiting to be catered for.

The Bill certainly provides greater clarity in terms of the management of
both immovable and movable property. The MF hopes that this amending Bill
will be effectively and efficiently implemented to attain the results of
delivery that we all desire. The MF will support the Bill.

Ms B THOMSON: Ngiyabonga, Somlomo. [Thank you, Madam Speaker.]

The Provision of Land and Assistance Bill amends the Provision of Land and
Assistance Act of 1993. The aim of the amendment is to facilitate
sustainable land reform.

Inhloso yalesi sichibiyelo ukunikeza uNgqongqoshe amandla okwelekelela labo
abafanelekile ukuba bakwazi ukuthengelwa lokhu esikubiza ngokuthi i-movable
and immovable property ngenhloso yokuqinisa intuthuka nokuqeda ubuhlwempu
kubantu bakithi. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[The aim of this amendment is to give powers to the Minister to be able to
assist in buying movable and immovable property on behalf of the legitimate
beneficiaries with the aim of ensuring development and eradicating poverty
among our people.]

The Provision of Land and Assistance Amendment Bill intends to repeal the
original Act that had allowed the department to buy land, but not assets
and equipment, as desired by the sellers of the land.

uNgqongqoshe simgixabeza ngamandla amakhulu okuthenga izinsiza zamapulazi
ngesicelo salowo obengumnikazi wepulazi. Le ndlela yokuthenga izolekelela
ekuqiniseni lokhu esikubiza nge-land reform programme ngoba umdayisi
akazukukhahlanyezwa ukusala nezinsizamsebenzi umhlaba esewuthengisike.
Ngolimi lukaJoji yilokhu esikubiza ngokuthi yi-going concern okusho ukuthi
ibhizinisi elisebenzayo. Lokhu phela kusho ukuthi umthengi omusha okwakhe
ukungena nje emsebenzini aqhubeke nomkhiqizo ngoba izinsiza zizobe zikhona
zilindele ukusebenza.

Kafushane nje ngizothanda ukusho ukuthi njengoba iPhalemende beliye kubantu
e-Bushbuckridge sihlangabezane nezinkinga. Uthola ukuthi abantu
abasebenzisa umhlaba banalo ipulazi futhi nomhlaba ukhona abawusebenzayo
kodwa izinsiza azikho. Sithole futhi ukuthi abantu bakithi laphaya baseb
enzisa imilomo yabo ukuthi bamome amanzi ukuze bachelele noma banisele
ukudla kwabo. Umlomo-ke bakwethu awukaze ube yi-generator. Awunawo amandla
okumoma amanzi kodwa bona bayakwenza ngoba bahluphekile. Ngakho sicabanga
ukuthi lesi sichibiyelo sizobelekelela ukuthi kube khona izinsiza ezizoba
khona emapulazini. Cabanga-ke nje ukuthi umuntu umoma amanzi ngepayipi
ekade liphansi bese elithatha yena amome ngalo amanzi.

Ngicabanga ukuthi iningi lethu kule Ndlu liye ligijime naleli bhodlelana
elincane lamanzi siwafake ezikhwameni ngoba sifuna amanzi ahlanzekile.
Nokho, ngoba uNkulunkulu ubathanda bonke abantu esikuqaphelile ukuthi laba
bantu baseMpumalanga abaguli. Thina kodwa esigijima namanzi amabhodlela
ezikhwameni kodwa iningi lethu liyagula - libuthakathaka. (Translation of
isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[We are giving the Minister more powers to buy assets and equipment for
farming as per request by the seller. This will help in the land reform
programme because the seller will not be burdened by remaining with the
assets and equipment whilst the land has been sold. This is what we call in
English, a going concern. This means that the buyer just gets to work and
goes on with production as the equipment would be readily available,
waiting to be used.

I would briefly want to indicate that we encountered problems in
Bushbuckridge whilst we took Parliament to the people there. People
reported to us that the people who are working the land have farms, but
they do not have equipment. We found that our people use their mouths to
contain water to water their plants. And good people, a mouth has never
been a water pump. It does not have strength to contain water, but they do
it because they are struggling. We therefore think that this amending Bill
will assist in availing equipment on farms. Hon members, you can just
imagine for yourselves a person taking a pipe that has been lying on the
ground for ages and puting it in her mouth to use it as a water
transporter, either to a container or somewhere else.

I think that most of us here in this House carry small bottles of purified
water in our cooler bags because we want clean water. But, because God
loves all his people what we have noticed is that these people of
Mpumalanga do not become ill. But most of us who carry this bottled water
in our bags are sick and fragile.]

Members of the portfolio committee unanimously support this provision as it
will make it possible for the department not just to buy land, but also the
assets and equipment that will make land reform projects more viable.
However, the committee rejected the proposal to make the legislation
retrospective.

Kodwa lokhu akuhlangene nalokhu obekushiwo ubaba u-Nel. [But this has
nothing to do with what hon Nel was saying.]

This has nothing to do with Polokwane. We were merely exercising our right
as a committee. The proposal to make legislation retrospective means that
whatever assets and equipment have been bought by the Minister outside the
mandate of the principal Act should be validated by the Bill. By accepting
validation of anything that has been done or purported to have been done
under the principal Act, the committee believes it would be signing a blank
cheque without knowing what assets have been bought by the Minister and for
what purpose.

Cha, ikomidi impela lisichithile lesi sicelo soMnyango. [Indeed, the
committee rejected the request of the department.]

The committee requested the department to report to the Auditor-General all
illegal land and property transactions that have taken place contrary to
the provisions of the existing legislation. In addition, Scopa should call
on the department to report on all the transactions that have taken place,
if any.

Kubalulekile ukuthi iPhalamende lilandele ukusebenza kwemisebenzi yohlelo
lwezomhlaba, ikakhulukazi ukuthengwa kwalezi zingqalasizinda. Kufanele
siqinisekise ukuthi wonke lo mnotho uhlala ezandleni eziyizo nezifanele.
Labo phela abahlomula emhlabeni. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph
follows.)

[It is important that Parliament should follow the processes of the land
reform programme, especially the buying of this infrastructure. And we must
ensure that all this wealth is placed in legitimate hands. I mean those who
are benefitting from the land.]
The committee, therefore, needs to be provided with adequate resources to
periodically monitor property acquired by the department for land
beneficiaries.

Ngabe uMnyango unawo amandla okwenza lo Mthethosivivinywa ukuthi usebenze?
[Does the department have powers to implement this Bill?]

It would require expertise in business management, or in running farms, to
manage the acquired farm where beneficiaries have not yet been identified
or are not yet ready to take over the farms. This could be a costly
exercise to the state if property was damaged, vandalised or abused during
this period. We therefore suggest that property acquired by the state
should not sit in its hands, but should be passed on - and in good
condition - to the ultimate beneficiaries. There should be the provision
that it would be properly cared for, pending the final transfer.

The issue of capacity is critical, considering the fact that the department
has been continually criticised for its lack of capacity to meet land
reform targets. If the department was effectively resourced, it would be
able to enter the market and acquire the necessary skills to attain this
capacity.

In the memorandum of the Bill it is stated that there will be no financial
implications. The explanation given is that the implementation of the Bill
will be accommodated within the current budget of the department in terms
of the medium-term strategic and operational budget. This is understood,
but what one fails to understand is that the department is already
complaining about high prices of land that are squeezing its budget. Buying
assets and equipment means that the department will have to spend more on
acquiring land.

According to the Director-General, Mr Thozi Gwanya, the department has
already approached National Treasury for further funding. Relevant here is
whether the grants that are made available to land beneficiaries are
adequate to cover the full costs of procurement of property, including
movable and immovable assets. At the moment grants only cover a fraction of
the cost of property, and farmers have to take out loans in order to
finance their agricultural activities. This squeezes them even more
financially.

Grants are not adequate for one individual farmer. The grant is only about
R111 000 to buy land. As a result, the number of recipients qualifying for
the grant resort to pooling their money and buying as a group. This
grouping has always been proven to be a recipe for economic disaster.
Management problems are also likely to arise.

Analyses of projects that have failed, or are on the verge of failing,
point to the urgent need to review the quality of support given to the land
reform beneficiaries. They showed that singular emphasis on land
acquisition and redistribution at the expense of equal efforts on
postsettlement support provision can undo all the good work done towards
achieving land reform objectives.

This has influenced policy shifts within the department. Part of the new
approach is the revised legislative framework contained in the Provision of
Land and Assistance Amendment Bill, which would give the Minister powers to
acquire farms, land and shares in the agricultural sphere for compensation
on behalf of black people. This includes provision for postcare issues such
as capacity. Ngiyabonga. [Thank you.]

UMPHATHISWA WEZOLIMO NEMICIMBI YEZOMHLABA: Ndiyabulela, Somlomo, nakuwo
onke aMalungu ePalamente ngokubanzi, ngokuxhasa lo Mthetho uYilwayo
nobaluleke kangaka. Lo Mthetho uYilwayo uza kunceda abantu bakuthi
ukwenzela ukuba xa sithenga ezi fama sikwazi nokuthenga iiteletele kwakunye
neenkomo. Kanti ngokubhekisele kwiifama zobisi singathenga izixhobo
eziyimfuneko  zobisi kunye neenkomo. Loo nto iya kunceda ukuba abantu
bakuthi ... (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Thank you, Madam Speaker
and Members of Parliament at large, for supporting this Bill. This Bill
will help people in that, when we buy farms, we will also be able to buy
tractors and cattle. With regard to dairy farms, we will be able to buy the
necessary dairy equipment and cattle. This will help our people to ...]
... move right into commercial agriculture after we have given them the
necessary skills.

Ndifuna ukuthi lo Mthetho uYilwayo usinika amandla okuba sifumane abaphathi
abaza kuthi babe nolwazi lokulawula iifama, ngeli xesha sisafuna abaxhamli.
Ndiyafuna ke ukuthi, ewe zikhona iimpahla ezingahanjiswayo(immovable
properties) esizithengileyo xa besithenga ezi fama. Kaloku nasithuka
kakhulu nisithi sithengela abantu imihlaba esingaziyo nokuba baza
kuyisebenzisa njani na. Isebe lenza uphononongo lweencwadi ukufumanisa
ukuba ngaba zonke ezo mpahla, iinkomo kunye nezixhobo ezithengiweyo
zigcinwe kakuhle kusini na, kwaye ngoku liza kuza apha ePalamente ukuza
kuphendula ngako konke oko.

Ndifuna ukubulela nakuBawo uNel ngokugayela uKhongolozi iivoti, ngoba
uthethe kakuhle kakhulu ngalo mbutho naMalungu ethu ePalamente. Ndifuna
ukuthi ke ndiyabulela kule Ndlu ngoba iPalamente yonke iwuxhasile lo
Mthetho uYilwayo. Siyathemba ukuba uza kuphunyezwa ze umiliselwe
ngokukhawuleza, ukuze siqhube ngokunikezela ngomhlaba kwaneenkonzo zolimo
kubantu bakowethu, ze siphelise ubuhlwempu kunye nendlala. Ndiyabulela.
[Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[This Bill gives us the power to find managers who can manage farms, whilst
we are looking for beneficiaries. I wish to say that, indeed there are
immovable properties that we bought when we bought these farms. However, we
felt very insulted when we were accused of buying land for people when we
did not even know how they were going to use it. The department carried out
an audit and checked whether all these properties, as well as the cattle
and equipment that were bought, are being taken care of, and the department
will come to Parliament to account for that.

I would like to thank hon Nel for campaigning for the ANC because he spoke
very well of this party and our Members of Parliament. I wish to express my
sincere gratitude to this august House because Parliament as a whole
supported this Bill. We hope that it will be passed and implemented as soon
as possible so that we can continue with land distribution and provide
agricultural services to our people, and be in a position to alleviate
poverty and hunger. I thank you. [Applause.]]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.


                       LIQUOR PRODUCTS AMENDMENT BILL


                           (Consideration of Bill)

Mr M R MOHLALOGA: Madam Speaker, hon members, the Liquor Products Amendment
Bill seeks to amend the Liquor Products Act of 1989, which provides for
control over the sale and production for sale of alcoholic products for
drinking purposes. It also provides for the composition and properties of
such products and for control over the import and export of such products.

As indicated above, the Liquor Products Act therefore predates the period
of lifting of sanctions. With our re-entry into the world economy, new
obligations and opportunities arose, and the Liquor Products Amendment Bill
seeks to respond to the obligations and opportunities thus presented.

The principal Act allowed certain wine cultivars for the production of
wine, which is no longer the case. Thus, there was a need for the principal
Act to be amended in this regard. One of the important aspects of the
amending Bill was in the area of the Wine and Spirit Board. The principal
Act provides, amongst other things, that members of the board, who speak on
behalf of the producers and merchants, be nominated by KWV and the Cape
Wine and Spirit Institute.

The problem with this arrangement is that there have been structural
changes in the industry, so the current composition of the board is no
longer representative of all participants in the industry. The amending
Bill seeks to ensure that the composition of the board is in line with the
changes that have occurred in the current structure of the industry. The
Bill provides that the board will be composed of members with skills,
knowledge or expertise in viticulture, oenology, distilling and the
regulatory environment of the liquor industry.

In terms of our appointment process, the Bill provides that the Minister
will establish a selection committee which will recommend a shortlist of
eligible candidates and submit its recommendations to the Minister. This
will be preceded by a process of public participation through the
invitation of interested parties to nominate any such persons as they think
possess the necessary requirements as spelled out in the Bill.

The amendment that comes from the NCOP suggests that the Minister should
appoint the board after consultation with Parliament. We understand
Parliament, in this particular instance, to include the NCOP. In our view,
as the committee, the process laid down in the Bill is sufficient for us to
have the right persons appointed to perform their duties as spelled out in
the principal Act and as further elaborated in this Bill. As indicated, it
provides for public involvement and for the selection committee that will
advise the Minister.

We could not, in our understanding of the role of this board, see the need
for Parliament to be involved in the appointment process of this board. We
think that the provision that obliges the Minister to notify Parliament of
the appointment of the board 30 days after such an appointment, is
sufficient. We could not elevate the role of the Wine and Spirit Board to
the Chapter 9 or similar institutions. So, there was no constitutional
basis for us as Parliament to get involved in the appointment of the board,
whose work is highly specialised and technical. It is our view that there
is no constitutional basis for us to get involved as this is purely an
executive function in which Parliament will not have any desire or interest
to involve itself.

In considering this amendment from the NCOP, it was only one member that
abstained from voting. Otherwise the committee was in agreement in
rejecting the amendment from the NCOP. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move:

   That the Bill be passed.

Motion agreed to.

Bill accordingly passed.


                  NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT LAWS AMENDMENT BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)
The MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Madam Speaker, the
National Environment Laws Amendment Bill seeks to amend the National
Environmental Management Act of 1998 and all specific environmental Acts.
In terms of the Act, the amendments include, firstly, the National
Environmental Management Act, Nema. It has become evident that whilst
prison sentences are adequate in our suite of environmental legislation,
where comparable with what is found internationally, our fines were too
low. This Bill seeks to increase the fines in Nema and the specific
environmental Act up to an amount of R10 million. The amendment seeks to
limit costs to the state by giving magistrates’ courts jurisdiction over
environmental offences as well as the penalties provided for in the Acts.

The National Environmental Advisory Forum and the Committee for
Environmental Co-ordination have also been dissolved in terms of this Bill.
We are now empowered to establish fora and committees to advise us on
various and specific environmental issues. There is a need for less
prescriptive and flexible ad hoc advisory committees that are less costly,
provide better value for money and substantially reduce the administrative
burden.

Secondly, with regard to the National Environmental Management: Protected
Areas Act, it has no section providing for the ownership of wild animals
occurring in protected areas. The proposed amendments now give ownership,
in trust, to the state. It would also be the state’s responsibility to
manage animals that have escaped from protected areas.

Thirdly, with regard to the National Environmental Management: Biodiversity
Act of 2004, the amendment provides for general surveillance and reporting
on all categories of genetically modified organisms once they are released
into the environment.

It also provides that in cases where an environmental assessment is
required for genetically modified organisms, GMOs, to be released into the
environment, an environmental impact assessment should be carried out.

The amendment further makes provision for notification requirements when a
person engages in the discovery phase of bioprospecting of indigenous
biological resources. This amendment also seeks to incorporate the list of
national botanical gardens under the Act and empowers the Minister to amend
the schedule if necessary.

Fourthly, with regard to the National Environmental Management: Air Quality
Act of 2004, in order to determine whether a person is fit and proper for
purposes of an application for an atmospheric emissions licence, a
licensing authority must take into account all relevant facts.

The present wording of the Act excludes reference to a juristic person,
which was excluded by error. It is important to have it included as its
members may fall within the ambit of the section. This has now been
remedied.

In conclusion, the main objective of this Bill is to enhance the
enforcement and implementation of environmental legislation and to address
a few implementation challenges that exist in the current legislation.
Thank you.

Mr L ZITA: Chairperson, the National Environmental Laws Amendment Bill of
2008 seeks to effect changes to the National Environmental Management Act,
Nema, of 1998, the foundational Act. The Nema also seeks to make changes to
the Nema Protected Areas Act of 2003 and the Nema Biodiversity Act of 2004
as well as the Nema Air Quality Act of 2004.

In its current form, parts 1 and 2 of the second chapter of Nema provide
for the establishment of a National Environmental Advisory Forum and a
Committee for Environmental Co-ordination alongside their functions,
compositions and objects. However, clause 2 of the Bill proposes the
repealing of parts 1 and 2 of the second chapter of Nema. It proposes the
deletion of any references to “committee” or “forum” throughout Nema and
proposes insertions wherever they are deemed necessary. For example, the
Bill proposes in clause 3 the insertion of section 3A regarding the
establishment of a forum or advisory committee, giving the Minister the
power to establish such fora or advisory committees and to determine their
composition and functions.

This releases the Minister from having to have a particular forum even if
there is no need for it. It gives the Minister the discretion to choose
which fora to establish and it would therefore not be mandatory.

The most far-reaching and significant amendments are those for section 28
of Nema under clause 12 of the Bill. Currently section 28 of Nema deals
with the duty of care and remediation of environmental damage. Section
28(1) provides that –

  Every person who causes, has caused or may cause significant pollution or
  degradation of the environment must take reasonable measures to prevent
  such pollution or degradation from occurring, continuing or recurring,
  or, insofar as such harm to the environment is authorised by law or
  cannot reasonably be avoided or stopped, to minimise and rectify such
  pollution or degradation of the environment.

Similarly, it criminalises noncompliance with certain of the emergency
incident provisions of section 30 of Nema which have been proposed in
clause 13. This clause proposes that any person who fails to comply with
the provisions as set out in section 30 is guilty of an offence and liable
upon conviction to a fine not exceeding R100 000 or 10 years or both such
fine and imprisonment.

Currently, section 30 provides for the control of emergency incidents and
the reporting of ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon members, I think we are no
longer hearing the debate.

Mr L ZITA: However, the failure to report an emergency incident or take the
necessary additional steps does not constitute an offence. This is now
corrected. If you fail to disclose, you are also liable.

Clauses 15, 16 and 17 of the Bill propose the removal of the requirement
that environmental management inspectors, EMIs - the Green Scorpions - must
carry notices provided for in section 31D(3). The Bill proposes that an
identification card is sufficient and further proposes an increase in the
EMI’s powers to allow the searching and seizure of vehicles during routine
inspections and to take photographs and audiovisual recordings.

The purpose of these amendments is to strengthen and consolidate the powers
of the EMIs. Clause 18 proposes the amendment of section 31 of Nema by
substituting section 31N(2), which replaces the terms ‘Minister’ or ‘MEC’
with “director-general” or “head of department” responsible for
environmental affairs in the province.
With regard to the Protected Areas Act of 2003, the Bill proposes in clause
23 state ownership and control of animals in protected areas and those that
have escaped, and associated matters. Section 49A has been proposed for
insertion after section 49 of the Act for this matter. Clause 24 of the
Bill proposes to amend section 82(3) of the Protected Areas Act, which
currently does not allow the Minister or MEC to appropriate privately held
rights to state land.

The amendment counters this by allowing the Minister or MEC to appropriate
such privately held rights to state land. Similarly, clause 24 of the Bill
proposes the amendment of section 88 of the Act to increase the amount of
the fines or the period of imprisonment for breaching regulations
formulated under section 86 of the Act.

Furthermore, clause 26 of the Bill proposes to amend section 89 of the Act,
with the express aim of increasing the amount of the fines or the period of
imprisonment to catch up with inflation or to reflect the seriousness of
the offence. It is also proposed that a magistrate’s court should have the
jurisdiction to impose the penalties prescribed by the Act.

With regard to the Biodiversity Act, the Bill proposes to amend 13 sections
of the Biodiversity Act of 2004, in addition to two insertions. Clause 27
relates to the biodiversity monitoring functions of the South African
National Biodiversity Institute. Accordingly, section 11 of Nema has been
amended to facilitate general surveillance monitoring of impacts of
categories of genetically modified mechanisms released into the
environment.

Clause 28 of the Bill proposes to amend section 45 by inserting subsection
(d), which now states that the Biodiversity Act should “take into
consideration” rather than “be consistent with” subordinate Acts or
instruments such as the Municipal Integrated Development Plan. It therefore
strengthens this provision.

Clause 29 proposes the amendment of section 57 of the Act by the addition
of section 57(4), which states that the Minister may, by notice in the
Gazette, exempt a person from the restriction contemplated in section 57(1)
of the Act.

Clause 32 proposes to amend section 81 by stating that no person may
without a permit engage in the “commercialisation phase of” bioprospecting.
The need to insert section 81A, which deals with the notification of the
Minister in case of engaging the discovery phase and related matters, means
that bioprospecting may not always result in new discoveries. Without this
amendment, it would mean that bioprospecting would always result in
discoveries, and hence this would raise expectations.

Clause 34 proposes the inclusion of “a specific individual” in section 82
among the stakeholders whose interests should be secured when issuing a
permit for bioprospecting. The current Act does not consider the fact that
the knowledge of indigenous biological resources may be known to only
specific individuals. Clause 35 proposes the amendment to section 85 by
making it possible for the Director-General to manage the Bioprospecting
Trust Fund or to appoint a trustee in terms of the Trust Property Control
Act of 1988 to manage the fund on behalf of the Director-General under the
terms he or she sees fit. This is in contrast to the original Act that
mandates the Director-General to manage the fund.

Similarly, clause 36 seeks to amend section 86 by giving the Minister the
opportunity to exempt indigenous biological resources used for research and
for commercial purposes. This was not the case with the original Act.

With regard to the Air Quality Act, clause 42 proposes to amend section 45,
including the need for the licencee to pay a prescribed processing fee
where an atmospheric emission licence undergoes periodic review. Currently,
there is no indication of a fee in the Act. The amendment is made to
standardise the licensing process.

Clause 43 of the amending Bill categorises a director or a senior manager
as a juristic person, thereby qualifying him for prosecution under the Act.
On the other hand, clause 44 proposes to amend section 52 of the Air
Quality Act by increasing the amount of the fine or the period of
imprisonment, consistent with the other amended laws. The same section now
makes provision for a magistrate’s court to prosecute and impose any
penalty prescribed by the Act.

Finally, clause 45 proposes the short title to the Act as the National
Environment Laws Amendment Act of 2008. This Bill seeks to strengthen the
regulation of the environment. The ANC supports this Bill.

Mr G R MORGAN: Good afternoon, Chairperson and hon members. Environmental
laws do not exist on our law books because they make us feel good or
because they provide some kind of illusion that as a society we are doing
our job and living up to the values of sustainable development. Our
environmental laws exist to be enforced; they exist because it makes
ecological sense to protect and sustain the natural world.

As I have said before in this House, a degraded environment undermines
human health, it undermines the basis for an economy that will grow as a
going concern and it undermines our heritage.

The National Environment Laws Amendment Bill is a patchwork Bill that seeks
to simultaneously amend six pieces of environmental legislation. Several of
the Bills, including the Atmospheric Pollution Prevention Act, the
Environment Conservation Act, Nema and the Protected Areas Act, are being
amended to increase penalties for offences.

It is common cause that higher penalties will act as a greater deterrent
for individuals or entities that consider perpetrating environmental
crimes. In most cases the monetary fines and jail sentences are
significantly ramped up and the DA fully supports these steps. Most
significant other amendments occur in the National Environmental Management
Act. The National Environmental Advisory Forum, Neaf, is removed. This
body, which took some time to be set up after the law was initially
promulgated, has now existed for four years. The Minister appointed its
members after consultation with our portfolio committee.

From its workings, however, it seems as if the Neaf duplicated the work of
many other departments and research institutions. It had a number of
subcommittees that dealt with, among other things, waste and climate
change. The amendment allows for the Minister to appoint advisory
committees as he sees fit. While the dissolution of the Neaf was questioned
by many individuals who made submissions to the committee, there were no
suggestions for alternatives.

The DA hopes that the Minister will make use of the power to initiate
advisory committees in the future. The issue of remedial costs for
pollution was the subject of considerable debate in the committee. If a
person fails to comply with the directive to remediate pollution the
authorities are, under this amending Bill, able to take measures to rectify
the situation. The DA was concerned about the open-ended nature of the
original proposed amendment, but supported it in principle. I’m
considerably more comfortable with it now that it has limited costs to
“costs for remedial measures to be undertaken”.

Retrospective application was also a subject of considerable debate. The
department had always maintained that section 28 of the Nema applied
retrospectively. However, a court case, Bareki NO and Another v Gencor Ltd,
found this was not the case. The effect of this decision was that the
activities which caused pollution and which were discontinued before the
coming into law of Nema on 1 January 1999, and were not covered by other
legislation, would become the responsibility of the state even where the
polluter was traceable.

The necessary amendments were made in the Bill to ensure that retrospective
application is ensured. I hope this particular amendment is well-publicised
by the department and that numerous polluters, who have not taken
responsibility for pollution prior to Nema being promulgated, take action
before the Green Scorpions come knocking on their door.

On that note, let me congratulate the new head of the Environmental
Management Inspectorate, Ms Francis Craig. I hope that she will take the
Green Scorpions forward, and I urge her to increasingly concentrate on
prosecuting those entities that commit pollution-related crimes.

I would also like to suggest that the work of training magistrates on the
intricacies of environmental law be further advanced. It is one thing to
have good environmental laws on paper, but it is another thing to enforce
them, and we need the judiciary to help with this. The DA supports the
National Environment Laws Amendment Bill.

Ms C N Z ZIKALALA: Chairperson, the Bill before us today seeks to amend a
number of laws, which will ultimately result in an increase in the maximum
penalties for environmental offences and the increased jurisdiction of the
magistrate’s court.

A comparison of penalties for environmental contraventions with selected
countries from around the globe revealed that, while South Africa’s penalty
clauses for terms of imprisonment compared favourably with the other
countries, our monetary fines were the lowest amongst the participating
countries. This Bill also aims to standardise penalties across various
environmental crimes, which will promote consistency.

The people who commit environmental crimes are robbing our land and its
people of its natural treasures and in the process they are becoming
extremely wealthy through the exorbitant profits that they make from their
illegal gains. The fines that are currently imposed are no deterrent for
many of these rich criminals. It is obvious that harsher fines have to be
imposed and the fight against environmental crimes must be intensified.

The amendments suggested in this Bill will contribute to the fight against
environmental crimes and to the preservation of our natural resources. The
IFP supports this Bill. I thank you.

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, the ACDP will support this Bill that seeks to
amend various other pieces of environmental legislation to protect our
environment by strengthening the fight against those who pollute or degrade
the environment.

We, over the years, have expressed our concerns regarding genetically
modified organisms, GMOs. Therefore, we welcome the amendment to ensure
that the release of GMOs into the environment will require full
environmental impact assessments. Whilst we appreciate that GMO-free zones
under the Biodiversity Act were beyond the scope of the currently proposed
amendments, we note comments that the department could not ignore concerns
such as cross-pollination with vegetation or crops in non-GMO zones.

We also welcome the clarification of retrospective liability in terms of
section 28 of the National Environmental Management Act. And, whilst there
was that court decision, the amendment seeks to address that and we have no
doubt that the courts will further give clarity and interpretation as
regards section 28. So we as the ACDP will in general support this Bill.
Thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, our national environment is one of the most
threatened features of our country – and this by our own people. It is most
disheartening to note that many veld fires and other damage to our
surroundings have been caused by the negligent or irresponsible behaviour
of our people.

In view of this, and the great need for us to preserve our natural
environment and its inhabitants, the MF is pleased that the judicial system
is being assessed, penalties are being instituted and provision is even
being made to imprison these perpetrators.

South Africa may boast of being rich in minerals, fauna, flora, animals and
marine life. And as government, in this month that marks our heritage, we
need to clamp down on the desecration of our surroundings.

We are extremely interested in monitoring how these laws actually affect
the balance of our environment and its effectiveness in addressing this
issue.

The MF supports the National Environment Laws Amendment Bill. Thank you,
Chairperson.

Mrs J CHALMERS: Chairperson, hon Minister and members of this House, the
Bill in front of us today, the National Environment Laws Amendment Bill, is
a critically important piece of legislation with far-reaching consequences
for this country. It represents a major and positive step in the challenge
to protect our environment for the benefit of present and future
generations of South Africans; a requirement set out with absolute clarity
in section 24 of our Constitution.

Chairperson, it is an acknowledged fact that our human species has a long
and unfortunate history indeed - going back to our very beginnings - of
using the resources of this, our amazing and beautiful planet, in a
careless, wasteful and often abusive fashion. It has been said that our
relative indifference to our impact on the environment springs from
somewhere deep within human nature, that the shortsighted view of the
future is a hard-wired part of our paleolithic heritage. So, what do we do
about increasing our ability to protect and preserve our environment?

South Africa has some of the finest pieces of environmental legislation in
the world; most of them have been promulgated since 1994. However, a major
problem has existed with regard to getting offenders who transgress these
laws to take them seriously. And that’s another unfortunate characteristic
of our human species. It is an absolute fact that if we think we can get
away with committing a wrongdoing, we carry on doing it, especially if we
profit by said offence; that is why the Bill in front of us today is so
important.

It is important because now, for the first time, it is really going to cost
those who degrade and abuse the environment very dear. No longer will the
big companies and corporations, which are usually also the big polluters,
be able to ignore the effect that they are having on air quality; no longer
will they – or anyone else – be able to dump their hazardous waste wherever
they please, causing significant damage to soil and water supplies and
putting the health of communities at risk. If they continue to commit these
offences and get caught – and we certainly do have to tighten up our
ability to police and catch offenders – they will now have to pay massive
fines or serve substantial prison sentences.

Chairperson, the old Atmospheric Pollution Prevention Act of 1965 set out
that a first conviction for an offence will incur a fine not exceeding
R500,00. Now R500,00 would not even be the equivalent of tea money in a
large company and certainly would be no deterrent to dumping hazardous
waste. Now, a first offence will cost the offender, on conviction, an
amount of R2 million or imprisonment for a period not exceeding five years.
In the case of a second or subsequent conviction, the offender would be
liable for a fine not exceeding R5 million or imprisonment not exceeding 10
years. This is certainly enough of a deterrent to focus the mind – and the
minds of directors of companies – on environmentally friendly alternatives
to their current modus operandi.

In addition, the Bill proposes a standardisation of penalties across
various types of environmental crimes, taking into account the financial
gains generated by illegal activities, the financial cost of the damage to
the environment and the cost of investigation and prosecution of the
alleged offence.

In the past, it had hardly been worthwhile for the government to spend
substantial amounts of money, time and energy on prosecuting offenders when
a successful prosecution would yield such a small reward. Indeed, the
offender, whether abalone smuggler, hazardous waste dumper or air polluter,
would smugly pay the small fine and go on his or her wicked way.
Chairperson, this should no longer be the case.

Given the limited time at my disposal, I cannot cover all amendments
contained in it, but a second critically important aspect of this Bill is
the increased jurisdiction power it gives to the lower courts. Access to
justice is another fundamental principle contained in our Constitution and
in Nema and this can only be achieved if courts are sufficiently accessible
to the public.

Accordingly, it is proposed in this Bill that this objective will be better
served by providing magistrates’ courts time to hear appropriate
environmental cases, notwithstanding their normal jurisdictional
limitations.

Also, in order to increase the capacity and knowledge in the lower courts,
the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism has, in collaboration
with Justice College, been offering awareness-raising workshops for
magistrates in environmental crimes.

Chairperson, this Bill is an exciting new addition to the impressive suite
of environmental laws now operating in South Africa. It is now up to us to
implement them in order to find a way to ensure the integrity of this
beautiful planet and the magnificent life it harbours. Thank you.
[Applause.]

The MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Chairperson, I would
like to thank all hon members of all parties for supporting this amending
Bill. I would therefore like to ask the House to pass this legislation.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): The Bill will be sent to the NCOP
for concurrence.


      NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT: PROTECTED AREAS AMENDMENT BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Chairperson, the
National Environmental Management: Protected Areas Amendment Bill seeks to
amend the National Environmental Management: Protected Areas Act of 2003.

Section 20 is amended by the incorporation of the schedule of national
parks into the principal Act. Furthermore, any amendments or additions to
the parks are provided for by means of a notice in the Government Gazette,
thus preventing the Act itself from being amended each time the schedule is
amended.

Section 28 is amended by the deletion of the time period of three years
after which the declaration of the protected environment has lapsed in the
case of land earmarked for inclusion in the national park or nature
reserve. The current period of three years is too restrictive and the
extension of one year is inadequate. The time period is now indicated in
the notice and can be extended by agreement with the owners of the land
concerned.

Section 38 is amended to enable the Minister to maintain the administration
of the Prince Edward Islands within the department. Given the fact that
national parks are national assets and their maintenance is in the public
interest, section 38 is further amended by limiting the assignment of all
national parks to the South African National Parks, SANParks.

Section 47 is amended to enable the management of flights over special
nature reserves, national parks or world heritage sites. Management of
these flights is critical to the protection of the environment. This
section has been amended to provide that prior written permission, subject
to conditions that the management authority provides for, must first be
obtained before flying over the aforementioned areas. Provision is made
that contravention of this section is an offence.

Section 54 is amended by adding an enabling section providing for the tax
exemption, winding up or dissolution of SANParks and the transfer of its
assets. It is further provided that SANParks can only be wound up by an Act
of this Parliament.

Section 55 is amended by the addition of an empowering section providing
for SANParks to manage all existing national parks and any protected areas
assigned to it by the Minister. Further provision has been now made for the
Minister to assign the management of world heritage sites and other
protected areas not included under section 55(1)(a) of the Protected Areas
Act. Provision is now also made for SANParks to impose traffic rules and
set penalties for the contravention thereof in all protected areas assigned
to it.

Section 75 of the principal Act is amended by expanding SANParks’ authority
to retain, as part of its funds, monies received for offences committed
under the Protected Areas Act within the protected areas assigned to it.

In conclusion, Chairperson, these amendments provide for the final
replacements of the old National Parks Act, Act 57 of 1976; the explicit
enabling of the Minister to assign areas other than national parks to
SANParks, thus providing for the further rationalisation of the management
of our protected areas; the alignment of this Act with the Income Tax Act
to ensure SANParks’ compliance, thus enabling SANParks to gain the
necessary benefits; and further enabling clauses, with the necessary checks
and balances, for SA National Parks to better manage those areas assigned
to it. Thank you. [Applause]

Mr L ZITA: Chairperson, comrade Minister, colleagues, the National
Environmental Management: Protected Areas Amendment Bill of 2008 seeks to
further strengthen the existing gaps that are in the original National
Environmental Management Act of 1998, with particular reference to national
parks and protected areas.

The Bill seeks to add a schedule detailing areas of national parks
currently in the National Parks Act, Act 57 of 1976, to the National
Environmental Management: Protected Areas Act. The Bill also seeks to
provide that management of special nature reserves may be assigned to any
person, organisation or organ of state, but that the management of national
parks can only be assigned to SANParks.

The Bill proposes that flying corridors over national parks, heritage sites
and specific areas need the prior permission of the management authority.
The Bill also makes provision for lodging an appeal with the Minister
against any decision of the management authority for measures pertaining to
the winding up and dissolution of SANParks; that SANParks manages all the
existing parks, nature reserves and protected environments that are
assigned to them; and for the traffic fines in parks.

With regard to clause 1 of this Bill, this relates to the amendment of
section 20, with reference to national parks and their areas, as contained
in Schedule 1 of the National Parks Act of 1976. It is now desirable to
repeal the said Act and have all provisions dealing with national parks in
the Act.

Furthermore, any amendments or additions to national parks are provided for
by means of a notice in the Gazette, thus preventing the Act itself from
being amended each time the Schedule is amended.

Section 28 of the Act contains a time period for an area of land to be
included in the national park or nature reserve. The present period is too
restrictive and the extension of one year is inadequate. The Bill seeks to
extend the time period with the agreement of all parties concerned.

In terms of section 38(1) of the Act, the Minister must assign the
management of a special nature reserve or nature reserve to a suitable
person, organisation or the state. As SANParks has exclusive rights to the
name, it is not desirable to have multiple organisations running national
parks. It is therefore recommended that the “must” be substituted with
“may”, thus giving the Minister a discretion, and that national parks are
only assigned to SANParks.

Section 47 relates to the control of flights over special national
reserves, national parks or heritage sites. This is of the utmost
importance for the protection of life and the environment. To effect this,
section 47 has been amended to provide that prior written permission,
subject to conditions provided by the management authority, is first
obtained before flying over the aforementioned areas. Provision is made for
the contravention of this section to be an offence.

There is no enabling section in the Act providing for tax exemption, the
winding up or dissolution of SANParks and the transfer of its assets. The
proposed amendment provides for this if the transferee has similar
interests and is exempted from income tax in terms of the Income Tax Act of
1962.

After receiving public inputs from the hearing that we had convened, we
felt that the issue goes beyond questions of tax administration to a
possible dissolution of SANParks. As a committee we felt that such a
prospect is undesirable and if for whatever reasons it would be
contemplated, it has to go through Parliament.

Our vigilance in this regard flows from the fact that biodiversity, of
which SANParks is a custodian, is one of the competitive and strategic
factors of the bioeconomy of the twenty-first century, thus the need for
effective governance and protection.

As a committee we felt that there is indeed a need to review the
biodiversity legislative regime, particularly with regard to threats such
as the introduction of genetically modified organisms. We have asked the
department to come back to us on this question.

With regard to the amendment of section 55, the Act has no empowering
section providing for SANParks to manage protected areas other than
national parks. Further provision has now been made for the Minister to
assign the management of world heritage sites and protected areas not
included under section 55(1)(a) of the Act, subject to written
documentation by the Minister.

Furthermore, to increase its exposure, provision is now made for SANParks
to attend international and similar initiatives identified by the Minister.

As roads in the park are neither national nor provincial, provision is now
made for SANParks to make and enforce traffic rules in all areas
administered by it. Previously, SANParks could only retain, as part of its
funds, money received in respect of offences committed within national
parks. This has now been expanded to include money collected for all
offences committed under the Act.

The amendment in clause 8 seeks to add a new schedule to the Act and it is
motivated by having reference to national parks contained only in the Act,
with a detailed description of the various parks.

With regard to the financial implications of the Bill, we found that it
doesn’t create further financial liabilities for the department. As the
ANC, we support this Bill. Thank you.

Mr G R MORGAN: Chairperson, hon members, Minister, our protected areas are
national assets and belong to all the people of South Africa. These
protected areas are havens for biodiversity and heritage, both of which
have intrinsic value.

It is important, at all times, that our parks are well funded, that they
create opportunities for wealth creation for people living in and around
the parks, and that opportunities to access these parks, particularly for
poor communities, are maximised.

While attending the People’s Assembly in Mpumalanga last week, the
portfolio committee had an opportunity to conduct oversight in the Kruger
National Park. I believe it was important for all the members of the
committee to see firsthand this important national asset and to understand
some of the complexities of running a park.

Among other things, we were fortunate to visit the open classroom run by
the My Acre of Africa initiative. This unique project provides access to
the park for many learners who otherwise would never have had the
opportunity to visit the park. The educators teach the children who attend
these workshops about the environment and why protecting it is important. I
would like to congratulate all the people involved with My Acre of Africa
and I wish it every success.

Turning specifically to the Bill, the Bill provides for provisions that
regulate flight corridors over protected areas. The DA argues that the
original proposed provisions were not strict enough as they provided too
much discretion to park authorities.

Flight corridors and how they are constructed have a fundamental impact on
the sense of place of parks. I was happy that an amendment to the Bill was
secured which provides for the need for environmental authorisations for
flight corridors in terms of section 24 of the National Environmental
Management Act to be implemented. This means that the parks will be obliged
to use an environmental impact assessment or similar environmental
management tool when establishing such corridors.

The clause related to provisions for the dissolution of SANParks caused
considerable consternation amongst many members of the public who made
submissions to the portfolio committee, mainly because it conceivably
allowed for national parks to be transferred to private entities.

My personal opinion is that there was no malicious intent by the department
in its original drafting, as SANParks needed to comply with the Income Tax
Act in this regard.

I agree, however, that the provisions needed to be strengthened. The
committee subsequently amended the clause to reflect that if dissolution
occurred, the assets would be transferred to the state or to an equivalent
Schedule 3A public entity contemplated in the Public Finance Management
Act.

For good measure, the committee also added that the winding up should be
done by an Act of Parliament. I believe all stakeholders were satisfied
with these amendments which reinforce the view that our national parks
belong to all South Africans. The DA supports the Bill. [Applause.]

Mrs C N Z ZIKALALA: Chairperson, a big part of our country’s appeal is its
natural beauty, as well as its unique characteristics. Our nature reserves,
national parks, world heritage sites and other protected areas are a key
component in the preservation of these assets. They must, therefore, be
maintained and managed with the utmost care and consideration so as to
ensure the sustainable development of our natural assets.

The Bill before us today introduces amendments that will go a long way in
achieving this. The expansion of the functions of SANParks is a key feature
of this Bill. Its expanded functions mean that it can now manage protected
areas which are not national parks, as well as world heritage sites
assigned to it. It can also set penalties and enforce traffic rules in such
national parks, special nature reserves, protected environments, world
heritage sites or other protected areas assigned to it.

I am also pleased that provision has been made for SANParks to participate
in identified initiatives, as this will increase their exposure and
knowledge and give them a chance to share the knowledge that they have. The
additional functions are empowering and will no doubt contribute to
sustainable development and to protected areas being better managed and
preserved.

However, we hope that capacity constraints will not hinder the performance
and effectiveness of the additional functions which SANParks will be tasked
with. The IFP supports the Bill. I thank you.

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, Minister, as was indicated, this Bill seeks to
provide a comprehensive list of all national parks and to assign such parks
to SANParks.

We have studied the Bill. We also understand the concerns expressed by
Animal Rights Africa relating to the possible privatisation of our parks
and we believe that their fears regarding the disposal of our parks and the
disposal of what was termed “family silver” have been allayed.

We also see the provision for flight corridors. This clearly is necessary
to protect life and the environment; and the management authority will be
imposing certain conditions. It is interesting, though, that we notice that
clearly the Defence Force and the testing of the South African Air Force
aircraft is allowed within identified protected air spaces. One wonders
what impact this will have on the environment.

We also notice the provision for traffic fines. I did wonder who would be
brave enough to man these speed traps in the Kruger National Park, but I
understand the rangers are already doing that! So we welcome that
provision. The ACDP will, therefore, accordingly support this Bill.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, this National Environmental Management:
Protected Areas Bill could not have come at a better time than in the month
that we celebrate and uphold our heritage - in terms of which the
protection of our natural environment falls far short.

We have a vast variety of flora and fauna and other life forms in our
national parks that we, without a doubt, consider to be a national
responsibility. In view of the amending Bill, we are pleased that
Parliament ensures exactly this.

It is unfortunate that poachers still manage to invade these parks and rape
our environment of its riches. We also expressed displeasure at the
suspension of the ban on the culling of elephants and we do certainly
advise the administration of preservation of all life. However, the MF does
support the Bill. I thank you.

Mr D K MALULEKE: Chairperson, hon members, comrades and friends, the Bill
before us today requires reference to the ANC’s broad policy statement
contained in our principles of environmental policy. The ANC believes that
all citizens of South Africa, present and future, have a right to a safe
and healthy environment and a life of wellbeing. The broad objective of our
environmental policy will be to fulfil this right. In this context, growth
and development within South Africa will be based on the principles of
sustainability.

The sustainability of our environment undoubtedly depends on a thought-out
legislative outcome, which ensures the designation and protection of
certain areas as worthy of being excluded from unreasonable exploitation,
and should therefore be preserved and, where possible and necessary, be
restored to its natural state.

Section 24 of the Constitution grants rights to environmental security for
every person, including people’s wellbeing and rights to participate and
enjoy the benefits of a healthy and well protected environment. This
constitutional directive has been enhanced by the implementation of the
National Environmental Management Act, Nema, of 1998. This Act also
provides mechanisms for the people to participate in decisions and
activities that safeguard a healthy environment, upon which the economy
depends.

The amendment of the Bill is to ensure that the principal Act, the National
Environmental Management: Protected Areas Act of 2003, is strengthened in
the following manner: to make provision for the Minister to periodically
update the schedule of the national parks; to extend the period of time for
the inclusion of an area of land into a national park; to provide for the
assignment of national parks, special nature reserves and world heritage
sites to SANParks; to make provision for flight corridors and permission of
the management authority to fly over national parks, special nature
reserves and world heritage sites, taking into account the protection of
the biodiversity and for public purposes; and to provide for the winding up
and dissolution of SANParks for tax purposes, though this dissolution will
require a parliamentary approval of a two-thirds majority. The ANC supports
the Amendment Bill.

The MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Chairperson, it is very
appropriate that we’re dealing with this legislation on the first day of
National Parks Week. For the remainder of this week access to most of our
national parks, with the exclusion of one or two, will be free of charge to
the public.

Over the last three years we have invested just over R500 million in our
national parks, not only consolidating our conservation estate, but also
improving infrastructure. We now have 22 national parks in the country and
a conservation estate of 4 million ha.

This legislation will help us to better manage our national parks and I
would like to thank all hon members and parties for their support.

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

               JURISDICTION OF REGIONAL COURTS AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Consideration of Bill)

There was no debate.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): I now recognise the Chief Whip of
the Majority Party.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Bill, as amended, be passed.

Motion agreed to.

Bill, as amended, accordingly passed.

                        RENAMING OF HIGH COURTS BILL

                           (Consideration of Bill)

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:


   That the Bill be passed.

Motion agreed to.

Bill accordingly passed.

  ROLE OF PARLIAMENTS IN ADVANCING NUCLEAR NONPROLIFERATION AND DISARMAMENT
   AND SECURING THE ENTRY INTO FORCE OF THE COMPREHENSIVE NUCLEAR TEST-BAN
                                   TREATY

                            (Debate on IPU Topic)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): I don’t have a speaker’s list with
me so I am not sure who is next. [Laughter.] Thank you. Hon Maloney, I see
you are not sitting in your seat, so I didn’t know whether to call you or
not.

Mrs L MALONEY: Chairperson, the topic we are dealing with today is one of
the Inter-Parliamentary Union, IPU, topics. The topic is about disarmament
and securing the entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban
Treaty of which our Parliament is a signatory. This debate is taking place
at the right time, when countries are yearning for peace and stability in
the world. This treaty we have signed, as a country, aspires to bringing
about that reality.

We have borrowed this world from future generations. It is, therefore,
incumbent on us to make sure that we nurture it and do all that we can in
ensuring that future generations do not carry the costs for which we are
responsible.

As a country, South Africa holds that a state must be allowed to exercise
its right to develop atomic energy for peaceful purposes in conformity with
articles 1 and 2. Article 1 states that each nuclear weapon state
undertakes not to transfer to any recipient nuclear weapons or other
nuclear explosive devices and not in any way to assist any non-nuclear
weapon state to manufacture or otherwise acquire such weapons or explosive
devices.

Article 2 states that each non-nuclear weapon state undertakes not to
receive from any source nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices,
not to manufacture or acquire such weapons or devices and not to receive
any assistance in their manufacture.

What is the policy around that? A policy affirming the principle that
benefits of peaceful applications of nuclear technology, including any
technological by-products, which may be derived by the nuclear weapon
states from the development of nuclear explosive devices, should be
available for peaceful purposes to all parties to the treaty, whether they
are a nuclear weapon or non-nuclear weapon state.

Our stance, as South Africa, has consistently reiterated the basic and
inalienable right of all states to develop atomic energy for peaceful
purposes in conformity with Articles 1 and 2, which I have already alluded
to, of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, NPT. South Africa cannot
support any restrictions on the inalienable right of states that fully
comply with their obligations under the NPT.

While we respect the sovereign right of any state that may decide not to
exercise its right, the right to the peaceful application of atomic energy
remains an inalienable one.

This Parliament is advocating the total ban of enforcement vis-à-vis the
partial test ban, which resulted in countries such as North Korea, Iran and
India to manipulate that part of the resolution by testing their nuclear
weapons in their respective countries. We, therefore, call on the US and
other superpower states, eg, Germany, France and others, not to play the
role of a referee and a player at the same time.

As this Parliament, we are proposing that an impartial body, that is, the
IAEA, must be capacitated and more resources must be pumped into that
structure to make sure that more power is given to it so that it isn’t just
a few individual countries taking control of the situation. I thank you
very much. [Applause.]

Mr J SELFE: Chairperson, there is something almost surreal about debating
the merits of nuclear nonproliferation on a day like today, since the only
thermonuclear explosion that threatens South Africa is happening within the
governing party! On a more serious note, ever since the discovery of
nuclear power, scientists and politicians have realised its twin capacities
to do harm or good, to sow destruction or to create prosperity.

At the heart of the global debate on nuclear nonproliferation is the simple
question of how one allows states to harness nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes, while preventing those states from developing weapons of mass
destruction. This debate is full of hypocrisy. The five states – the so-
called “nuclear weapon states” - are allowed to have weapons of mass
destruction. These states, the United States, Russia, Britain, France and
China, have some 30 000 nuclear weapons between them.

They are allowed to have these weapons simply because they happened to have
nuclear weapons before 1968, which is when the text to the Nuclear Non-
Proliferation Treaty, the so-called “NPT”, was adopted by the General
Assembly of the United Nations.

The rest of the world isn’t allowed to have those weapons. However, some
states do have them despite not being allowed to have them. These states
include India, Pakistan, Israel and North Korea. Other states, notably
Iran, may have the capacity to produce such weapons. South Africa is in a
class of its own. Between 1979 and 1989, it produced six indigenously
developed nuclear weapons and then dismantled these to the satisfaction of
the International Atomic Energy Agency and acceded to the NPT in 1991.

The use of nuclear power for peaceful purposes is regulated in
international law by the NPT. Article 4 gives all states, and I quote -

  ... the inalienable right ... to develop research, production and use of
  nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination and in
  conformity with articles I and II of this Treaty.


In other words, the NPT allows states to enrich uranium or produce
plutonium and to construct facilities to generate nuclear power, provided
such facilities are open to inspection by the IAEA and the IAEA is also
provided with information about the location and capacities of nuclear
weapons at the disposal of the nuclear weapon states. This is how it’s
supposed to work in theory.

The practice is far more complex. The development of nuclear technologies
is so rapid that it is difficult to police all such developments. It is
relatively easy to further enrich uranium used to generate power to the
stage where it can be used for destruction purposes. The states can
obstruct the IAEA inspectors or hide their facilities from inspection.

More complex still is the situation of the weapon states that are not part
of the NPT, such as India, Pakistan, Israel and North Korea. Such states
should, theoretically, be sanctioned but this happens inconsistently,
usually because of other political or strategic reasons, notably being the
allies of the United States in the war against terror.

Likewise, nonstates, such as terrorist organisations, could very easily
acquire weapons. Some have come close to acquiring this capacity in the
past, but the biggest challenge of all lies in the progress towards
disarmament. While some states have the capacity for nuclear weapons, other
states will want to protect themselves and will want to acquire similar or
even more destructive weapons in order to do so.

At the 2000 Review Conference of the NPT, it seemed as if, at last, solid
progress was being made towards the goal of disarmament. The Final
Document, adopted at the conclusion of the conference, included an
unequivocal undertaking by the five nuclear weapon states to accomplish the
total elimination of their nuclear arsenals, which could then lead to
nuclear disarmament.

Regrettably, the Bush administration subsequently withdrew its support for
key aspects of the undertaking and the continued bellicose attitudes of
both the US and Russia have set back this goal. Indeed, the 2005 NPT Review
Conference was unable to adopt any agreement at all.

The progress towards disarmament will greatly be facilitated by the
implementation of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty, the so-called
“CTBT”. It is very difficult to produce new armaments if the states are
prohibited from testing them. The early entry into force of this treaty and
a moratorium on nuclear testing, pending the entry into force of the
treaty, were some of the practical steps that South Africa, as one of the
member states of the New Agenda Coalition, suggested at, and which were
adopted by, the 2000 NPT Review Conference.

South Africa has both signed and acceded to the CTBT, but unfortunately not
all SADC states have done so. Angola, Malawi, Mozambique, Swaziland,
Zimbabwe and Mauritius have still to accede to the treaty. One of the
practical things that this Parliament can do to advance the entry into
force of the CTBT is to raise this matter pertinently at the SADC
Parliamentary Forum.

Maintaining and increasing international control over fissile material and
the specialised devices needed to build nuclear armaments remains an
elusive goal. Despite the fact that the NPT has more party states than any
other arms control treaty, its success in lowering the threat of a
thermonuclear meltdown has been patchy. It has failed to control states
that simply ignore the treaty or those states that have opaque nuclear
development programmes.

There are sharp disagreements on the principle of irreversibility, with
respect to nuclear disarmament measures, on strengthening compliance
enforcement and export controls and on limiting the transfer of nuclear
fuel cycle technologies. These difficulties and disagreements need,
however, to be assessed in terms of the alternative, which is a world held
hostage by weapons that can cause so much devastation to the future of
humankind as a whole that we will simply not be able to live on this
planet. We have no option. We must, as parliaments and governments,
continue to find one another in the goal of nuclear disarmament. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Chairperson, the IFP welcomes this debate on a
crucially important international issue which threatens mankind as a whole.
Nuclear weapons represent the most deadly force on earth, with the
potential to destroy whole cities and nations, exterminating hundreds of
millions of human beings.

During World War II, the Americans destroyed the Japanese cities of
Hiroshima and Nagasaki, which brought that war to an end. After that, more
and more countries developed nuclear weapons as a means of deterring their
enemies from acts of aggression. The perverse doctrine of Mutually-Assured
Destruction, Mad, kept the major powers from using nuclear weapons during
the Cold War, whilst other countries such as India, Pakistan and even South
Africa joined the nuclear club from the 1970s onwards.

The end of the Cold War and the break-up of the Soviet Union led to a more
dangerous world as unpredictable countries such as North Korea also raced
to acquire the Bomb. The power of having nuclear weapons and their
deterrent effect have meant that voluntary disarmament has not had much
success. Only South Africa voluntarily dismantled its nuclear weapons,
while it took hard sanctions to convince the North Koreans and Libyans to
stop weapon development.

Nuclear proliferation is continuing as it is thought that even Syria is
seeking nuclear weapons, perhaps with the help of the North Koreans. As
showed by recent arrests and convictions, a thriving black market exists
for nuclear components. Although Iran strongly denies that it is looking to
developing nuclear weapons, that country’s nuclear programme is viewed with
great unease and suspicion in the West.

What should parliamentarians do to advance nuclear disarmament and
nonproliferation? In my view, there are at least four steps that
parliaments could take. Firstly, in democratic systems where there is a
separation of powers, parliaments could hold their executive to account for
its policies, vis-à-vis nuclear development and nuclear energy used, as
well as their obligations in terms of international treaties.

Secondly, they could and should support the work of the International
Atomic Energy Agency that has been charged with advancing nonproliferation
through inspections and certification.

Thirdly, they should keep nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation high on
their agendas by debating those issues regularly; and fourthly, they should
co-operate in forums such as the International Parliamentary Union and
others to present a unified front against nuclear weapons development and
in favour of disarmament.

Nuclear power could be harnessed peacefully for electricity-generation. It
presents humankind with a source of clean energy that would limit carbon
emissions and address global warming. But, as parliamentarians, we should
remain vigilant and constantly be careful about nuclear arms development
and proliferation. That should be our duty to the people who elected us and
to mankind. [Applause.]

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Chairperson, ladies and gentlemen, the advent of nuclear
weapons has fundamentally shifted international relations. Nuclear weapons
were used to end the Second World War. They also ushered in the Cold War
era and the politics of “might makes right”. Not a single life on this
planet was unaffected by the brutal politics inspired by nuclear might.

Under this constant threat of a nuclear holocaust, the lives of ordinary
people even in democracies were often governed, not by the parliaments they
elected, but the considerations and agendas of the two super powers. The
decades of intrigue and proxy warfare that happened during the Cold War era
led to a number of states pursuing their own warfare capacity.

Proliferation of nuclear weapons made the world even less safe and inspired
others to also acquire this ultimate deterrent. As long as the US and USSR
remained locked in a race to build new and bigger nuclear weapons and
stronger missiles to deliver them, the less credibility there was for any
attempt to prevent proliferation among other states.

Eventually the super powers acknowledged the futility and madness of the
nuclear arms race and the complex negotiations for stockpile reductions
commenced. Alas, this came after several other states had also acquired
this terrible technology. South Africa has been the only country to date
which has voluntarily abandoned the nuclear warfare programme and
dismantled its existing stockpiles.

The good news is that the majority of nuclear states have elected
parliaments. They include countries such as the US, Russia, UK, France,
India, Pakistan and Israel, whilst countries such as China are moving more
towards more democratic and accountable forms of governance. Therefore it
is imperative that we encourage them to reduce their stockpiles and cease
further testing. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chairperson, the following extract taken from No Immediate
Danger, Prognosis for a Radioactive Earth, written by biostatistician,
Rosalie Bertelie, would, I hope, help us as we consider the role of
Parliament in advancing nuclear nonproliferation and disarmament and
securing the entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty.


  In the dim light of a hospital room, seven-year-old Jimmy was remembering
  the day on which he was told that he had leukaemia. He remembered his
  mother’s tears, his father’s bewildered anger, and the alien feeling of
  the hospital environment. Then his mind replayed the nausea, the diarrhoea
  caused by radiation and chemotherapy, his hair falling out and kids
  laughing at him. Jimmy died gently, exhausted from having lost so much
  blood. His tissue had broken down completely, and he was bleeding from
  every opening in his body. His bed looked like a battlefield.

Jimmy’s story is just one of hundreds of thousands of similar stories
related to the nuclear age. Radiation released from every step of the
nuclear weapons production cycle and in the testing of the nuclear weapons,
has spread mostly unnoticed and insidiously around the globe. Radioactivity
has leaked into the environment from underground nuclear tests; large areas
of land are uninhabitable as a result of atmospheric and underground
nuclear testing; and indigenous people, their children and their children’s
health and livelihoods have been affected by nuclear weapons tests.

The radiation we are talking about causes congenital defects, mental
retardation, immune destruction, cancer, stillbirths and other health
problems. It is also responsible for environmental problems. With this in
mind, the Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty, CTBT, was established.
This forbids nuclear weapons test explosions and any other nuclear
explosions. It aims at eliminating nuclear weapons by constraining the
development and qualitative improvement of new and more advanced nuclear
weapons.

Nuclear weapons production, testing, possession, deployment, clean-up, and
containment of radioactive products are extremely dangerous and hazardous
to both the environment and the human race. Clearly parliaments have a
responsibility and a role to play in ensuring that people and nations are
protected, by constraining and prohibiting the production of nuclear
weapons. I thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, the MF is of the understanding that the SA
government is set to invest R4 million in talks on nuclear energy in the
country. We are of the opinion that if this has been considered by the
executive, then it would be with good reason and in consideration of our
international responsibilities and agreements.

The term “nuclear” always had adverse effects because of thoughts of its
uses and side effects. It has been proven that, in many instances, nuclear
energy had and has effects on community health and is a detrimental threat
in war. However, we are eager to see what the environmental impact
assessment report and the specialist studies of the proposed pebble bed
modular reactor, PBMR, demonstration plant in Koeberg has to show on this
matter.

However, the MF sees no harm in engaging in talks on nuclear energy. In the
report drafted by Eskom on the new conventional nuclear power station, it
has been said that, and I quote:

  Nuclear power emits proportionately the same quantity of greenhouse gases
  as renewable energy forms like wind and solar power, and only a hundredth
  of the average emissions of power that has been generated by coal, oil
  and natural gas.


It has further been indicated that nuclear power has the potential to make
substantial contributions to sustainable development and a significant
contribution to reducing South Africa’s gas emissions. In view of this and
our international commitment to tackle the problems of our ozone layer, the
MF feels confident in our considering nuclear energy and opening the debate
on its pros and cons.

The MF would be very interested in exploring every avenue that could
contribute to a better life for our people and the development of South
Africa.

Mr E N N NGCOBO: Chairperson, hon Ministers and hon members, I stand here
before you to debate the role of Parliament in advancing nuclear
nonproliferation and disarmament, and securing the entry into force of the
Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty, CTBT.

The history of the CTBT can be traced back to the early fifties, when
public concern was roused as a result of radioactive fallout from the
atmosphere, owing to nuclear testing and the escalating arms race. Over 50
explosions were registered between 16 July 1945 and 31 December 1953, when
the first nuclear explosive test was conducted by the United States at
Alamogordo in New Mexico.

It was in 1954 that Prime Minister Nehru of India voiced the heightened
international concern and proposed the elimination of all nuclear test
explosions worldwide. However, within the context of the Cold War
atmosphere at the time, scepticism in the capability to verify compliance
with the CTBT posed a major obstacle to any agreement. It was only in 1963
that limited success was achieved with the signing of the Partial Test-Ban
Treaty, which banned nuclear tests in the atmosphere, under water and in
space.

However, even at this partial level of nuclear test banning, France and
China never signed the agreement. A major step towards nonproliferation of
nuclear weapons was subsequently achieved with the signing of the Nuclear
Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1968.

Under the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty of 1968, nonnuclear weapon
states were prohibited from, inter alia, possessing, manufacturing or
acquiring nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices. All
signatories, including nuclear weapon states, were committed to the goal of
total nuclear disarmament.

It is interesting to note at this juncture that it was almost about the
same time, in 1965, that the United States decided to provide the apartheid
regime in the Republic of South Africa with the Safari Research Reactor
that is being used today at Pelindaba. This gave the apartheid regime the
power to develop six of the seven nuclear devices that it sought to use as
what it termed “a nuclear deterrent strategy” based on nuclear terror
against the so-called “forces of communism” advancing on its northern
borders.

However, it did not end there; in 1977, the US observed the nuclear test
explosion conducted by the apartheid regime around the South Pole, south of
Cape Town. This test was played down by the US government.

On 13 October 1999, the US openly rejected the ratification of the CTBT and
dealt a blow to this effort that was first proposed by the then Prime
Minister of India in 1954 and followed up by all parties to the Partial
Test-Ban Treaty in 1993, with strong support from the UN General Assembly.

It was only in 1996 that the CTBT draft was finalised with its two annexes,
albeit without a consensus on the adoption of the text being reached. This
was after Australia decided to send the text to the UN General Assembly in
New York where it was submitted as a draft resolution.

On 10 September 1996, the treaty was finally adopted by a large majority,
comprising more than two thirds of member states in the UN General
Assembly. The US has finally signed the treaty, but without ratifying it.

An ongoing debate on the treaty is that, if the US succeeds in ratifying
the treaty, this would lead, firstly, to an international norm that would
push other nuclear-capable countries such as Pakistan, India, North Korea,
etc, to sign. Secondly, it would not compromise US national security
because the science-based Stockpile Stewardship Programme serves as a means
of maintaining current US nuclear capabilities without physical detonation.


Thirdly, it would lead to constraining worldwide nuclear proliferation by
vastly limiting a country’s ability to make nuclear arms that only such
testing can ensure.

In terms of the monitoring of the CTBT, the existing variety of technology
is to be used to monitor compliance with the treaty. This includes
seismology, hydroacoustics, infrasound as well as radionuclide monitoring.
Such technologies are used to monitor the underground waters and the
atmosphere for any sign of a nuclear explosion.

An aggressive approach must, therefore, be sought through instruments such
as the IPU and regional and continental blocs of the globe to force
reluctant nuclear powers to ratify the treaty in support of the efforts
that have so far been developed by the Preparatory Commission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty Organisation. This is an
international body based in Vienna, created to build a verification regime.
Its duties include the establishment and provisional operation of the
network of monitoring stations, the creation of an international data
centre and the development of on-site inspection capabilities.

As we speak, 337 facilities of the monitoring network have been established
and allocated all over the globe by this commission. By January 2008,
almost 70% of such facilities were already operational for this purpose. I
thank you. [Applause.]
Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 16:34.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           FRIDAY, 22 AUGUST 2008

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1. The Minister for Public Enterprises

   a) Report and Financial Statements of Eskom Holdings Limited for 2007-
      2008, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
      Financial Statements for 2007-2008.


2. The Minister of Labour

   a) Report and Financial Statements of Agriculture Sector Education and
      Training Authority for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
      General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
      2007-2008 [RP 67-2008].


   b) Report and Financial Statements of the Finance, Accounting,
      Management Consulting and other Financial Services Sector Education
      and Training Authority for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
      Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
      Information for 2007-2008 [RP 74-2008].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

CREDA INSERT REPORTS - T080822e-insert1 PAGES 1594-1621

                           MONDAY, 25 AUGUST 2008

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Local Government Budgets and Expenditure Review (2008), 2003/04
        - 2009/10 [RP 113-2008].

 2. The Minister of Labour

     a) Report and Financial Statements of Productivity SA for 2007-2008,
        including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
        Statements for 2007-2008.

     b) Report and Financial Statements Clothing, Textiles, Footwear and
        Leather Sector Education and Training Authority (CTFL-Seta) for
        2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2007-2008 [RP 70-2008].

     c) Report and Financial Statements of the Banking Sector Education and
        Training Authority (Bank-Seta) for 2007-2008, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008
        [RP 68-2008].


 3. The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

     a) 2007-2008 Yearly Report to Parliament in terms of section 26(1) of
        the National Environmental Management Act (NEMA), 1998 (Act No 107
        of 1998).


     b) 2005-2006 Yearly Report to Parliament in terms of section 26(1) of
        the National Environmental Management Act (NEMA), 1998 (Act No 107
        of 1998).


National Assembly

1. The Speaker


    (a)     The President of the Republic submitted the following letter
        dated 31 July 2008 to the Speaker of the National Assembly
        informing Members of the Assembly of the employment of the South
        African National Defence Force in Uganda, for service in fulfilment
        of the International Obligations of the Republic of South Africa
        towards the Republic of Uganda:


        EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE IN UGANDA,
        FOR SERVICE IN FULFILMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS OF THE
        REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA


        This serves to inform the National Assembly that I have authorised
        the employment of the South African National Defence Force (SANDF)
        personnel Uganda, in fulfilment of the international obligations of
        the Republic of South Africa towards the Republic of Uganda, to
        provide technical assistance in the destruction of explosives and
        ammunition.


        This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002).


        A total of seven (7) SANDF members were employed as from 15 July
        2008 to 30 November 2008 to assist in the destruction of explosives
        and ammunition in Uganda.


        I will communicate this report to members of the National Council
        of Provinces, and wish to request that you bring the contents
        hereof to the attention of the National Assembly.


        Yours Sincerely,


        signed
        TM Mbeki

                          WEDNESDAY, 27 AUGUST 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(3) classified the following
         Bill as a section 75 Bill:

          a) Bible Society of South Africa Act Repeal Bill [B 70 – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).
National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Committees

      The following changes have been made to the membership of Committees:

    Portfolio Committee on Communications


    Alternate:              Morutoa, Ms MR


    Portfolio Committee on Defence


    Appointed:         Koornhof, Mr GW


    Alternate:         Schoeman, Dr EA


    Discharged:        Fazzie, Mr MH


    Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs: Sub-Committee on International
    Affairs


    Appointed:         Jacob, Mr AC


    Discharged:        Njobe, Ms MAA


    Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs


    Appointed:         Jacob, Mr AC


    Discharged:        Motlanthe, Mr KP


    Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development
    Appointed:              Ngaleka, Ms E


    Discharged:             Ndzanga, Ms R


    Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government


    Appointed:         Nash, Mr J


    Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises


    Appointed:         Hendrickse, Mr PAC


    Portfolio Committee on Public Works


    Appointed:         Nyembe, Mr KKM


    Discharged:        Gogotya, Mr NJ
    Portfolio Committee on Social Development


    Appointed:         Fazzie, Mr MH


    Discharged:        Koornhof, Mr GW


    Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry


    Alternate:              Zulu, Mr BZ


    Joint Budget Committee


    Appointed:         Mkongi, Mr BM


    Joint Constitutional Review


    Appointed:         Nash, Mr J


    Discharged:        Ndzanga, Ms R


    Standing Committee on Public Accounts


    Appointed:         Gumede, Mr DM


    Discharged:        Nene, Mr J
    Committee on Private Members’ Legislative Proposals and Special
    Petitions


    Appointed:         Gogotya, Mr NJ

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


        1. The Minister of Labour

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Insurance Sector Education
        and Training Authority (Inseta) for 2007-2008, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2007-2008 [RP 79-2008].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Safety and Security
        Sector Education and Training Authority (SAS-Seta) for 2007-2008,
        including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 84-2008].

     c) Report and Financial Statements of the Manufacturing, Engineering
        and Related Services Sector Education and Training Authority (MER-
        Seta) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008
        [RP 82-2008].

     d) Report and Financial Statements of the Forest Industries Education
        and Training Authority (FIETA) for 2007-2008, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2007-2008 [RP 76-2008].


     e) Report and Financial Statements of Department of Labour – Vote 16
        for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 and
        the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information of the Sheltered Employment Factories for
        2007-2008 [RP 60-2008].


     f) Report and Financial Statements of Umsobomvu Youth Fund for 2007-
        2008, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements for 2007-2008.


     g) Report and Financial Statements of Transport Education and Training
        Authority for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2007-2008 [RP 87-2008].

     h) Report and Financial Statements of Services Sector Education and
        Training Authority for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2007-2008 [RP 88-2008].

     i) Report and Financial Statements of Mining Qualifications Authority
        for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP
        86-2008].

     j) Report and Financial Statements of the Food and Beverages
        Manufacturing Industry Sector Education and Training Authority for
        2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP
        75-2008].

     k) Report and Financial Statements of the Wholesale and Retail Sector
        Education and Training Authority for 2007-2008, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 88-2008].

        2. The Minister for Public Enterprises
   Report and Financial Statements of Alexkor for 2007-2008, including the
   Report of the Independent Auditors for 2007-2008.

3) The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

      a) Government Notice No 808 published in the Government Gazette No
         31281 dated 1 August 2008: Intention to declare certain land
         situated in the Harrismith and Bethlehem Registration Division,
         Free State Area as part of the Golden Gate Highlands National
         Park, made in terms of section 33(1)(a) of the National
         Environment: Protected Areas Act, 2003 (Act No 57 of 2003).


      b) Government Notice No 835 published in the Government Gazette No
         31301 dated 8 August 2008: National Moratorium on the trade of
         individual Rhinoceros Horns within South Africa, made in terms of
         section 57(2) of the National Environment: Biodiversity Act, 2004
         (Act No 10 of 2004).

      c) Report and Financial Statements of the Isimangaliso Wetland Park
         Authority for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
         for 2007-2008 and the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements and Performance Information of the  People
         and Parks Development for 2007-2008.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly
   1. Draft Report of the Portfolio Committee on Education on its Strategic
      Workshop with the Department of Education on 9 – 11 March 2008 at
      Villa Via Hotel in Gordon’s Bay:

      1.    Background:

      The management of the committee, having conducted a number of
      meetings, undertook a decision to conduct a three-day strategic
      workshop with the Department of Education which included three guest
      speakers.

      The strategic planning workshop intended to achieve the following
objectives:
      ▪ To obtain a deeper understanding of the key challenges
        confronting our education system in the provision of quality
        education as well opportunities that can be exploited.
      ▪ To obtain deeper understanding of the new model of parliamentary
        oversight and accountability in order to improve the quality of the
        Committee’s work.
      ▪ To identify key strategic issues to be factored in the
        development of the committee’s programme.
      ▪ To identify relevant sub-themes and activities for the purpose of
        developing a programme of action that would promote the
        provisioning of quality education.

      2.    Delegation:
      The delegation constituted a multi-party delegation of the Committee.
      The delegation was led by the Chairperson of the Committee, Prof S M
      Mayatula (ANC) accompanied by Adv A Gaum (ANC), Ms P Mashangoane
      (ANC), Ms J Matsomela (ANC), Ms V Mentor (ANC), Mr G Mosala (ANC), Mr
      B Mthembu (ANC), Mr R Ntuli (ANC), Mr R van den Heever (ANC), Mr G
      Boinamo (DA), Ms D van der Walt (DA), and Ms C Dudley (ACDP).
      The support staff of the Committee consisted of:


      Mr A Kabingesi (Committee Secretary), Mr A Mphunga (Committee
      Researcher) and Ms N Mxinwa (Party Researcher).

      The three special guest speakers consisted of:
      Prof P Christie (Cape Peninsula University of Technology, CPUT), Prof
      C De la Rey (University of Cape Town, UCT) and Hon. O. Bapela, MP
      (House Chairperson, Parliament).


      The Department of Education was presented by:
      Dr C Madiba, Chief Financial Officer: Strategic Planning, Dr M
      Mulchany, Special Advisor: Ministry of Education, Mr D Ngobeni,
      Director: Director-General’s Office, Dr W Makgalanchenche, Director
      Strategic: Planning, Mr D Hindle, Director- General: Department of
      Education and Mr E Surty, Deputy Minister: Department of Education.

      3.    Findings:
      The following formed part of the key findings:
       ▪ The Quality Improvement and Development Programme (QIDSUP) by the
         department has been a good example to redress inequality in
         schools.
       ▪ The provincial education departments do not comply with national
         norms and standards set by the national department.
       ▪ There is a need to look at education through the “Backward
         Mapping Approach”.
       ▪ It was discovered that the department does not provide the
         Committee with performance and quarterly reports as it is supposed
         to.
       ▪ The new Oversight Model will enhance the ability of Members to do
         oversight and it will also enhance the ability of the Committee to
         exercise its legislative authority over the executive more
         effectively.
       ▪ The way the committee operates currently has to be reviewed.
       ▪ The authority of the Committee has not been recognised as it
         should by the Executive.


      4.    Opening and Welcome
      The Chairperson welcomed all Members and special guests to the
      Workshop. He informed them that the workshop was a wonderful
      opportunity for the Members of the committee to debate important
      issues that affect the Committee and come up with solid
      recommendations for the way forward of the committee. The objective of
      the session as follows.
      ▪ Education and Health have been prioritised as the mainstream of
        government in the post-Polokwane conference.
      ▪ The committee would highlight its priorities for the year.
      ▪ The committee will monitor and prioritise the main priorities of
        the department.
      ▪ The committee will gain an insight into education from different
        perspectives.
      ▪ The committee will observe broadly what is happening in regard to
        the laws that have been passed.

      5.    Presentations:

      5.1 Towards the Provision of Quality Education for all in the Second
      Decade of Freedom and Democracy, presentation by Prof Christie:

      Prof Christie’s presentation was based on the following outlines:
      ▪ Changing education systems
      ▪ What does quality education entail?
      ▪ What are some of South Africa’s achievements in the First Decade?
      ▪ What are some of the challenges facing South Africa in the Second
        Decade?
      ▪ Some considerations in planning for quality education for all in
        the Second Decade.

      Prof Christie began the presentation by highlighting the importance of
      a good policy. She indicated that creating a good policy will bring
      good changes to the ground. However, it is not easy to achieve that
      since the education system is multi layered and complex. The biggest
      challenge of policy makers is the lack of understanding of the reality
      in schools, and without this knowledge it is not possible to develop a
      good policy. An example of Elmore’s “Backward Mapping Approach” was
      given as an example that could be used to develop good policies.
      Interaction between students and teachers in the classroom forms the
      basis of what quality education entails. In learning outcomes it was
      highlighted that, schools are accountable for the results they
      produce. However, this depends on the district’s capacity and
      accountability. In some schools there are teachers who cannot teach
      which blocks the whole system and affects the ability of students to
      learn.

      Achievements in the First Decade:
         ▪ More equitable distribution of state resources, e.g “No-Fee
           School”
         ▪ Redesigned and restructured system
         ▪ More access to schools
         ▪ Improvements to school provisioning
         ▪ Moving towards achieving Education For All (EFA) goals.


      Challenges in the Second Decade:
         ▪ Persistent inequalities, different rates of progress through
           the system.
       ▪ Instances of poor quality in the Trends in International
         Mathematics and Science Study (TIMMS) test South Africa came last
         and in the United Nations Educational and Scientific Cultural
         Organization (UNESCO) survey South Africa ended on 30% below
         Senegal.
         ▪ Senior Certificate results of the country are not improving
         ▪ Big difference between urban and rural systematic tests.


      Consideration in making quality education for all:
         ▪ Ensure supply of well-remunerated teachers
         ▪ Need to do well in Maths and Science
         ▪ Recognise one size does not fit all
         ▪ Set realistic policies for schools
         ▪ Adopt a backward mapping approach.

      The following formed part of the discussion:
      ▪ It emerged that the issue of mother tongue language is very
        important and that teachers needed to emphasis its use. How do
        teachers ensure that there is quality education in the classrooms?
        What are the measures in place to get rid of bad teachers?
      ▪ A concern was raised about the issue of teenage pregnancy in
        schools. Did the country have plans to reduce this problem in high
        schools?
      ▪ What is the role of parents in schools in relation to teenage
        pregnancy?
      ▪ Mozambique has a high literacy rate than South Africa. Most South
        African students cannot read well and the dropout rate in schools
        is very high. To address this more support mechanisms are required.
      Responses:
      ▪ The mother tongue issue is associated with education and
        politics. There will be no choice in future for teachers to teach
        in the mother tongue of learners where it is required. In
        monitoring the system, it is dangerous that we do not have
        inspectors. The new Occupation Specific Dispensation (OSD) will
        definitely benefit good teachers who will provide quality
        education.
      ▪ Research shows that teenage pregnancy is not spread as result of
        the child support grant. In combating this problem, parents play a
        crucial role in educating their children about this issue.
      ▪ Parents have a major role in protecting the schools. If the
        school does not have a good parental relationship, it will be
        vandalized.
      ▪ There is no quality system without good results. The country has
        many teachers who cannot teach the New Curriculum. The current
        budget is not a problem, but capacity is the main problem.


      5.2 South African Higher Education - Challenges and Opportunities,
      presentation by Prof De la Rey:
      Professor C De la Rey welcomed the opportunity to present to the
      Committee. The committee congratulated on her for appointment as the
      new Chief Executive Office (CEO) of the Council on Higher Education
      (CHE). Her presentation focused on the following key issues:
          ▪ National Plan for Higher Education
          ▪ OECD Review
          ▪ SWOT Analysis of Higher Education
          ▪ Key challenges
          ▪ Role of Council of Higher Education (CHE).
      One of the main issues in the National Plan for Higher Education is
      the re-engineering of the Higher Education system. In addition, equity
      of access is another critical issue that was highlighted. Steering
      mechanisms such as funding, planning and quality assurance needed to
      be taken seriously. The higher education system was a building block
      of any education system in a country. Research shows that South Africa
      produces very low amount of PhD graduates as compared to other middle-
      income countries. However, it was highlighted that there was a need to
      focus more on Maths and Science as well as increasing research
      capacity in higher education. Another critical issue is the need to
      invest more funds in Higher Education.
      SWOT Analysis of Higher Education:


   a) Strengths:
         ▪ Improved level of education
         ▪ Infrastructure is a legitimate concern in the country
         ▪ Our institutions have pockets of efficiency and excellence
         ▪ There are number of recent improvements in Higher Education
           that can be pointed.

   b) Weakness:
    ▪ Failure in management of higher education institutions is a major
      concern
    ▪ The country is experiencing a high rate of  unemployed graduates
    ▪ There is a high drop-out rate and low through put in higher
      education istitutions
    ▪ Skewed research output.

   c) Opportunities:
      ▪ South Africa’s education system has a good international standard
        and recognition, e.g  the University of Cape Town (UCT) is among
        the top Universities in the world
      ▪ The country’s economic growth is fairly stable
      ▪ Introduction of internship programmes to give graduates the
        opportunity to be employed.

   d) Threats:
      ▪ There is a lack of co-ordination in higher education institutions
      ▪ Reality of student life in our residences is not pleasing at all
      ▪ Inability to produce skilled labour.

Key challenges:
  ▪ There is a need to review the National Plan and Institutions should
    have a longer term plan for education. e.g Japan has a 100 years term
    plan for education.
  ▪ Not enough school learners go to higher education institutions because
    of socio economic- dynamics
  ▪ Internationalisation of our higher education institutions is
    inactive.

Role of CHE:
    ▪ Providing considered advice based on evidence and expert opinion
    ▪ Quality assurance
    ▪ Information gathering and dissemination
    ▪ Posing questions, facilitating debate
    ▪ Preparing independent reports on system performance against policy
      objectives.

The following formed part of the discussion:
  ▪ The country has a skills shortage. What are the challenges and what
    can be done to solve this problem?
  ▪ What is being done with unemployed graduates?
  ▪ The issue of public confidence cannot be handled by higher education
    institutions only. HEI’s do not look at leadership dynamics and
    communities that are around them.
  ▪ How do you promote a person to be a professor?
  ▪ In relation to international standards, how do you measure
    international institutions with the country’s institutions?
  ▪ What mechanisms are in place to reduce high drop-out rate in higher
    education institutions?
  ▪ In relation to failures and gaps in governance, what is being done
    about the misuse of the mandate of the SRC in our HEI’s?
  ▪ How do we deal with issues of equity and equality?
  ▪ Does NSFAS contribute the to high drop-out rate in HEI’s?

Responses:
  ▪ Te country is not producing enough graduates with special skills in
    key areas such as Maths and Science. Another major challenge is that the
    few skilled people that the country produces leave in search of greener
    pastures overseas. Chemical Engineering has been an example of success
    in the country. The problem is the lack of capacity in our system.
  ▪ There is no institution in the country that has a problem of
    unemployable graduates. The Council of Higher Education has a monitoring
    policy tool to track the employability of graduates.
  ▪ Community engagement with HEI’s is a key element. However, the reality
    is that there is not a good relationship between HEI’s and the
    communities that surround them.
  ▪ International standards can be measured in many ways. Ranking systems
    can somehow be biased.
  ▪ In order for one to be promoted as a professor, a number of aspects
    are considered. Firstly, the academic performance of an individual plays
    a major role.
  ▪ Student leaderships often push management to make wrong decisions. All
    SRC in HEI’s have separate budgets allocated to them. Most of the
    management of these SRC are often greedy for money, and as a result
    accept sponsorships promoting alcohol within the institution.
  ▪ Equity is a challenge in the country. However co-operation is the key
    to solve this problem.
  ▪ National Student Financial Aid Scheme is a very good financial aid
    scheme. However, the scheme’s criterion is missing an important income
    group, where both parents are working but unable to pay the required
    funds by the institutions.  The lifestyle of students is very expensive
    and it is often a problem for those students who cannot afford it.
Day 2:
5.3 Presentation on the Draft New Model of Oversight by Hon. Bapela MP:
Hon Bapela indicated that the New Model was still a draft and was to be
finalised by the task team the following Wednesday.
His presentation focused on the following key issues:
    ▪ Legislation
    ▪ Oversight and Accountability
    ▪ Public Participation
    ▪ International Forum.
Since 1994, Parliament has done considerable work in passing legislation.
Parliament passed about 100 pieces of legislation per year.  Research shows
that legislation that has been coming to Parliament in the past five years
has declined as compared with previous years.

In defining oversight Hon Bapela mentioned that it is a constitutionally
mandated function of the legislative organs of state to scrutinise
executive action. Parliament has a legislative power of action over the
Executive. This means that Parliament can summon anyone to appear before
and report to it as a way of exercising its authority. Committees of
Parliament were designed in a manner to observe and scrutinise executive
action. The Inter-Parliamentary Union’s studies the show South African
Parliament as the leader in terms of oversight.

The Committee was informed that it is not only Parliament that conducts
oversight over the Executive and also other bodies like the Auditor-General
and the Chapter 9 institutions. On the absence of legislation to regulate
the financial administration of Parliament, Parliament is also accountable
to the Committee on Public Accounts. The President is questioned by
Parliament, unlike in Ghana, where no one has the authority to question the
President. This means that Parliament, regardless of its enormous powers,
is accountable.

Public participation forms part of the key role of Parliament. Parliament
is the voice of the people; therefore it is a representative of all people
of the country. The public is regularly invited to make submissions before
legislation can be passed. All laws made in Parliament are passed with the
mission to ensure a better life for all citizens.

Parliament participates in international forums. This means that it does
not operate in isolation.  It has partnerships with other international
legislative bodies. The importance of international forums is that Members
have an opportunity to share their political experiences with other
international stakeholders. Parliament will be hosting the Inter-
Parliamentary Union (IPU) on 13 – 18 April 2008, a good example of an
international forum.

The following formed part of the discussion:
 ▪ International participation is critical in our constitution. However,
   some Members representing Parliament in international forums do not
   submit reports.
 ▪ The issue of oversight in our constituency is a problem. Members are
   often told to ask for permission before conducting oversight. What is
   being done to improve this?
 ▪ There is a problem with regard to power relations between Parliament
   and the Executive. Committees are often taken lightly by most
   cepartments. What can be done to solve this problem?
 ▪ The issue of Member’s training is compulsory.  What is the significance
   of the training?

Responses:
 ▪ It is a responsibility of a Member to bring a report of the conference
   or international forum that he/she participated in before the House for
   debate.
 ▪ There is a lack of space in Parliament. However, construction opposite
   the 90 Plein Street Building is taking place for the development of the
   new Chamber. The 120 Plein Street Building will belong to Parliament
   soon.
 ▪ The new model does not require Members of Parliament to apply for
   permission before conducting oversight visits. However, the model
   requires that a surprise visit not disrupt activities of a place.
 ▪ Parliament has been undermined by the executive and there is a need for
   committees to exercise their legislative power over the departments.
 ▪ Training of Members will empower Members to engage substantially in
   presentations.

5.4 Department of Education’s Annual Programme Review:
Dr Chris Madiba, Chief Financial Officer (CFO) in Strategic Planning
handled the presentation. He apologised on behalf of the Director General
Mr D Hindle, who was attending an important meeting with the Minister. His
presentation focused on four broad priorities namely:

    ▪ Dealing with poverty
    ▪ Skills development
    ▪ Review of the National Qualifications Framework
    ▪ Quality improvement

   a) Dealing with poverty
     ▪ The declaration of “No Fee Schools” has been a major achievement by
       the department in combating poverty especially in poor schools.
       Schools in quintiles 1, 2, and some schools in quintile 3 have been
       declared “No Fee Schools”. Approximately 6 million learners are
       benefiting from this initiative.
     ▪ The National Schools Nutrition Plan (NSNP) ahs also contributed to
       combating poverty. The department has set aside a budget of R1, 152
       billion to feed poor schools. The department is planning to extend
       this programme to include secondary schools.
     ▪ The department established the FET Colleges Bursary Scheme to
       assist learners, especially from poor communities, and to access
       quality skills programmes in Further Education and Training Colleges.

   b) Skills Development
     ▪ The National Human Resource Development (NHRD) plan of the
       Department of Education and the Department of Labour has been a
       progressive plan to improve skills development. The implementation of
       the National Teacher Framework (NTF) on teacher education and
       development is another good example of progress made by the
       department.
     ▪ The Fundza Lushaka Teacher Bursary was introduced to increase the
       capacity of teachers in the education system.
     ▪ The Khari Gude Mass Literacy Campaign and the Adult Basic Education
       and Training (ABET) have been implemented to address illiterate
       adults. The cepartment has appointed a new chief executive officer
       (CEO) to advocate the Mass Literacy Campaign.
   c) Review of the National Qualifications Framework (NQF)
    ▪ The new policy on Higher Education Qualifications Framework (HQEF)
      has been approved.
    ▪ The Council of Higher Education (CHE) has considered the National
      Qualifications Framework (NQF) Bill.

   d) Quality Improvement:
    ▪ The department has a partnership with the Department of Water
      Affairs and Forestry (DWAF) to ensure supply of water and sanitation
      to schools.
    ▪ The department has been on a mission to get rid of mud schools in
      rural areas through its infrastructure development initiative.
    ▪ The implementation of the Integrated Quality Management System
      (IQMS) has been strengthened to assess and improve skills of teachers.
    ▪ The department is also implementing the National Education
      Infrastructure Management System that will give information about the
      status of schools.


5.5 Presentation on the Strategic Plan 2008-2011 & Budget and Operational
Plans 2008-2009:
Dr Chris Madiba, the Chief Financial Officer (CFO), in Strategic Planning
handled the presentation. He mentioned that the way the department has
drawn the operational plan will give strategic objectives and performance
indicators. The presentation highlighted the following strategic issues:
    ▪ Systems planning and monitoring
    ▪ General education
    ▪ Further education and training
    ▪ Social and school enrichment
    ▪ Higher education
    ▪ Budget Vote 13 Hearings
The CFO indicated that the Minister’s continuing vision is to impact
urgently and directly on poverty, unemployment, social cohesion by
providing quality education for all. Some of the continuing approaches
highlighted are the use of information and communication technology (ICT)
to enhance teaching and learning as well as building effective partnerships
with non governmental Organisations (NGO’s). The Ministers five broad
priorities are as follows:
    ▪ Quality improvement
    ▪ Health education
    ▪ Institutional development
    ▪ Dealing with poverty
    ▪ Human resource development


The Minister’s Goals for 2008/09 have been summarised as follows:
    ▪ Improving learning outcomes, especially reading, writing and
      numeracy
    ▪  Preparing for e-learning in schools
    ▪ Increasing the number of “No Fee Schools”
    ▪ Finalizing the recapitalization of FET Colleges
    ▪ Implementation of Kha Ri Gude Mass Literacy Campaign
    ▪ Review of Adult Education programmes
    ▪ Implementing the Education Laws Amendment Act  No 5 of 2002
    ▪ Building on Funza Lushaka teacher bursaries
    ▪ Improving the School Nutrition Programme

   a) Systems Planning and Monitoring
      The main priority areas for the planning and monitoring programme were
      reported as follows:


      Need to strengthen the Education Management Information System (EMIS)
      to collect data from schools. This data would be useful to analyse
      expenditure of education in schools, and improve labour relations to
      enhance quality teaching in schools.
      The Occupation Specific Dispensation (OSD) is intended to benefit
      teachers thereby ensuring improved teaching conditions


      General Education:
      The Department is planning to increase access to quality Early
      Childhood Development (ECD) opportunities particularly in poor
      communities. The Quality Management and Improvement Programme (QIDSUP)
      have been identified as a good example of redressing inequality in
      schools. Implementation of the QIDSUP initiative means more resources
      would be delivered to schools through the resource provision. The
      department has been focusing its plan in giving more attention to
      Learner Schools with special Education Needs (LSEN). The department
      has done this by implementing the Inclusive Education Policy to
      increase the access of learners with disabilities to schools as well
      as training teachers with necessary skills for disabled learners. The
      department is aiming to attract qualified and competent teachers
      through the OSD.

      Further Education and Training:
      • The department has been focusing on increasing the number of FET
        learners, with special emphasis on languages, mathematics and
        science proficiency. In addition, a national examination system for
        the National Senior Certificate has been implemented. The
        department supports the implementation of the National Curriculum
        Statement (NCS) in Grades 10 to 12. One of the key challenges has
        been to combat the drop out and repeat rate of Grade 10 to 12 and
        increasing the number of Dinaledi Schools.
      • In FET Colleges, the focus has been to strengthen the existing
        partnership with FET stakeholders e.g. SETA’s, NGO’s and
        Universities. The department has done a lot of work in improving
        the throughput and placement rate of college students. The
        department has been supporting the use of information and
        communication technology (ICT) in teaching and learning at all
        colleges.

   b) Social and School Enrichment
      ▪ The issue of safety of schools has been a very critical issue. In
        response to this, the department has done a lot of work in creating
        safe and caring schools by supporting schools that experience high
        rate of violence and crime.
      ▪ The department has introduced the Khari Gude Mass Literacy
        Campaign in response to the large number of illiterate adults.
      ▪ The department has ensured the implementation of the National
        Schools Nutrition Programme (NSNP) reaches poor schools and that
        learners are fed properly.

   c) Higher Education
      ▪ The department has embarked on a mission to promote
        internationalisation of Higher Education Institutions (HEI’s).
      ▪ The department has been assisting HEI with bursary schemes,
        especially for students from poor socio-economic background
      ▪ The department has also been promoting institutional diversity,
        especially in institutions that were unequally still exist.

Budget Vote Hearings:
  ▪ The total budget allocation for education has increased from R104,
    710,636 in 2007/08 to R 122,878,295 in 2008/09.
  ▪ The National Department has been allocated R18, 857,546, while most of
    the Budget has been aallocated to Provincial Education Departments at a
    cost of R 104,020,749.
  ▪ The Kwa-Zulu Natal Education Department is the leading province in
    terms of budget allocated with R 14,645,637 budget set aside for
    education.
  ▪ Northern Cape the largest province of the country has the least budget
    allocated for 2008/09 with R 2,286,860 set aside for education. The
    reason for this low budget is because the Province has the smallest
    population.
  ▪ The summary of Vote 13 indicated that the department spends more money
    on higher institutions of learning.

The following formed part of the discussion:
  ▪ A concern was raised regarding the operational plan of the department
    that it did not include quantitative indicators. The committee wanted to
    know whether the department had plans to include quantitative
    indicators. The department has been focusing extensively on the
    challenges in rural schools forgetting that there are poor schools in
    urban areas. This approach is not viable.
  ▪ The committee revealed that in some rural areas there were schools
    that were still collecting fees form poor learners. The committee wanted
    to know why this was happening. How does the department ensure safety
    for teachers and learners in school? What are the plans of the
    department for learners with disabilities?
  ▪ The Human Resource Development Framework agreements of the department
    were not reached yet. The committee wanted to know the problems in
    reaching agreements.
  ▪ A concern was raised on the issue of “No Fee Schools”. The committee
    wanted to know whether the department has reached the 40% target.
  ▪ A concern was raised regarding the Higher Education Qualifications
    Framework (HEQF). The committee wanted to know if the heads of Higher
    Education Institutions were consulted with regards to the HEQF, and what
    kind of feedback has the department received from them.
  ▪ It emerged that the department through the School Nutrition Programme
    (SNP) feeds learners from Grades 1-7. The Committee wanted to know
    whether the department had plans to expand this programme to other
    grades.
  ▪ A question was asked whether the department had a policy in place to
    deal with using school premises to operate businesses or other
    activities.

Responses:
  ▪ Quantitative indicators are very important and provide analytical
    data. However, the department has been struggling to provide them. The
    department has been focusing on rural schools while there is mass
    poverty in urban schools.
  ▪ The issue of schools still collecting fees from poor learners is
    totally unacceptable. The reason the department introduced “No Fee
    Schools” was to deal with this problem.
  ▪ The National Schools Nutrition Programme (NSNP) should be extended to
    secondary schools. However, the department does not have funds o extend
    this programme.
  ▪ The safety at schools is a priority for the department. There is a
    section within the department that has been established to deal with the
    issue of safety at schools.
  ▪ The corruption of scholar transport is a major concern. The department
    monitors scholar transport in provinces. The problem is of capacity in
    the Provinces to deal with this challenge.
  ▪ There is a change in the structuring of the HEQF to stretch it up to
    level 10, in order to solve the problems of learners from FET Colleges
    not getting enough attention on their qualifications.
  ▪ Currently legislation does not deal with the hiring of school premises
    to conduct other activities.

5.6 PC on Education Review of Activities 2007:
Mr Randall van den Heever welcomed the opportunity to present to the
committee.  He began the presentation by indicating that he has considered
the 2007 annual report of the committee in reviewing the committee’s
activities for 2007. The Report had as its main subsection the following:
      ▪ Objectives of the Committee
      ▪ Various milestones of the activities of the Committee
      ▪ Challenges of the Committee
      ▪ Departmental entities overseen by the DoE
      ▪ Meetings held in 2007
      ▪ Oversight visit by the Committee
      ▪ International Study Tours
      ▪ Papers referred to the Committee
      ▪ Budget Vote
      ▪ Annual Reports of entities
      ▪ Support Staff

He further indicated that, in order to determine the measure of success of
the committee, there is a need to consider and interrogate the objectives
set for the committee and the extent to which the committee has fulfilled
these objectives.

Challenges facing the Committee:
 ▪ The Committee’s interaction with the NCOP is weak in respect of
   education legislation affecting the provincial legislatures. The
   committee should improve its working relationship with the Select
   Committee on Education in the NCOP, in order to get a well oiled system
   of co-operation.
 ▪ International study tours and visits to the provinces undertaken by the
   committee are not co-ordinated with the NCOP in order to avoid
   duplication and unnecessary repetition.
 ▪ Presentations by the department and its entities are question-answer
   sessions. Members are not informed enough to decisively interrogate
   various budgets, annual reports and strategic plans of the department and
   its entities.
 ▪ Formulation of education policies is largely in the hands of the
   Minister of Education. Most of the times, policy processes proceed
   without active participation or even the knowledge of the committee,
   leaving the Committee ineffective in dealing with this important area of
   work.
 ▪ The committee has not been active in initiating a matter of public
   importance to be discussed in Parliament.
 ▪ The committee has also not been able to initiate legislation. This is a
   matter which the committee has to apply greater attention.
 ▪ The department and its entities have a tendency of submitting their
   documents late, leaving the Members with little time to interact with the
   content of the presentation.

Regardless of major challenges the committee has been successful with
regard to its monitoring and oversight functions in respect of education
legislation. In fact, this counts as one of the committee’s most effective
oversight function of education legislation.  The Members of the committee
have developed skills and expertise with regard to the legislative process
and indeed the committee exercises its right to intervene and amend various
pieces of legislation under consideration by the committee. In 2007, the
committee recommended the adoption of the Education Laws Amendment Bill.
The Members demonstrated great experience and maturity in the consideration
of the Bill.
The following formed part of the discussions:
 ▪ It emerged that, the committee has not been able to meet its
   obligations and mandate. The committee has an opportunity to improve its
   delivery. There is a need for the committee to review its mandate and
   engage more in visiting areas where problems in education persists.
   Engaging with other education stakeholders closely will help the
   committee to attain its objectives. Education related conferences enable
   Members of the committee to meet with other academics and share common
   experiences with regards to education. The committee has not taken
   seriously the need for Members to attend these conferences.

 ▪ A concern was raised in respect of the committee’s operations. The
   committee is reactive, meaning that, the committee does not lead instead
   it follows the Department. There is a need to clearly redefine the
   mandate of the committee. Service Delivery is a point of departure and,
   the committee has to be responsive to the needs of the people. The way
   the Committee operates currently needs to be changed. There is a lot of
   knowledge among the Members of the committee; therefore the committee
   needs to be divided into Sub-Committees with specialised tasks. These Sub-
   Committees will improve the work of the committee by identifying
   important issues related to education. The committee has a researcher
   and, it needs to utilise the service of the Researcher effectively.

 ▪ It was discovered that, there was a serious challenge facing the
   Members of the Committee. Members often lacked the understanding of why
   they are in Parliament as party representatives. The Members of the
   committee should work together not as different parties but as Members
   that are representing education in Parliament. The committee should work
   closely with the Select Committee on Education in the National Council of
   Provinces (NCOP) to effectively tackle issues that affect education.

 ▪ The idea of establishing Sub-Committees within the committee will bring
   transformation in the manner in which the committee is currently
   operating. The Sub-Committees will be headed, and the head of each Sub-
   Committee will have a link with a relevant stakeholder to the Sub-
   Committee.

5.7 Committee Priorities for 2008/09:
Prof Shepherd M Mayatula, Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on
Education handled the presentation. He indicated that, everything that the
committee does should be driven by, among others, the following themes:

    ▪ Business Unusual as propound by the President in the State of the
      Nation Address (SONA).
    ▪ National Campaign on Mobilising Communities to ensure Quality
      Education for all.


Prof Mayatula further mentioned that, the committee needs to follow the
following guiding principles:

 ▪ Over the next five years, the committee needs to undertake a concerted
   campaign to support and promote the continued transformation of
   education. (Taken from the January 8 statement).
 ▪ Education needs to be elevated from being a departmental issue, or even
   a government issue, to a societal issue one that occupies the attention
   and energy of all our people.
 ▪ Implementation of Legislation with special reference to: FET Colleges
   Act No. 16 of 2006 and the Education Laws Amendment Act No 31 of 2007.
 ▪ Visits to Institutions of Higher Learning to bring stability.

Oversight and Monitoring:
The presentation included the following oversight matters that could be
prioritized and included in the programme of action of the committee:
 ▪ Provision of Quality Education; Monitoring the implementation of the
   National Curriculum Statement (NCS) in Grade R, Foundation Phase,
   Intermediate Phase, Senior Phase and FET Band.
 ▪ Improvement of schools infrastructure; the department has been slow in
   terms of implementing service delivery in schools. Investigation of
   progress on library provisioning in schools and development of
   infrastructure should be taken seriously.
 ▪ Free education for poor learners is a key issue and expanding the
   nutrition programme to include high schools should be considered
   seriously.
 ▪ Norms and standards should be developed to classify schools, given the
   variation of school types in the Provinces.
 ▪ The No-Fee Schools should be expanded to 60% by 2009.
 ▪ The New Curriculum must be accompanied with skills development of
   teachers.

The following formed part of discussions:
 ▪ There is a need for a serious interaction with the Minister to discuss
   issues of service delivery especially in rural schools.
 ▪ Free education for poor learners has not been achieved yet. The country
   has the National Student Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS) in institutions of
   higher learning that assists disadvantaged students to further their
   education. However this fund comes as a loan, meaning that at a certain
   period, the candidate will return the assistance he/she received while
   studying. Therefore, this is not free education at all.
 ▪ There is need to focus on developing local teachers with necessary
   skills especially in areas of maths and science.

5.8 Emerging Strategic Issues for the 2008 Programme of Action:
Mr Ben Mthembu, Member of the Portfolio Committee on Education led the
presentation on behalf of the Steering Committee. He indicated that, the
theme of the committee for 2008 was developed as follows:
“Towards the provision of Quality Education for all in the Second Decade of
Freedom and Democracy”.
He further indicated that, this theme would guide the committee’s
activities for the year. The committee has taken a decision to focus on the
provision of quality education for all. This theme is predicated on the
general consensus that, considerable progress has been made in the first
decade of freedom and democracy to achieve the goal of access to quality
education. The need to focus on the provision of quality education for all
without loosing sight of the equity goal is in part informed by concerns
raised by various stakeholders in our civil society.

The presentation highlighted the following key issues:
    ▪ Need for meaningful reports to quality education.
    ▪ Need to divide the committee into sub-committees.
    ▪ Invitation of provincial MEC’s on education to report to the
      committee on their progress.
    ▪ Co-operation of Parliament and the Executive.
    ▪ Student governance and instability in higher education Institutions
      is a serious challenge.
    ▪ The way the committee operates is reactive and needs to be changed
    ▪ Permission for Members to conduct oversight, totally unacceptable.

5.9 Address by the Honourable Deputy Minister:
Honourable Deputy Minister, Mr Enver Surty, welcomed the opportunity to
address the committee. He highlighted the issue of Batho Pele meaning
“Putting People First” as a very important key issue that the committee
should understand. He informed the committee that, what happens overseas
has an impact on the economy of the country. He further indicated that, the
country was shifting from a producing economy to a knowledge economy. The
following key issues formed part of his address:
 ▪ Education is a societal issue, not only the responsibility of the
   Committee or the department.
 ▪ When Members conduct oversight in their Constituencies, it is important
   for them to do so within an acceptable framework. Tension from the
   provincial representatives of education arises because Members often
   disturb school activities during their oversight visits. When Members
   conduct oversight visits to schools, it is important to observe the
   critical issues that affect a particular school.
 ▪ Access to education has indeed increased; hence the focus now is on the
   need for the provision of quality education for all.
 ▪ Members need to be very critical about the state of education in this
   country. This means that, as the representatives of education in this
   country, Members need to be responsive to the needs of education.
 ▪ The cepartment has been promoting the use of Information and
   Communication Technology (ICT) in schools. The establishment of E-
   Learning as a system of learning in schools has been a good example of
   the use of ICT in schools.
 ▪ The education system of the country has been compared with many
   countries including first world countries. Comparisons are good; but they
   need to be contextualized.
 ▪ Members should submit their oversight reports on schools to the
   Ministry, so that those schools that need special attention should be
   addressed by the department with immediate effect.

6. Resolutions:
The committee identified the following resolutions for its progress:
 ▪ The need to conduct more oversights to areas where the problems in
   education persist and engaging closely with other education stakeholders
   will assist the committee to meet its objective.
 ▪ There should be greater emphasis on participation in Education
   Conferences in order to sharpen the committee’s understanding of
   universal educational issues.
 ▪ The committee should call Provinces, MEC’s and Heads of Institutions to
   account to it because of the seriousness of problems in the field of
   education in various provinces.

6.1 Conclusion:
The idea of the strategic workshop has been described by the committee as
an opportunity to dig deeper and interrogate issues that affect the
committee directly. The idea to invite influential and special guest
speakers to the workshop has been very enriching in assisting the Committee
to enhance its work. Presentations made by the Members of the committee
resulted in the formation of new ideas that were developed to enhance the
work of the committee and to solve some of the political tensions that
exist among the Members of the committee.

The invitation extended to the epartment to present its strategic plans and
budget was meant to challenge and interrogate the lack of service delivery
to schools especially in rural schools. It was clear to the committee that,
the department has not been able to achieve its objective contrary to its
claims. This has been revealed by information derived from the various
guest speakers who on a large scale made useful inputs. The hard work of
the steering committee developed a new programme of the committee for 2008
based on the theme “Towards the Provision of Quality Education in the
Second Decade of Freedom and Democracy”. The overall presence of the
Department as well as different guests was deeply appreciated by the
committee.

6.2 Recommendations:
The Portfolio Committee on Education, having conducted a strategic workshop
with the Department of Education and special guests recommends the
following key issues:
 ▪ The department needs to address the persistent unequal provision of
   quality education, that is, equality of access to quality education.
 ▪ The Department of Education has to supply the committee with
   performance and quarterly reports
 ▪ Presentations from the department to the committee should be submitted
   timeuosly to allow Members more time in preparing for the meeting.

Report to be considered.


   2. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs on the Refugees
      Amendment Bill [B 11B – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 26
      August 2008:

      The Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs, having considered the
      Refugees Amendment Bill [B 11B – 2008] and proposed amendments of the
      National Council of Provinces (Announcements, Tablings and Committee
      Reports, 24 June 2008, p 1386), referred to the Committee, reports the
      Bill with amendments [B11C – 2008].

   3. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Public Works on the Built
      Environment Professions Bill [B 53 - 2008] (National Assembly- sec
      75), dated 27 August 2008:


      The Portfolio Committee on Public Works, having considered the subject
      of the Built Environment Professions Bill [B 53 - 2008] (National
      Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging
      Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with amendments [B
      53A - 2008].

                          THURSDAY, 28 AUGUST 2008
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


        1. The Minister of Labour

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for Conciliation,
        Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) for 2007-2008, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 55-2008].


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the Compensation Fund for 2007-
        2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 64-2008].

     c) Report and Financial Statements of the Unemployment Insurance Fund
        (UIF) for 2006-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008
        [RP 201-2008].

        2. The Minister for Public Enterprises

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Forestry
         Company Limited (SAFCOL) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.

National Assembly
1. The Speaker

    (a)     Reply from the Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry to
        recommendations in Report of Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs
        and Forestry (Water Board hearings, 19-20 March 2007), as adopted
        by the House on 21 August 2007.

    (b)     Reply from the Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry to
        recommendations in Report of Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs
        and Forestry (Hearings on the Strategic Plan and Budget Vote: 34
        Department of Water Affairs and Forestry), as adopted by the House
        on 10 June 2008.

        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry.

    (c)     Reply from the Minister for Public Enterprises to
        recommendations in Second Report of Committee on Public Accounts
        (Financial Statements of South African Airways (SAA)), as adopted by
        the House on 19 February 2008.

    (d)     Reply from the Minister of Finance to recommendations in First
        Report of Committee on Public Accounts (Investigation Relating to
        Export and Sale of Diamonds in terms of Diamonds Act, 1986), as
        adopted by the House on 27 May 2008.


    (e)     Reply from the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
        Development to recommendations in Sixth Report of Committee on
        Public Accounts (Annual Report and Report of Auditor-General on
        Financial Statements of Department of Justice and Constitutional
        Development for the Financial Year ending 31 March 2007), as adopted
        by the House on 19 February 2008.


    (f)     Reply from the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
        Development to recommendations in Seventh Report of Committee on
        Public Accounts (Report of the Auditor-General on Investigation into
        Procurement at Department of Justice and Constitutional Development
        for March 2007), as adopted by the House on 19 February 2008.


    (g)     Reply from the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
        Development to recommendations in Twelfth Report of Committee on
        Public Accounts (Consideration of Approval of Unauthorised
        Expenditure incurred by Department of Justice and Constitutional
        Development), as adopted by the House on 19 February 2008.


    (h)     Reply from the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
        Development to recommendations in Twenty-Second Report of Committee
        on Public Accounts (Department of Justice and Constitutional
        Development), as adopted by the House on 21 November 2007.

        Referred to the Committee on Public Accounts.

    (i)     Reply from the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
        Development to recommendations in Special Report of Joint Standing
        Committee on Intelligence (Special “Browse” Mole Consolidated
        Report), as adopted by the House on 19 March 2008.
        Referred to the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence.

COMMITTEE REPORTS
National Assembly

   1. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and Tourism
      on the National Environmental Laws Amendment Bill [B66-2008] (National
      Assembly – sec 76), dated 26 August 2008:

      The Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and Tourism, having
      considered the subject of the National Environment Laws Amendment Bill
      [B66-2008] (National Assembly – sec 76), referred to it, and
      classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) as a section 76 Bill,
      reports the Bill with amendments [B66A-2008].

   2. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and Tourism
      on the National Environmental Management: Protected Areas Amendment
      Bill [B67-2008] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 27 August 2008:

      The Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and Tourism, having
      considered the subject of the National Environmental Management:
      Protected Areas Amendment Bill [B67-2008] (National Assembly – sec
      75), referred to it, and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism
      (JTM) as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with amendments [B67A-
      2008].

3.    Progress Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Draft
      Money Bill Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Bill, dated 22
      August 2008.

      The Committee reported to the House on 14 August 2008 and was granted
      an extension to 29 August 2008 to report on the bill. (see Minutes of
      Proceedings of the National Assembly, dated 19 August 2008).

      The Committee at subsequent deliberations on the bill found that there
      were aspects of the bill which required further engagement. The
      Committee therefore is of the view that it would not be in a position
      to finalise its deliberations by 29 August 2008. The Committee
      accordingly requests that the deadline given to it to report on the
      draft legislation be further extended to 30 September 2008.

      Report to be considered.

                           FRIDAY, 29 AUGUST 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) Financial Intelligence Centre Amendment Bill [B 18B – 2008] – Act
         No 11 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 22 August
         2008).

      2) Cross-Border Road Transport Amendment Bill [B 51B – 2007] – Act No
         12 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 22 August 2008).


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


               1. The Minister of Labour

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Economic
        Development and Labour Council (NEDLAC) for 2007-2008, including
        the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
        for 2007-2008.


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the Chemical Industries
        Education and Training Authority (CHIETA) for 2007-2008, including
        the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 69-2008].


               2. The Minister in The Presidency

        a) Report and Financial Statements of the International Marketing
           Council of South Africa (IMC) for 2007-2008, including the
           Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 144-2007].


               3. The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of South African Tourism for
         2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008.

     b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Weather
        Service (SAWS) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2007-2008 [RP 197-2008].


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
        Biodiversity Institute (SANBI) for 2007-2008, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2007-2008.


               4. The Minister of Home Affairs

    (a)     Annual Performance Plan (Revised) of the Department of Home
         Affairs for 2007-2008.


National Assembly

          1. The Speaker

    (a)     Request from the President of the Republic to recommend three
        candidates for appointment to the Public Service Commission in
        terms of section 4(1) of the Public service Commission Act, 1997
        (Act No 46 of 1997).
        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Public Service and
        Administration.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry on the
    Companies Bill [B61-2008] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 27 August
    2008:

        The Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry, having considered the
        subject of the Companies Bill [B61 – 2008] (National Assembly – sec
        75), referred to it and classified by the JTM as a section 75 Bill,
        reports the Bill with amendments [B61A-2008]

                          MONDAY, 1 SEPTEMBER 2008

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1. The Speaker and the Chairperson

     a) Report and Financial Statements of Parliament of the Republic of
        South Africa Vote 2 for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2007-2008.


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the Public
        Protector for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
        2008 [RP 211-2008].


     c) Report of the Public Protector on an Investigation into the Causes
        of Delays in the Administration of Criminal Appeals lodged by
        Prisoners [Report No 10 of 2008-2009].


     d) Report of the Public Protector on Systematic Investigation into the
        Deficiencies with the Processing of Pension Benefits payable to
        Former Government Employees and their Dependants [Report No 11 of
        2008-2009].


     e) Report of the Public Protector on an Investigation into an
        Allegation of the Misappropriation of Public Funds by the Kungwini
        Local Municipality in the Gauteng Province [Report No 12 of 2008-
        2009].


     f) Report and Financial Statements of the Electoral Commission for 2007-
        2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008.


     g) Report and Financial Statements of Parliament of the South African
        Human Rights Commission for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2007-2008 [RP 89-2008].

2. The Minister of Education

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Department of Education Vote
        14 for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP
        220-2008].


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the National Student Financial
        Aid Scheme for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2007-2008.


     c) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Qualifications
        Authority for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
        2008 [RP 149-2008].


     d) Report and Financial Statements of the Education Labour Relations
        Council for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
        2008 and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Transformation
        Fund of the Education Labour Relations Council for 2007-2008 [RP 136-
        2008].


     e) Report and Financial Statements of the Council on Higher Education
        for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008.

3. The Minister of Communications

   Report and Financial Statements of Sentech Limited for 2007-2008,
   including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
   Statements for 2007-2008.
4. The Minister of Labour

    a) Report and Financial Statements of the Local Government Sector
       Education and Training Authority for 2007-2008, including the Report
       of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
       Information for 2007-2008 [RP 80-2008].


    b) Report and Financial Statements of the Energy Sector Education and
       Training Authority for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
       General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
       2007-2008 [RP 73-2008].

    c) Report and Financial Statements of the Health and Welfare Sector
       Education and Training Authority for 2007-2008, including the Report
       of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
       Information for 2007-2008 [RP 77-2008].

    d) Report and Financial Statements of Education Training and Development
       Practices Sector Education and Training Authority for 2007-2008,
       including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
       Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 72-2008].

5. The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

   Report and Financial Statements of the Marine Living Resources Fund for
   2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
   Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 190-2008].

                          TUESDAY, 2 SEPTEMBER 2008
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

               1. The Minister of Labour

     b) Report and Financial Statements of the Tourism, Hospitality and
        Sport Education and Training Authority (Theta) for 2007-2008,
        including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance information for 2007-2008 [RP 128-2008].




    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Information Systems,
        Electronics and Telecommunications Technologies Sector Education
        and Training Authority (ISETT-Seta) for 2007-2008, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 78-2008].


               2. The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Legal Aid Board for 2007-
        2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 97-2008].


               3. The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)     Government Notice No 314 published in Government Gazette No
        30886 dated 20 March 2008: AgriBEE Sector Charter on Black Economic
        Empowerment, in terms of the Broad-Based Black Economic Empowerment
        Act, 2003 (Act No 53 of 2003).


        Please Note: The above item replaces entry 3(b) under Tablings of
        the Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of 29 July 2008,
        as published on page 1472.

    (b)     Government Notice No 672 published in Government Gazette No
        31145 dated 20 June 2008: International Trade Administration
        Commission of South Africa: Export control, in terms of the
        International Trade Administration Act, 2002 (Act No 71 of 2002).


     c) Government Notice No 776 published in Government Gazette No 31255
        dated 18 July 2008: Framework for accreditation and verification by
        all Verification Agencies, in terms of the Broad-Based Black
        Economic Empowerment Act, 2003 (Act No 25 of 2003).

 4. The Minister of Arts and Culture

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African State Theatre
        for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP
        224-2008].


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the Msunduzi/Voortrekker and
        Ncome Museums for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2007-2008 [PR 160-2008].

     c) Report and Financial Statements of the National English Literary
        Museum for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
        2008.

     d) Report and Financial Statements of the Market Theatre Foundation
        for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP
        102-2008].

     e) Report and Financial Statements of Blind SA for 2007-2008,
        including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
        Statements for 2007-2008.

     f) Report and Financial Statements of the National Museum –
        Bloemfontein for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2007-2008.

     g) Report and Financial Statements of the Iziko Museums of Cape Town
        for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP
        185-2008].

     h) Report and Financial Statements of the War Museum of the Boer
        Republics for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.

     i) Report and Financial Statements of the National Film and Video
        Foundation (NFVF) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2007-2008 [RP 176-2008].
     j) Report and Financial Statements of Artscape for 2007-2008,
        including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 189-2008].

     k) Report and Financial Statements of The Freedom Park Trust for 2007-
        2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008.

     l) Report and Financial Statements of the William Humphreys Art
        Gallery for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
        2008.

     m) Report and Financial Statements of Business and Arts South Africa
        (BASA) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008 [RP 166-2008].

     n) Report and Financial Statements of the Natal Museum for 2007-2008,
        including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements for 2007-2008 [RP 158-2008].

               5. The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 26 – Department of
        Environmental Affairs and Tourism for 2007-2008, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information of Vote 26 for 2007-2008 [RP 53-2008].


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the National Environmental
        Advisory Forum (NEAF) for 2007-2008 [RP 101-2008].

                         WEDNESDAY, 3 SEPTEMBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Assembly
    (a)    The vacancy which occurred in the National Assembly owing to the
         passing on of Ms N C Kondlo on 24 March 2008, has been filled with
         effect from 7 August 2008 by the nomination of Mr J H Nash.


    (b)    The vacancy which occurred in the National Assembly owing to the
         resignation of Mr A M Maziya with effect from 1 December 2007, has
         been filled with effect from 7 August 2008 by the nomination of Mr
         A C Jacob.


         Mr J M Mnisi, who was nominated to fill this vacancy with effect
         from 6 May 2008 currently occupies a position in the Public Service
         and is therefore eligible for nomination.


    (c)    The vacancy which occurred in the National Assembly owing to the
         resignation of Mr S A Mshudulu with effect from 25 July 2008, has
         been filled with effect from 7 August 2008 by the nomination of Mr
         K K M Nyembe.


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

                    1. The Minister for Public Enterprises



    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 30 – Department of
        Public Enterprises for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information of Vote 30 for 2007-2008 [RP 156-2008].


                    2. The Minister of Arts and Culture

     (a)    Report  and  Financial  Statements  of  the  Pan  South  African
        Language Board (PANSALB) 2007-2008, including  the  Report  of  the
        Auditor-General  on  the  Financial  Statements   and   Performance
        Information for 2007-2008 [RP 137-2008].


     a) Report and Financial Statements of the  National  Heritage  Council
        for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General  on  the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008  [RP
        203-2008].

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of  The  Playhouse  Company  for
        2007-2008, including the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008.

     d) Report and Financial Statements  of  the  Nelson  Mandela  National
        Museum for 2007-2008, including the Report of  the  Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information  for  2007-
        2008 [RP 202-2008].

     e) Report and Financial Statements of the Afrikaans Language Museum en
        Language Monument  for  2007-2008,  including  the  Report  of  the
        Auditor-General  on  the  Financial  Statements   and   Performance
        Information for 2007-2008 [RP 161-2008].

     f) Report and Financial  Statements  of  the  South  African  Heritage
        Resources Agency (SAHRA) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General  on  the  Financial  Statements   and   Performance
        Information for 2007-2008 [RP 192-2008].

     g) Report and Financial Statements of the South  African  Library  for
        the Blind for 2007-2008,  including  the  Report  of  the  Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2007-2008.

     h)  Report  and  Financial  Statements  of   the   Northern   Flagship
        Institution for 2007-2008, including the  Report  of  the  Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2007-2008 [RP 164-2008].

     i) Report and Financial Statements of the  Windybrow  Centre  for  the
        Arts for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General  on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008.



National Assembly

                    1. The Speaker

    (a)     Reply from the Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry to
        recommendations in Report of Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs
        and Forestry (Price increases of bulk resources (water) for
        provision of municipal services – section 42 of the Local
        Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of
        2003), as adopted by the House on 21 August 2007.

    (b)     Reply from the Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry to
        recommendations in Report of Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs
        and Forestry (Oversight visit to Gauteng Province – 6-11 May 2007),
        as adopted by the House on 21 August 2007.

        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry.


    (c)     Reply from the Minister of Labour to recommendations in Report
        of Joint Budget Committee on Expenditure for the Second Quarter of
        the 2007-08 Financial Year, as adopted by the House on 20 May 2008.

        Referred to the Joint Budget Committee.
    (d)     Reply from the Minister of Minerals and Energy to
        recommendations in First Report of Committee on Public Accounts
        (Investigation Relating to Export and Sale of Diamonds in terms of
        the Diamonds Act, 1986, as adopted by the House on 27 May 2008.

      e) Reply from the Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry to
         recommendations in Fortieth Report of Committee on Public Accounts
         (Department of Water Affairs and Forestry and its Trading
         Accounts), as adopted by the House on 21 November 2007.


    (f)     Reply from the Minister of Defence to recommendations in
        Thirtieth Report of Committee on Public Accounts (Department of
        Defence), as adopted by the House on 21 November 2007.


        Referred to the Committee on Public Accounts.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Joint Standing Committee on Defence on the employment
    of the South African National Defence Force (SANDF) in Uganda, the
    extension of employment of SANDF in Burundi and within the Republic of
    South Africa in co-peration with the South African. Police Service
    (SAPS), dated 27 August 2008.


     The Joint Standing Committee on Defence, having considered the letters
     from the President on the employment of the South African National
     Defence Force (SANDF) in Uganda, the  extension of employment of the
     SANDF in Burundi and extension of employment of SANDF for a service in
     co-operation with the SAPS within the Republic of South Africa,
     referred to the Committee, reports that it has concluded its
     deliberations thereon.


                         THURSDAY, 4 SEPTEMBER 2008

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

               1. The Minister of Foreign Affairs


    (a)     Treaty of Friendship and Partnership between the Republic of
        South Africa and the Russian Federation, tabled in terms of section
        231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

     a) Explanatory Memorandum to the Treaty of Friendship and Partnership
        between the Republic of South Africa and the Russian Federation.

National Assembly

                    1. The Speaker

    (a)     Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the Fifth
        Consolidated Public Service Monitoring and Evaluation System
        Report: Research Cycle 2007/2008 – July 2008 [RP 134-2008].
    (b)     Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on Evaluation of
        the Consistency of Sanctions Imposed for Misconduct in the Public
        Service – April 2008 [RP 135-2008].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

   1. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs on
      the Provision of Land and Assistance Amendment Bill [B40-2008]
      (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 2 September 2008:

      The Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs, having
      considered the subject of the Provision of Land and Assistance
      Amendment Bill [B40-2008] (National Assembly – sec 75) referred to it,
      and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) as a section 75
      Bill, reports the Bill with amendments [B40A-2008].

   2. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs on
      the Liquor Products Amendment Bill [B22B-2008] (National Assembly –
      sec 75), dated 2 September 2008:

      The Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs, having
      considered the subject of the Liquor Products Amendment Bill [B22B-
      2008] (National Assembly – sec 75) and the proposed amendments of the
      Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs (see Announcements,
      Tablings and Committee Reports, 20 August 2008, p 1564 ), referred to
      it, reports the Bill without amendment.

3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Health on the Medicines and
      Related Substances Amendment Bill [B 44 – 2008] (National Assembly –
      sec 75), dated 3 September 2008:

     The Portfolio Committee on Health having considered the Medicines and
      Related Substances Amendment Bill [B 44 – 2008] (National Assembly –
      sec 75), referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism
      as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with amendments [B 44A – 2008].

                          FRIDAY, 5 SEPTEMBER 2008

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

       a) Annual Financial Statements of the Corporation for Public Deposits
          for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
          the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.


      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the Accounting Standards
          Board for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Independent
          Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
          for 2007-2008 [RP 109-2008].


      (c)   Government Notice No 871 published in Government Gazette No
          31336 dated 15 August 2008: Appointment of Board members of the Co-
          operative Banks Development Agency, in terms of section 58 of the
          Co-operative Banks Act, 2007 (Act No 40 of 2007).


      (d)   Government Notice No 887 published in Government Gazette No
          31342 dated 22 August 2008: Designation of Institution of which
          the activities do not fall within the meaning of “The Business of
          a Bank” (“Financial Service Co-operative”), in terms of the Banks
          Act, 1990 (Act No 94 of 1990).


      (e)   Government Notice No 880 published in Government Gazette No
          31342 dated 22 August 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
          1/1/1360), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
          of 1964).


      (f)   Government Notice No 881 published in Government Gazette No
          31342 dated 22 August 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No 2/305),
          in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


      (g)   Government Notice No 882 published in Government Gazette No
          31342 dated 22 August 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No 3/634),
          in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


      (h)   Government Notice No 883 published in Government Gazette No
          31342 dated 22 August 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No 3/635),
          in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


      (i)   Government Notice No 884 published in Government Gazette No
          31342 dated 22 August 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No 4/314),
          in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


      (j)   Government Notice No 885 published in Government Gazette No
          31342 dated 22 August 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
          1/1/1359), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
          of 1964).


      (k)   Government Notice No 886 published in Government Gazette No
          31342 dated 22 August 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No 3/633),
          in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


      (l)   Government Notice No 895 published in Government Gazette No
          31342 dated 22 August 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
          1/1/1361), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
          of 1964).


      (m)   Government Notice No 878 published in Government Gazette No
          31346 dated 22 August 2008: Municipal Asset Transfer Regulations,
          in terms of the Local Government: Municipal Finance Management
          Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

                          MONDAY, 8 SEPTEMBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Transport


          a) Civil Aviation Bill [B 73 – 2008] (National Assembly –
             proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
             of its introduction published in Government Gazette No 31120
             of 4 June 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Transport of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
             Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
             Joint Rule 160.
             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.


National Assembly

The Speaker

1. Membership of Committees

   The following changes have been made to the membership of Committees:

   Portfolio Committee on Arts and Culture

   Appointed:          Zulu, Mr BZ
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

      a) Report and Financial Statements of the Competition Tribunal for
         2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements and Performance information for 2007-2008 [RP
         183-2008].


      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the National Consumer
          Tribunal for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
          General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
          for 2007-2008 [RP 217-2008].


      (c)   Report and Financial Statements of the Export Credit Insurance
          Corporation of South Africa Limited for 2007-2008, including the
          Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for
          2007-2008.

      (d)   Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
          Accreditation System (SANAS) for 2007-2008, including the Report
          of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-
          2008 [RP 199-2008].


      (e)   Report and Financial Statements of the National Credit Regulator
          (NCR) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General
          on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
          2008 [RP 140-2008].
      (f)   Report and Financial Statements of the South African Bureau of
          Standards for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
          General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
          for 2007-2008 [RP 208-2008].


      (g)   Report and Financial Statements of the South African Micro-
          finance Apex Fund for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
          Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
          Information for 2007-2008 [RP 111-2008].


      (h)   Report and Financial Statements of the Companies and
          Intellectual Property Registration Office for 2007-2008, including
          the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
          Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 187-2008].

      (i)   Report and Financial Statements of the National Metrology
          Institute of South Africa for 2007-2008, including the Report of
          the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
          Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 221-2008].


      (j)   Report and Financial Statements of the National Gambling Board
          for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
          Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP
          125-2008].

      (k)   Report and Financial Statements of the Industrial Development
          Corporation of South Africa Limited (IDC) for 2007-2008, including
          the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
          for 2007-2008.


      (l)   Report and Financial Statements of Khula Enterprise Finance
          Limited for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Independent
          Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008 [RP 210-2008].


      (m)   Report and Financial Statements of the Competition Commission
          for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
          Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP
          107-2008].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    The following report replaces the report published on page 1668 of
    the ATC of 4 September 2008:

    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Health on the Medicines and
    Related Substances Amendment Bill [B 44 – 2008] (National Assembly –
    sec 75), dated 3 September 2008:

        The Portfolio Committee on Health having considered the subject of
        the Medicines and Related Substances Amendment Bill [B 44 – 2008]
        (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and classified by the
        Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, presents a redraft of
        the Bill [B 44B – 2008].

                          TUESDAY, 9 SEPTEMBER 2008

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Transport

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Air Traffic and Navigation
        Services Company Limited (ATNS) for 2007-2008, including the Report
        of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-
        2008.

2.    The Minister for Public Enterprises

       a) Report and Financial Statements of South African Airways
          (Proprietary) Limited (SAA) for 2007-2008, including the Report of
          the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-
          2008.


       b) Report and Financial Statements of Broadband Infraco (Pty) Limited
          for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
          the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.


3.    The Minister of Communications

       a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Post Office
          Limited for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Independent
          Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.


4.    The Minister of Health
        a) Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Medical
           Schemes for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2007-2008 [RP 96-2008].


5.    The Minister of Correctional Services

       a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 19 – Department of
          Correctional Services for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
          Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
          Information of Vote 19 for 2007-2008 [RP 217-2007].


6.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the National Lotteries Board
          for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
          Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008.


      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the Support Programme for
          Industrial Innovation (SPII) for 2007-2008, including the Reports
          of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-
          2008.

                        WEDNESDAY, 10 SEPTEMBER 2008

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
1.    The Minister of Social Development

     a) Report  and  Financial  Statements  of  the  South  African  Social
        Security Agency for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2007-2008 [RP 108-2008].

2.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the National Library of South
          Africa for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General
          on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
          2008 [RP 222-2008].


       b) Report and Financial Statements of the Luthuli Museum  for  2007-
          2008,  including  the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on   the
          Financial Statements and Performance  Information  for  2007-2008
          [RP 181-2008].

National Assembly

           1. The Speaker

      (a)   Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on Assessment on
          Disability Equity in the Public Service – January 2008 [RP 50-
          2008].

                         THURSDAY, 11 SEPTEMBER 2008

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Health


      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the National Health
          Laboratory Service (NHLS) for 2007-2008, including the Report of
          the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-
          2008.


       b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Medical
          Research Council (MRC) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
          Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008 [RP 173-
          2008].

                          FRIDAY, 12 SEPTEMBER 2008

TABLINGS

 National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

       a) Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the Auditor-
          General for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Independent
          Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
          for 2007-2008 [RP 235-2008].
2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the International Trade
          Administration Commission of South Africa for 2007-2008,
          including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
          Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 207-
          2008].

       b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Quality
          Institute for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Independent
          Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.

                          MONDAY, 15 SEPTEMBER 2008

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

       a) Government Notice No R.827 published in Government Gazette No
          31297 dated 1 August 2008: Amendment of regulations, in terms of
          the Attorneys Act, 1979 (Act No 53 of 1979).

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry


      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 32 – Department of Trade
          and Industry for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
          General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
          of Vote 32 for 2007-2008 [RP 198-2008].

       b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Council for
          the Non-Proliferation of Weapons of Mass destruction for the
          period July 2007 to 31 March 2008.

       c) Report and Financial Statements of the Technology and Human
          Resources for Industry Programme for 2007-2008, including the
          Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
          Performance Information for 2007-2008.

       d) Report and Financial Statements of the National Empowerment Fund
          for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Independent Auditors
          on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
          2008 [RP 228-2008].

       e) Report and Financial Statements of the Estate Agency Affairs
          Board for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Independent
          Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 10 – Public Service
           Commission (PSC) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
           Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
           Information of Vote 10 for 2007-2008 [RP 194-2008].

                         TUESDAY, 16 SEPTEMBER 2008

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

 1. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Arts and Culture on the Methodist
    Church of Southern Africa (Private) Act Repeal Bill [B 68 - 2008]
    (National Assembly – Sec 75), dated 09 September 2008:

    The Portfolio Committee on Arts and Culture, having considered the
    Methodist Church of Southern Africa (Private) Act Repeal Bill [B 68 -
    2008] (National Assembly – Sec 75), referred to it and classified by the
    Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill without
    amendments.

    The Committee further reports that it has amended the Memorandum on the
    objects of the Methodist Church of Southern Africa (Private) Act Repeal
    Bill, 2008 as follows:

   1. On page 3, in paragraph 1(a), to substitute the semi-colon for the
      full-stop.


   2. On page 3, to omit paragraph 3 and to substitute:
        3.  BODIES CONSULTED
           The following bodies were consulted:

         • The Bible Society of South Africa
         • The Methodist Church of Southern Africa
         • The Council of African Instituted Churches
         • The Muslim Judicial Council
         • South African Council of Churches
         • The Dutch Reformed Church
         • The Apostolic Faith Mission

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Arts and Culture on the
    Apostolic Faith Mission of South Africa (Private) Act Repeal Bill [B 71
    - 2008] (National Assembly – Sec 75), dated 09 September 2008:


    The Portfolio Committee on Arts and Culture, having considered the
    subject of the Apostolic Faith Mission of South Africa (Private) Act
    Repeal Bill [B 71 - 2008]
    (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and classified by the Joint
    Tagging Mechanism as a Section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with amendments
    [B 71A -2008].

3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Arts and Culture on the Bible
    Society of South Africa Act Repeal Bill [B 70 - 2008] (National Assembly
    – Sec 75), dated 09 September 2008:

    The Portfolio Committee on Arts and Culture, having considered the
    subject of the Bible Society of South Africa Act Repeal Bill [B 70 -
    2008] (National Assembly – Sec 75), referred to it and classified by the
    Joint Tagging Mechanism as a Section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with
    amendments [B 70 A – 2008].

4.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Arts and Culture on the Dutch
    Reformed Churches Union Act Repeal Bill [B 69 - 2008] (National Assembly
    – Sec 75), dated 09 September 2008:
    The Portfolio Committee on Arts and Culture, having considered the Dutch
    Reformed Churches Union Act Repeal Bill [B 69 - 2008] (National Assembly
    –  Sec 75), referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism
    as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill without amendments.

    The Committee further reports that it has amended the Memorandum on the
    objects of the Dutch Reformed Churches Union Act Repeal Bill, 2008 as
    follows:

  1. On page 3, in paragraph 1, before paragraph (a), to insert the
     following new paragraph:


     “(a) give effect to the constitutional principles of human dignity,
     equality and the advancement of human rights and freedoms, non-
     racialism and non-sexism;”


  2. On page 3, in paragraph 1(a), to omit “Verenigde” and to substitute
     “Verenigingde”.

  3. On page 3, in paragraph 1(a), to substitute the semi-colon for the full-
     stop.

  4. On page 3, in paragraph 1(b), after the semi-colon, to insert “and”.

  5. On page 3, to omit paragraph 3 and to substitute:

        3. BODIES CONSULTED
           The following bodies were consulted:

         • The Bible Society of South Africa
         • The Methodist Church of Southern Africa
         • The Council of African Instituted Churches
         • The Muslim Judicial Council
         • South African Council of Churches
         • The Apostolic Faith Mission

                        WEDNESDAY, 17 SEPTEMBER 2008

TABLINGS

 National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Safety and Security

       a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 23 – Department for
          Safety and Security for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
          Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
          Information of Vote 23 for 2007-2008 [RP 204-2008].


2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

      (a)   Report of the Strategic Industrial Projects for April 2002 to
      March 2008.
      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the Small Enterprise
          Development Agency for 2007-2008.


       c) Report on the National Distribution Trust Fund – Souvenir Brochure
          2008.


3.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

       a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Agricultural
          Marketing Council (NAMC) for 2007-2008, including the Report of
          the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
          Information for 2007-2008.


       b) Report and Financial Statements of the Ncera Farms (Pty) Ltd for
          2007-2008, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
          Financial Statements for 2007-2008.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

   1. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Financial
      Management of Parliament Bill [B 74 – 2008] (National Assembly –
      proposed sec 76(1)), dated 16 September 2008:

      In the Second Parliament the Assembly passed a resolution mandating
      the Portfolio Committee on Finance to consider the subject of the
      financial administration of Parliament with a view to introducing a
      bill dealing with the matter (see Minutes of Proceedings of National
      Assembly, dated 23 September 2003).
      The Committee was unable to complete its consideration of the matter
      before the end of the Second Parliament and the mandate consequently
      lapsed.

      The Assembly again passed a similar resolution in the Third Parliament
      (see Minutes of Proceedings of National Assembly, dated 18 June 2004).



      The Committee subsequently gave prior notice of introduction of the
      draft legislation in Government Gazette No 28166, dated 28 October
      2005. The Gazette also contained an invitation to interested persons
      and institutions to submit written submissions on the draft
      legislation. The Committee deliberated and held public hearings on the
      submissions received. Consultation with National Treasury also took
      place.

      The Committee therefore reports that it has completed its
      deliberations on the matter and, in accordance with Rule 243,
      introduces the Financial Management of Parliament Bill [B74 – 2008]
      (National Assembly – proposed sec 76(1)).

      Report to be considered.

                         THURSDAY, 18 SEPTEMBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson
1.    Introduction of Bill


     (1)    The Portfolio Committee on Communications


          a) Financial Management of Parliament Bill [B 74 – 2008]
             (National Assembly – proposed sec 76(1)) [Draft Bill and
             memorandum setting out its objects published in Government
             Gazette No 28166 of 28 October 2005.]


             Bill initiated by the Portfolio Committee on Finance of the
             National Assembly, and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
             (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

TABLINGS

 National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Foreign Affairs

     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 3 – Department of Foreign
        Affairs for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 3
        for 2007-2008.


2.    The Minister of Communications

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Universal Service and Access
        Agency of South Africa (USAASA) for 2007-2008, including the
        Reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
        Universal Service and Access Agency of South Africa (USAASA) and
        the Universal Service and Access Fund (USAF) for 2007-2008 [RP 219-
        2008].


3.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

      (a)   Report on the National Lotteries Distribution Trust Fund –
      Souvenir Brochure 2008.


       b) Report and Financial Statements of the Small Enterprise
          Development Agency Technology Programme for 2007-2008.


          Please Note: The above item replaces item 2(b) and (c) under
          Tablings of the Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of
          17 September 2008, as published on page 1694.


National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

     a) Updated reply from the Minister of Labour to recommendations in
        Nineteenth Report of Committee on Public Accounts (Department of
        Labour), as adopted by the House on 21 November 2007.
        Referred to the Committee on Public Accounts.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

   1. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
      Development on the Renaming of High Courts Bill [B 5B─2008] dated 17
      September 2008.

      The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development,
      having considered the Renaming of High Courts Bill [B 5B─2008], and
      the proposed amendments of the National Council of Provinces
      (Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 29 July 2008, p 1474),
      referred to the Committee, reports the Bill without amendment.

   2. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
      Development on the Jurisdiction of Regional Courts Amendment Bill [B
      48B-2007] dated 17 September 2008.

      The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development,
      having considered the Jurisdiction of Regional Courts Amendment Bill
      [B 48B-2007] and the proposed amendments of the National Council of
      Provinces (Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 25 June
      2008, p 1425), referred to the Committee, reports the Bill with
      amendments [B 48C-2007].


   3. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Defence on the National
      Conventional Arms Control Amendment Bill [B 45 – 2008] (National
      Assembly– sec 75), dated 17 September 2008:
      The Portfolio Committee on Defence, having considered the  subject of
      the National Conventional  Arms Control Amendment Bill [B 45 – 2008]
      (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and classified by the
      Joint Tagging Mechanism  as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with
      amendments [B 45A - 2008].


   4. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy on the
      National Radioactive Waste Management Agency Bill [B 41 – 2008]
      (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 17 September 2008:

      The Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy, having considered the
      subject of the National Radioactive Waste Management Agency Bill [B 41
      – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and classified by
      the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill
      with amendments [B 41A – 2008], and presents the National Radioactive
      Waste Disposal Institute Bill [B 41B - 2008].



   5. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry on the
      Consumer Protection Bill [B19B – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 76),
      dated 16 September 2008:

      The Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry, having considered the
      subject of the Consumer Protection Bill [B19B – 2008] (National
      Assembly – sec 76), referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging
      Mechanism as a section 76 Bill, reports the Bill with amendments [B19C
      – 2008].

                          FRIDAY, 19 SEPTEMBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bill

     1) South African Judicial Education Institute Bill [B 4D – 2007] – Act
        No 14 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 12 September
        2008).

2.    Introduction of Bill - correction


     The introduction of the Financial Management of Parliament Bill [B 74 –
    2008] (National Assembly – proposed sec 76(1)) in the ATC of 18
    September 2008 was incorrectly placed under the heading “Portfolio on
    Communications”. It should have read “Portfolio Committee on Finance“.

TABLINGS

 National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Defence

        a) Report and Financial Statements of the Armaments Corporation of
           South Africa Limited (ARMSCOR) for 2007-2008, including the
           Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 58-2008].

2.    The Minister of Finance

        a) Report and Financial Statements of Sasria Limited for 2007-2008,
           including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
           Financial Statements for 2007-2008.


        b) Report and Financial Statements of the Development Bank of
           Southern Africa for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
           Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.




        c) Report and Financial Statements of the Development Bank of
           Southern Africa Development Fund for 2007-2008, including the
           Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
           of The Fund for 2007-2008.

        d) Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services Board
           (FSB) 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
           the Financial Statements for 2007-2008 [RP 139-2008].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    The following report replaces item 5 under “Committee Reports” on
      page 1716 of the Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports dated
      18 September 2008:


      Report of the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry on the
      Consumer Protection Bill [B19B – 2008] (National Council of Provinces
      – sec 76), dated 16 September 2008:


        The Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry, having considered
        the subject of the Consumer Protection Bill [B19B – 2008] (National
        Council of Provinces  – sec 76), referred to it and classified by
        the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 76 Bill, reports the Bill
        with amendments [B19C – 2008].


   2. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy on the Mine
      Health and Safety Amendment Bill [B 54 - 2008] (National Assembly –
      sec 75), dated 18 September 2008:


        The Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy, having considered
        the subject of the Mine Health and Safety Amendment Bill [B 54 -
        2008] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and classified
        by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the
        Bill with amendments [B54A – 2008].

                          MONDAY, 22 SEPTEMBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)    Bills passed by National Assembly on 22 September 2008:


          a) Jurisdiction of Regional Courts Amendment Bill [B 48D – 2007]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).


          b) Renaming of High Courts Bill [B 5B – 2008] (National Assembly
             – sec 75).


          c) Liquor Products Amendment Bill [B 22B – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the South African Reserve
          Bank for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Independent
          Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.


        b) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 12 - Statistics South
           Africa for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           of Vote 12 for 2007-2008 [RP 126-2008].


      (c)   Report and Financial Statements of the Independent Regulatory
          Board for auditors for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
          Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
          Information for 2007-2008.


2.    The Minister of Transport

      (a)   Report of the Regulating Committee of the Airports Company of
          South Africa and Air Navigation Services Company for 2007-2008.


       b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
          Roads Agency Limited for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
          Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
          Information for 2007-2008 [RP 104-2008].


      (c)   Report and Financial Statements of the South African Search and
          Rescue Organisation (SASAR) for 2007-2008.


      (d)   Report and Financial Statements of the Road Traffic Management
          Corporation for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
          General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
          for 2007-2008 [RP 103-2008].


3.    The Minister of Communications
       a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 25 – Department of
          Communications for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
          General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of
          Vote 25 for 2007-2008 [RP 247-2008].

4.    The Minister of Public Works

      Report and Financial Statements of the Independent Development Trust
          for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
          Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP
          154-2008].

5.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

       a) Proclamation No R.35 of Government Gazette No 31394 dated 4
          September 2008: Referral of matters to existing Special
          Investigating Unit and Special Tribunals, in terms of the Special
          Investigation Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of
          1996).

       b) Proclamation No R.36 of Government Gazette No 31394 dated 4
          September 2008: Referral of matters to existing Special
          Investigating Unit and Special Tribunals, in terms of the Special
          Investigation Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of
          1996).

6.    The Minister of Science and Technology

       a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 31 – Department of Science
          and Technology for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
          General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of
          Vote 31 for 2007-2008 [RP 200-2008].
7.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs


     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 28 – Department of Land
        Affairs for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 28
        for 2007-2008.



