---
title: 'National Assembly - 06 March 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2008-03-06
---

THURSDAY, 6 MARCH 2008
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:00.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC

    Government’s economic strategies to reduce gap between rich and poor

1.    Ms N N Sibhidla (ANC) asked the President of the Republic:

      Whether the Government’s economic strategies are reducing the gap
      between the rich and the poor; if not, what measures does the
      Government intend implementing to achieve this goal; if so, what are
      the relevant details?                                    NO660E
The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, the question posed by the hon
Sibhidla as to whether the government’s economic strategies are reducing
the gap between the rich and the poor is complex in nature and cannot be
answered with a simple yes or no. I trust that the hon member and other
members of the House have had the opportunity to study the report of 2005-
06 on income and expenditure of households which was recently released by
Statistics SA. If not, I would suggest that hon members should indeed do
so.

With regard to the Gini coefficient that is used to measure inequality,
Statistics SA reports, and I quote:

   Inequality continues to remain high between population groups and within
   individual population groups. The Gini coefficient, based on disposable
   income, from work and social grants, for the whole country was 0,72.
   Within individual groups the Gini coefficient was highest at 0,63 among
   black African households, with the other population groups ranging
   between 0,56 and 0,59. If social grants and taxes are excluded, the Gini
   coefficient for the whole country would be 0,80 rather than 0,72, ie the
   reduction of inequality through redistributive policies reduces the Gini
   coefficient by 8 percentage points.

I am certain that we would therefore all agree that we continue to be
confronted not only by an unacceptable high level of inequality, but by one
that has tended to increase - though slightly.
However, we must also make an important point that this does not mean
growing impoverishment among sections of our population. In this regard,
the Statistics SA report says, and I quote:

   From 2000 to 2005--06, black African households’ share of consumption
   expenditure rose from 42,9% to 44,3% (and black Africans’ share of the
   population rose from 78,3% to 79,4%). Black African households
   experienced increases in their share of expenditure in each expenditure
   category except for miscellaneous goods and services, with the largest
   percentage point increases occurring in food and nonalcoholic beverages
   (+8 percentage points); furnishings, household equipment and maintenance
   (+10,7 percentage points); and communication (+9,7 percentage points).


   White households’ share of consumption expenditure fell from 44,1% in
   2000 to 42,9% in 2005-06, (and the white population fell from 10,1% to
   9,2%).

It is sad that there was little change in the shares of the Coloured and
Indian population groups – that includes their share of expenditure as well
as the share of the population.

Furthermore, I quote:


   Mean real per capita income increased in all income deciles between 2000
   and 2005-06 (based on income excluding imputed rent). But the increases
   were uneven, with above-average increases occurring in deciles 1, 2, 3
   and 10, and below-average increases occurring in deciles 4 to 9 (where
   decile 1 refers to the 10% of the population with the lowest income and
   decile 10 refers to the 10% of the population with the highest income).

This means that real income per capita increased at above average rates of
30% for the poorest of the population and 10% for the richest of the
population. It would then be the higher rate of the increase of 10% that
would account for the increased inequality.

A desegregation of our population would however show that there has been
some significant change in the racial and gender composition of the middle
class and the section of the working class made up of skilled and
semiskilled workers. This means that within these strata, there has been a
definite reduction of the level of inequality with regard to both race and
gender. This has been reflected in the increases in expenditure items such
as mortgages, automobiles and household durables.

It is obvious that the single most important factor that drives inequality
is the gross disparity in skills levels. As the economy has continued to
change, requiring fewer and fewer unskilled workers and showing a keen
appetite for an educated and skilled working population, those with these
skills have taken an increasing share of the national income, on the one
hand. On the other hand, many of the poorly-educated and the unskilled end
up being unemployed. This means that we must continue to focus on the
critical task of reducing the unacceptably high level of unemployment in
our country. In turn, this means that we must further intensify our efforts
to raise the skills level of all our people, with particular reference to
the poorest sections of our population which are most affected by the
scourge of unemployment.

But, of course, I am not suggesting that this is the only intervention that
we should make to address the challenge of inequality. Perhaps I should
stop here for now, Madam Speaker, to allow the hon Sibhidla to pose a
follow-up question. There is more to this answer. Thanks, Madam Speaker.
[Applause.]

Nksz N N SIBHIDLA: Ndiyabulela, Somlomo .Ndibulele kuMongameli ngempendulo
asinike yona enenkcazelo eyanelisayo.Kodwa ndicela ukuqonda kuMongameli
ukuba ingaba uyaneliseka na yinkqubela- phambili kulo mba, ukanti nendlela
ushishino labucala elenza ngayo ekuxazululeni lomba? (Translation of
isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[Ms N N SIBHIDLA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me thank the President for
giving us a satisfactory response. However, I would like to know from the
President whether he is pleased with the progress in this matter, and the
manner in which the private sector operates in resolving this matter.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, as I have said, we would
therefore all agree that we continue to be confronted not only by an
acceptably high level of inequality, but by one that has tended to
increase. But to accelerate the process of the reduction of the gap between
the rich and the poor, we had to direct the entirety of government
machinery and resources to deal with all elements pertinent to the high
inequality gap. In this regard, we have, since 1994, introduced a number of
measures to redress the exclusion of the majority in this country – from
ownership and management, to control of the economy.

We have also embarked on a variety of programmes aimed at increasing
ownership and access to resources, as well as delivery of better services
to all our citizens. These include such measures as the broad-based black
economic empowerment, employment equity, preferential procurement and
special interventions aimed at empowering SMMEs, women, people with
disabilities and the youth. Because of the many government interventions
such as BEE, employment equity, access to resources, delivery of services
and others, inequality between different races has declined from 61% in
1993 to 40% in 2006. This is still a big gap, yet it also indicates that
progress is being made. Accordingly, many government programmes, including
the Apex Priorities we announced in the state of the nation address,
Asgisa, Jipsa and others, continue to focus on the challenge of poverty
reduction and the narrowing of the inequality gap.
As we know, part of this ongoing work which is central to our efforts to
close the gap between the rich and the poor includes the comprehensive
social security interventions. This is with the understanding that social
assistance support would over time decline as other second economy
interventions start to make a significant impact. These include programmes
around housing and services such as health, clean water, electricity,
sanitation and others; access to capital for the poor in the form of
microcredit for productive purposes as well as support for SMMEs; human
resource development strategies; specific interventions in the school
system and other areas of education and training; the Expanded Public Works
Programme; sector investment strategies; and land and agrarian reforms. All
these measures and others which constitute the government’s programme are a
critical part of our efforts to close the gap between the rich and the
poor.

Although we are dealing with a difficult legacy - to ensure the persistence
of an acceptably high inequality gap - I firmly believe that our policies
are indeed correct and that they have begun as we have indicated. We have
made a positive impact, firstly, in reducing the level of poverty and
limiting the growth of the inequality gap. For example, one of the
paragraphs of the Statistics SA report we have cited says, and I quote:
“The reduction of inequality through redistributive policies reduces a Gini
coefficient by 8 percentage points.”

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I hope that answers the question of the
hon member. [Applause.]

Mr S J F MARAIS: Mr President, although the expansion of the social grant
system might ultimately reflect a lessening of income equality in our
society, although making it more dependable on the state, the income divide
between the rich and the poor remains high, with the rich having 20%,
earning 70% of the income. Throughout their lives, the poor are confronted
by ever-increasing prices of maize, bread, paraffin, transport and fuel,
electricity and municipal tariffs, amongst other things; and high levels of
inflation are exacerbating the hardship faced by the poorest among us and
consumers in general.

Mr President, can you, firstly, outline the government’s strategy to
alleviate the effect of these deteriorating inflationary conditions on the
public, and secondly, the government’s strategy to contain the price
increases in staple food and essential goods and services. Furthermore,
what is your message of hope in this regard to the millions of suffering
South Africans out there? I thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, let me first of all agree
with the hon member in terms of the identification of the problems and the
challenges that we face with regard to matters he has listed. Indeed, I do
hope that we will, all of us, join in answering the questions he has posed.
This divide and inequality gap, which he refers to quite correctly, is of
course very much embedded in our legacy. Therefore, a general comprehensive
response to the eradication of the legacy is critical to addressing this
matter on which both of us agree.

I think the hon member would also be aware that the matter of food prices
is a global problem. It is affecting all countries in the world and
therefore we wouldn’t expect, and shouldn’t expect, that South Africa would
be excluded in this regard.

I am sure that the hon member also knows that we did set up, in the past, a
special committee to deal with this issue – to track it – so that we can
indeed make an assessment as to whether increases in food prices are
justified so that we can make the necessary interventions. I am quiet
certain that the committee is doing its work to follow this up. But I am
saying that will have to be done in the context of rising food prices
across the world. This is a matter that we shall have to address in the
context of what is happening globally, knowing that there is no way that we
can entirely insulate ourselves from these processes.

I am sure that the hon member knows what is being done to address these
inflationary pressures which arise from these food prices and other matters
over which we have no control, such as high fuel prices. There is very
little we can do about the high price of crude oil. I am sure the hon
member has noticed that it is now already over US$100 a barrel. But the
interventions that we sought to make were partly from the intervention made
by the Reserve Bank. Partly what we tried to do, from the Budget’s point of
view to try and cushion the impact of these prices, particularly on the
poorest, was to implement some of the interventions that were possible. So
I am saying that we will indeed try and do whatever is possible and
necessary; but we will be limited in what we can achieve by what is
possible.

I indeed share the view of the hon member that we need to attend to all of
these issues, particularly to protect the standard of living of the poor.
This is indeed very, very important. Thanks, Madam Speaker.

Prof E S CHANG: Mr President, unemployment and low levels of economic
participation are amongst the greatest challenges faced by South African
women in rural areas who are illiterate and are the poorest of the poor.
They are at a disadvantage with regard to access to jobs. Government has
identified targets, but they are not specific. Mr President, what would you
do to have a short to medium term strategy to help rural women who are
illiterate in the second economy to have access to jobs that they can do as
we meet the Apex Priority and the reality as you said in your state of the
nation address. Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, I think we agree very well
amongst ourselves today in this House – it is very good.
This is indeed a challenge. I think the hon member knows that some years
ago, government precisely identified this problem and decided to designate
certain rural areas as priority areas – this is what we call the Integrated
and Sustainable Rural Development Programme. We selected those parts of our
country in rural areas that had the highest incidence of poverty, including
the unemployment and poverty of rural women. We have, therefore, sought to
ensure that those priority areas thus identified, received the necessary
attention. I must confess that development in these areas has been uneven.
There has been better progress in some areas than in others. But, indeed,
we continue to focus on this, including other programmes.

I am sure the hon member knows that if you take, for instance, the EPWP in
these areas, it will focus, among other things, on attracting rural women
into training employment programmes that are afforded by the programme.
There are many interventions of this kind. So, I agree with the hon member
that we have to focus on this matter; we are indeed focusing on it. Thank
you very much, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr M N NGCOBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon President, a total of 2
billion people around the world are estimated to be lacking electricity.
The World Energy Association states that the situation is particularly bad
in rural areas, with 56% of the world’s rural population having to manage
without electricity. Historically, many public utilities in the world have
undertaken great extensions by setting targets and financing investments
through levies or cross-subsidies, with a notably disappointing outcome.
[Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Excuse me, hon Ngcobo. Is that a follow-up question to the
first question?

Mr N W NGCOBO: Yes, it is.

The SPEAKER: Ok!

Mr M N NGCOBO: On the contrary, Eskom in South Africa has reached its
target of 350 000 connections – in fact, it exceeded it during the 1990s.
[Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: It seems as if this might be a follow-up question to a
different question. Therefore, I will call upon hon .... What happened to
the names now? Someone removed the names from the screen.

Mr M N NGCOBO: I must thank the hon member, Madam Speaker, for alerting me
to what is coming. [Laughter.]

Mr N SINGH: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon President, whilst we
acknowledge that there are a number of pro-poor interventions to help
particularly the youth and women, would you not think that poverty is at
such high levels that it is important to establish a war room in the Office
of the Presidency where we can deal with issues related to poverty? I say
this because there are a number of duplications, we believe, between
various departments and the message that goes out, particularly to able-
bodied youth, is not clear. So possibly a more co-ordinated manner in which
projects can help the youth, especially, would be something that could be
considered in the Office of the Presidency. Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: I agree fully with what the hon member says.
Indeed, he will recall that in the state of the nation address, we
addressed this matter of the establishment of that war room and, as he
says, in the Presidency. So the decision that government has taken is that
indeed we must have that war room properly staffed, with the full capacity
to co-ordinate all of these programmes and to focus them and so on,
immediately under the leadership of the Deputy President. So, indeed, I
agree fully with what the hon member says. Thanks, Madam Speaker.

The SPEAKER: We now come to Question 2 asked by the Leader of the
Opposition.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, I don’t want to take over the
direction of the House. I was told that ... [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Oh, we did. Yes!
The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Yes!

The SPEAKER: We did. We did agree that we will swap so that we can enable
the hon De Lille to catch the flight. So, now we’ll go to Question no 5
asked by the hon De Lille.

   Retention of power of prosecution by Directorate of Special Operations

5.    Mrs P de Lille (ID) asked the President of the Republic:


      Whether, with reference to his state of the nation address and his
      reply to the debate that followed, the Directorate of Special
      Operations will retain their power of prosecution after their
      envisaged restructuring; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant
      details?                                     NO733E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, I said before that government
will approach Parliament, this House, soon with this proposal on an
integrated and specialised unit dedicated to the fight against organised
crime. Parliament will decide on the powers and functions of such a unit,
taking into account the need to effectively address the challenge posed by
organised crime. It will, therefore, be inopportune and improper for me to
speculate on what power such a unit will have.

The very complex nature of organised crime and the threat it poses to our
country requires that, in establishing this unit, we should reaffirm the
specialist character that informs the establishment and composition of the
Directorate of Special Operations, DSO, while we build on the experience we
have accumulated during the years of the existence of this formation. This
includes continuing to use professionals with their appropriate legal
competence to ensure that all matters submitted to the National Prosecuting
Authority for possible prosecution are properly prepared in keeping with
everything that needs to be done to ensure that justice is done. Thank you.


Mrs P DE LILLE: Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for agreeing to move my
slot up and also thank the other opposition parties. Mr President, thank
you for your response. I’m just seeking clarity regarding what you said in
response to the question during the debate of your state of the nation
address. You said that the specialist unit will continue to be guided and
assisted by the skills that reside in the NPA and our intelligence
services, ensuring that its operations are both prosecution and
intelligence, driven to continue the history of the high conviction rates
of the Scorpions.

I also accept, Mr President, that Parliament will finally decide on the
powers and functions of the specialised unit. My concern there, Mr
President, is that how do you reconcile this with the resolution that was
adopted at the 52nd ANC National Conference in Polokwane, which basically
said that the Scorpions will be dissolved and members of the DSO performing
policing functions will fall under the SA Police Services, with what you
said in your reply to the state of the nation address debate?

Mr President, I do understand that the DSO is a specialised unit under the
NPA and that the investigative powers of the DSO could possibly move to the
police, and that is the focus of my question: What will happen to the
prosecutorial powers that the DSO has at the moment? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, yes, indeed, that is the
question the hon member posed but she didn’t raise anything about Polokwane
in the question. She talked about the retention of the powers of
prosecution of the specialised unit. That was the question I was seeking to
respond to. Now, what I’m saying with regard to that is that this matter
will come to Parliament and, again, as I will indicate later, the proposal
that we will make takes into account the recommendations made by the
Khampepe Commission.

The Khampepe Commission – if I may say this – does, in fact, address this
particular matter and, therefore, we’ll have to take into account what the
judicial commission says, but in the end it will be up to this House to
decide on this matter. I think, really, it would be quite improper for me
to say this is what the House will decide because I don’t have that kind of
power, but I’m saying that the judicial commission addresses particularly
the matter that the hon De Lille raises. I have said this and I will repeat
it again later that we will release the reports of the Khampepe Commission
when we table those proposals, and members will see the manner in which the
judicial commission approaches this question that she poses. Thank you.

Dr J T DELPORT: Madam Speaker, hon President, I must say at the outset that
I think the question, with all due respect to the hon De Lille, is somewhat
incorrectly phrased because it’s not about a police service having
prosecuting powers. It is about a prosecution with investigating powers.
That is what it’s about and that structure has been proven all over the
world to work and it was proved in South Africa to work.

Dit is, soos ons in Afrikaans sê, ’n feit soos ’n koei.[ As we say in
Afrikaans: It is an accomplished fact.]

In more modern parlance I would say: It’s as much a fact as there are 10
million bicycles in Beijing. It’s a fact. Are we going to retain that? The
hon President says it will come to Parliament. The question is: What will
come to Parliament? Are you going to use your influence as the leader of
this country to retain a prosecution-led investigative authority? Secondly,
are you going to see to it that they will deal with the police at arm’s
length? Unless they have that measure of independence, you will vacate your
office without making provision for someone to do what has always been
asked: “Who will guard the guards?”

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: The hon Delport is asking me to do something
which I’m not going to do. He is asking me to table the proposals that
government will table later in this House. I’m not going to do that, hon
Delport. We have said we are going to come to the House with the proposal
on this matter. Now you are asking me to table that proposal here and I’m
saying I’m not going to do it.

The hon De Lille didn’t make any mistake whatsoever in the question she
posed because the law that establishes the DSO does, indeed, give the DSO
the power of prosecution. There’s nothing wrong at all if she is citing
what is in the law. There’s nothing wrong at all with what she said. So,
I’m saying that with regards to that, as with regards to all other elements
that have a bearing on the specialised unit, we shall come to the House,
make a proper proposal on this thing and we see what is it that we do, as
Parliament, about that. I’m not going to accept that hon Delport delegates
me to make that presentation today. Thank you. [Applause.]
Mr G SOLOMON: Madam Speaker, Mr President, I have no question but rather a
short comment to make on this matter here. The question, I think, that
should have been asked is not whether the DSO will retain its power of
prosecution, but whether the crime-fighting capacity in South Africa will
be enhanced by the envisaged restructuring. In response to the Portfolio
Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development, the present head of
the DSO admitted that to relegate the role of the SAPS to crime
investigation and prevention is, in its word, a dangerous perception.

I hope that the hon De Lille does not create this perception in the minds
of the public in South Africa. Since 2004 the SAPS has established a number
of specialised units, which played a major role in crime investigation and
prevention. Successful prosecution, Mr President, depends upon a good
quality investigation resulting in a good quality docket which is then
presented to the NPA, that’s the National Prosecution Authority, which has
the constitutional power to prosecute.

We have no doubt in our minds that the envisaged restructuring will lead to
a better co-ordination between the investigative and prosecutorial
processes between the two departments, thus enhancing the crime-fighting
capacity in South Africa.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, indeed, we have said this
before. What we are aiming to achieve is to improve our capacity to fight
organised crime. We will do everything that is necessary to ensure that we
improve our capacity to fight organised crime. That, indeed, is a central
point. I think the hon members will see that from the recommendations of
the Khampepe Commission. That is exactly what that commission also focuses
on. So, everything that is necessary to improve that capacity – I’m quite
certain – will be among the proposals that we will bring to Parliament.
Thank you.

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Madam Speaker, Mr President, my question is short and
sweet – maybe not so sweet. [Laughter.] My question is: Are you personally
in favour of the fact that the Scorpions should become part of the police?
If you are not, why are you not in favour of that and if you are in favour
of that, why didn’t we ensure that the Scorpions were part of the police in
the first instance?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, I don’t know how many times I
must say this. I am in favour of better capacity to fight organised crime.
[Applause.] The proposal that will come to Parliament will be a proposal
that will be approved by Cabinet. It will, therefore, be a proposal of
government and not of a particular Minister that will come and stand here
to make a proposal. At the heart of that proposal is improving the capacity
to fight organised crime. Thank you.

      Holding of relevant members of Cabinet accountable for crisis in
                             electricity supply

2.    The Leader of the Opposition (DA) asked the President of the
    Republic:

    Whether he will hold relevant members of the Cabinet accountable for the
    crisis in the electricity supply; if not, why not; if so, what are the
    relevant details?                                    NO654E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, let me restate what I have
said before, that with regard to the matter of the emergency around the
supply of electricity, we as government take collective responsibility for
these difficulties, and again say that we apologise to the nation for the
inconvenience the electricity supply deficit has caused.

In this regard, in the state of the nation address I said, and I quote:

  It is necessary that we take this opportunity to convey to the country
  the apologies of both the government and Eskom for the national emergency
  which has resulted in all of us having to contend with the consequences
  of load shedding. I would also like to thank all citizens for their
  resilience and forbearing in the face of the current difficulties.
No element of this statement was a slip of the tongue, a throw-away phrase
or mere rhetoric. Yet again, let me restate that government takes
collective responsibility for the energy emergency. Similarly, government
takes collective responsibility to do everything possible, working with
Parliament and all our people, vigorously to respond to the emergency.

I truly hope that the hon members will, together with the rest of the
nation, do everything they can to contribute to the accomplishment of the
goals we must pursue as we respond to the national energy emergency.

With regard to the question posed by the hon Leader of the Opposition, let
me therefore say, one, that the government takes collective responsibility
for the national electricity emergency. This means that the attempt to
attribute this national emergency to particular Ministers is misdirected.
The President of the Republic will certainly not join that effort.

Secondly, the urgent task our nation faces is to act in unity to respond to
this emergency, consistent with the call we made in the state of the nation
address: ``All hands on deck’’. Thirdly, what needs to be done has been
presented in detail. Members of Parliament, who constitute an important
component part of our national leadership, have a responsibility to lead
and inspire the nation to act in unity, to implement the programme of
action represented, for instance, by the joint statement of the
Presidential Working Groups.

The energy emergency has presented all of us with the difficult question –
once again I must say: Is our nation capable of acting in unity to confront
common national challenges, overcoming our historical divisions, many of
which continue to define contemporary South African society? Are our nation
and this House capable of rising above our political differences and
partisan interests to promote the greater good? The electricity emergency
requires as much united national action as do the highly reprehensible
manifestation of racism and human abuse at the University of the Free
State, as well as the sexism and human abuse that took place at the
Johannesburg Noord Street taxi rank.

For some weeks now, the President, the Deputy President, the Ministers and
Eskom have repeatedly explained the origins, the history and the nature of
the energy problem we share and must solve together. These explanations
tell a very instructive story about the challenges posed by a process of
truly revolutionary change, from which we must learn many lessons that must
help all of us as we continue to pursue the objective of the reconstruction
and development of our country.

It is this, the serious lessons we learn about the origins, the history and
the nature of the energy problem that will help us to respond better than
we have in the last 14 years to the challenge of fundamental social change.
I trust that each one of us, including the hon Leader of the Opposition,
will discover within ourselves the capacity to be wise, patriotic and
selfless, enabling us purposefully to join the national effort to assist
our country to emerge successfully from the national energy emergency. I
trust that all the hon members, regardless of party affiliation will
respond to this appeal, which reflects the sincere hope of the overwhelming
majority of our people. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr President, you
can be assured that the whole opposition – speaking for DA – can be held to
account when it comes to the interests of South Africa.

Mr President, I have to ask you: Were you taken by surprise by Eskom’s
latest decision to delay large-scale building projects, considering that
government’s policy as per the Cabinet statement of 25 January 2008 states
that ``There is no question of stopping contracted projects or freezing any
new projects.’’

In the light of the possible 500 000 jobs which could be put in jeopardy by
this situation, Mr President, do you still believe it is appropriate that
the Cabinet is not collectively held to account?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: The Cabinet, Madam Speaker, is saying it’s
collectively responsible. I’ve just said that.

As I understand it, the statement to which the hon member refers was made
by a spokesperson. It was a response by somebody from Eskom to a question
that was posed. I haven’t got the details of that statement, but what I
understand is that what Eskom was saying is that the practice – it’s a
normal practice – whereby people who intend to launch large projects apply
to Eskom for the supply of the necessary volumes of electricity will
continue, and that because of the emergency, it might take a bit longer to
approve those applications. That’s what I understand is being said. As I
said, I haven’t seen the transcript of what was in fact said, but that’s
what I understand about it.

We indeed would want to insist that we must do everything possible to
ensure that this does not impact negatively on economic growth, that it
doesn’t impact negatively on job losses, and that Eskom must handle this
matter in a way that addresses those challenges. I do not know who has
already made these calculations where Eskom says that instead of taking x
days to consider the application, we might take x plus five days to
consider the applications, that the hon member refers to regarding job
losses of half a million.

But, indeed, we would of course be very, very concerned if there was some
decision taken by Eskom which would produce the negative results that she
indicates. But, as I say, it was no statement from Eskom. As a response to
a question that was posed, the manner in which the question might have been
answered might have been unfortunate, but the policy, certainly, is that
this should not result in unnecessarily slowing down economic growth and
generating job losses. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr E N N NGCOBO: Madam Speaker, hon President, historically many public
utilities in the world, including the former apartheid government, have
failed to provide access to electricity to the poor and the rural
population. On the contrary, our public utility, Eskom, was able to exceed
its target of 350 000 connections per year in the years since the dawn of
our democracy in 1994.

Was this achievement due to the correct energy reform policies of our ANC
government? If not, what are the relevant details, hon President?
[Laughter.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Yes, indeed, Madam Speaker, we took this
decision quite deliberately that electricity, like other services such as
health, education, housing, sanitation and roads, and that kind of
infrastructure should also be available to the poor and our rural
communities. I think that, indeed, we should be very proud of what has been
achieved with regards to that programme of electrification.

I must say that, hon member and Madam Speaker, in the context of the
national emergency, we have continued to insist that that particular
programme should also continue and, in this instance, with a harder push
with regard to using alternative sources of energy. Yes, the outcome that
you described is an outcome that we decided upon quite deliberately
because, as I said earlier, our programme must continue to focus on
improving the standard of living and the quality of life of the poor in our
country, including the rural people. Thanks, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: The hon Van der Merwe. [Interjections.] It’s a follow-up
question on Question 2.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker, I was hoping to ask a follow-up on the
question dealing with the Khampepe Commission.

The SPEAKER: Ok.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr President, South Africa has
electricity blackouts at least in part because alternative electricity
generating companies have been kept out of the market. Foreign generating
companies, for example, were told that they could erect generating plants
in the country, but that government officials would fix the price at which
they could sell their electricity and decide whom it could be sold to and,
not surprisingly, they declined.

Our question would be: How many other avenues of alternative power have
been discouraged? You have accepted, we know, collective responsibility and
apologised. Is government policy to blame, or bilateral agreements,
perhaps? Has this situation arisen as part of a strategy to create a
receptive atmosphere as nuclear solutions are speedily imposed without
public debate regarding toxic waste and proper procedure as set out in the
Green Paper? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: No, Madam Speaker, I don’t know. Perhaps we
need to explain to the hon Dudley, once again, the history of this problem.
It may be that when we did explain, she wasn’t around. Maybe we should do
that again, and she would understand that it’s got nothing to do with any
bilateral agreements or any subterfuge to advantage nuclear power stations.


There is a problem that arose. She referred to independent power producers.
Indeed, there is a problem that arose. It actually arose as a result of a
good thing that we were trying to do. The good thing we were trying to do
was to keep the cost of electricity down. Indeed, we prided ourselves on
this notion that we produced the cheapest electricity of any country in the
world, as indeed we do.

The consequence of that was that when we put out tenders to try to attract
independent power producers into this market, they said, ``Your electricity
is too cheap, and therefore, we would not make a profit in that situation.
Raise your electricity prices, and we will invest.’’ We said, ``No, it’s
important for the poor of our country, it’s important for our industrial
development, etc, that indeed we keep the price of our electricity down.’’
The consequence is what you are talking about, hon member, concerning the
independent power producers. There was no conspiracy about the matter, but
of course, it is clear now, that these extra low prices of electricity
can’t be sustained. We have said so quite openly, that the prices will
increase but, nevertheless, we will still remain among the cheapest sources
of electricity in the world.

Whether those even higher prices will attract those independent power
producers, I don’t know. So, there has been no attempt, no conspiracy, to
exclude alternative sources of power or to advantage nuclear power
stations, but the economics of the issue are changing, and in the context
of that, we will see what happens; provided of course that we build up this
generating capacity that our country needs. Thanks, Madam Speaker.

Dr C P MULDER: Madam Speaker, I think the first important thing is that the
President and the government acknowledge that we are dealing with a
national emergency with regard to the electricity supply in South Africa. I
am not sure that we have already seen the consequences of the situation
that we are dealing with at the moment.

Section 91(2) of the Constitution says the following:

  The President appoints the Deputy President and Ministers, assigns their
  powers and functions, ...


...and then there is a little phrase at the end that says:


  ... and may dismiss them.


I think the question deals with that specific issue, and the question being
asked is what is being done in that regard. Section 92 of the Constitution
deals with accountability and responsibilities. Section 92(2) states
clearly that:


  Members of the Cabinet are accountable collectively ...

That’s what the President has said. But then the section goes on, and says:


  ... and individually to Parliament for the exercise of their powers and
  the performance ...

Are we not sending a very bad message out there that, in such a situation
as this which causes a national emergency, it’s one thing to say that you
are acting collectively, but who is taking the responsibility and the blame
for the situation that we are in at the moment? Is it correct also that
Eskom did supply the executive a couple of years ago with a report that
indicated that if we do not take certain steps, then they will run out of
power in 2007, as basically happened in the end?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, I am sure the hon member is
quoting from the Constitution quite correctly. Indeed, I am quite certain
that if Parliament wanted any of our Ministers to come and account,
Parliament is perfectly at liberty to ask them to come. The Ministers were
never stopped. If Parliament hasn’t done that, it can’t be our fault. If
Parliament wants to call Ministers to come and discuss anything, Parliament
indeed is perfectly at liberty to do so. So, by all means, do that.

What I have been saying is that we take collective responsibility for this.
The reason is inherent in the nature of the problem. That is why I was
referring to the history and the origins of the problem. If the hon member
understood the history and the origins of the problem, the hon member would
understand why I take that position.

You see, it’s not as though you have life that operates in silos. There is
a particular element of life that would be defined by what the Minister of
Minerals and Energy says in her portfolio. This problem arises from many
sources. Indeed, I referred to the matter of the independent power
producers. We had indeed understood that we are going to require more
generating capacity, more electricity, some time back, and that is why we
said that we must then create the space for these independent power
producers, among other things, to ensure that Eskom continues to have the
resources to address the poor and the rural communities.

I explained why the independent power producers did not come on board:
because they had said that our electricity prices were too low and would
not guarantee them the profits they would need. It was precisely to address
this problem. So, no, it’s true. It would be incorrect if I said that we
woke up with this problem now in January or December, hence the decisions
that had been taken some time back to say, therefore, that Eskom must have
its own building programme with all of the various power stations, some of
which are already being built.

That’s the answer, hon member, but what I am saying is that if you
understand the nature, the history and the origins of this challenge, you
would understand why the Cabinet says we must take collective
responsibility for this matter. It can’t be farmed out. We can’t resort to
fall guys and scapegoats and things like that. We have got to say as
government, all of us were present as this problem emerged and we each
contributed in our various ways.

I’m saying that that was not, as I said, a rhetorical statement. It’s an
actual reflection of reality. It’s a reality that I am afraid I cannot
change, hon member. Thanks, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]
  Progress made towards continental integration at Heads of State Summit of
                              the African Union

3.    Mr M P Sibande (ANC) asked the President of the Republic:


      What progress was made towards continental integration at the Heads of
      State Summit of the African Union held in Ethiopia recently?
                                                         NO659E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, hon members, you will recall
that the grand debate on the formation of a union government was held in
Accra, Ghana, on 1 to 3 July 2007. The outcome of that debate is settled in
the Accra Declaration where the Heads of State and Government agreed that
to ensure that the African Union is a union of peoples and not just a union
of states and governments, this debate must involve the African peoples
living both on the continent and in the diaspora. I am pleased that we have
this opportunity once again to discuss this important matter here in this
home of elected representatives of the people of South Africa.

Hon members will recall that there is general agreement on the objective of
ensuring the integration of the African continent. The Accra Summit
decisions set out in the Accra Declaration confirms that the Heads of State
and Government agreed to accelerate the economic and political integration
on the African continent, including the formation of a union government for
Africa with the ultimate objective of the African Union being to create a
United States of Africa.

In taking this decision the Heads of State and Government were informed by
a division of the founding fathers of the OAU, the need for common
responses to detrimental challenges of globalisation and the need for intra-
Africa, political and economic integration. The differences that arose on
this matter related to the process by which we reached the agreed objective
of a United States of Africa and there are essentially two views in this
regard: The first is that we proceed immediately to set up a United States
of Africa and appoint Ministers in charge of a number of portfolios to be
agreed upon.

The second view, which was a view that was accepted by the Accra Summit,
was that we should approach this integration in a gradual manner – building
from below, as it were. The Accra Declaration sets out the steps that need
to be taken, which include: rationalising and strengthening our regional
economic structures, especially the regional economic communities; to
conduct an audit of the organs of the African Union; to examine issues such
as the relationship between the union government with national governments,
it’s domains of competence and the related impact on the sovereignty of
member states; and to examine timeframes for the formation of the
government as well as its sources of finance.

We are of the view that these matters do indeed need careful consideration.
To illustrate this, the Accra Summit agreed that the union government would
be built on common values that need to be identified and agreed upon. The
question that we need to answer is what these values are that would
underpin a union government. For instance, are we all agreed on the
principle that all who seek to govern must do so on the basis of the will
of the people, expressed through regular elections based on one person, one
vote? What would be the economic policies that we would seek to advance and
protect us as a collective? Similar questions can be posed about foreign
policy and a range of other matters.

After the Accra Summit, the then Chairperson of the African Union working
with the AU Commission, established a ministerial committee of ten, which
included South Africa, to examine all these issues and report to the
executive council at their next meeting, which was held just before the
February 2008 Addis Ababa Summit. The ministerial committee of ten could
not provide a definitive answer to these questions. Having considered the
report of the committee, the executive council recommended to the summit
that it should be allowed to hold an extraordinary meeting to discuss the
matter. However, the summit decided that this matter should be elevated to
the Heads of State and Government and accordingly decided to reconstitute
the committee of ten at that level with the addition of the immediate past
and current chairpersons of the African Union.

The membership of this committee, therefore, is as follows: Tanzania is the
current Chair of the AU, Ghana is immediate past chair, Botswana, Cameroon,
Gabon, Egypt, Ethiopia, Libya, Nigeria, Senegal, South-Africa and Uganda.
We will be participating in the deliberations of this committee of ten
informed by the view of both our Parliament and government that we should
approach this matter in a manner that would ensure that we create a strong
foundation upon which the union government would be built, so that we have
a union government that is not such in name only. The meetings of the
committee of ten are scheduled to take place soon. Thank you very much.

Mr M P SIBANDE: Madam Speaker, hon President, what impact does the European
Union economic partnership agreements with African countries have on
regional and continental integration? Last year the European Union and the
African Union held a summit in Portugal and certain commitments were
reached. Is the economic partnership agreements, as proposed by the
European Commission, advancing the objectives of the summit or reversing
the gains made at the summit? I thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, I think this particular
question would of course require a discussion of its own. It is a very
important question. Indeed, the hon member is correct, it does bear on the
matter that we are discussing about regional integration and African unity.
It is clear to us that various provisions in these economic partnership
agreements would work in an adverse manner - if we just talk about our
region here – with regard to this process of regional integration. If you
just take a very simple fact to start with: SADC is made up of 14
countries, but in fact the group that is called SADC that is negotiating
with the European Union is seven of the members of SADC. The other members
of SADC belong to different groups. That already indicates to you the
impact that the process of these EPAs can have in hampering regional
integration.

We have, therefore, been discussing these matters among ourselves, first of
all, and with the European Union to indicate to them the consequences of
various provisions in these economic partnership agreements, both with
regard to Sacu and SADC. I am sure the hon member is aware that the SADC
group of the seven countries met with the EU Trade Commissioner, Peter
Mandelson, in Gaborone on Tuesday to discuss this matter in particular.

That meeting did agree that a process would be put in place to discuss the
concerns that we have raised, which concerns - and indeed, as the hon
member indicates - we did raise at the Africa EU Summit in Lisbon last
year, pointing to the negative impact of elements of these economic
partnership agreements on this matter of regional integration on our
continent and African unity.

It was agreed then that the European Commission would indeed engage the
African continent on those concerns. The AU Summit at the beginning of
February came back to this matter and reaffirmed the need for the African
continent to interact with the European Commission to address this
particular matter. It is a matter that remains very much on the agenda, not
for us only as a region, but for the continent as a whole. We would want to
pursue the decision that was taken in Lisbon, that there should be that
engagement between Africa and the EU, to make sure that the economic
partnership agreements don’t act as an obstacle to the achievement of the
goal of regional integration on our continent and African unity. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr W J SEREMANE: Madam Speaker, hon President, just on a sideline, perhaps
Africa’s development has made the term “continental” a bit nebulous. I
wasn’t sure whether we were talking about Europe or Africa. Perhaps a
redefinition of “continental” has to be explored?

To expand the question a little further, what effect do conflict areas such
as Sudan or Darfur, Kenya and even Zimbabwe - without ignoring the efforts
to resolve the conflict in these areas- have on the integration of the
continent and its endeavours to retain skilled professionals to assist in
meeting the dire need for the integration of Africa and the global
competitive challenges facing her? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, obviously, as the hon member
indicated, those conflicts do have a negative impact on the matter of
integration and indeed do result in the outflow of skills, which the
countries themselves and the continent need, but I’m sure that the hon
member is aware that this matter of conflict resolution on the continent is
indeed one of the high priority matters in terms of the agenda of the
African Union. Even this current discussion we are having concerning the
question that was posed about progress with regard to the matter of an
African Union, a union government and all that. This matter remains a
central point to the resolution of conflicts on our continent. It must
continue to serve as such, because you wouldn’t be able to achieve the sort
of integration that all of us are looking for on the continent were you to
continue having fires burning in these various countries on our continent.
It remains also, from the point of view of our government, an area of
particular focus, the matter of the resolution of these conflicts, wherever
they may occur. Thank you.

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Speaker, Mr President, the USA government seems to be
working hard to impose Africom on African states. This seems to be dividing
these states in that some states are in favour of the establishment of
Africom, while others are not.

African heads of state are conscious of the divisive danger of Africom. Are
the measures in place by Heads of State to resist the USA in its
interference with progress towards continental integration? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, the hon member refers to some
African states being in favour of the establishment of what is called
Africom. I don’t know which ones those are; I haven’t heard of them. What I
do know is that the general position that the continent has taken with
regard to this is that indeed this isn’t necessary. It is not necessary to
establish such an Africom on the continent.

I am not aware of which particular countries might be in favour of this. I
haven’t heard any African countries say that. I am quite sure the continent
is fully conscious of this matter and I would think that, for instance, the
hon member will remember the statement that was made from here last week by
the President of France who said that they are going to discuss with
relevant African countries the continued presence, military agreements and
continued presence, of French troops in those countries. I am quite sure
that if those African countries said they don’t need those troops indeed
those troops will leave. I think it’s a reflection of the sentiment on the
continent that we do not need these foreign troops.

The hon member might also have heard the comments made by President Bush
when he was in Ghana where he very vigorously denied that there was any
plan on the part of the US government to position US troops on the African
continent. Certainly the view of the continent is that, no, we do not need
that Africom. Thank you. [Applause.]

Dr C P MULDER: Madam Speaker, hon President, in the run up to the African
Union Summit in Ghana in 2007, the President of Libya, Gaddafi, asked the
following question:

   How can an African country face a Europe that is united, negotiate with
   the USA, Japan or China?

He went on to say, ``Africa would be on equal footing when we have one
single government’’.

That’s his point of view. The President also adequately pointed out the
current process within the structures of the African Union, and thank you
for that. May I ask what the South African Government’s position is with
regard to this process? What would that exactly be, if I may ask?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, as I indicated, the position
that we have taken with regard to this was the second option, which, as I
said, is building this process of African integration and African unity
from below. Therefore, the option that was accepted and is reflected in the
Accra Declaration, is let us strengthen the regional economic communities,
let us from those communities address the matter of economic integration.
The declaration says, “where possible” and also the matter of regional
political integration must be built up from there. That is the position we
have taken with regard to this matter, and, as I said, that is the position
that was decided upon by the summit.

So the Accra Declaration reflects exactly the positions that we have taken
- and also in this committee of ten - as we discussed the matter of how do
we then take the matter of that Accra Declaration further. We will have to
operate strictly within the confines of the mandate contained in that Accra
Declaration. We do not believe that a proclamation of an African government
and the appointment of Corné Mulder as African Minister of Defence is going
to mean anything. Let’s come at it from below and perhaps we will, by the
time he is 100 years old, get to the point where he will be Minister of
African Defence. Thank you. [Applause.]

         Recommendations of Khampepe Judicial Commission of Inquiry

4.    Rev K R J Meshoe (ACDP) asked the President of the Republic:

     (1)    Whether Cabinet has accepted any of the recommendations of the
          Khampepe Commission of Inquiry into the future of the Directorate
          of Special Operations; if not, why not; if so, which
          recommendations were accepted;


      (2)   whether these recommendations will be made known before public
          hearings are held; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant
          details?                                            NO734E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, in response to this question,
let me again restate what I said in my response to the debate on the state
of the nation address. This was that at the time that we approach
Parliament to seek its view on and agreement with the proposals, we will
also release the recommendations of the Khampepe Judicial Commission to
enable the hon members and the country to better understand the overall
context within which we must address the specific challenge of intensifying
the fight against organised crime.

As a consequence of this commitment, which I confirm again, I would like to
make the appeal that instead of engaging in a discussion now on the
decisions of the government in respect of the recommendations of Justice
Khampepe and related matters, let us rather wait for a few more weeks and
deal with all these issues comprehensively when we table the government’s
proposal relating to improving our capacity to fight organised crime. This
will take into account the recommendations made by Justice Khampepe, which
indeed, hon member, we will release.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, Mr President. I
appreciate what you are saying. I have a very straightforward follow-up
question – a very easy one for you.

The ACDP believes that the decision taken by the ANC at the Polokwane
Conference to disband the Scorpions before they even saw the
recommendations made by the Khampepe Commission of Inquiry was ill-advised
and a severe blow to successful crime-fighting in this country. It is a
decision that fails, I believe, a test of rationality when one considers
the unit’s excellent prosecution record. It was reported that the Khampepe
Commission found out, among other things, that the Scorpions obtained a
conviction rate of about 90% compared to 8% for the police’s serious and
violent crime units within its first three years of operation. I’m sure, Mr
President, you will agree with me that these are great results. Members of
the public, we believe, must know about all these successes. [Time
expired.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, let me remind the hon
Reverend Meshoe about the question that he asked: whether Cabinet has
accepted any of the recommendations of the Khampepe Commission of Inquiry
into the future of the Directorate of Special Operations, and if not, why
not, and if so, which recommendations were accepted; and secondly, whether
these recommendations would be made known before public hearings are held,
and if not, why not, and if so, what are the relevant details.
I believe I have answered the question, Madam Speaker. The rest of what the
hon Reverend Meshoe said is entirely irrelevant, even to the question he
asked. Thank you, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker, I’m sure we all know that the whole
country was upset when it appeared from Polokwane that the Scorpions will
be dissolved. But when I listened to what the hon President debate and the
Minister of Safety and Security said in the state of the nation and what we
know from Khampepe, it now appears that there will be an improved capacity.
In other words, there will still be a structure, with improved capacity, to
fight crime. My question is ... [Interjections.] Somebody is answering on
behalf of the President but I would like to hear the President – am I
correct if I say that, in fact, a better crime-fighting unit will replace
the Scorpions? If so, Mr President, I suggest you call them ``the Mambas’’.
[Laughter.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Do you really want
me to repeat myself, hon Van der Merwe?

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: [Inaudible.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Van der Merwe, truly, what I was saying
is that this matter of organised crime is a very serious challenge. We
can’t, as a country, afford to lose the capacity to fight organised crime.
It can’t be done! It will be wrong if we destroyed our capacity to fight
organised crime. We can’t. Therefore, we are saying as government let’s
take into account what Judge Khampepe has said – account everything else as
necessary - in order to ensure that we improve our capacity to fight
organised crime.

And we will bring those proposals here in the National Assembly and we will
have all the proposals and the time it needs to discuss those proposals.
Which is more dangerous, the scorpions or the mambas? I don’t know, but
certainly, if greater effectiveness is represented by a mamba – green,
black, I don’t know what colour – I am quite sure that there will be no
opposition to what hon Van der Merwe proposes. But I had actually thought
that Koos was more deadly than mambas. [Laughter.]

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon President, how is it
that a Minister in your Cabinet, the Minister of Safety and Security, was
allowed by you to announce that, and I quote, ``the Scorpions will be
dissolved’’ before the matter was ever discussed in the relevant portfolio
committees or indeed debated in this House or before we had sight of the
Khampepe Commission report? With all due respect, how could you, as
President of this country, allow such a thing to happen? The result of this
is that our citizens, heads of security services around the world and
indeed other parliaments have been scandalised? Please tell us: Did you
know that he was going to make that statement?
The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: You know, Madam Speaker, when Members of
Parliament participate in debates on the state of the nation or the Budget
of the Presidency, none of them submit their statements to the President.
We are not a censoring board. We don’t maintain any censorship of this
particular matter.

But, Madam Speaker, I think I have explained sufficiently what we intend to
do on this matter and we will indeed do as we have said we will. We shall
come back here and make proposals. Parliament must look at this as the only
legislative body that we have. Government has no power to legislate. So the
National Assembly will decide as to what happens in this regard. Thank you,
Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

Ms A VAN WYK: Madam Speaker, it is clear from the President’s answer that
we are going to get the Khampepe Commission report before we start with our
public hearings. I think that it is the answer that we wanted to achieve.
What we need to do from here on is to focus, I think, more broadly, Mr
President, than simply on the Special Investigating Unit and the SAPS but
rather look at the integrated justice system and the progress that we can
make there.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: You are quite correct, hon member. That’s
why I’d said when I addressed this matter earlier in Parliament when I
responded to the debate on the state of the nation that this specialised
capacity to fight organised crime rests in various institutions of the
state and to say let us increase our capacity, our effectiveness with
regard to that fight, we have to look at all these various institutions –
the police, intelligence, the DSO, everywhere – so that indeed we make sure
that we bring this into a pool. And we are talking about a specialised unit
to fight organised crime. Other units that fight organised crime will
remain. It is therefore, as we indeed indicated, a matter that relates to
the entirety of the criminal justice system and indeed it’s integral to
that process we described as the revamping of the criminal justice system
on which we reported from this podium. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

           DEBATE ON MATERNAL AND NEWBORN CHILD HEALTH (IPU TOPIC)

Ms I W DIREKO: Madam Speaker and hon members of this House, maternal and
child health is a national priority.

Numerous treaties, initiatives and programmes have been introduced and
formulated to improve the wellbeing of women and children. The latest
effort, to which South Africa subscribes, is the Millennium Development
Goals, which aim to drastically reduce maternal and child mortality
specifically, and to address diseases related to challenges by 2015.

However, despite numerous efforts and commitments, the health status of
women and children remains poor in South Africa despite its middle-income
status. Data shows that the mortality and maternal health status of infants
and children under five are not optimal. To rectify these alarming
occurrences, concerted efforts must be made to address the core
contributing factors to poor maternal and child health.

Whilst many of the underlying challenges lie outside of the health sector,
the health services have a significant contribution to make and, at the
very least, health interventions must be implemented in the best possible
way. In addition, all other sectors need to be accountable for their role
in improving maternal and child health. For children, in particular, all
sectoral policies and plans need to be viewed through a child-rights lens
and child impact assessments must be done to ensure that children and their
families enjoy a better life.

Health for women and children is a basic human right and a non-negotiable
human right that has found expression in various international treaties and
programmes and should not be seen as an issue of pure economics. According
to the United Nations Fund for Population Activities department of health,
in 1998, the maternal mortality ratio in South Africa was 150 deaths per
100 000 live births. The number of maternal deaths per annum in South
Africa runs into 1 600. The lifeline risk of maternity death is one in 70.
South Africa compares favourably to the average developing world regions,
but poorly to that of the developed world. South Africa has a high HIV
infection rate; therefore, the proportion of indirect deaths may be higher
with infection, with TB as a significant factor. Similarly, maternal
morbidity patterns follow those for maternal deaths. For every maternal
death there is an estimated 30 to 50 women who survive, but with short - to
long-term complications.

The ANC government has adopted an approach that women’s health is paramount
and, therefore, has advanced numerous policies in this regard. In 1995
government accepted that women and children should be at the top of the
health prioritisation agenda. One of government’s earliest pronouncements
was on free care to children under the age of six years. This was to ensure
access to health for pregnant women and young children irrespective of
economic status.

Great strides have been made since the pronouncement by former President
Nelson Mandela. New clinics have been built, others have been upgraded, and
antenatal clinic attendance has improved significantly. The demographic and
health survey of 1998 highlighted the fact that 94% of women surveyed
attended antenatal care at least once compared to 89% in 1994. This is
indicative of the fact that women realise the importance and, therefore,
the necessity to get antenatal care.

Delivery in health care facilities increased from 78% to 83%, suggesting
that user fees acted as a deterrent to health care access. The child
support grant, which is available to children up to 14 years, and which is
to be extended gradually to children of 18 years, has an uptake rate of
between 78% and 84% across provinces.

Although our government’s policies are excellent, we need to do more to
ensure that these policies are real for women and children. We need to
attend to the socioeconomic situation. Access is the lowest for the poor,
of which the majority is African. Steps must be taken to address the
equitable provision of health care and inequalities in health outcomes. The
aggregation of indicators at provincial level masks gross interprovincial
disparities. This must be addressed. Much more must be done to ensure that
those who need it most access the services.

We welcome the Department of Health’s recent announcement of an inquiry
into maternal deaths in the country. We trust that this exercise will
ensure renewed commitment at all levels to ensure better and improved
maternal and child health. I want to conclude by saying: forward to a
caring society. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs S V KALYAN: Madam Deputy Speaker, most of the times when a woman is
pregnant, there is celebration and joy. Much planning takes place to ensure
that when the little person arrives, it is welcomed into a cocoon of love
and comfort. However, sometimes there is no happy ending. A 2005 World
Health Organisation Report states that 11 million children worldwide, under
the age of five, die annually, mostly from causes that could have been
prevented.

The number of child deaths in South Africa is high. Despite greater
national wealth and rapid economic growth, it is estimated that every year
in South Africa, an estimated 23 000 babies die in the first month of life.
This number is equal to a daily crash of four minibuses full of passengers,
whereby everyone on board is killed. While the crash will make a front page
story, the daily deaths of babies occur silently, with no news coverage.
One in three deaths in South Africa is that of a newborn and one in five
deaths could have been clearly avoided.

The major causes of death can be attributed to pneumonia, diarrhoea, birth
trauma, malnutrition, vaccine preventable diseases and HIV infection.

The MDG’s Goal 4 centres on reducing child mortality. The lack of progress
toward achieving this in South Africa is disturbing. A report entitled
``Saving Children 2005’’ suggests that the infant mortality rate is
increasing and the thinking is that this increase is closely linked to the
HIV epidemic. While the debate on monotherapy vis-á-vis dual therapy has
been raging in South Africa, hundreds of babies have died.

The Portfolio Committee on Health heard this week that guidelines for dual
therapy for PMTCT have finally been approved, but regrettably the roll-out
and operational effectiveness is nowhere near ready and transmission from
mother to child is occurring at disappointingly high rates.

The MDG’s Goal 5 is to improve maternal health. This goal aims to reduce
the number of women who die in pregnancy and childbirth by three quarters
by 2015.

Currently, the rate of maternal deaths is 124 per 100 000. This is
considered to be too high for a middle-income country such a South Africa.

Again, maternal HIV infection is the most common underlying cause of
maternal and infant deaths in South Africa. Aids is the single most common
cause of maternal death, reported as being responsible for 20,1% of all
deaths.

However, conclusive statistics to support this suggestion are unavailable,
because in South Africa HIV and Aids cannot be recorded on the death
certificate as the underlying cause of death.
Many women are still ignorant about certain health-threatening conditions
and have not fully developed effective health-seeking behaviour.

Long distances from medical facilities, the high cost of transport, poor
patient records, long queues and staff shortages are major contributory
factors.

The right to life is implicated when a pregnant woman dies, because
government has a duty to adopt positive measures to prevent death where it
can be prevented. The right to health is also implicated because government
has an obligation to ensure access to quality health care.

There are major difficulties which affect implementation of this policy,
with the shortage of trained nursing staff being the most critical.

The PMTCT programme is an integral part of the continuum of mother-baby-
child care and prevention of paediatric HIV infection is potentially the
most effective life-saving programme in South Africa today. Every antenatal
HIV diagnosis represents the chance to save the life of a child.

If South Africa is serious about realising the MDG goal of reducing child
mortality, the child health agenda needs to be energised, with particular
and specific emphasis on reducing the burden of disease among children. A
faculty-based perinatal death review must be instituted and the results
forwarded to the provincial and national health information system. This is
one of the most important ways of improving the quality of care.

The Department of Health needs to be more proactive in recruitment and
retention strategies to ease the critical shortage of nursing staff. It is
very clear that intersectoral action is required to accelerate progress
towards achievement of the health-related MDGs and the DA calls on the
social cluster to develop and improve concrete plans as a matter of
urgency. [Applause.]

Ms C N Z ZIKALALA: Madam Deputy Speaker, it is a well-known fact that many
African countries have been struck by mass departures of skilled medical
staff for overseas destinations in recent years.

Partly as a result of this exodus, large numbers of African women, newborns
and children die from preventable causes. While the medical interventions
that could have saved their lives are generally well-known, they are often
not available to those most in need. For instance, internationally, only
42% of births are attended by skilled medical practitioners.

According to global statistics, this large-scale migration of skilled
medical workers results in an annual figure of 60 million women delivering
at home without skilled care. About 530 000 women die from pregnancy-
related complications with some 68 000 deaths resulting from unsafe
abortions. About four million babies die within the first month of life,
and more than three million children die as stillbirths. More than 10
million under the age of five die annually. A shocking fact is that most of
the maternal newborn and child deaths occur in the low - and middle-income
countries, including our own country, South Africa.

A serious challenge faced by governments all over the world to improve the
health of women, newborns and children is to educate the community at
large. It has been established that community education about healthy
practices that result in behavioural change can safeguard health and
improve fertile and maternal wellbeing. Also, childbirth education of
mothers and family members is imperative in maintaining the best possible
health condition preceding birth.

Furthermore, governments need to strongly focus on the two dimensions of
the continuum of care and ensure that each dimension is well taken care of.
The first dimension is the maternal-newborn-child health continuum of care,
with its concept of maternal-newborn-child health based on the assumption
that the health and wellbeing of women, newborns and children are closely
linked and should be managed in a unified way.
The second dimension is that of the household-to-hospital approach that
ensures the availability of and access to quality maternal and newborn
care. There is no doubt that proper and sufficient funding of maternal and
child health services are vital for their wellbeing. Money is not the only
requirement though. There is also a great need for political will and
accountability. Political will is required for designing an appropriate
health care system and to implement them, while accountability refers to
the manner in which governments report to the people whom they serve. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Madam Deputy Speaker, it is reported that more than 10
million of the world’s children die before reaching the age of five each
year. What is even sadder is that two out of every three of these children
die of easily preventable and treatable diseases.

Furthermore, globally, more than 60 million women deliver at home - as
indicated by the previous speaker - placing both the mother and the child
in danger. Babies do not have any better a chance as four million babies
die within their first month, and more than three million are stillborn.
Ninety-nine per cent of these deaths occur in middle - and low-income
countries such as ours.

In a country whose healthcare is challenged, however, by the harsh reality
of poverty, what interventions can be made? While in South Africa we have
legislation that has legislated abortions and facilitated healthcare
facilities with family planning guidance, we are haunted by the statistics
as girls still opt to have backstreet abortions. Good nutrition, as
indicated and encouraged by our hon Minister, is extremely important in
pregnancy. The fight against HIV and Aids still finds pregnancy further
complicated by the infection, and orphanages are filled with the children
orphaned by this horrific disease.

Individual motivation to respect our babies and take responsibility for
them and their preservation needs to be firmly instilled with interventions
at school level and even through municipal efforts. We need to seriously
address the issues of the health of the mother and child. I thank you.

Ms M L MATSEMELA: Deputy Speaker, hon members of Parliament, the ANC in its
96 years of existence has put the interest of all the people of South
Africa at the top of its agenda. In 2002 the people’s contract demonstrated
that the journey we have thus far travelled gives us confidence that we
shall reach our goals of a society that cares by building a healthier
nation with programmes to defeat TB, malnutrition, malaria and other
diseases, and in doing so we will turn the tide against HIV and Aids so as
to achieve a better life for all.

Thus in the 2004 ANC manifesto, President Thabo Mbeki said, “Today South
Africa has a caring government with clinics being built close to where
people live.” This literally says that health makes development possible
and in turn development contributes to health. This, therefore, says that
there is a nexus between development and a healthy society. In this regard
health services have to be closer to where people stay.
Looking at the improvement in the maternal mortality rate and the reduction
of it by three-quarters between 1990 and 2015, it is important to focus
much on health-related Millennium Development Goals with special reference
to Goal 5, that is, improving maternal health. The reduction of maternal
health and neonatal mortality and morbidity are some of the key indices in
meeting the MDGs.

Given this fact, women are at a greater risk. They are becoming infected at
an earlier age than men. Contrary to popular belief South Africa is on
track in decreasing maternal and infant mortality, taking into
consideration the paradox of being a developing and yet middle-income
country. Most important is the reporting of enquiries into maternal deaths,
and this is relatively new in South Africa. The first report was published
in 1999. The maternal mortality ratio in countries such as the UK is 10 per
100 000 maternities while in poor countries it is at 650 per 100 000.

In South Africa, a middle-income country, the National Committee on
Confidential Enquiries into Maternal Deaths reported a maternal mortality
ratio of 150 per 100 000 conducted through the demographic and health
survey in 1998. In 2002 Statistics SA reviewed all registered deaths and
estimated that to be 124 per 100 000 - a figure that I don’t think we can
be proud of. To quote the Minister of Health in this regard: “I am sure we
can still bring it down drastically and we must do that”.

This was followed shortly by the Perinatal Problem Identification Programme
and the Child Health Care Problem Identification Programme in 2003. These
audit tools are of extreme importance in that they do not only identify
causes and trends of these deaths but also identify modifiable contributing
factors at various levels of service delivery. Of significance is that the
latter reports have included both the recommendations as well as the
intervention strategies. While significant progress has been made in
addressing the challenges of maternal mortality in the country, there is
still more that needs to be done because women need not die when giving
birth.

Women must be given information and support to help them to control their
reproductive health. They need to be supported with their newborn baby,
right up to childhood. The improvement of the health of women and children
has always been key in the health care planning of our democratic
government. In 1994 the major critical policy decision taken was free
health care for pregnant and lactating women as well as children under five
years.

This has already been said by hon Winkie Direko. Furthermore, we have
constructed more than 1 600 clinics to which the majority of the
historically marginalised people have access. Presently, more than 94% of
mothers attend antenatal care at least once during pregnancy and over 84%
give birth in these facilities. Family planning packages are also available
and women no longer have to suffer complications or even die.

“Indeed today is better than yesterday and tomorrow will definitely be
better than today”, said the President of South Africa in 2006. The PMCTC
programme for HIV and Aids has been expanded to 90% of facilities with an
uptake of 60% because HIV and Aids is an extraordinary global epidemic.
Treatment protocol has been improved to include dual therapy and this
intervention is being expanded. The PMTCT serves as an entry point for
women to access a comprehensive package of care for HIV and Aids including
nutrition, treatment and opportunistic diseases and ART.

Reducing maternal and neonatal mortality rates are some of the key indices
in meeting the Millennium Development Goals. For instance, Sub-Saharan
Africa is mostly hit hard by HIV and Aids. An estimated 25 million people
are living with HIV in Sub-Sahara Southern Africa. South Africa compares
favourably with other middle-income countries such as Australia, Canada and
Denmark.

In our case, the confidential enquiries into maternal health have given
South Africa a status of being the only country that has instituted and
sustained confidential enquiries into maternal death. For instance, when
you compare South Africa with Latin American countries like Bolivia, you
look at a still birth-rate of 44 per 1000, while in South Africa it is at
19. In a Sub-Saharan Africa country like Cote d’Voire it is 34 per 1000,
while in South Africa it is still 19.

Considerable research has been done over the past 10 years in determining
the causes of maternal mortality through the work of the National Committee
on Confidential Enquiry into Maternal Death. The work of the committee,
which is published every three years in the Saving Mothers Report, has
enriched the process of assessing deaths in an effort to improve the
quality of care through clinics, hospitals, professionals and doctors.

In conclusion, the vast majority of maternal deaths could be prevented if
women, for instance, like here in South Africa, have taken some strides. We
have moved forward. Women, for instance, continue to have access to quality
family planning services, skilled care during pregnancy and childbirth
support in the first month after delivery. Over 15% of pregnancies and
childbirths need emergency obstetric care because of risks that are
difficult to predict. Therefore a working health system with skilled
personnel is key to saving these women’s lives. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Deputy Speaker, a woman dies from complications in
childbirth every minute and the vast majority of these are in developing
countries. A woman in Sub-Saharan Africa has a one in 16 chance of dying in
pregnancy or childbirth compared to a one in 4000 risk in developed
countries. At the same time at least 20% of diseases in children below the
age of five is linked to poor maternal health and nutrition.

Each year 8 million babies die during delivery or in the first week of life
and statistics shows that babies left motherless are 10 times more likely
to die within two years of their mother’s death. Major causes of death
among infants in South Africa are pneumonia, diarrhoea, birth trauma and
vaccine preventable diseases, malaria in some areas and malnutrition.

Almost 2 million children die each year globally from diarrhoea, a
statistic which, according to studies, could be halved by a culture of
washing hands with soap and water.

HIV and Aids further complicate matters and the Prevention of Mother-to-
Child Transmission of HIV and Aids has been delayed too long in South
Africa, where 3,1 million women and 240 000 children are estimated to be
living with HIV and Aids.

New government policy and guidelines, however, which facilitate provision
of dual therapy, that is, AZT and a single dose of Nevirapine are welcomed
by the ACDP. Better late than never, I guess.

The effects of poverty in Africa continue to undermine efforts and conflict
in emergency situations in many countries also severely impact on maternal
and newborn child health. Shockingly, some have concluded that the easy way
out of this dilemma is for women not to carry their babies to full term and
they promote abortion.

Countries especially in Africa which present the biggest obstacle to global
targets are under increasing pressure to legalise abortion on demand.
Genuine solutions are not necessarily easy solutions. We must not pay lip
service to women and betray them and their babies in this manner.

The ACDP calls on the South African delegation to the International
Parliamentary Union to oppose this strategy. I thank you.

Ms N C NKABINDE: Madam Deputy Speaker and hon members, the measure of a
nation’s wellbeing is often the health of its expectant mothers and newborn
children. On that score South Africa was correct in revamping the health
care system and introducing primary health care with the focus on maternal
and newborn health.

Despite these legislative and policy changes the reality is that we still
do not have satisfactory maternal and newborn statistics. One of the major
factors is HIV/Aids and mother-to-child transmission of the disease.
Government’s failure to produce an adequate policy and the subsequent slow
pace of implementation once the policy was developed, have contributed to
shocking numbers of newborns succumbing to the disease. Unfortunately,
there has also been confusion about the government message regarding
newborn feeding whether breastfeeding is appropriate or not.

The pandemic has taken a terrible toll amongst newborns. Another major
factor affecting maternal and newborn child health care in many IPU
countries is the question of poverty and nutrition. The ability of
government to provide not only primary health care but also education,
nutrition and welfare assistance to expectant and new mothers is a vital
determinant of whether all children get an equal start in life.

Now that South Africa has begun to roll out on a large scale, the mother-to-
child treatment programme, we are perhaps in a position to provide our
fellow nations in the IPU with a case study in responding to the HIV/Aids
in particular, as well as maternal and newborn child and health care
management in general. I thank you.

Ms R J MASHIGO: Madam Deputy Speaker and hon members, according to our
Constitution, everyone has the right to have access to health care
services, including reproductive health care, and every child has the right
to basic nutrition, shelter, basic health care services and social
services.

One of the Apex Priorities’ main categories is accelerating our advance
towards the achievements of the goal of health for all. This debate will
look at the Millennium Development Goals of the reduction of child
mortality and improvement of maternal health by two thirds between 1990 and
2015.

On 25 February 2008, at the launch of the Committees for Maternal
Mortality, Perinatal Mortality and Infant Mortality (Children under Five)
in Boksburg, the Minister of Health stated that, “We chose to focus on this
group because maternal and child health are the basic indicators of the
performance of the health system.” It is within this context that we are
today launching the three committees which I have already mentioned. These
committees will consist of experts, who will monitor the death rate, the
causes and what steps are taken in order to reduce the mortality rate and
improve the mother’s health.

Newspapers have written articles about baby death and stillbirth rates at
several hospitals. These articles could not escape anybody’s eyes because
there were also pictures. These are public hospitals and the majority of
South Africans rely on them for their health. You know these hospitals
because they are in our communities and, as public representatives, we are
very much hurt because the National Treasury allocates a reasonable budget
to the Department of Health, as well as conditional grants to provinces,
and it is our responsibility as public representatives and Parliament to
ensure that the money is properly spent on improving the lives of our
people.

I’m going to refer to Chris Hani Baragwanath Hospital and the Star that
reported on 1 October 2007 about Khosi Seshange who thought she had stomach
pains and went to Baragwanath, where she gave birth to a healthy baby boy,
with no complications reported. Khosi should have actually gone to the
local clinic, where she could have been assisted by our capable midwives to
deliver a healthy baby. We also know that Baragwanath is a referral
hospital surrounded by many clinics, and people from other provinces also
use Baragwanath Hospital.

The Financial Mail report dated 19 October 2007 carried an article entitled
“Baragwanath Hospital in numbers”. This article can help us to objectively
address the issue of primary health care as public representatives, and
assist in discovering why communities do not have confidence in primary
health care centres. Are our communities well educated about their
functions, and what programmes are available to promote primary health
care? It is our responsibility as public representatives to go out there to
educate and assist whatever structures are in the community on the use of
primary health care centres.

Coming to Sub-Saharan Africa, the Paper on Child Mortality and
Socioeconomic Status in Sub-Saharan Africa between 1960 and 2000 has data
that shows the seven top-ten causes of death in Africa are infectious
diseases. They have been mentioned right throughout the speeches. Some 11
million children under the age of five die annually in the world, of which
over 10 million are in the developing world, and Sub-Saharan Africa is the
most affected.

Nearly three-quarters of child deaths in the developing world are caused by
diseases, for which practical low-cost interventions exist, including
immunisation, oral rehydration therapy use and antibiotics. Many sub-
Saharan countries’ response to maternal and child care are compromised by
other factors such as HIV/Aids, malaria, political disturbances and civil
war as well as poverty.

There is a huge gap between the developed and underdeveloped countries.
Numerous studies have shown an association between child mortality and
socioeconomic status. In the 1970s to 80s, support from International Aid
Programmes substantially contributed to the positive and rapid improvement
in health, and particularly in child survival, but there was a decline
towards the 90s in most of these countries. The poor performance was
attributed to the conditions that were attached by some international
sponsors to the issues that might not have been the priorities in those
particular countries. If they rely on international sponsors and the
priorities are given, that contributes more to the death rate in our sub-
region.


Inexpensive interventions using universal coverage could have prevented
over half of these 4,4 million deaths of children under the age of five
that have occurred in Sub-Saharan Africa. Health infrastructure is
important in helping health care workers to perform their functions. This
is inadequate in most African countries and rural areas; access to health
facilities is still a problem due to distance.

Funding for health care in Sub-Saharan Africa is inadequate. There seems to
be more reliance on foreign donors and funding, which might be withdrawn at
any time and cause a decline in health care. Like South Africa, I hope some
African governments prioritise health in their national budgets.

South Africa relies on its own budget from our revenue resources. South
Africa has a good working relationship with the Southern African Economic
Development Community countries on the following programmes: sexual
reproduction health and rights, confidential enquiries into maternal death
and expanded programmes on immunisation. A ministerial meeting was held in
Maputo, which was prepared here in South Africa. The theme was “Re-
operationalisation of the Sexual and Reproductive Health Rights”, which
I’ve mentioned earlier.

Following this Maputo plan of action, South Africa has achieved the
following: The amendment of the Choice on Termination of Pregnancy Act, hon
Dudley, and the development of a curriculum in sexual health care. This
curriculum is being piloted. There are efforts to reposition family
planning so that it should be integrated into the HIV and the Prevention of
Mother-to-Child Transmission programmes; and men in our country are being
involved in sexual and reproductive programmes.

When we come to immunisation, the overall immunisation coverage had
increased so much that it had gone up to 83% by 2006. In the same year,
this country was declared polio-free by the Africa Regional Certification
Commission. South Africa, Lesotho and Swaziland have a close working
relationship with regard to polio eradication, and have formed an Inter-
country Certification Committee on polio eradication. They meet annually
and, as a result, we’ll also know about polio trends in our country. During
the polio outbreak in Namibia, South Africa provided vaccines whilst
conducting campaigns in the border areas of Namibia as well as those areas
in South Africa where coverage was low.

Sub-Saharan Africa remains mostly affected by HIV and Aids; I won’t repeat
it because most of the speakers have referred to it. Let me refer to the
fact that health care alone cannot reverse this trend in maternal and child
health. Social interventions are needed to promote education and food
security as well as the policies to support good health care.

The PMTCT high-level Global Partners Forum met in November here in South
Africa. Before referring to it, it’s important to mention that South
Africa, which was already mentioned by other speakers here, has already
submitted its policies and guidelines on the new PMTCT. In this report
released in 2007, national government, through the MDG and United Nations
General Assembly Special Session Declaration of Commitment committed
towards improving maternal child survival by 2015, halving infection among
infants by 2010. This was a call for an integrated and effective PMTCT and
paediatric HIV services to reach at least 80% of pregnant women and their
infants through a family-centred approach.

This Global Partners Forum has a comprehensive four-element strategy, which
is primarily the prevention of the HIV infection; preventing unintended
pregnancies among HIV-positive women; preventing HIV transmissions from
infected women to their children; and providing care, treatment and support
to infected mothers and their children.

The objectives of the Global Partners Forum are to analyse and document
progress made by national governments since the endorsement in Abuja, and
the PMTCT call to action towards an HIV and Aids-free generation in 2005,
and to review and share lessons learned by the different governments.
Progress reports over 2004-05 show government in South Africa should invest
in the health of the people by financing their health care services,
education, research and development. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 16:13.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Defence


          a) Defence Amendment Bill [B 6 – 2008] (National Assembly –
             proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
             of its introduction published in Government Gazette No 30803
             of 22 February 2008.]
             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Defence of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
             Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
             Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Health

     a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Health for 2008/09 to 2010/11.

