---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 29 May 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2008-05-29
---

THURSDAY, 29 MAY 2008
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:08.

The Acting Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 1354.

                       PRECEDENCE TO ORDER OF THE DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move:

   That Order No 2 becomes Order No 1 and consequently Order No 1 becomes
   Order No 2.


I so move, Chair.

Agree to.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Thank you, Chairperson. I will move at the next sitting
of the House:

   That the Council -

     1) notes that the Council of the University of the Free State decided
        to close the Reitz men’s residence on its main campus by 20 June
        this year;

     2) further notes that the university plans to convert the hostel into
        a Institute for Diversity to make a contribution towards
        transformation;

     3) notes the misplaced displeasure of the FF plus and DA in the Free
        State regarding this decision of the university; and

     4) welcomes this announcement, which is a step in the right direction
        and further calls on the university to further speed up
        transformation.

Mr M A MZIZI: Thank you, Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the NCOP, I shall move on behalf of the IFP:
   That the Council —


     1) notes that while thousands of municipal workers gathered outside
        the council offices in Germiston to protest low salaries and other
        issues, one worker, Wessels Lesenyelo, stripped down to his
        underwear and made it known that he intended to urinate on the
        mayor;


     2) further notes that the police officers who were monitoring the
        strike ignored Lesenyelo as he walked around in his underwear
        hurling insults at the mayor;

     3) acknowledges and supports the rights of workers to strike legally,
        but expresses disapproval of the actions of Mr Lesenyelo; and

     4) realises that Lesenyelo’s indecent behaviour was insulting and that
        the police officers on duty should have arrested him for public
        indecency.

                        INTERNATIONAL CHILDREN’S DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms D ROBINSON: Thank you, Chairperson. I move without notice:


   That the Council –


     1) notes that Monday, 26 May 2008, marked the beginning of Child
        Protection Week which will culminate in the commemoration of
        International Children's Day on 1 June;


     2) further notes that the theme for the week is: "Getting South Africa
        ready to implement the Children's Act";

     3) recognises that a large number of our children, one of the most
        vulnerable groups in our society, are still victims of neglect,
        abuse and violence on a daily basis;


     4) acknowledges the selfless role stakeholders in civil society and in
        local communities have played in campaigning for the protection and
        development of our children; and


     5) calls on all South Africans to stand together to ensure that our
        children are   protected from all forms of abuse, so that they can
        enjoy the benefits of freedom and democracy which they so rightly
        deserve.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                       APPEAL APPLICATION TURNED DOWN

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr Z C NTULI: Thank you, Chairperson. I would like to move without notice:

   That the Council –


     1) notes that on Wednesday, 28 May 2008, the Pretoria High Court
        turned down an application for leave to appeal in the Supreme Court
        in Bloemfontein against the conviction and 12-year prison sentence
        for assault and murder by Christoff Becker, Frikkie du Preez, Gert
        van Schalkwyk and Reinach Tiedt, also known as “the Waterkloof
        Four”, who murdered an unidentified black man in a Pretoria park
        six years ago;


     2) further notes that on passing their judgment, Judges Willie Seriti
        and Piet Ebersohn indicated that “there is no prospect that another
        court could come to an alternative decision on both accounts”;

     3) acknowledges that Magistrate Len Kotze branded the four as
        “callous, cowardly killers without a shred of remorse, humanity or
        conscience”, and sentenced them to direct imprisonment for the
        December 2001 murder; and

     4) takes this opportunity to reiterate its strongest condemnation of
        the inhuman and appalling criminal act committed by the four who
        are currently out on bail and using every trick in the book to
        avoid serving their sentences.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                            DEATH OF VUYO MOKOENA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Nk M N OLIPHANT: Ngiyabonga Sihlalo, ngiphakamisa ngaphandle kokwazisa:

   Ukuthi sihlalo siyile Ndlu yoMkhandlu Kazwelonke Wezifundazwe -

   (1)      siphakamisa ngokukhulu ukushaqeka nobuhlungu ukudlula emhlabeni
        komculi wodumo uMnumzane uVuyo Mokoena;


   (2)      Sithi umndeni, izihlobo, abangani, balale ngenxeba uMdali uphile
        futhi uthathile;


     3) Singumphakathi sizomkhumbula ngengoma yakhe ethi, “Sakhiwe Phezu
        Kwesisekelo”.
(Translation of isiZulu draft resolution follows.)


[Mrs M N OLIPHANT: Thank you, Chairperson, I move without notice:


   That the Council –


     1) notes the death of the renowned singer Mr Vuyo Mokoena;


   (2)      would like to say to the family, relatives and friends to accept
        the painful fate of his death - the Lord gave and the Lord has
        taken; and


   (3)      acknowledges that as a community we will remember him through
        his song entitled “Sakhiwe Phezu Kwesisekelo”.]


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                          DEATH OF ABRAM RASELEMANE

                             (Draft Resolution)
Mnu S SHICEKA: Sihlalo, ngiphakamisa ngaphandle kokwazisa:

   Ukuthi siyiNdlu yoMkhandlu Kazwelonke Wesifundazwe sifaka isiphakamiso
   sokuthi -

   (1)      siyoxoxa ngendaba yokuthi sixhase;


   (2)      nokuthi siyiNdlu yoMkhandlu Kazwelonke Wesifundazwe
        sizimbandakanye nokuzwelana ngokuhamba emhlabeni ngokukhulu ukuzuma
        komfana obeyiqhawe lokushaya amagoli, edlalela iqembu leBidvest
        Wits;


   (3)      kanye nokuthi lo mfana, u-Abram Raselemane, ushone ngoLwesibili
        eBloemfontein, eshona ngokuzibulala emuva kokuthi bexabene nomama
        wasekhaya, unkosikazi;


   (4)      sithi ke siwuMkhandlu sizwelana nomndeni, sizwelana nekhaya
        lakhe, ilahlekelwe iWits njengeqembu lezikanobhutshuzwayo,
        ulahlekelwe umndeni, silahlekelwe isizwe, ilahlekelwe iBafana
        Bafana ngoba lo mfana ubeke waba ngumshayi wamagoli kuBafana
        Bafana; futhi


     5) sithi umndeni wakhe mawulale ngenxeba akwehlanga lungehlanga.
(Translation of isiZulu draft resolution follows.)

[Mr S SHICEKA: Chairperson, I move without notice;

   That the Council –


   (1)      will discuss the issue of supporting;


   (2)      expresses its condolences as a result of the untimely departure
        of a young player who was a remarkable goal scorer, playing for the
        Bidvest Wits football team;


   (3)      notes that this young player, Abram Raselemane, died in
        Bloemfontein, having committed suicide after a conflict with his
        wife;


   (4)      would like to say that we share in the pain with the family and
        his home and realise that Wits has suffered a loss as a football
        team, the family has suffered a loss, the nation has suffered a
        loss, and Bafana Bafana too because this young player was once a
        goal scorer in the Bafana Bafana team; and


   (5)      says to the family to accept the fate and pain and look ahead.]


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.
                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 19 – Defence:

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Deputy Chairperson, the Minister of Trade
and Industry Minister Mpahlwa, Deputy Ministers, members of the House, this
debate takes place against the backdrop of a very unfortunate atmosphere in
which, in the recent period, we have seen in our country violence erupting
in communities against very innocent and desperate people. This is an event
which in a very large measure has also undermined the image our country has
been developing since democratisation, where South Africa has been
exporting peace, bringing stability to troubled countries and reciprocating
the goodwill that we had enjoyed whilst we were struggling for freedom in
various countries of our region and beyond.

I take this opportunity today to present to this House or at least to
announce to you the findings of the defence update, which maps out the
direction we hope our National Defence Force should take in the period that
lies ahead, perhaps up to 30 years from now.

The issues that informed the 1996 White Paper on Defence and subsequently
the 1998 Defence Review centred on the transition to democracy and the
resultant transformation of the Department of Defence.

The period leading to democratisation was characterised by a defence
posture by this country, which was offensive, focused on subduing sections
of the population as well as some of the countries of our region,
especially those who showed themselves in support of the struggle for
freedom.

Since we were democratised, we adopted a defensive posture concentrating
largely on capacity to enable our nation to defend itself in the event it
was attacked. Now, 14 years on, the situation has further changed,
requiring a review and an adjustment of our approach to defence.

In light of the engagements that we have been in, conflict prevention,
conflict resolution, peacekeeping and post-conflict reconstruction
commitments, these impose necessary adjustments, if Defence is to remain
relevant to the challenges that our nation is facing.

The adoption of a defensive posture has meant a full review of our support
activities right down to the content of the training that we give to the
soldiers in the National Defence Force. Members of the National Defence
Force need to be equipped today with skills which give them versatility in
peacekeeping, skills which once back, they can also take into society and
contribute to growth and development in this country. In addition, the
advancement of our African agenda has been a lodestar in the complex
transformation of the Department of Defence.

The 1996 White Paper on Defence and the Defence Review two years later
advocated the importance of civil-military relations, military
professionalism, transparency, efficiency, effectiveness and economy in all
defence activities. The above principles continue unchanged into the second
decade of South Africa's freedom and are now, to a large extent,
encapsulated in domestic law and regulation.

The funding of a defence capability commensurate with functional realities
and constitutional imperatives constitutes a major challenge to government
and the Department of Defence, especially given that differences exist in
terms of focus and priority.

The SA National Defence Force should only be employed within the means of
what government can afford. The SA National Defence Force must therefore
have the ability to provide military forces with the full spectrum of
support during peace and war.

Since our first democratic elections in 1994, South Africa’s strategic
environment has changed dramatically. We have seen in this period a
movement away from Cold War thinking, with globalisation and an American
hegemony taking centre stage in world affairs.

Presently, the danger of the shortage of resources threatens the stability
in the world, particularly in the developing world. South Africa’s approach
to security derives from these realities. And I remind the House of the
main tenets of our present approach to security. First of all, the South
African notion of national security is now premised on our commitment to
multilateralism and effective functioning of multilateral institutions.
These alliances have produced groundbreaking agreements like the Common
African Defence and Security Policy, and the SADC Mutual Defence Pact,
which in turn influence the common understanding we must have regionally in
setting up the SADC brigade and continentally by participating in the
African Standby Force.

Secondly, we have broadened the concept of human security to include
political, economic, social and environmental matters. We aspire to operate
on the basis of collective security. This is the collaboration among states
in the defence and protection of an existing security order from mutually
recognised threats.

Thirdly, national security is viewed as an all-encompassing condition,
which includes the safeguarding of South Africa and its people against a
wide range of threats, many of which are nonmilitary in nature. Since many
of these sources of insecurity transcend state borders, collective action
must be undertaken within multilateral organisations to provide adequate
responses and lasting solutions.

We have an integrated approach to the security sector reform with
particular focus on post-conflict reconstruction, especially in the areas
of security sector reform and the successful integration of the armed
forces. We understand that development and growth depend on peace and
security.

We have noted the increasing privatisation of warfare, and that mercenary
activity is a manifestation of unregulated foreign military assistance and
has the potential to undermine legitimate constitutional democracies.

Climate change now has to be factored into our planning, since disaster
management is one of our responsibilities deriving from our constitutional
mandate.

Defence diplomacy is a very important area of our work since it ensures
peaceful cofunctioning. We now have defence attaches’ in 32 countries and
we are accredited to 52 countries. Maritime security, entailing the
protection of trade and maritime resources including fisheries, seabed
minerals and energy resources, has to be allocated resources as well.

The complex issue of crime must be discussed and understood in our
different defence forums. Whilst the SA Police Service is responsible for
this work, we may be called in at any time to support, and therefore we
must be ready to do so at any time. Let me say at this point, however, that
the SA National Defence Force has a range of capabilities to support all
government departments in South Africa and not just the police.

Last but not least, the growing utilisation of the SA National Defence
Force in peacekeeping has compelled a review of the distinction between
primary and secondary functions. The above indicates the changed situation
we find ourselves in since the 1998 Review. We have to align accordingly.

Indeed I may say to the House that the United Nations today relies on South
Africa and therefore on the SA National Defence Force to secure elections,
as far deep as Madagascar, as far as the Comores, disaster management as
far as Ethiopia, world fires, terrorists attacks and the evacuation of
victims as far deep as Tanzania and Kenya.

There’s hardly any of the countries of our region that is able to do this.
South Africa, in fact, carries the responsibility for the entire region
south of the Sahara.

However, responding to the changing strategic environment, the SA National
Defence Force has increasingly been undertaking functions aimed at
addressing conflict and stability on the continent, rather than being
solely preoccupied with deterring or preventing an external military
threat. Often people ask: Why are we devoting so much energy and time to
stabilising countries around South Africa?

The issue is that unless South Africa is surrounded by stable nations –
unless that is so - then domestic stability is in danger. You can see large
numbers of people running away from conflict from various areas, putting
pressure on resources and so on inside the country, and that also
destabilises the country as it is. So, we do need to expand stability so
that the people in the various countries surrounding us can live peacefully
and are able to enjoy a better life there and have no need therefore to
come here. We also needed to go to these countries when there was no
stability at home.

When charting a new force design, therefore, a number of assumptions had to
be made: Firstly, that long-term planning for the SA National Defence
Force's conventional capacity would determine the force‘s design and
capabilities; secondly, that prime mission equipment would be acquired to
equip for the defence and protection of the Republic and would be used in
the execution of all other missions and tasks; and thirdly, in the short
and medium term, mission specific tasks that require specific equipment
would be sourced from the operational budget for each specific mission.

The Department of Defence has thus adopted the "core growth-one force"
strategy. This concept has been retained as a fundamental design driver to
establish a defence nucleus to maintain the required defence capabilities
of the Republic.

The force design will provide a core nucleus of capabilities that can be
expanded upon and developed should the need arise. This implies the need to
ensure that all the necessary building blocks, such as doctrine, technology
and training capabilities are retained at an appropriate level to provide
the backbone to future growth as and when required by government. This
concept gives equal prominence to the role of the regular and reserve
forces.

We are now structured to meet this requirement. We have adopted the
doctrine of command and control of the joint forces. This means we have
combined force employment.

In terms of landward defence, and in the context of our defence objectives,
the mandate to defend and protect the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the Republic means we must have versatility to counter a range of
potential threats, for example, firepower and protection to engage
potential opposing forces, but also the mobility to operate across the
range of terrain that may be encountered.

Our contribution to global security implies long-term involvement in peace
missions. We must have light, mobile forces and the ability to deploy and
sustain such forces over considerable distances in remote areas, and into
hostile and underdeveloped areas. It takes a lot of doing to provide
support for our forces that are deployed in the Sudan.

And the weather conditions – the sandstorms which are not common here –
require even that the dress code of our soldiers has to be able to adjust
to those conditions. Many people see the people of the north with all these
veils that they put on and think that they are merely there for decoration.
Actually, that dress code is imposed by the speed of the sandstorms which
have the capacity to cut the face and cause people to bleed. Therefore,
those ``doekies’’ actually mean that people are able to cover their faces
and only see with the eyes where they are going.

Our soldiers, dressed appropriately as they are now deployed in the Sudan
in the Sahara, are confronted with those sandstorms and find themselves in
difficulty. We have seen them with our eyes and we do now know that we have
to acquire a new dress code that will make it possible for them to survive
in conditions wherever we deploy them on the continent.

In terms of air defence, the South African Air Force provides a defence
umbrella for other assets. It must therefore have the ability to detect
hostile or illegal flights in the affected areas, but is dependent on other
means such as aerial surveillance or mobile ground systems.

Maritime defence has three components: Surface, subsurface and air
capabilities encompassing the defence of South Africa's territorial waters
and sea lines of communication. This is vitally important to effective
maritime defence but cannot be done by surface vessels alone. Aerial
surveillance by satellite and/or aircraft is critical. A suitable
combination of systems is a key requirement.

I read in newspapers a few days ago that there was a very fallacious
assertion that the SANDF has no crews to operate its submarines. Nothing
could be further from the truth. Each of the submarines that we have
acquired has a full complement as it was built in Germany. We were
developing side by side with that process a full complement of naval staff,
including engineers and everything, to look after it. We have a crop of the
most competent well-trained young officers that man those submarines around
the clock. At the present time we are developing access capacity that has
to be available in the event we have to replenish or put others out of
service or send them on leave; we have all of that in place.

I need also, of course, to add that we have moved on in terms of the
Corvettes that we have acquired. We are able to say now without hesitation
that we have bought the helicopters that match them because that increases
the reach of the ships, radar detection and so on. All of those helicopters
have their personnel in place and we are now able to operate them with
those helicopters on the ships.

The health and fitness of members of the SANDF is central to an effective
force. Comprehensive health care must be provided to all members of the
SANDF and must also include a mobile capability for members deployed on
operations. There is just one more word I would like to say on this –
members of the House must take careful note of the point I am about to
make. It is very unfortunate that there is a general public perception that
comprehensive medical checks of all people who are recruited into the armed
forces started with the advent of HIV/Aids. I want to say quite
categorically that comprehensive medical checks have been part of the
building of armed forces from time immemorial. Everybody building an armed
force has to first and foremost make sure that each and every one of the
people recruited is healthy, because if there are any people carrying
illnesses which are not curable they cannot be taken.

There are some people who suffer from haemophilia. Haemophilia is a
condition where people have blood that does not clot. If such a person is
taken into the armed forces, even in training such a person will get
scratched, will start bleeding and chances are that such person will die,
especially if they are involved in operations far away from hospitals. You
can’t therefore take someone with haemophilia into the armed forces.

Then there are people with other conditions – hepatic A, hepatic B – which
cannot be corrected. If you take those people into the armed forces and you
want them to run for three hours up a mountain for training they are likely
to collapse and die. Now, you can’t take people that are not well and make
them soldiers. HIV/Aids only comes into the picture now.

This practice has been with defence forces for centuries. You are the
legislators. If a law was to be allowed that anybody who is sick could go
into the armed forces, soon enough 90% of your armed forces will consist of
sick people; sick people to defend healthy people! [Laughter.] You have to
get healthy people who can endure the tough conditions to defend them.
There are various other areas where we can look after people.

Now, if there are people who are sick or who become sick when they are
already in the armed forces, we take responsibility for that. In our
hospitals, whether it is HIV/Aids, broken legs or lost arms, we don’t throw
them away, because they came in healthy. We look after them till the end of
their days.

But we can’t go and take people that are already not well and bring them
in. So, the recent pronouncement by the courts is being studied, and we are
going to do some work to try and correct that situation.

The success of securing and stabilising areas of conflict depends to a
large extent on a sound understanding of the conflict. The focus,
therefore, of defence intelligence must move beyond the traditional focus
on opposing military forces to include broader intelligence expertise.

The new force design must meet all the requirements we have outlined above.
Note that the 1998 recommended force design levels were in many cases not
achieved. It was finally decided that the Department of Defence is duty-
bound to ensure that basic capabilities are retained despite severe budget
constraints. The new force design is now ready and will be presented in
detail to both the executive and the legislature within the next month.

The magnitude of this initiative requires that the programme be staggered
against a clear prioritisation of the requirement. First priority will be
given to those elements of the landward programme that are critical to the
fulfilment of the international obligations of the Republic, namely the
forces required for UN and AU peace missions, humanitarian and disaster
assistance and those elements required for the SADC Brigade and the Africa
Standby Force.

The second long-term priority will be the conventional elements of the
landward capability. The understanding of this House of the tasks that lie
ahead for the SANDF and the support for our programmes to be able to carry
out our constitutional mandate is central to our success.

We are justly proud of our brave men and women in the SA National Defence
Force, and this speech is dedicated to them. I take this moment to say to
hon members that the SANDF and the youth of our country have been doing
exceptional and outstanding work. As I talk to you, the African Union and
the Sudanese are putting us under heavy pressure to lead the command and
the mission in Darfur.

As I talk to you, the UN has recently insisted that we must take the
command and leadership of the UN forces in the DRC. We had no choice and we
accepted that. General T T Matanzima has now been appointed and he is now
getting ready to take command of all the UN forces across the biggest of
Africa’s countries, the DRC, to command that and consolidate peace. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr J W LE ROUX: Chairperson, hon Minister and colleagues, the aim of the
Department of Defence is to defend and protect the Republic of South
Africa, its territorial integrity and its people. To fulfil its core
function, the Defence Force must have funds and manpower. It is clear that
the budget allocations will not allow the Defence Force to fulfil all its
obligations.

Alhoewel die begroting met 7% verhoog is, is daar in reële terme feitlik
geen addisionele fondse beskikbaar gestel nie. As ons kyk na die belangrike
rol wat Suid-Afrika nou in vredesoperasies vervul – en dit strek regoor
Afrika – sal dit haas onmoontlik wees om die begroting te laat klop.
Hierdie nuwe rol, soos minister Lekota nou net gesê het, sal talle nuwe
eise en uitdagings aan die Weermag stel. Daarvoor het ons genoeg geld en
kundigheid nodig, Minister.

Wat die beheer en kontrole van Weermagfondse betref, is daar groot
probleme. Selfs ons bateregister is onvolledig en nie op datum nie.
Belastingbetalers betaal miljarde rande aan die Weermagbegroting en dit is
die plig van die departement om te verseker dat hierdie fondse deeglik en
eerlik bestuur word. Die aantyging van enorme korrupsie tydens die aankoop
van wapens is nie net ’n skande vir die land nie, maar beïnvloed die moraal
van belastingbetalers sowel as weermaglede.

Wat die territoriale integriteit van ons landsgrense betref, is daar groot
probleme. Duisende immigrante stroom onwettig die land binne en die
probleem wat dit veroorsaak, is nou baie duidelik. Die feit dat die Suid-
Afrikaanse Polisiediens nou hierdie beheerfunksie van ons grense by die
Weermag oorneem, gaan die probleem net vererger. Ek kan werklik geen rede
sien waarom die Weermag nie gebruik kan word om ons grense te beskerm nie.

Dit is verstaanbaar dat die Weermag en SAPD verskillende funksies het om te
vervul en dat hul opleiding verskil, maar in die lig van die huidige vlakke
van misdaad, is dit noodsaaklik dat die Weermag die SAPD in hierdie verband
moet ondersteun, soos wel nou gebeur. In dié verband wil ek graag die
Minister bedank vir die humanitêre hulp wat die Weermag tans bied aan
hawelose mense in Kaapstad. As die Minister nog huisvesting beskikbaar het,
sal dit die probleem nog gouer vir ons oplos. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Although the budget has been increased by 7%, in real terms virtually no
additional funds were made available. When one looks at the important role
that South Africa is playing in peace operations at the moment – and it
stretches across Africa – it will be almost impossible to balance the
budget. This new role, as Minister Lekota has just pointed out, will put
several new demands and challenges to the Defence Force. For that purpose
we need enough money and expertise, Minister.

There are big problems as far as the management and control of the funds of
the Defence Force are concerned. Even our asset register is incomplete and
not updated. Taxpayers contribute billions of rand to the Defence Force
budget, and it is the duty of the department to ensure that these funds are
managed in an appropriate and honest manner. The allegation of enormous
corruption with the procurement of weapons is not only an embarrassment to
the country, but also influences the morale of taxpayers as well as members
of the Defence Force.

There are major challenges with regard to the territorial integrity of our
country’s borders. Thousands of immigrants enter the country illegally, and
it has now become clear that it is causing a problem. The fact that the SA
Police Service has now taken over this function of controlling our borders
from the Defence Force is only going to compound the problem. I really
don’t understand why the Defence Force cannot be used to protect our
borders.

It is understandable that the Defence Force and the SAPS have different
functions to fulfil and that their training differs, but in light of the
current high levels of crime it is imperative that the Defence Force should
support the SAPS in this regard, as is the case right now. In this regard I
readily want to thank the Minister for the humanitarian support that the
Defence Force is currently offering to homeless people in Cape Town. If the
Minister has more accommodation available, it will solve this problem for
us more quickly.]

Minister, as far as the protection of South Africa against foreign invasion
is concerned, what we heard in the committee was alarming. However, you
have now said that as far as our submarines are concerned we definitely
have enough trained men. What we heard in the committee was that we
actually only had fully trained staff for one submarine and that the staff
for the rest of the submarines were not fully trained yet. It was alarming
to hear that, but I am very glad that you have corrected the misconception.

As far as the air force is concerned, Gen Gagiano informed the committee
that virtually all his training staff has left the force. He said that in
the very week that he addressed us, he had lost four senior trainers to the
Australian Air Force. Here, again, the fact that we have modern fighter
aircraft, Minister, doesn’t help us much if we don’t have suitably trained
staff.

Dit bring my by my laaste punt, naamlik die gebrek aan gekwalifiseerde
mannekrag. Dis algemene kennis dat die Weermag te veel kundige personeel
verloor. Die Weermag moet bemagtig word om hierdie tendens om te keer. Alle
regdenkende Suid-Afrikaners weet dat regstellende optrede nodig is om die
diskriminasie van die verlede reg te stel. Dis egter ook waar dat die
diskriminasie teen wit lede van die Mag die paraatheid van die Weermag
benadeel het.

Ek haal graag aan wat die tesourier-generaal van die ANC, mnr Mathews
Phosa, in dié verband gesê het:

   Daar was baie onopsetlike gevolge van swart ekonomiese bemagtiging en
   regstellende optrede, soos byvoorbeeld die breinkwyn. Die skade, veral by
   ons plaaslike owerhede ...

Ek sluit sy aanhaling en ek sit by ... dit geld ook vir die Weermag.

   ... is ’n ramp. Daar is geen ander manier om dit te beskryf nie.

Dis weer Phosa se woorde. Mathews Phosa het gesê:

   Die regering moet dringend ingryp en sorg dat ervare mense in
   sleutelposte aangestel word.

Ek sluit sy aanhaling.

Die Weermag se rol in Suid-Afrika is van uiterste belang en die Minister
moet sorg dat ons te alle tye paraat is. Ons sit in Suid-Afrika met
duisende werklose mense wat reeds Graad 12 geslaag het. Minister, is dit
nie nou tyd dat ons weer kyk na ons stelsel van vrywillige weermagdiens
nie? Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[It brings me to my last point, namely the lack of a qualified workforce.
It is common knowledge that the Defence Force is losing too many skilled
personnel. The Defence Force should be empowered to prevent this tendency.
All right-minded South Africans know that affirmative action is necessary
to correct the discrimination of the past. However, it is also true that
the discrimination against white members of the Force has been detrimental
to the preparedness of the Defence Force.

I would like to quote the treasurer-general of the ANC, Mr Mathews Phosa,
in this regard:

   Daar was baie onopsetlike gevolge van swart ekonomiese bemagtiging en
   regstellende optrede, soos byvoorbeeld die breinkwyn. Die skade, veral by
   ons plaaslike owerhede ...

I close his quote and I add ... this applies to the Defence Force as well.

   ... is ’n ramp. Daar is geen ander manier om dit te beskryf nie.

These are the words of Phosa once again. Mathews Phosa said:

   Die regering moet dringend ingryp en sorg dat ervare mense in
   sleutelposte aangestel word.

I close his quote.

The role of the Defence Force in South Africa is of vital importance and
the Minister should ensure that we are prepared at all times.

We have thousands of unemployed people in South Africa who have passed
Grade 12. Minister, has the time not come for us to reconsider our system
of voluntary service in the Defence Force? I thank you.]

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, colleagues, hon members, comrades and
friends, let me start off by thanking the hon Minister of Defence for
outlining the strategy plans of the Department of Defence and all of its
activities, and also to thank my colleague hon Le Roux for the wonderful
speech. I agree with him in all respects of what he said concerning what
happened during our budget hearing with the department. I thank him so
much, because that’s what we are doing in our committee; politics take a
backseat.

I only differed with him on two things that I want to  correct,  because  we
should not create an impression that only the Defence  Force  has  the  only
people who are able to man our borders. It is not true, because  the  Police
Service is getting the same training on how to man our borders. How  do  you
differentiate between the two, because  they  are  going  through  the  same
training, even though the Defence Force is trained differently.  The  police
are trained to deal with people right there on the spot.  On  that  issue  I
think we need to get our facts correct.

On  the  issue  of  discrimination  against  white  force  members,   again,
colleague Le Roux, I don’t think you’re right. For example, on  the  day  we
had our budget hearings with the department, the senior officials  who  were
leading us in briefing the committee were our senior  white  officials  whom
we trust and love so much and who are very  good.  Even  though  there  were
black senior officials, they were led by white officials who  were  briefing
the committee. So, the question  of  discrimination,  I  think,  existed  10
years back, but not now.

Chairperson, I want to thank the Department of  Defence  because  they  were
honest and frank and they didn’t shy away from  acknowledging  some  of  the
shortcomings within the department. They were able to  respond  to  some  of
the probing questions asked by committee members. This  happened  on  8  May
2008, when they came to appear before the committee. It was  clear  that  in
this department we have very dedicated officials whom we are very proud  of,
and they can only have our support.

Hon Minister, among other concerns that were raised by members during  these
budget briefings is the retention strategy or retention policy. As was  said
by hon Le Roux, it looks as if we don’t entice our members  enough  to  stay
in the Defence Force.

For example, we were told that we’ve lost not less than 900  members  within
6 months who were poached by Australia. When we asked as to why our  members
are being poached by other countries, we were told that  they  are  enticing
our people by giving them better  salaries.  Of  course,  let’s  acknowledge
that we cannot match some of these private  entities,  in  terms  of  giving
better salaries. The number of pilots that we are losing as a department  is
too much. The question is: What can  we  do  to  curb  this  exodus  of  our
skilled personnel?

Now, one other thing that was sharply raised by members is the  question  of
the qualified reports that the department has been receiving every year.  It
has been so now for four consecutive years  and  this  is  not  sending  the
right message to the public. We asked as  to  whether  this  department  had
audit committees and the department does indeed have  audit  committees.  We
asked what these audit committees are really doing, because  these  are  the
issues that were identified  by  the  Auditor-General  as  challenges.  They
cannot identify the same issues for four years in a row and then  still  not
address them. For  example,  it  was  shocking  to  learn  that  there  were
instances where you find that someone within the department had  passed  on,
but the medical aid was still paying the premium  even  though  this  person
was no more.

I am happy to say that the  department  has  made  this  commitment  to  the
members to say that qualified audits will be a thing of  the  past.  We  are
very glad to hear this commitment from the  department.  Indeed,  there  are
some of the serious issues that the department said they cannot  respond  to
and they can only  be  responded  to  by  the  hon  Minister.  In  terms  of
addressing these issues that were  identified  by  the  Auditor-General,  we
want to suggest that the department should dedicate some officials who  will
concentrate or only dedicate their focus on the issues that were  identified
by the Auditor-General. I think this will address  some  of  the  challenges
that are faced by this department.

Hon Minister, we are happy that after the Lohatla  incident  you  personally
acted swiftly and were even on the spot and  visited  the  family  and  gave
them support. We appreciated that very much, because it is only  people  who
have a good heart who can do that.

What I want to raise,  hon  Minister,  is  to  find  out  whether,  when  we
acquired some of these ammunitions from these  countries  or  companies,  we
were notified that some of this equipment might have some  deficiencies.  If
not, I think we have to make some follow-ups to find out as to  why  it  was
the case. If we don’t do that some people might conclude to say our  members
were negligent and I don’t think it might be true.

Now, one other issue that I want to raise, hon Minister, is the question  of
the famous - let me not say the famous but rather the notorious - ship  that
was seen on our shores carrying those dangerous weapons. When we asked  this
question to your officials, they simply said that they  heard  the  question
but unfortunately they were not qualified to respond to the  question.  Only
their colleague, the  political  head,  will  be  able  to  respond  to  the
question.

I am glad and know that the hon Minister  will  respond  accordingly  as  to
exactly what happened, because there is the allegation that  the  department
gave the instruction  that  it  must  be  refilled  for  it  to  proceed  to
wherever. Some of us don’t believe that is accurate, but this myth can  only
be removed by you, hon Minister.

A concern that we raised a few years ago was when we were told  that  flying
hours for our air force when they were training had been reduced. If  it  is
true why were you forced to reduce these hours, hon  Minister?  We  will  be
committing suicide. There is no  way  we  can  have  people  who  are  half-
trained. If it is a question of funds it’s up to us as this House.  We  want
to plead, not as a committee, but as this Council  to  fight  on  behalf  of
this department so that there is adequate funding. If  we  have  people  who
are going to be half-trained, we are  heading  for  disaster.  If  it’s  not
true, we will be glad to hear that.

Another issue that needs our attention, hon Minister,  is  the  question  of
the court case that you referred to. We would like  to  find  out  if  there
will be any negative  impact  if  you  implement  or  adhere  to  the  court
decision about those who are infected or affected by the HIV pandemic.  Just
take this House into your confidence.  What  it  is  going  to  say  to  the
department and even to the morale  of  other  members  who  were  not  taken
simply because of that requirement.

My colleagues hon A L Moseki and hon N J Mack will deal with other issues.
I want to conclude by saying, hon Minister: We are happy that we’ve noticed
there are officials in your department who were dedicated and ready to talk
to the committee and even identified issues that the committee were not
aware of, and pleaded for our support for them to succeed. They can only
succeed if they receive support from this House. Convey our sincere thanks
to them, even though we have told them. We are very happy to have such
officials in our government. If we can have many such officials, we can be
a shining example to other countries really. To you colleagues of this
committee ...

Re rata go leboga re re go lena go a bontšha gore le apeilwe ka pitša ya go
butšwa. Le belegwe ke banna le basadi ba go tšea gabotse. Go a bontšha gape
gore re kgonne go fenya go fihla mo re lego gona ka gore re šoma bjalo ka
sehlopha. Go a bonagala gape gore ba a rereša ba kgale ge ba re: Tau tša
hloka seboka di šitwa ke nare e hlotša. Ka gona ke re sethikwa ga se na
maatla. Re a leboga. (Translation of Sepedi paragraph follows.)

[We would like to thank you. What we are conveying to you is that we are
also aware that you are well trained. You were born and bred by principled
parents. It is also an indication that we have conquered thus far, because
we were working as a team. It is also clear that our ancestors were correct
by stating that unity is strength. Therefore, nothing is difficult as long
as we work together. Thank you.]

Mr N J MACK: Hon Chair, hon Minister, Deputy Ministers, hon members,
special delegates and ladies and gentlemen, I know that hon Le Roux is a
man of integrity and a very good man. I don’t think he ever wanted the
perception to be out there that our Defence Force is weak because whites
are leaving the force. I think we should stop the brain drain which
involves both blacks and whites. I don’t think that is a perception that
you wanted to send out.

Hon Minister, this debate is of personal significance to me also today. I
will allude to this during my speech. During 1955, South Africans gathered
in Kliptown at the Congress of the People and they declared for the world
to know that the people shall govern, that there would be houses, security
and comfort. The doors of learning and culture would be opened. There would
be peace and friendship.

In this year, 1955, I was born. That is of personal significance to me. In
1996, the people spoke and declared through their Parliament:

  Defence must serve to uphold peace and security in a democratic society
  so as to create a stable environment for the improvement of our people’s
  lives and for the development of progress of our country.

Today we gather here to debate a critical budget at a time when the SANDF
is needed within and outside our country to uphold peace and security.

As our Minister said during his budget speech tabled in the National
Assembly, ‘‘the SANDF is in demand everywhere’’.  What is of significance
also today is that this debate is taking place on the same day and same
month I was born. [Applause.] [Interjections.][Laughter.]

The Military Skills Development System was started in 2003 to ensure the
enhancement of the SANDF mission’s readiness for the systematic
rejuvenation of its human resource composition, through yearly intakes of
the county’s youth.

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): I would like to
bring to the attention of the House and the members here that Rule 32 says
that during a debate in the Council, no member may converse aloud. Please
take note. Thank you.

Mr N J MACK: The MSDS also ensures a continuous provision of personnel to
the SANDF reserves. This system also provides the youth with skills and
employment opportunities.

The programme is indeed welcomed, and gives a sense of hope for developing
our future generations, and arms them with education instead of shooting
children, as happened during June 1976 when commanded to do so by the
previous regime.

Within 19 days from today we will celebrate National Youth Day. I challenge
all members present here, as a small contribution or gesture towards
upliftment, to download the application form for young matriculants between
ages 18 and 22. Forward it to your constituency offices and to all high
schools and other public buildings to target our youth to be recruited into
the Defence Force. This is a small request.

Our 1994 democratic breakthrough had introduced a paradigm regarding the
national Budget. It meant that the interests and aspirations of the poor
and marginalised would also inform processes relating to the budgeting and
allocation of our national resources.

The ANC subscribes to the instrumentalist view of the Budget. Hence it
expects the government to use the Budget allocations to implement
programmes that purport to change our society.

Debating the Budget becomes a strategic task of the ANC to determine
whether the Budget takes into account policy priorities of the movement.
The Military Health Support Programme provides prepared and supported
health capabilities services for the defence and protection of South
Africa.

Its measurable objectives contribute to the defence and protection of South
Africa by providing medical support elements for deployed and contingency
forces consisting of five medical battalion groups, including one
specialist medical battalion group, and providing a comprehensive
multidisciplinary health service to a patient population of 2 230.

This fits in with what the Minister said, namely that we give a health
support system to our members when they are in the Defence Force. The SANDF
has played a helping role even beyond our borders, because it also provided
relief and rescue support to people of Mozambique who were trapped in
floods.

Moreover, following the explosion at the ammunition storage facility in
Maputo, the SANDF also provided support to clear Maputo of all the
unexploded ammunition.

Members of the SANDF continue to provide peace, support and post-conflict
reconstruction operations in various areas within the African continent.
This should happen because the democratic movement harbours a firm belief
that without peace in the SADC region and the continent, South Africa
cannot be at peace.

While progress has been made, there are still challenges within these
security forces. There are still those who have not fully accepted and
internalised the Constitution of our Republic.

Afrikaans remains a dominant language at field level in the SANDF, as was
the case during the apartheid days. At the middle management level of the
SANDF population, demographics of the country do not seem to be reflected
and this poses serious challenges when it comes to the leadership
succession within the SANDF.

Serious attention should be paid to the issue of training and development
of black members of the SANDF with a view to creating a pool of people to
occupy middle management positions within the Defence Force and the
department.

I am also concerned about the poaching of our members by other countries. I
think that a better remuneration package should be there for our members
that will support the Defence Force to keep the members that we need.

That is why I will also support the call for the Defence Force’s budget to
be reconsidered and maybe more money to be allocated so that we retain our
people. I also do believe that there are quite a number of internal labour-
related matters that some Defence Force members are not happy with. Surely,
Parliament should not involve itself with labour matters as such and it
should be correctly addressed within the bargaining council. The ANC
supports this budget. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson,

... uNgqongqoshe nePhini lakhe ngithi unwele olude. [... hon Minister and
his deputy, I greet you all.]

The 2008-09 Defence budget increased from R26,2 billion last year to R28,2
billion this year. This represents a nominal increase of about 7,7%.
However, if the average rate for last year is factored into the allocation
of it, it is clear that the Defence budget has in fact decreased in real
terms. I will return to this issue again later.

Over the medium term, the Defence budget will grow by an average of 7% per
year to increase to R32,2 billion in 2010-11. If the projected annual
inflation rate for the next three years is above that figure, it becomes
clear that the Defence budget will not just stagnate in real terms, it may
even go backwards, depending on the inflation figure.

With economic conditions worsening, it is likely that inflation over the
next three years will be substantially more than 7% and the budget picture
of the SA National Defence Force, therefore, looks very bleak. The IFP
cannot find fault with the main objective listed in the department’s
strategic plan for the next few years. However, we are extremely concerned
that the budget cannot be aligned at all with the strategic objectives.
Virtually all the individual budget programme allocations have gone
backwards and the strategic objective cannot be met by allocating more
funds. This means that the Defence Force itself will go backwards if the
funding situation does not improve.

For a number of consecutive years the department has received qualified
audits, and it is clear to the IFP that it is not in a position to
effectively spend its allocation or properly account for the finances in
terms of the Public Finance Management Act. This raises a question on the
quality of the SANDF’s internal audits. Surely, if the internal audits were
of a high quality, they would have raised early alarm bells to alert
management to the problems.

The recent wave of xenophobic attacks on foreigners in South Africa has
many causes, which I do not want to go into now, but these events have
clearly shown that our country has inadequate immigration policies and that
our borders are wide-open to anyone who wants to enter, whether for
illegitimate reasons or not.

The IFP has long believed that government’s decision to transfer border
control from the SANDF to the SA Police was a mistake. The SAPS simply does
not have the manpower and other resources to carry out this very important
function. The IFP feels that the SA Army should again be responsible for
controlling our land borders, while the SAPS can deal with entry points
such as airports and harbours.

I realise that the existing Defence Budget is inadequate to provide for the
army to take up border control again, but the Minister must now push
Cabinet for the reversal of its previous decision and lobby the Minister of
Finance to release the necessary funds. The IFP supports the Defence
budget, but we feel that it is high time that it should be increased to
allow the SANDF to meet all its commitments and obligations.

Voorsitter, ek wou net die stelling maak dat ek ten volle met die agb
Minister saamstem dat ons Weermag getoets moet word. Ons kan nie toelaat
dat die siekes die gesondes moet dra nie. Baie dankie. [Gelag.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Chairperson, I only wanted to state that I am in full agreement with the
hon Minister that our Defence Force should be tested. We cannot allow that
the hurt and the lame should have to care for the healthy. Thank you very
much. [Laughter.]]

Mr A L MOSEKI: Chairperson, hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers, I see hon
Sibiya wants to say, “Amandla”. It is fine to say that in this House. Is
there something wrong with that? No, there is nothing wrong with it.

I just want to say that the security of a nation in a developing democratic
state is the prerequisite for stability. South Africa, as a developing
democratic state is a witness to this statement. Since 1994, South Africa
has experienced peace and stability and those conditions have created an
opportunity for socioeconomic development in our country.

These conditions have helped to advance the strategic agenda of the country
to fight poverty and banish unemployment to a certain extent. In addition
to that, the role played by the SA National Defence Force has also assisted
to ensure that this environment that we have just alluded to prevails. It
is our view that our national Defence Force must be commended for doing a
wonderful job.

Over and above that, the SA National Defence Force has played a very
strategic role in ensuring that peace prevails in Africa, particularly in
the region that is known to all of us as SADC, but beyond that on the
continent as a whole as well.

The debate on this budget today, Vote No 19, also gives us the opportunity
to reflect on some of the concerns that we raised in the last financial
year. In the last financial year we raised concerns about transformation in
the various units of the Defence Force.

In particular we pointed out that the SA Air Force still lacked with regard
to integrating other nationalities in the country. In a meeting that we
held briefly with the department three weeks ago, we received a progress
report that shows a great improvement in that respect, and for that we
commend the department.

However, as the chairperson of the committee said, one challenge that seems
to be arising with regard to transformation, particularly in that unit, is
that we are losing these expensive skills that we might have introduced,
like pilots, to the commercial sectors and to the foreign countries,
particularly Australia.

The question, therefore, is: What are the strategic plans that the
department has put in place to ensure that we retain these scarce and very
expensive skills? That is very important, because if we don’t do that we
will keep on training and using the little resources that we have to
develop these skills, and at the end of the day they leave the country.

It is also important to point out that we indicated in the last financial
year that we have realised that middle management of the Defence Force was
still also lacking in terms of transformation. We are pleased to report
today that a lot of progress has been made. However, there are challenges
and in our discussions we raised the matter, and it looks like progress is
being made.

There are still challenges with regard to gender imbalances, particularly
at the levels that we are talking about. We were told that there is the
good intention to ensure that this challenge is being addressed, but we
want to urge you, Minister and the department, to develop an aggressive
strategy and ensure that those gaps of transformation are closed.

Having said all these things, without really repeating what my colleagues
have said, we want to say that we are satisfied as a select committee
generally about the progress that has been made by the department in terms
of driving the transformation agenda, of ensuring that our military forces
remain disciplined, but we are also satisfied that many of our defence
force units do participate in international peace missions.

We however think that in terms of ensuring that our forces remain ready for
combat for the future activities that are unforeseeable now, we need to
ensure that in addition to activities that we normally engage in, there
should be other activities that keep our forces active at all times.
Otherwise, if we don’t do that, we know, if soldiers are not kept active,
what could happen.

It is in this context that in general we are satisfied with what the
department is doing and we move as a select committee that this budget be
adopted. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Chair, I start off by thanking the House for
its general support of the budget. It is important that our nation today
comes to terms with the reality that, on average, all nations of the world
spend at least 1,5% of their GDP on defence needs. Under apartheid, this
country spent up to 7% or 5% of its GDP at some point and those were huge
quantities of money.

We don’t need to go that high. However, we must, given our responsibility,
spend an amount of money that is commensurate with the responsibilities we
carry. We estimate today that an average of 1,5%, as with many other
nations, would go a long way to deal with some of the problems members have
alluded to. Therefore, I am very grateful for that.

Let me deal briefly with some of the particular issues. We will never
escape the loss of trained personnel to other industries and the private
sector. All national defence forces suffer from this illness. This is
simply because, generally, national treasuries try to maintain a certain
level of the wage bill, whereas the private sector can choose to pay more.

Sometimes Checkers chooses to pay a CEO much more than what the country can
afford to pay the President of the country, but if you are going to try and
match Checkers and pay the President of the country the same as you pay the
CEO, then there will be no money for water for people in Soekmekaar and so
on. So, you have to keep a balance between what is available in the kitty
of the nation and what you need to do for the people.

Similarly, with Defence, we have to sit and think every year about the fact
that if we devote so much money to Defence, how much money will we have for
housing; how much money will we have for medical care; and how much money
will be available for social welfare. So, when you look at that balance, it
becomes very, very difficult to come out where you would like to come out
at. You work with what is available.

So, we lose trainers. We don’t lose them only to other countries. At the
present time, there are other African countries that I approached in this
regard. When we lose trainers here, I go and get trainers from other
African countries because we can afford to pay trainers better that some
other African countries. But what am I doing to that country? I am leaving
it without trainers.

The first time I had to do this was because we had our own home-bred
trainers finding all kinds of reasons why they could not train black
youngsters to be pilots. They would say this one is too short. Then I would
say to them: But the Chinese are shorter than this guy. [Laughter.] Then
they would say to me: But this guy is overweight. Then I would say to them:
Well, make him run and lose weight and then he must come and do this. But
they would find all kinds of reasons.

Then I decided that if that was the situation, then I would get some of
these trainers from other African countries because I really wanted to
check whether these trainers who have been trained in very advanced
countries would come with the same excuses.

Then some of our white home-bred trainers decided that if I was going to
get trainers from some other country to come and do parts of their work,
then they better go to Australia. I have nothing against Australia. The
other time I spoke about this and then there was trouble. Others go to, of
course, Virgin Atlantic or these huge airways companies. They can pay
incredible salaries.

The only institutions that can really train pilots as well as the defence
forces are other defence forces. Defence forces have jet fighters and all
kinds of planes you can think of. So, when a pilot is qualified in the
Defence Force, that pilot would have flown an aircraft that no civilian
training thinks it can produce.

Civilian trainers want people who are thoroughly trained and therefore
present the greatest possibility of getting people safe to their
destination. So, they will pay any amount of money and salaries for these
people. So, we lose these people as a result of that. But we are working
hard on this. We are countering some of these things in the manner in which
I am just saying now.

Then, the other issue I want to deal with relates to the suggestion that
was made by one of the members that we must get volunteers – maybe go back
to voluntary service and so on. But the Defence Force is voluntary. Anybody
who wants to be a member of the National Defence Force may come. The
reserve forces are kept there for people who can get training and who are
prepared to do work even just for an allowance and not for a salary.

What we need above all is a youth that is patriotic. I keep saying to the
young people who come to the armed forces that they must take a decision
like the former President Nelson Mandela did; they must take a decision
like all of the people who brought democracy to our country to say: I will
give 5 or 6 years of my life to the service of my country. I will train as
a soldier in any area. I will complete that – usually basic military
training takes 9 months and you are done.

I will devote a further 4 years doing work in the national Defence Force.
In the fifth year, I will then give way so that others can come in, and I
can go and make money.

I talk to these people. We take them in and send some of them to
universities as civil engineers and mechanical engineers. We send them to
our military academies elsewhere and train them as pilots and all of that.

I say to them that once they have finished the course – whether as a pilot
of a ship, pilot of an aeroplane, medical doctor, nurse or whatever – they
must give us 2 or 3 years of their full-time training to plough back some
of the money that we spent on them because that would be at the expense of
the nation. They plough back into our service for the salaries that we pay
– they don’t do it for free. After that they can go to the private sector
and so on.

There will be others to take the gap and so on. They must do the same thing
– a little patriotism of 3 or 5 years that they give. I tell them that
Nelson Mandela gave 27 years of his life to all of us so that we could have
democracy. The commander in chief, Thabo Mbeki, grew up virtually in exile,
working for freedom and democracy to come. I am not asking them for 30
years; I am not asking them for 27 years. Oliver Tambo was there for more
than 30 years, and Sisulu was there for more than 26 years. Patriots gave
their lives. Bram Fischer gave his life.

They must give just 4 or 5 years to the national service and then take the
skills they have and go back to their lives and make as much money as they
want. But they must just give us this amount of time. Even if a big company
comes and offers them big money, they must say to them: Sorry, you can get
me after 5 years. These 5 years I am still giving to my country.

That is the philosophy we must really get our young people to understand.
If we can get that, all of these training opportunities that are there in
the national Defence Force would benefit the country and give it lots of
skills. We would never say we are running short of pilots for helicopters,
jet fighters and for this and that – personnel will be there.

Let me just deal with the question of the Chinese ship briefly. The
national Defence Force is a military institution. The only harbour where we
fix our ships is Simons Town. There is no commercial ship that can approach
the national Defence Force and say we must give them fuel. We cannot do
that. The only ships that come into Simons Town to refuel are those ships
from countries with whom we have signed agreements – defence force to
defence force.

As to why people think that the national Defence Force carries fuel to any
commercial ship that might run short of fuel, I don’t know. We couldn’t
possibly do that. It’s impossible. It is not done; it cannot be done; and
it will not be done.

So, the ship that carried the cargo that was going to Zimbabwe was a
commercial ship. I don’t even know which company it belongs to. They could
never have gotten petrol or fuel from the national Defence Force at any
stage. They could have bought it from somewhere else – Engen or somewhere
else – and not from the national Defence Force. So, that already is a
fallacy. When we leave here, our ships leave too. They can only fuel in at
ports in the military zones of countries we have signed agreements with.

Therefore, when a country like Zimbabwe or Botswana buys equipment from
some other country and so on, we are not involved in the transaction – we
are not there.

Nevertheless, when the goods bought in that transaction comes here and that
country is a member of the customs union, that cargo will be checked under
the customs arrangement with the countries that are members of the customs
union to which we are duty-bound. If we are satisfied that the cargo does
not transgress any international protocols and so on, then we, of course,
let it go. It gets checked and we let it go.

Zimbabwe is not a member of the customs union, but we inherited a bilateral
arrangement with Zimbabwe. A lot of their cargo comes into Cape Town, Port
Elizabeth and Durban harbours in terms of that agreement. It is checked
just like all the others. They have to pay for their cargo and not the
members of the customs union. The arrangement and agreement is there, and
then we let this thing go.

Unless we don’t want this. If we didn’t want this, then we would cancel the
agreement with Zimbabwe and say that we don’t have this agreement. Then, of
course, none of their cargo could pass here. As long as that agreement is
in place and it does not give us the powers to impound their cargo, then we
cannot do so. We would be in contravention of international practice and
international law.

So, I am only saying to members: We knew nothing of the transactions. All
that happened is that Zimbabwe came to ask us ... And, of course, we heard
later that the company that owned the ship owed somebody and they ran away.
We had nothing to do with that.

I am saying to members: If they had transgressed the law and the police
went to court and got an order to say that the ship had transgressed such
and such a law and must be arrested, we, not the police, would have
commandeered it and we would have compelled it to stay here. It would have
never left here. But there was no such transgression of the law and there
was no such order of the court. We are not pirates. The national Defence
Force cannot act like pirates and just take anybody’s ship. We can’t do
that kind of thing. [Laughter.]

The last point I want to deal with is that of budgeting. As we deal with
issues of budget, where sometimes we may find that we have duties to do but
we don’t have sufficient budget, we look at everything that we have to do
and then we may decide that such and such a project must be held in
abeyance and take money that was budgeted for that and use it for other
things.

When members say to you that we have reduced flying hours, practice hours
and shooting hours, it means as a result of the shortage of money, we have
not bought ammunition for daily shootings. So, maybe we can decide that
soldiers will practice shooting thrice a week rather than every day. What
that does is that it reduces training hours in terms of shooting, and it
affects the efficiency and the sharpness of your armed forces. If you say
we have reduced flying hours, it doesn’t mean that there is no flying. They
do fly. It is now just reduced to lesser hours than what we would otherwise
do if the budget was sufficient.

I have said to the members of the national Defence Force, and I am saying
to the members of the House that this budget is going to be important as we
move beyond this period. You cannot have an air force that is going around
on foot. There is a difference between walking on the ground and flying.

So, if you say this is an air force, it must be up there in the sky. It
cannot be on the ground. So, we have reduced flying hours. What this means
is that our air force people are spending more time on the ground walking
around rather than flying. This is a formula for disaster. I thank members
for the support, and I wish you well. Thank you. [Applause.]

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): We thank the hon
Minister. We appreciate and congratulate you on your comprehensive and fact-
finding speech. Thank you for participating in the debate.

Debate concluded.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 32 – Trade and Industry:

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Thank you, Chairperson and hon members,
ladies and gentlemen. I would like to recognise MEC Saaiman and thank him
for attending our debate. Yesterday, in the NA we addressed the hon members
on matters relating to the state of the economy. Through you, Chairperson,
I would like to repeat some of the key points here today.

Firstly, we argued that at the inception of democracy this government was
faced with the massive task of rebuilding the economy. In taking up this
responsibility the policy choices were defined by the objectives of
eliminating poverty, the reduction of inequality and to that end ensuring
the sustainable growth of the economy.

There is no doubt that we have done remarkably well in this task, and there
is no reason to doubt that we can and must continue to aspire to the higher
rates of growth that we envisaged in the Accelerated and Shared Growth
Initiative of South Africa. We must, all of us, aspire to continue this
level of growth if we are to make further inroads into reducing
unemployment, poverty and inequality.

Secondly, we expressed the view that our economy is stronger than it was at
the dawn of democracy because, overall, the economy grew by 5,4% in 2006
and by 5,1% in 2007. Fixed investment, as a key indicator of the underlying
capacity of the economy, had grown dramatically from 15% in 2004 to 21% of
gross domestic product in 2007. Real income per capita had been rising at
around 4% per person annually since 2004 and the rate of unemployment fell
from 31,2% in March 2003 to 23% in September 2007. This translated into an
increase of approximately 1,8 million employed people and meant that
employment was beginning to respond to the economy's higher growth rate.

Thirdly, and very significantly, the majority of new jobs since 2004 have
been within the services-related subsectors of trade, construction,
financial and business services, as well as manufacturing, which together
also reported the highest rates of GDP growth.

Growth in these areas was significant, because it has shown that our
economy has undergone deep structural changes and that the fastest growth
had taken place in increasingly diverse and new sectors of the economy. In
fact, the data I have quoted revealed that there is a strong underlying
growth momentum in the economy that should ensure its resilience in the
current environment and sustain the upward trend over the medium to long
term.

While we found that the domestic manufacturing sector could not take full
advantage from strong demand conditions, both globally as well as in South
Africa, as it was operating at almost full capacity, this should change as
the sector has been re-capitalising and investing in new capacity with a
view to expanding production in the future.

Quite clearly then, our growth has thrown up a set of new challenges, such
as the electricity supply and pressures on our infrastructure, but it is in
taking up these challenges that we also now have very significant new
opportunities to exploit for the benefit of our nation. These new
opportunities involve responding to the everyday needs of our people, our
enterprises and industries for more and better infrastructure, means of
public transport and freight, amongst others. The Department of Trade and
Industry has a key role to play in assisting industry to respond to these
demands.

In addition, as the demand for goods and services increases in South Africa
and as we vamp up our capacity to respond to them, we would also find that
our capacity to export would be increasing. In turn, as our exports
increase and are diversified through increased value-addition, it would
impact positively on the current account balance and help reinforce
macroeconomic stability.

It is for this reason that the department had and would continue to pursue
strategies that would respond to these new opportunities. In this regard,
the National Industrial Policy Framework and the action plan that we have
developed has, as its central objective, the diversification and
strengthening of manufacturing with an emphasis on nontraditional tradable
goods and services and labour-intensive activities.

Therefore, this framework had become the fulcrum on which our interventions
in the real economy would rest. So, we would continuously expand our access
to markets, encourage investments and boost our exports. Simultaneously, we
have and would be continuing to promote competition, vigorously combat
anticompetitive behaviour in certain industries, protect consumers, and
broaden participation by encouraging massive growth in small businesses and
co-operatives as well as promoting broad-based black economic empowerment.

As a whole, these initiatives must be undertaken in a co-ordinated and
integrated manner which would enable us to reach the objectives of halving
unemployment and poverty by 2014, as set out in the Accelerated and Shared
Growth Initiative for South Africa programme. It is clear that pursuing
these objectives is not the responsibility of the Department of Trade and
Industry alone and we have been involved in intensive intradepartmental and
intergovernmental co-ordination, including through the Economic Cluster and
Minmec.

As you know, in the context of the economic cluster, our work is focused on
three key areas - enhancing economic efficiency in the economy, promoting
dynamic growth sectors, and growing small enterprises. And the Minmec is a
vital forum and vehicle for us to engage and co-operate with provinces on
these matters. In fact, we now have absolute clarity on what needs to be
done and we have moved forward in implementing this plan.

Implementing our plan requires a national effort and no person in this
country, in whichever province he or she may reside, would be left
untouched by these developments. But, indeed, at the policy and
implementation levels it had been our experience that engagement with the
provinces improves the depth and robustness of our work. During the past
few years it had, therefore, been our privilege to work with provincial
governments and municipal structures as we set about together building our
economy. Our working together has enabled implementation in very
significant ways and ensured the broadest possible impact of national
policies and strategies.

For instance, the implementation of the Industrial Development Zones
programme is an excellent example of how the efforts of the three spheres
of government could be focused to achieve commonly desired goals. Since I
last addressed this Council on this matter, the regulations of the
Industrial Development Zones have been amended in order to remove the ultra
vires provisions of the customs and excise section, as well as in relation
to issues regarding Value-Added Tax administered by the South African
Revenue Service.

In addition, the IDZ enterprise permit has been replaced with broad
guidelines which operators should comply with in assessing whether or not
an enterprise could locate or trade within an IDZ or the customs-controlled
area. These amendments are improving the ease with which the establishment
and operations of the IDZs could be taking place and, together with the
completion in February this year of the IDZ Operational Guidelines, has
done much to promote investor certainty.

I can also report that the Industrial Development Zone Policy Review has
been completed and presented to Minmec and other relevant stakeholders for
input. Furthermore, we have completed an international benchmark study to
ensure that we develop a competitive value proposition, and I am confident
that we will have a new policy in the near future.

Together all of these initiatives and the possible introduction in future
of IDZ legislation will allow us to adapt our programme to ensure that we
build on the momentum that has been generated in the four designated
Industrial Development Zones. And certainly, what we have seen is that the
zones are increasingly being seen as attractive nodes for manufacturing and
related service industries. For instance, I am informed that the Coega IDZ
has been able to generate private sector investment in excess of R49
billion.

An interesting story to emerge from this IDZ is with regard to the firm
Dynamic Products, which exports frozen yoghurt and pepper. The firm employs
650 people of whom over 80% are women, all from the surrounding areas, and
the suppliers are mostly emerging farmers from the area. In using this
business model, the firm is successfully exporting 25 tons of yoghurt per
day to the United States, Canada and Europe.

I relate this example because I think this is a good case study of the
economic benefits to communities surrounding IDZs and, in particular, the
potential for surrounding communities to build sustainable businesses based
on the anchor IDZ investment.

We are, therefore, encouraged that the Richards Bay IDZ has secured major
investors and that the Johannesburg International Airport IDZ is set to
begin operating in the foreseeable future. Similarly, now that an
international airport license has been granted to the Mafikeng Airport, a
major obstacle to the designation of the Mafikeng IDZ has been removed and
further work can be done in this regard.

We have made this progress even though we could not take anything for
granted when we undertook these initiatives. Yes, there are and will be
challenges, but the fact is that we are succeeding in attracting
investments that would not have materialised without the active
intervention of government to enable such investments.

It is in this context that I raised the investment opportunities regarding
business process outsourcing in the National Assembly yesterday, and I wish
to do the same here today. Because over the next few years the global BPO
industry is forecast to grow at approximately 50% per annum and because we
have several competitive advantages to offer investors, a window of
opportunity exists for South Africa to realise significant value by
developing this sector.

In fact, since the department started supporting this sector in 2007, over
9 000 direct jobs have been created and approximately R700 million worth of
investment value realised. At the outset we set a target of 100 000 jobs
and current indications are that we can achieve this if we continue to work
hard at promoting this sector.

I raise this matter here, since I believe that BPO offers an opportunity to
achieve some of our regional development objectives as, already, a number
of localities - some in rural areas - have been identified as suitable for
call centres. But I also raise this matter here, because the mere
possibility that such a highly technology dependant industry can locate in
a rural area should alert us to the great many possibilities of investment
for economic development in whichever province or municipality we may find
ourselves. And provinces must become increasingly alert to this new range
of possibilities.

Consider for instance that the DTI has during the past year - in its work
to mobilise domestic and international investment - generated a pipeline of
74 projects worth R206 billion with the potential to create more than 30
000 new jobs. Of this, domestic investment projects are worth R153 billion
and foreign investment worth R53 billion, and already, R171 billion in the
pipeline is committed or is in progress with manufacturing accounting for
R19,7 billion of this investment, resources accounting for R182,7 billion
and services R3,6 billion.

I am also glad to be able to report that our trade and investment division
has had great success working hand in hand with provincial investment
agencies leading to the very significant Heineken brewery and associated
investment in Sedibeng of R7,7 billion; the new R3,2 billion cement plant
investment in Mafikeng, and the Unilever and Cognis investments in a R750
million Hoodia extraction plant in the Western Cape, as well as agronomy
investments in Karbees in the Northern Cape.

In the same way as the spin-offs from the IDZ investments, these
investments will result in enormous opportunities for especially black-
owned companies entering the manufacturing sector as suppliers in glass
bottling and canning. Furthermore, procurement opportunities from local
companies will be released in respect of raw materials, construction,
distribution, warehousing, transport, marketing and advertising.

I have spoken in detail of these opportunities to illustrate the importance
of building local economic development capacity to ensure that we can
respond effectively to the type of investments I have described. In this
regard, we have as the department, working with the Department of
Provincial and Local Government and other role-players, begun to implement
Project Khulisumnotho, which involves, during 2008, addressing the Local
Economic Development, LED, capacity-building needs in 17 of our district
municipalities.

The intention of this project is to assist district municipalities or
metropolitan areas in building capacity in order to ultimately develop
credible LED strategies and bankable projects with viable business plans,
thereby allowing them to take up investment opportunities when they arise.

However, a key aspect of sustainable LED capacity-building is the
involvement of provinces in identifying the broader regional economic
projects that are of industrial significance and that will impact on the
selected districts, and I thus urge all provinces to partner with us in
this project. In this way, from national to provincial to municipal levels,
we can jointly give impetus to industrial development on a more regionally
spread basis, which in turn can sustain growth in our economy for
generations to come.

Finally, through you, Chairperson, I wish to thank the National Council of
Provinces and the select committee in particular for its role in the DTI’s
legislative programme. Since 2004, the Council has applied its wisdom to,
amongst others, the National Gambling Act, the National Small Business
Amendment Act, the Co-operatives Act, the National Credit Act and
legislation relating to our technical infrastructure.

All of this legislation, together with those pieces of legislation that you
will be asked to consider this year, have a huge impact on our society and
our economy. We are privileged to have been able to walk this journey with
you. I would like to commend the DTI budget to this House. Thank you.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms E Thabethe): Chairperson,
members of the National Council of Provinces, hon members, ladies and
gentlemen, I know that today is the Cell C Take a Girl-Child to Work
Campaign, but I hope the members will accept the explanation that
yesterday, as the Department of Trade and Industry, DTI, we brought about
10 girls to work and they attended the Budget Vote in the National
Assembly, but they had to go back to school today because they cannot miss
two days of school. We want them to be good students. They were from the
Eastern Cape from Zweledinga High School. We hope that they are going to
further their business opportunities as upcoming young businessgirls.

One of the resolutions taken at the last national conference of the ruling
party states that the building of small and micro enterprises is a critical
developmental challenge which requires the state to deploy resources, to
build capacity and institutions. The Department of Trade and Industry fully
concurs with this sentiment as well as with all the references to improve
the quality of life of our communities, in particular those in the rural
and peri-urban areas.

If you are to give true expression to this resolution we must intensify and
strengthen our implementation of initiatives that make the most of the
economic potential of every province in the country. In this regard I can
proudly say that the department has, since 11 February 2006, been on a
campaign to provide our rural and peri-urban communities with the tools to
make the correct decisions that will improve their lives.

What we have done as an initiative from DTI has been to embark on a
campaign of taking the DTI to the people. We have visited the 52 district
municipalities, including the metros; approximately 33 of them. It is my
full intention to visit all 52 with the assistance of the communications
and marketing divisions under the leadership of Clement Manuku, present
here today. Attendances to these events have an average of 700 to 800
community members, of which two thirds are often women.

Through the campaign the DTI has focused on this support offered for
enterprise development, not only by the DTI, but also by its agencies, as
well as by our provincial governments, districts and local municipalities.
The campaign is in line with commitments we made to our nation of
government’s commitment to working with communities and to ensure progress
in creating awareness about government’s programmes for enterprise
development support.

Feedback from the campaign indicates that government needs to intensify its
effort to make the economic environment friendlier to the growth and
sustainability of Small, Medium and Micro Enterprises or SMMEs. In this
regard the DTI sees co-operatives as an important vehicle to support
enterprise development in rural and peri-urban communities.

Over the past five years the department started implementing the provisions
of the Growth and Development Summits, and agreements of 2003 including the
establishment of a fully fledged Co-operative Development Unit. The
Minister participated in some of those Growth and Development Summits, GDS.
The total number of co-operatives currently is approximately 17 000 that
are registered with the Companies and Intellectual Property Registration
Office, Cipro.

KwaZulu-Natal, with 40%, leads, followed by the Eastern Cape 19% and 10% in
Gauteng. KwaZulu–Natal has emerged to achieve high levels of performance
and provides the best practice on how to successfully promote co-operatives
within the country. In some provinces the provincial treasuries, for
example, KwaZulu-Natal, started setting targets for the departments to set
aside certain percentages of their procurement to co-operatives.

This resulted in the fact that linen used by the KwaZulu-Natal health
department is produced in this manner by these co-operatives. This best
practice requires closer examination to provide lessons that could be
emulated throughout the country. Member of Executive Council, MEC Mkhize,
is one of those best placed to give us those lessons. Well done to you and
your department.

Whereas a great deal of progress has been made by government and other role-
players’ efforts to promote collective entrepreneurship and development of
co-operatives, some important challenges still remain. This change of mind-
set for South Africans, who either interpret co-operatives as poverty
relief projects or as an entity only meant for agricultural purposes, is
also a particularly difficult challenge.

Despite these challenges the DTI will utilise the process of finalising the
Co-operative Development Strategy to outline a number of programmes to
strengthen the support programmes designed to build the co-operative
movement in SA.

I would be doing this House a disservice if I failed to mention that this
year we saw the launch of the Isivande Women’s Fund. The fund is critical
and aims to unleash the entrepreneurial potential of many women. The Deputy
President in conjunction with the Minister officially launched this fund in
February this year. The fund is set to be capitalised with plus minus R500
million in total aimed at providing affordable enterprise loans to women
ranging from R30 000 to R5 million. We are aiming to have the fund
operational by August this year.

The SA Women Entrepreneur’s Network, SAWEN, is busy with the gender and
women empowerment unit together with the Industrial Development
Corporation, IDC, to make sure that women can then access this money and be
trained on how to use the money.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank those who have made a
positive contribution to our work, Minister Mpahlwa, Deputy Minister
Davies, our Directors-Generals, and DG Matona. I wish to express also to
the Deputy Director-Generals, DDGs, present our thanks for their support in
ensuring that our policies make a meaningful contribution to the lives of
our people.

Special thanks also go to other officials and the DTI and its agencies who
week after week participate in the taking of the DTI to the people
campaign, who go to deep rural areas leaving behind their families often
for days, in order that they may fulfil the task of informing communities
about the services that this department is providing. I hope that they will
continue to do this good job.

I also want to congratulate the officials from the creative industries led
by Nadia Surjee for making sure that we can win accolades for the
department this year. Under the handmade collection we won, in Durban, the
Decorex gold award and a certificate at a Decorex Cape Town. The DTI has
been instrumental in raising awareness of the work of our crafters by
giving them national and international exposure. The Decorex event was one
of these.

Allow me to thank our provincial counterparts for supporting the work
undertaken by the DTI, especially in the Northern Cape where we have a good
working relationship with the MEC, present here today, and the premier. We
hope that we will be able to continue the good job. The achievements which
I have highlighted would not have been possible without their assistance. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Ms S S CHEN: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister and all my
hon colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, the current uncertain economic
environment in the United States and Europe amidst the global credit crisis
are issues for concern. This is compounded in the context of the global
economic slowdown, the increase in petroleum prices as well as higher
domestic interest rates. This is of particular concern due to the negative
impact on consumer spending, on which our GDP mainly relies. All these
negative aspects will no doubt test the quality and durability of South
Africa’s economic growth and employment creation.

As the department provides leadership to South Africa through its
understanding of the economy and its very important role as the co-chair of
the economic cluster, it should listen widely to all input offers. It is
extremely critical that the DTI enhances its capacity and position as the
department for implementation of a “Business Unusual” approach. We often
have a well-intentioned policy, but when it comes to implementation, it
does not achieve the original good intent. An example is the curb on
imports through the implementation of quotas on Chinese products. This
policy has done little to improve the local industry as retailers have
simply turned to other countries for imports.

As our broad unemployment rate remains stubbornly high, it is time for
critical interventions on the part of the DTI to enhance and grow our SMME
sector. We have spent a long time arguing and debating about policy and the
structure of SMME development, but now is the time for action.

International experience has proved beyond any doubt that a SMME-rich
economy equals a healthy economy. The phenomenal economic success typical
in Asian economies shows that SMMEs are comprised of 99% enterprises. Over
60% of the economy is comprised of private sector employment, while 40% of
the economies are involved in exports. Taiwan and Korea are leaders in the
Asian model of economic development and they have relied heavily on SMMEs.
In these two countries, SMMEs provide about 80% of the private sector’s
employment. It will be beneficial for us to share and learn from their
experience.

Recently I heard of the DTI’s new idea of the Move the Ten Product Plan of
government procurement to the SMME sector. This is much welcomed as our
SMMEs have always faced difficulties in accessing markets. It is time for
us to provide open and equal opportunities for all. We acknowledge that the
department is facing huge challenges ahead and we sincerely wish for our
hon Minister and his department to have the wisdom and strength to lead our
country forward. I thank you.

Ms M P THEMBA: Hon Minister, Comrade Mpahlwa, hon Deputy Ministers, Comrade
Thabethe and Comrade Davies, hon Chairperson and hon members of this very
important House; hon Deputy Minister Thabethe, we really appreciate the
fact that you brought girl-children to work yesterday and we also agree
that you could not have let them out of the classroom again today for two
successive days. It is our considered view that today you could have
brought others from different schools and we hope that in future you will
alternate them so that they can know that Parliament is made up of two
Houses.

There has been quite substantive progress in transforming the economy in
order to benefit the majority, especially the poorest of the poor or,
rather, the previously disadvantaged. The Budget Vote in front of us today
really presents the ANC with an opportunity to objectively look at whether
its policy objectives are adequately met through the implementation of
government programmes. This Budget Vote presents us with an opportunity to
reflect on what is objectively possible, given the available resources and
prevailing circumstances. Accordingly, as the ANC, this year’s entire
Budget process presents a very critical period, especially for trade and
industry, looking at the circumstances forming what one chooses to call
subjective factors.

This point actually becomes more relevant within the spirit of the 52nd
National Conference of the ANC where there has been more emphasis on
certain issues and the current Budget Vote should effectively address those
areas emphasised. The DTI has been very effective in the manner in which it
structured its programmes. For example, 19 existing agencies each have a
medium-term plan that outlines its contribution to the achievements of
DTI’s transformation strategy. The extent to which the DTI exercises
oversight within the 19 agencies immediately becomes a very critical
measurable area for providing credible and customer-centred services that
enhance service delivery.

The 52nd conference also stated that there is a need –

  Building and strengthening development finance institutions, as well as
  nonfinancial institutions, which are accessible to the people, and which
  are able to effectively channel financial and institutional resources
  towards a variety of economic transformation objectives.

As the country is depending on the DTI’s programmes to rescue all those
trapped in poverty and unemployment, the DTI has outlined areas of policy
development and selected achievements which include industrial policy,
broad-based participation, equity and wider access to customised sector
programmes, exports and investment and many more.

In this regard, one would expect one day to see an independent, profitable
and commercially viable women’s Sasol-like or youth PetroSA-like and many
more big industries run by our daughters and sons, brothers and sisters and
also those with disabilities, amongst others. I am saying the above because
the DTI has moved miles with establishing bodies such as SA Women
Entrepreneurs Network, Technology for Women in Business, and others. Those
bodies should be in a position to assist in building the kind of big
businesses that I have mentioned above.

As for co-operatives, there is a need to position those collective forms of
ownership as equal alternatives. The DTI as the custodian of co-operative
programmes has established the interdepartmental committee to co-ordinate
co-operatives development activities and programmes with key departments,
or even better vehicles to pursue economic participation and creating
wealth in the same manner as close corporations. I am very proud to mention
that in all these areas there have been significant successes which the DTI
stipulates clearly in the estimates of the national expenditure for 2008.
As the ANC, we therefore support the Budget Vote. I thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Dr R H Davies): Chairperson,
Minister, MEC Saaiman, hon members, I want to use my time to focus on
matters of spatial and regional economic development and the role of the
different spheres of government in this endeavour.

But before I do, I need to respond to some of the remarks made by the hon
Chang about the quite extensive agreement with China covering certain
clothing textile products. I need to make it clear that we never saw this
as a panacea that was going to solve all the problems in the clothing
industry, rather it was a measure which would provide a breathing space
during which we could elaborate on a series of plans to deal with the
productivity issues in that industry.

Although it’s true that there has been an increase in imports from
countries other than China, figures which I tabled here in this House in
response to questions a few weeks ago indicate that the volume and the
value of imports from other countries have been much less than the
reduction in imports from China. In fact, we judge that a breathing space
has been provided. In the meantime, we’ve been working energetically on a
new package of support measures encouraging productivity and capital
upgrading.

Our Constitution is singularly vague when it comes to prescribing the roles
of national, local and provincial government in the area of economic
development. Schedule 6 of the Constitution defines trade without any
further qualifications as a concurrent function between national and
provincial government and all spheres of government recognised within the
framework of the ambition to create a developmental state, that they have
roles and responsibilities in promoting local economic development.

As we move into the elaborated and more importantly the enhanced
implementation of our industrial policy, however, practice rather than just
theory will require of us that we sharpen our definitions of the respective
laws of the three spheres of government in this regard.

The National Industrial Policy Framework and the Industrial Policy Action
Plans, which have emerged from it, have involved the selection of priority
sectors. Simultaneously, provinces have embarked on growth and development
summits, which have also identified within the provinces a number of
priority areas and sectors. At the same time, the local growth and
development summit processes in district municipalities have performed
similar functions at that level.

What these three exercises demand of us is firstly that, within the spirit
of co-operative governance, we ensure a level of co-ordination and
harmonisation and, secondly, that appropriate support measures are put in
place to ensure that the actions of departments operating in the three
spheres of government are mutually reinforcing.

It has not been necessary at the level of evolution of our industrial
policy to date to exercise hard choices about what projects and programmes
arising from provincial and local government processes national government
would want to support.

Often, indeed, provincial processes have identified activities that are
genuinely province-specific and which have no resonance in other provinces
in the country. An example of this is the oil and gas rig servicing
programme in the Western Cape, which is a successful programme specific to
that province.

However, we can anticipate that as our industrial policy becomes
operational on a larger scale, there will be a need for us to make sharper
choices at national level, which could have implications at the other two
levels. Even today, it is apparent that more than one province has
ambitions to become active in particular lines of economic activity, which
probably the country cannot support in more than one of them. Co-ordination
and harmonisation would therefore emerge as significant challenges for
industrial policies and sector strategies across our three spheres of
government.

Beyond this we face the long-standing, but also very difficult challenge to
try to promote a broader spread of economic activity throughout the
country. There are very strong economic forces, which tend to concentrate
economic activity in the established urban areas whilst simultaneously
excluding from opportunities people who reside outside those areas.

A principle which has been established in the Regional Industrial
Development Strategy is that we need to make purposeful interventions to
try to bring about a more equitable spread of economic activity and
opportunity. This has to be based, in the first instance, on an objective
and sober assessment of the economic potential of particular areas, and
then an identification of steps and strategies necessary to promote that
potential.

The instruments which we have developed since 1994 include Industrial
Development Zones and the Spatial Development Initiatives, SDIs, sometimes
known as Corridor Programmes. As the Minister indicated earlier, we have
four IDZs at present, which operate by providing particular infrastructure,
and the opportunities of concentration around that infrastructure
orientated particularly towards export activities. IDZs have, therefore,
been linked to major international airports and ports.

In addition to this, they offer duty-free entry of inputs, which are then
used to manufacture products that are exported in a special customs
administration arrangement. A range of other incentives have also been
developed for the IDZs. The IDZs, which we have in place have all achieved
some degree of success in achieving their objectives, but I believe as a
conclusion of the review, which the Minister mentioned, that all of them
could potentially reach much higher levels of activity.

Together with our partners in Minmec, we have therefore completed the
review of the operation of the IDZs and have identified the need for a new
Industrial Development Zone Act, which will be presented to the next
Parliament. Among other things, the IDZ policy strategy needs to deal with
issues of governance, defining more closely the roles of national
government, provinces, local government, as well as that of the direct
authorities established to run those IDZs.

In addition to that, there is a need for a clear funding stream and an
incentive programme for the IDZs. The Minister indicated that we have
lifted the moratorium on new IDZs and the Mafikeng IDZ business plan has
been prepared, and is well in the process of adjudication. In addition to
that, a number of other IDZ proposals are at various stages of development.
What we have realised though is that IDZs are a model applicable only to
activities in certain parts of the country, in particular in activities, as
I’ve mentioned, related to exports and linked to ports or airports.

We have accordingly developed and discussed with our colleagues in Minmec
another model to encourage broader spatial economic development, called
Special Economic Zones or Regions. A number of candidates for Special
Economic Zone status have already been identified in many of our provinces.
Beyond this, we could anticipate assisting municipalities in developing
particular industrial clusters and in developing a series of support
services and related schemes linked both to the Special Economic Zones and
to Municipal Industrial Clusters. Ultimately, what we have identified is a
need to establish some sort of Regional Industrial Development Fund,
somewhat similar in conception to the European Union’s Regional Development
Fund Programme.

The other key measure I’ve mentioned is the SDI programme. These programmes
are related to particular infrastructure development such as road or
transport links, which package together a series of investment
opportunities linked to those infrastructural investments and potentially
benefiting from them. These programmes have had some measure of success,
the most important being perhaps the Maputo Corridor Programme.

Here again, there is a need for us to revisit the SDIs that have been
established in different parts of the country, to take stock of their
successes and challenges and to confront the possibility of new approaches.
All of these will require much higher levels of co-ordination and
interaction across the three spheres of government.

At the last Minmec meeting, which we held in March this year, I believe
that we took some decisions which could potentially take us a big step
forward. These related mainly to the functioning of the Minmec process.

Minmecs can no longer be justified as gatherings where MECs and members of
the Ministry meet together to simply receive general reports about current
policy developments at either level. Meetings of the Ministry and the MECs
need rather now to be grounded in ongoing work at technical and official
levels.

We have accordingly agreed that Minmecs will be preceded by meetings at the
level of heads of department and more frequent interactions between
officials and experts. These will identify issues that need particular
political decision-making, in particular over harmonisation and co-
ordination of efforts to spur on developmental programmes.

A much sharper focus on a more rigorous Minmec process is the practice that
we believe needs to be taken forward by the administration that succeeds us
after the next elections.

Important recommendations have also been made for greater co-ordination of
small business and co-operative programmes, and I’m not going to go into
those. I’m simply going to suggest in the remaining seconds that one of the
areas where I do think there’s a need for greater co-ordination is the
matter of trade investment promotion programmes.

Our department, through Trade and Investment SA, has been developing an
export strategy which is being used as the basis for decisions about the
location of Department of Trade and Industry foreign economic offices. A
feature of this strategy has been the development of a methodology to
identify, in particular, new markets where we have big opportunities to
increase our trade through appropriate promotion activities.

I believe that what we need to do is to have a much greater co-ordination
around these, so that the efforts of provinces and of the national
government in promoting exports are more co-ordinated.

Finally, let me say I’m very pleased to see that the NCOP continues to take
an interest in international trade negotiations. I discussed this at some
length in my speech in the National Assembly yesterday. I just want to draw
the attention of the House and of the select committee to the fact that
there are now very serious efforts underway to conclude the Doha
Development Round this year, with many ministerial negotiations possible
next month or July. South Africa faces many challenges especially in the
nonagricultural market access negotiations and I trust that the select
committee and the council will find ways of monitoring and effectively
engaging in these very important matters. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms A N T MCHUNU: Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon Deputy
Ministers, hon provincial Ministers and hon members and staff, the aim of
the Department of Trade and Industry is to lead and facilitate access to
sustainable economic activity and employment for all South Africans and
this sustainable economic activity may be in the household as a home
industry or street vending, retailing, manufacturing or in agriculture. I
am pleased that our hon Deputy Minister has just mentioned agricultural
activity right at the end, which is so important.

The economic success and achievement of any country is measured against the
extent of diseases affecting people, especially children and the elderly,
and the death rate of infants, which we refer to as the infant mortality
rate, IMR, of babies under a year old, which is a very sensitive age. The
successes are being made at Asgisa level for the second economy, but the
third economic group, the poorest of the poor, are failing to be part of
economic growth, because of the abject poverty in which they find
themselves.

Urbanisation, to look for job opportunities in cities, does not help them,
because there are no jobs. The Department of Trade and Industry, therefore,
needs to work with the Department of Agriculture to use the land to produce
crops like cotton and sisal for further processing and production. Likewise
many goats are slaughtered and their skins may be used for belts, sandals,
skirts and waistcoats, just as we are doing in KwaZulu-Natal, where we are
making leather skirts.

It is time to revive factories like the one at Tugela Ferry in Msinga where
young girls and women were thronging shoes by hand in exchange for butter.
Women were involved in economic growth while looking after the children in
their homes. Home industries for clothing and textiles, through activities
such as spinning, weaving and knitting are to be promoted by the SA Women
Entrepreneurs Network, Sawen, and therefore Sawen needs to be visible in
communities. There may also be a need to revive the KwaZulu-Natal Training
Trust, which was based in Pinetown and trained all categories from poor
communities in South Africa and in all skills.

Simple production skills should be taught from kindergarten, where children
build houses for their dolls, grow food and make the dolls’ clothes. Making
spindles for spinning and shearing homegrown cotton and sheep’s wool will
contribute a lot to economic growth. It is better to start young and small.
Our large population of orphans have to be assisted to be independent and
economically viable.

Load-shedding or Eskom problems contribute to the downgrading of businesses
and loss of jobs, for instance in Alusaf in Richards Bay. All South
Africans, therefore, have to manufacture energy-saving kits so that
businesses and retailers have enough electricity.

I commend DTI for supporting the Richards Bay Industrial Development Zone,
IDZ, and the budget of R750 million for Tata FerroChrome Steel. Their
support for metal sheet workers and the furniture technology incubator
project in Mthatha, which is making furniture as well as tanks for rain
harvesting and silos for grain storage, is appreciated. More areas have to
be involved in the making of tanks in the face of water shortages and water
tanks are in great demand, so making them can contribute to economic
growth.

We have a Mr Mzila in Mbonambi in the municipality who would like to be
assisted financially with this project as well. The IFP has always played a
great role in Trade and Industry. Small and bigger industries were
constructed for economic growth, for instance in Sitebe, Ezakheni and
Newcastle. This budget is supported by the IFP. I thank you.

Mr P W SAAIMAN (Northern Cape): Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon members, in
our department we are all optimistic that our economy is growing, but we
all acknowledge that this growth in this era is under many stresses because
of the rising cost of oil, basic services and especially the rising cost of
foodstuffs.

We need the help of the Department of Trade and Industry and our Ministers
to research and develop with us incentives and innovative solutions and
meaningful interventions that can practically be applied to support our
poorer communities when the full effects of the rising cost of basic
foodstuffs and other essential commodities impact on us in the months to
come.

Now this challenging picture, we agree with the Minister, is brought about
by some external factors in response to the very good South African
economic performance of the last few years.

In the Northern Cape, we are very excited and look forward with optimism to
the new instrument of industrial policy to assist rural development and
provide an important leverage to the Northern Cape to increase our economic
growth and employment.

There is a bit of concern that some indicators in the National Spatial
Development Perspective, the NSDP, indicate the Northern Cape as having
limited economic potential with relatively no poverty. If the Industrial
Policy Framework and the Regional Industrial Development Strategy, Rids, is
largely based on the principles of the NSDP, how will that impact on us?

It is a position that we don’t agree with. We find it extremely difficult
that an area such as the Northern Cape, with plenty of mineral wealth, can
be considered by policy developers to have limited economic potential. We
wish to appeal to the DTI and our Ministers to use the Industrial Policy as
an instrument to develop rural economic centres, not only to empower
communities, but also to achieve the bigger aim to curb rapid urbanisation
with the accompanying social problems that it creates.

The Northern Cape is approaching this matter very positively and we are in
the process of developing our provincial economic perspective so as to
identify areas with relative economic potential where opportunities can be
exploited to fight against poverty and to create work. For too long the
Northern Cape exported employment, because we exported our raw material and
commodities to be beneficiated in other areas of South Africa and they are
counting the jobs for them and also internationally.

That is why we trust that the department and our Ministers will assist the
Northern Cape to beneficiate at source, specifically in an economic
exploding area. There is no excuse not to pay attention to the Kgalagadi
area any more.

In this regard the province also wants to commend the DTI on the
Khulisumnotho Local Economic Development Capacity Programme that was
recently launched. In terms of the programme, 18 district municipalities in
the country have been identified. Of these, four districts in the Northern
Cape have been identified for support. We think we will go far with that to
lay the basis for economic development.

We have listed with our department a few strategic projects and we believe
and wish to reaffirm the status of Kimberley as the diamond hub of South
Africa. As announced in this House last year, this strategy will see the
relocation of the State Diamond Trader to Kimberley, a planned move which
was reaffirmed by the Minister of Minerals and Energy when she recently
opened the gold chain factory in Kimberley. A definite timeline for this
relocation is being worked on and this step will contribute towards the
availability of rough diamonds, so that the rest of the diamond strategy
can be implemented.

Linked to this, we will see the diamonds and jewellery intricately linked
to the Kimberley brand which is presently being identified. In an effort to
address the skills shortage experienced in the industry throughout the SADC
region, an international diamond and jewellery academy is planned. This
will be coupled with a cutting and polishing facility, highlighting
beneficiation as a key part of the Northern Cape’s provincial growth and
development strategy. The establishment of a diamond hub will be the net
result of the linkage of these various strategies in terms of the Rids.

The hub will be developed as a special economic zone. In general, mining is
still one of the key sectors of the Northern Cape economy. This sector
mainly focuses on the iron ore and manganese mining activities in the
Kgalagadi area and diamond activities over the whole province.

The main concern in terms of the mining industry is the fact that the
majority of inputs used in the production process are imported from other
provinces or other countries. Linked to this, the economic analysis of the
provincial economy also indicated that the manufacturing industry in our
province is underperforming.

To address both these concerns, the North West University was appointed to
research the possibilities of manufacturing, for the mining industry,
products through the process of reverse engineering.

The Northern Cape province is also a pilot project for the Presidential
project on the ICT. As part of the process, the province is in the process
of establishing the business process outsourcing and offshore industry in
the province. The Minister mentioned one or two. This links to the need to
identify the provincial growth and development strategy to divert the
economy from the interdependence on the primary sector to the service
sector. The ICT sector has been identified by Asgisa as a sector that can
contribute significantly to job creation in the South African and Northern
Cape economy.

The province is proud to announce that the first Business Process
Outsourcing and Offshore Industry call centre has been launched in
Kgalagadi with the help of DTI and we thank the department and the
Ministers for their enthusiasm. We are planning to open a second centre in
Sol Plaatje Municipality in Kimberley; it is well-advanced. We hope to
launch this with the help of the department very soon.

The Upington International Airport is being redeveloped as a cargo hub and
the support of major role-players in the industry, such as the Airports
Company of South Africa, SA Airways Cargo and some freight forwarders has
already been confirmed.

The cargo hub project fits the definition of the logistics hub as
identified in the Regional Industrial Development Zone Strategy. The major
challenge is to secure enough freight to make this hub sustainable. The
local Khara Hais Municipality is investigating the possibilities of
establishing an industrial development zone or other special economic zone
in the industrial area adjacent to the international airport. The support
from DTI to ensure that this project is on the national agenda in terms of
the industrial development is requested.

It should be clear from this brief overview about strategic projects in the
Northern Cape that we are in full support of the recently launched National
Industrial Policy. In this regard the province also wishes to congratulate
the DTI for arranging a consultative meeting on these issues in Kimberley
that was very successful and will take our processes to create jobs and new
industries well forward. We believe that this initiative can only
contribute to improving collaboration and co-ordination between the
provincial and national departments, which is sorely needed if we are to
reach the targets for economic growth and job creation, as identified in
Asgisa.

We remain committed to facilitating the creation of job opportunities in
our vast province with so many raw materials and resources to support that.
The Northern Cape supports the vote of the DTI. [Applause.]

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Thank you, Madam Chair, according to news reports the
Cabinet recently approved the new Companies Bill which will change the way
businesses in South Africa are run. It is going to replace the 1973
Companies Act. The Minister announced the intended Bill already in February
2007 and it was supposed to be brought before Parliament in October last
year to be ready for approval in February this year. The Bill was supposed
to be introduced in Parliament in March this year but it did not happen.
The question is whether the proposed Companies Act is still going to be
introduced this year.

The original version of the Bill provided, amongst others, for the gradual
phasing out of close corporations as indicated by the Minister in February
2007. I also understand that there was an agreement with the National
Economic Development and Labour Council, Nedlac, to the effect that close
corporations would be retained for the near future.

Volgens, in soverre ek kon vasstel, die nuwe weergawe van die wetsontwerp
word die oprigting van beslote Korporasies of BK’s, verbied en geen
maatskappy mag in ’n BK omskep word nie. Sou ek korrek wees, dan is die
beperking op BK’s in stryd met die ooreenkoms met Nedlac. Dit is moontlik
dat ek verkeerd is en dat ek bloot spekuleer.

Die Departement van Handel en Nywerheid is ’n goeie departement met goeie
amptenare maar die skuld lê by hulle. Ek wil hulle nie beskuldig nie, want
ek het werklik moeite gedoen om dit te probeer vasstel. Ek het by die
departement navraag gedoen; ek het by Parlement navraag gedoen en ek het
eweneens by die Staatsdrukker navraag gedoen. Ek kan nêrens hierdie wet in
die hande kry nie.

As ek verkeerd is, sal ek graag wil weet wat die werklike stand van sake
is. Wat my betref dui dit nie op deursigtigheid nie en die deelname van die
publiek is gevolglik onmoontlik. Ek sal graag van die Minister en die
departement wil verneem presies wat die stand van hierdie wetgewing is. Ek
dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[According to, and in as far as I could ascertain, the new version of the
Bill prohibits the establishment of close corporations or CCs, and no
company may be transformed into a CC. If I happen to be correct, then the
limitations on CCs are contradictory to the agreement with Nedlac. It is
possible, though, that I am wrong and that I am simply speculating.

The Department of Trade and Industry is a good department with fine
officials, but they are to blame. I do not want to accuse them, as I really
did make an effort to ascertain this. I made enquiries at the department; I
enquired at Parliament and at the Government Printing Works as well. I have
been unable to get hold of this Bill.

However, if I am wrong, I would really like to know what the actual state
of affairs is. It does not, as far as I am concerned, indicate transparency
and participation by the public is therefore impossible. I would like to
hear from the Minister and the department what the particular status of
this Bill is. I thank you.]

Mr D D GAMEDE: Thank you, Chair, there were two things I was going to say
before starting on my speech, but the third one is that hon Van Heerden
deprived himself of the correct information by not being in the meetings
and by not even having a look at the strategic plan. He has not only
deprived himself but also his party.

The second thing is that we as the ANC support this Budget Vote. Thirdly,
let me say upfront or we will do an injustice to the movement, that we as
the ANC condemn the recent attacks on foreign nationals and all South
Africans. We call upon all our branches, our membership and our supporters
to protect our foreign brothers and sisters, for it is a known fact that
prior to 1990 the ANC was all over Africa, Asia, China and Europe. South
Africa really belongs to all who live in it and as Africans we all know
that “umuntu ngumuntu ngabantu” [a person is only a person through their
relationship to others.]

The strategic framework has been presented to this committee and in order
for this department to succeed it must be properly financially resourced.
It must have the required human resources. It must have the skills and must
be able to monitor, evaluate and then report.

Chairperson and hon Minister, while the appropriation by Parliament of
about R16 billion over the three-year period is appreciated, we are worried
about the decrease of close to a R1 billion in the outer year, that is,
2010 or 2011.

The question would then be: Where would the economic growth of the country
be at that time? Would it be at 6%, 5% or 4% especially on programmes three
and five? This department is one of the biggest and one of the key
departments in eradicating poverty and creating employment. That is why it
is one department that has two deputies.

In order for it to implement its strategy, it must have the skills and
human resources; there must be persons. Therefore, this calls for filling
all vacancies and retaining the skilled employees. This means that it would
have to dig deeper into its pocket so that it does not lose the skilled
employees to the private sector.

It is highly important that the envisaged women’s resources plan is
developed as speedily as possible, as part of the department’s human
resources strategy, including the revised Employment Equity Plan. While I
am still there, it is really sad to know that the department has not
reached the 2% target of employing people with disabilities, whilst it had
done very well in employing women.

The Department of Trade and Industry, DTI, is the pillar of economic growth
of any country, so it is imperative that we develop and institutionalise
this knowledge and experience. The introduction of the Enterprise Content
Management is highly appreciated.

Last but not least, it will be important that the department monitors,
evaluates and reports to the relevant structures such as the Cabinet and
Parliament. We as a committee will also monitor that it monitors. We shall
hold the executive part of the DTI accountable.

Speaking in Parliament on 8 February 2008 at the state of the nation
address, hon President Thabo Mbeki called for “Business Unusual”. When he
addressed Parliament, he identified the 24 Apex Priorities. I am sure the
Minister was happy to note that the first priority, which is the Industrial
Policy Plan, is the responsibility of this department.

He said, and I quote:

  We will urgently finalise and implement customised sector programmes for
  identified sectors of the economy such as agro processing, textile, car
  manufacturing and tourism.

The question is: Where is the department in this regard? I have heard that
you have touched on this Industrial Policy Plan in your speech.

In closing, speaking at the University of Zurich early this year, ANC
president, Comrade Jacob Zuma, said: “The ANC has firmly located our
country as a developmental state.”

This presupposes active state intervention in the economy of the country
and the sound mechanism to address the needs of the poor. We have come to
the conclusion that a complete free market economy without any form of
state regulatory intervention will not be able to address the huge and
unacceptable backlog of eradicating poverty and underdevelopment. It is
only the DTI that can meet this challenge. Once more, the ANC supports this
budget. Thank you.

Ms J WITBOOI (Western Cape): Thank you, Chairperson. Hon Minister, hon
Deputy Minister, hon members of the NCOP, it is always a pleasure for me to
debate in the NCOP, the House where I started in 1999. Today I am glad to
do so on behalf of the Western Cape province.

Under the direction of President Thabo Mbeki in 2004, the province was
tasked with building the notion of a developmental state. He said:

  Focus on the shortfalls of the marketplace, speed up the process of
  skills development and deliver a detailed programme that responds to the
  second economy so that we too can begin to contribute to economic growth.

The Department of Economic Development and Tourism in the Western Cape
therefore developed the Microeconomic Development Strategy during 2004-05,
which seeks to stimulate economic development and transformation in the
Western Cape. The Microeconomic Development Strategy of the Western Cape is
a focused set of interventionist sector strategies overlaid by an
additional set of cross-cutting themes. Given resource constraints, the
Microeconomic Development Strategy advocates that the province focuses on
sectors that have the highest potential for growth, transformation, job
creation and where government interventions could actually make an impact.

In the Western Cape, these prioritised sectors were oil and gas, business
process outsourcing, ICT, tourism and the creative industries. The cross-
cutting themes which we prioritised were the SMMEs, the informal sector and
skills development.

Having developed a clear policy framework, the Western Cape in 2006
implemented the Microeconomic Development Strategy. We have had some
challenges and considerable successes as a result of the Meds. We
introduced the iconic red doors as the one-stop shop for SMME services,
available to businesses and the informal sector.

We also improved our services to the rural areas by introducing the mobile
Red Door and the mobile Cape Crafts programmes. We have facilitated the
establishment of 16 sector bodies, private-public partnerships and have
begun to stimulate growth, competitiveness and transformation in the target
industries. As a result of the Meds, we have facilitated the creation of
69 384 jobs in the province, contributing towards the national Asgisa
target of halving unemployment by 2014.

The Western Cape has spent an enormous amount of effort and time in
nurturing and developing relationships not only with businesses, but also
with civil society, labour, communities and municipalities. We want to
offer the DTI this platform of engagement and our assistance to effect the
National Policy Framework, and we do it humbly.

We also want to share with the DTI our successes and even our failures to
help strengthen national policies. We really want to offer our eyes, our
ears, our hands and our commitment to make economic growth and
transformation happen.

Some of the collective partnerships between the DTI and the Department of
Economic Development and Tourism are starting to bear fruit. In March this
year, the province and the Companies and Intellectual Property Registration
Office signed an agreement where the Red Doors will be facilitating the
registration of closed corporations and co-operatives.

This is a win-win situation, not only for the DTI, who will now have a
larger footprint and expanded capacity in the province, but also for the
department of economic development, as it is able to add a valuable service
to its table of assistance packages to businesses. It is also a win for
Western Cape businesses and the informal sector, as this effectively
reduces red tape and reduces the cost of doing business.

The DTI and province partnership is also beginning to take effect within
the sectors. In the craft industry, the Craft Customised Sector Programme
of the DTI is working closely with the sector body, the Cape Craft and
Design Institute in our province, and we are thankful for that.

Regarding the business process outsourcing industry, the province is keen
to engage and it needs the DTI’s support to grow the industry. This sector
is of particular significance to the Western Cape and it is one of the
priority sectors identified by the Meds. National policy is attempting to
encourage the location of such operations in rural areas. This is being
done on the grounds of equity and alleviating poverty in rural areas and we
agree with that. We want to bring something to the Minister’s attention: In
the Western Cape, in contrast with others, by far the largest portion of
the poor is located not in the rural areas, but in the metropole regions.

We agree that halving unemployment and halving poverty by 2014 is a
collective imperative of gigantic proportions that will only be achieved if
we work together.

The economic needs of our country outstrip both the DTI and the province’s
resources. As long as we are working together as a collective towards
commonly determined objectives and projects, we will be able to realise and
optimise our goal of shared growth.

We wish the Minister and his department well in their endeavours to close
the gap between rich and poor in our country. The Western Cape supports
this budget.

Ms B L NTEMBE: Hon Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon Deputy Ministers and,
especially our hon MEC from the Northern Cape, Mr Saaiman; in the Northern
Cape, we are united, regardless of our political affiliations. This kind of
spirit can only come from inside, and from a divine spirit.

Hon Chairperson, I want the House to know that I take cognisance of the
fact that the Department of Trade and Industry’s budget takes the form of
transfer payments to the agencies that comprise the DTI group. It is with
great interest that the ID waits to set its eye on the plan of the DTI in
relation to the recruitment of high-calibre people, and by the retention of
people who are holding key managerial and technical positions.

Hon Chairperson, higher or lower salaries play a big role. As part of the
DTI’s mandate to contribute to regional economic development, which also
includes the strengthening of local economic development leading them to
partnering with the local government, the request is to partner a bit more
with local government as the need is so deep at that level of government.

The ID is also looking forward to the implementation of the DTI’s
investment strategy, which is to commence in 2008. The central approach to
effective export promotion, as a priority in the targeting of new high
growth markets to increase export in underexploited markets, has to be
supported by all South Africans.

The Consumer Protection Bill is a good Bill. Just as with other Bills, it’s
debated and we need to prioritise its implementation and monitoring for our
people to benefit from and buy into it. When, at the end, a case or
complaint is to be taken to court, finances will have to be available.
Those who can afford to take the case to court and be able to read what
justice is meant for will benefit. But the poor, again, hon Chairperson,
will be denied such justice because of the lack of funds. It saddens us to
know that money can buy justice in life. I thank you.

Mr J M SIBIYA: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, the Deputy Ministers,
officials of the department, comrades, colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.

As the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs - and I take it as
the NCOP generally - we do appreciate the achievements of the DTI. As
outlined by the Minister, his deputies and the departmental officials
during our interaction, we are aware that we managed, as a country, to
create about a million jobs and to attain macroeconomic stability in our
economy, and that we are gradually shifting.

These achievements coincide with the belief the ANC expressed at Polokwane
during our 52nd National Conference when it said South Africa is still at
the beginning of the historic transformation of the economy as called for
in the Freedom Charter of 1955. The conference went on to say that such a
process of economic transformation aims, in part, to realise a thriving and
integrated economy, which draws on the creativity and skills the population
can offer, building on South Africa’s economic endowment to create decent
work for all and to eliminate poverty.

On the basis of the above, the government, in general, and the DTI, in
particular, says that the following constitutes the basis of its mission:
Firstly, to provide leadership to the South African economy through its
understanding of the economy, its ability to identify the economic
opportunities, potential and its contribution to the Accelerated and Shared
Growth Initiative for South Africa, Asgisa; secondly, to act as a catalyst
for transformation and development of the economy and to respond to the
challenges and opportunities of the economy to support the government’s
economic goals of growth, employment and equity.

In the circumstances, the DTI waits for the finalisation and passage of
relevant Acts and Bills so as to intervene decisively in the following
areas: Firstly, industrial development; secondly, trade investments and
exports; thirdly, broadening participation; fourthly, regulation; and
fifthly, administration and co-ordination.

In pursuance of the above objectives as set out, the department has
structured itself in a way that saw the seven programmes and 19 agencies in
place. Among these we have the Industrial Development Corporation, IDC,
Khula Enterprise Finance Limited, and others to assist people to become
SMMEs, and grow, one day, to become big independent businesspeople in their
own right. Nonetheless, we need to applaud the department’s assistance in
the field of skills, whereby business plans that are necessary to access
funds are given to the aspirants.

Apart from the institutions referred to, the department is working hard to
build an equitable multilateral trading system and links with key economies
in Southern Africa, Africa and the whole world.

Let us take the example of the links we have with the European Union. We
are aware that such agreements and links are not based on equal relations,
and that has been documented. We cannot, as a committee - and I take it as
the House - expect the hon Minister, his deputies, the department, and his
counterparts, beyond South Africa to achieve a miracle by changing these
relations overnight; that would be impossible. Nonetheless, we say that as
long as your efforts are resulting in your caring for us, some will benefit
from these relations. Soldier on, comrades; we support you; we shall
support you until we are on our last legs.

Hon Minister, comrades, ladies and gentlemen, on the issue international
trade relations we have begged for a number of answers from the Minister
and his team for Members of Parliament to be able to have a sharper
understanding, and be able to argue factually for what the department asks
of us in terms of maintaining and improving its capacity and future
capabilities.

The first question is: How are provinces involved in the International
Professional Security Association, IPSA, process? We have relations with
India, Brazil, and to a certain extent China and other countries. We do
consult in terms of putting a particular position when we meet those that
are stronger than us in the economic competition. How do we get the
provinces involved? Secondly, how do we ensure that the economic
partnership agreement issues are filtered down to grassroot level?

It is the policy of the ANC that if there are issues to be discussed and
decisions to be taken, whether policy or any other, we have a way of
involving the lowest structures of the African National Congress, which are
the branches. How are we getting it done?

Thirdly, how do we ensure that regional integration assists member states
of the Southern African Development Community, SADC, in curtailing and/or
minimising immigration towards the South which unfortunately resulted in
the xenophobic attacks we learnt about recently?

Fourthly, are we doing enough to promote Pan-Africanism through trade, and
if so, how far have we gone? And fifthly, can we measure the trade we have
with our neighbours such as Swaziland, Lesotho, etc, who also need
development to stand on their own and be able to assist us too? What
benefits are likely to accrue to us as South Africa from the agreement with
the Republic of Mozambique for mining iron ore in that country?

Answers to the above questions are intended to update the Members of
Parliament in order to strengthen their resolution in arguing, if
necessary, for what the department might need to sharpen its effectiveness.


On the other hand, the Polokwane resolution on the economic transformation
emphasised that structures of production and ownership should be
antimonopolised and anticoncentrated. This should aim at creating
competitive markets, broadening ownership and participation of our people
in addressing monopoly pricing and other forms of rent-seeking,
anticompetitive behaviour and overcoming barriers to entries that inhibit
growth of small enterprises.

Perhaps we need to add another point of achievement made by the department
in this case: We had a serious problem in this country, where some people
assumed the responsibility of becoming fixers. They didn’t announce it so
that we can begin to compete with them; they did it on their own.
Fortunately, they were unearthed and the Competition Commission took vital
steps to deal with them accordingly.

It is the belief of our committee - and I take it the House as well - that
those who might still be practicing will, one day, be unearthed and be
dealt with accordingly. To maintain the policies in the economic field that
our country has put in, the DTI is the engine of economic development. Let
me refer to what I heard a certain Peter said the other day on television
when he was interviewed and had to comment on Africa Day. He said a lot of
things, but there are two things which interested me the most - I’m not
going to quote him. He said that according to him and his colleagues in the
National Media Group, South Africa is undoubtedly a cornerstone of economic
development in the continent and a pivotal link in the world economy.

I think you will agree with me, ladies and gentlemen - as we always do, we
can’t differ now - that the role of the DTI in this respect is not minor.
We would like to say forward with DTI. I want also to go back to the slogan
which I first heard when we went to Kuruman. It was said by the Deputy
Minister, hon Elizabeth Thabethe, when she was given a platform to speak.
She said that she did not come there necessarily to take part in the
proceedings of the NCOP only, but to bring DTI to the people. This slogan
meant a lot to me.

It is on this basis, ladies and gentlemen, that the Select Committee on
Economic and Foreign Affairs unreservedly supports this Vote. We urge this
House to do the same. Thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Chairperson and hon members, I think I
must thank the hon Sibiya for closing the debate on a rousing note, if I
may say so. I think every time when he finishes you must always allow a few
minutes, Chair, for the House to regain its composure. [Laughter.]

But let me attempt, Chair, to just respond to some of the issues that have
been raised by members, because I think that they are actually very
important issues. If I may begin with the absolutely important issue that
the hon Member of the Executive Council raised around what the relationship
is or is going to be between the National Spatial Development Perspective
and the Industrial Policy, clearly ours is not the approach of the
industrial policy framework and the action plan. It’s not an approach that
is based on spatial concerns. Ours is an approach that is based on
opportunities, capacities that we have, possibilities that we can create
but also ensuring that we continue to grow the economy as we further
industrialise. We will do that in a way that can also help us to move away
from the concentration of industries that has historically evolved in South
Africa.

We have, for example, an instrument to support our industrial policy in the
Regional Industrial Development Strategy, through which we seek to provide
the kinds of instruments to local authorities as well as provinces or
regions to be able to identify economic opportunities and work in a
systematic way with our support and co-operating with us to realise
whatever potential has been identified in a particular area.

We are increasing our co-operation, as well as our participation, in some
of the provincial and district-based processes of framing economic
development strategies. We have been doing this and we are moving beyond
just having IDZs, but also looking at other types of special economic zones
and some of the 17 that I referred to and two of those are actually going
in the Northern Cape.

But we are also making some resources available, both technically and
otherwise, towards the sponsoring of provincial industrial strategies and
we have also launched the first rural call centre in Kuruman. That must
tell you about the approach of the Department of Trade and Industry. It is
not the same approach as the national spatial development perspective but
really it worked a lot more closely with provinces, regions and localities
in identifying and realising economic opportunities.

I think the next issue that I should deal with is the issue that was raised
by the hon Van Heerden - is he still here? Yes, from our perspective there
hasn’t actually been a boring moment in so far as the Companies Bill is
concerned. We have been working on further developing this Bill and
finalising the drafting throughout 2007. And of course, the nature of this
Bill generated a lot of interest, but also a lot of issues that we had to
consider and deal with. The consultation process took a lot longer than we
envisaged, but the Bill was adopted by Cabinet for introduction to
Parliament two weeks ago. The state law advisers at the moment are working
to certify this Bill and I do believe that by tomorrow this process should
be complete.

Equally, the Competition Amendment Bill has also been adopted by Cabinet
and it is also undergoing the certification by the state law advisers and
so both of those pieces of legislation which are very important to our work
will be introduced in Parliament during this particular sitting.

You also raised an issue around the question of close corporations. I don’t
know how briefed you are from the time that we introduced the Companies
Bill. What we proposed at the time was that we retain the Close
Corporations Act and part of the reason we made that proposal is because of
the sheer volume of registered close corporations. We felt that we needed a
better approach rather than forcing all of these close corporations to
transfer to the new Companies Act when this Bill becomes law.

As we create a much simpler mechanism through this new company law, we are
hoping that companies will no longer see the need to go the route of the
Close Corporations Act, because the Close Corporation Act had been put in
place to offer simpler mechanisms for smaller companies to register.
Through this new comprehensive review that we have done of company law we
hope that for different categories of companies, particularly for smaller
companies, we will be able to create a much simpler mechanism. Going
forward you’d actually have a lot more smaller companies registering in
terms of the new Companies Act. Over time, therefore, the need for the
Close Corporations Act would simply dissipate, so that is the approach that
we have taken with regard to this issue.

We accept the criticism around how we are doing on disability, but I think
it would be quite a nice way to apologise for that by sharing with you
something very interesting that we are doing.

When the Cabinet adopted its 24 Apex Priorities, it said that we needed to
establish a dedicated investment centre to assist investors, particularly
large investors, and work with them to make it easier to move from the
point of registering an intent to the actual moment of investment.

We, as part of this dedicated centre, are going to have a call centre
function and this call centre that we are establishing as part of this
dedicated centre is going to be staffed completely by disabled people. And
the way in which we are doing it is by providing the information technology
infrastructure that will make it unnecessary for these people to move from
the places where they reside.

So, this is an innovative thing that we are doing which we hope is actually
going to work out quite well. We are making some efforts to address this
matter.

About the concern that has been raised around the issue of costs that will
be incurred by a consumer who has an issue that he or she needs addressed
in terms of the consumer protection legislation, the approach that has been
taken now is that the consumer would not have to incur any costs in this
regard. The consumer would simply have to register his/her concern with the
Consumer Commission and it will take over from there. Therefore, that
problem has been resolved.

Let me also try to respond to the issue that has been raised around how far
we are on industrial policy. We did make an attempt yesterday to provide
some sort of an update. I will pick some of the aspects that we reported on
yesterday. Certainly, a big effort in this regard is going towards this
work on developing the capital goods industry because there is a major
opportunity there.

We’ve got existing capacities in South Africa, the kind of labour that
would be easy to absorb in those kinds of industries. A lot of this effort
involves a co-ordinated effort between ourselves, the Department of Public
Enterprises and Eskom, as well as Transnet who have major investment
programmes that are going on.
There are timelines by which, in terms of the economic cluster programme,
we hope to attain the supplier development programmes coming out of these
two major entities. There is a huge opportunity for that, but we are also
looking at the costs of intermediate inputs in this regard into the
manufacturing of these goods. Some of the import tariffs that relate to
intermediate input will go into the manufacturing of capital goods and are
being reviewed with a view to seeing whether we shouldn’t or can’t actually
remove them.

Through the revamped Small Medium Enterprise Development Programme which we
suspended at a particular point and has now resurfaced as a new scheme that
we are going to be launching during the month of June, we are looking at
supporting it because this is a scheme that’s going to focus on supporting
small and medium enterprises and there is about R200 million in terms of
investments.

We hope to assist those small and medium enterprises in the sector through
this Enterprise Investment Programme and furthermore also on the work on
the National Tooling Initiative which is a vital component of developing
the capital goods and industry. This was launched in March this year.

The first phase of the National Foundry Technology Network, which is
another important component in developing the capital goods industry, will
commence in July and this is going to make a big difference in terms of the
effort towards industrial upgrading.

On the automotive sector the work is going on towards completing the review
of the Motor Industry Development Programme and we remain committed to the
date of August in terms of completing that work, so that a new scheme can
actually be introduced.

But there is other important work that is going on and you will remember
that a particular focus in terms of the automotive industry as a priority
sector in the Industrial Policy Action Plan is that we need to deepen
components manufacture; we need to raise the level of local content in the
vehicles that are assembled in South Africa.

And so we have begun to roll out the first component of a 3-year supplier
development programme through the automotive industry development centre.
There is also something that begins our work towards deepening a components
manufacturing process.

We also want to state that we are quite pleased with the continued
confidence in the automotive industry. If you look at some of the recent
investments that have been announced by different companies, they show that
we are correct in believing that the automotive sector still holds a lot of
potential in South Africa.
The hon Deputy Minister did touch a little bit on the clothing and textile
sector but he focused more on the quota issue. We are also working on
bringing on board new measures to practically support the clothing and
textile sector.

We are working also in the forestry sector with the Department of Water
Affairs in terms of fast-tracking the issuing of licences so that we can
achieve afforestation of 3 000 hectares in the Eastern Cape this year, with
another 800 hectares to follow.

This is some of the work that is going on, but in July at the Cabinet
lekgotla we are going to provide Cabinet with a comprehensive one-year
report on the implementation of the Industrial Policy Action Plan. We are
also doing further work in this area of industrial financing and the
revamping of what used to be the SMEDP into what is now the Enterprise
Investment Programme - that’s part of the work that we are doing.

We are working with Treasury in terms of designing this. Remember, the hon
Minister of Finance announced the R5 billion package on tax incentives for
the next few years, so we are working with them in terms of determining how
that is going to work.

We launched this year a revised Film and Television Incentive Programme
which would support our local productions, because initially the Film and
Television Incentive was really aimed at attracting big budget foreign
films to be shot in South Africa. A huge cry from our local filmmakers made
it important for us to reconfigure the scheme so that we can also
accommodate smaller local producers of films. So, those are the things that
we are doing.

The Enterprise Investment Programme, which is your revised SMEDP, is also
going to support tourism with a very particular focus on encouraging
investment in tourism infrastructure and facilities in your nontraditional
areas. In other words we are going to use this scheme to attract investment
not only to Johannesburg but also to infrastructure in Johannesburg, Durban
or Cape Town. In Johannesburg you could use it to invest in a tourism
facility in Soweto, for example. So, it’s to attract the investment in
tourism infrastructure and facilities in those areas that are beyond your
traditional urban areas, where you have the biggest concentration of
tourism facilities and infrastructure.

Finally, I think on the points raised by the chair, around the issues of
our trade relationships, of course we have to fight all the time to
rebalance the power relations. I think that the World Trade Organisation
represents quite a major departure from what the G8 used to be. The G8 was
where you know the developed countries really interact and those were the
forums that were serving the interest of the developed countries. In the
WTO it’s not so easy because the voice of developing countries is a lot
stronger and the balance of power is a lot better than it was in previous
times.

And so, even in the context of economic partnership agreements the stance
that South Africa has adopted in this regard is representative of that. We
cannot allow a situation where a region that has succeeded, precisely
because of regional integration, can come amongst us, divide us and destroy
the possibility for us to achieve the important objective of regional
integration. We have insisted on staying within that process so that we
raise these issues and have them corrected. It is one thing to just walk
away, but is quite another to fight and retain that possibility for our own
success of achieving regional integration.

These are ongoing battles that we have to fight every day. You are quite
correct and, of course, the co-ordination amongst us as developing
countries is a very important aspect in this particular regard.

We have to do a lot more work to overcome the barriers to trade amongst
ourselves as African countries but also as countries of the South. We have
to do more trade amongst ourselves as developing countries. We have to
invest more in each of our countries. It’s quite interesting for us that we
are beginning to see important investment. Have a look at India and the
rate at which it is investing in South Africa. We are also beginning to see
South African companies that are investing outward, so these are important
issues that we have to continue to work on.

I think, Chair, I have taken too much of your time. So, I should stop here,
even though there are still a few other matters that I would have
addressed. Thank you very much, ladies and gentlemen.

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Thank you, hon Minister, I have
allowed you to continue precisely because you are responding to the issues
that were raised by the members.

Hon members, let me thank the hon Minister and the hon Deputy Minister and
also the other hon Deputy Minister in absentia and also the MEC from
Northern Cape, our special delegate from Western Cape and our guests in the
gallery and also the officials from the department for your presence and
participation in this debate. Thank you very much.

Hon members, I want to remind you that tomorrow our plenary will start at 9
o’clock. Lastly, I’ve been requested by the Chief Whip to inform you that
those ANC members who have received the invitation by the Chief Whip should
proceed to the Chief Whip’s office. Thank you very much. That’s the end of
the business of the day. The House is adjourned.

The Council adjourned at 17:39.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.          Introduction of Bills

    (1)    Please note: The Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports
         of 28 May 2008 contained an error in that, under “Introduction of
         Bills”, it referred to the Land Use Management Bill [B 27 – 2008]
         as a proposed sec 75 Bill. It should have read “proposed sec 76”.


     (2)    The Minister for Intelligence


          a) Protection of Information Bill [B 28  – 2008] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
             prior notice of its introduction published in Government
             Gazette  No 30885 of  18 March 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Ad Hoc Committee on
             Intelligence Legislation of the National Assembly (see House
             resolution in Minutes of Proceedings of 13 May 2008), as well
             as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
             classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bill passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


    (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly and transmitted for concurrence
         on 29 May 2008:


         (a)      National Environment Management Amendment Bill [B 36B -
             2007] (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).


            The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Land and
             Environmental Affairs of the National Council of Provinces.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

    (a)    Draft Regulations in terms of the Criminal Law (Sexual Offences
        and Related Matters) Amendment Act, 2007 (Act No 32 of 2007).

2.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

    (a)    Report of the Commission on Restitution of Land Rights for 2007-
        2008 [RP 30-2008].

