---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 19 November 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2008-11-19
---

                         Wednesday, 19 November 2008
                                    ____

              Proceedings of the national council of provinces
                                    ____

The Council met at 11:36.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the Council I will move on behalf of the IFP:


   That the Council –


      1) notes with shock and horror that a 15-year-old pupil from
         Mpumalanga died after being brutally raped and stabbed 66 times;


      2) further notes that this gruesome murder has taken place just as we
         are about to launch the 16 Days of Activism for No Violence Against
         Women and Children;


      3) realises that our current efforts at stopping violence against
         women and children are not good enough as there are still too many
         incidents of violence against them;

      4) acknowledges that we need to intensify our efforts in combating
         crimes against women and children; and


      5) calls upon the relevant authorities to do everything in their power
         to apprehend the monster who committed this shocking crime as he
         does not belong in society.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day I shall move the following motion:

   That the Council –


      1) notes that in light of –


           a) the relaunch of the Democratic Alliance at Constitution Hill
              on 15 November, on which occasion the party unveiled a new
              logo symbolising its commitment to promoting diversity in the
              context of one nation with one future; and


           b) the DA’s undertaking to strive to become a party of
              government and to realise its vision of an open opportunity
              society for all; and

      2) congratulates the DA and welcomes its relaunch as a positive
         contribution to the consolidation of multiparty democracy in South
         Africa and to the entrenchment of core constitutional values such
         as dignity, equality, nonracialism and nonsexism.

Ms K A KGAREBE: Chairperson, I give notice that I shall move:

   That the Council –


      1) notes that on 4 October 2008 in Greater Taung Municipality,
         Pudumong Township in North West, Othusitse Leburu, an educator of
         45 years at Joseph Saku Middle School decided to destroy himself
         and everything he had accumulated for his family by pouring petrol
         over himself and his house and setting everything alight;


      2) also notes that on the morning of the same day friends and
         neighbours were with him at the unveiling of a tombstone at
         Dryharts, where he showed no symptoms of anger or of committing
         suicide;

      3) acknowledges that the inside and outside of the house was
         completely burnt and that he burnt himself and the family home to
         ashes; and


      4) calls on the government to work more closely with educators so as
         to observe and experience the overloading of work on educators and
         to try and get to the root of the problem which might help to stop
         other educators from killing themselves.

Me H LAMOELA: Voorsitter, ek gee hiermee kennis:

   Dat die Raad –

     1) kennis neem –


         a) van die vernietigende vloede wat dele van die Wes-Kaap verlam
            en groot skade en selfs lewensverlies veroorsaak het, toe ‘n
            matriek meisie op pad na haar eksamen verdrink het;


         b) dat die Hexriviervallei, Montagu, Greyton en Genadendal van die
            gebiede is wat die ergste geraak is;


         c) dat daar reg oor die provinsie paaie, brûe, huise, wingerde en
            selfs vee in die slag gely het; en


         d) dat die impak van hierdie skade groot invloed op hierdie
            seisoenale gebiede gaan hê; en
     2) die Provinsiale Minister versoek om so spoedig moontlik hierdie
        vloedgeteisterde gebiede as rampgebiede te verklaar sodat ramphulp
        spoediglik verleen kan word om gebiede te kan herstel en om
        betrokkenes kans te gun om weer met hul lewens voort te kan gaan.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Ms H LAMOELA: Chairperson, I hereby give notice:

   That the Council –


        1) notes –


         a) the devastating floods that have paralysed parts of the Western
            Cape and have caused extensive damage and even loss of life,
            when a matric schoolgirl drowned on the way to write her
            examination;


         b) that the Hex River Valley, Montague, Greyton and Genadendal are
            some of the areas that have been worst affected;


         c) that throughout the province roads, bridges, homes, vineyards
            and even livestock have been destroyed; and


         d) that the impact of this damage will severely affect these
            seasonal areas; and

     2) requests the provincial minister as soon as possible to declare
        these flood-ravaged areas as disaster areas, so that disaster relief
        can be rendered without delay in order to enable these areas to
        recover and afford the people involved the opportunity to continue
        with their lives.]

                   Massive turnout at rally at kamhlushwa

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr V V Z WINDVOËL: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council –

      1) takes note of the massive turnout of 25 000 to 35 000 people who
         attended the rally at Kamhlushwa in Mpumalanga, addressed by the
         President of the ANC Jacob Zuma, the General Secretary of Cosatu
         Comrade Zwelinzima Vavi and the General Secretary of the SACP
         Comrade Blade Nzimande;


      2) confirms and reaffirms the confidence of the people in the national
         liberation movement that it is still a trustworthy and reliable
         organisation upon which to depend;

      3) recommends that the mampara journalist of the SABC who could not
         count to more than 10 000 be taken to an Adult Basic Education and
         Training, Abet, programme where he can gain arithmetic and
         mathematical skills; and

      4) lastly confirms that the ANC-led alliance is still embedded in the
         Freedom Charter that the people shall govern and will always be
         with the people.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Chairperson, on a point of order ... [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I will just check one word, whether it is
parliamentary to call them “mamparas”. I am not too sure on that one.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Thank you, Chairperson. That was the point of order I
wanted to raise.

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, I object to the motion.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: There is an objection to the motion. In the
light of the objection the motion may not be proceeded with. The motion
without notice will now become notice of a motion.

          TELEVISION EXPOSURE GIVEN TO President Kgalema Motlanthe

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council –


      1) notes with concern the recent reports that party leaders of the ANC
         are concerned that too much television exposure is given to
         President Kgalema Motlanthe, to the detriment of ANC president
         Jacob Zuma and that pressure is being exerted on SABC bosses to
         reverse the situation;


      2) further notes that this has reportedly been confirmed independently
         by two senior SABC sources;


      3) also notes that this is the same ANC that has forced the previous
         President’s early resignation, which resulted in the election of
         President Motlanthe;

      4) rejects, with contempt, any attempts to reduce the stature of the
         constitutionally elected President of the Republic of South Africa;
         and

      5) reaffirms its unconditional support for, and acknowledgement of,
         President Kgalema Motlanthe as the indisputable Head of State of
         South Africa.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Is there any objection to that motion?

HON MEMBERS: Yes!
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Okay, in light of the objection, the motion
cannot be proceeded with. [Interjections.]

Order, order! Hon members, don’t be disorderly! Please, you are causing
disorder in the House. I will name you and put you out of the House if you
continue causing disorder in the House. The motion without notice will now
become notice of a motion.

                       SIGNIFICANCE OF FREEDOM CHARTER

                             (Draft Resolution)


Mr R J TAU: Thank you very much Chair, I hereby wish to move without
notice:

   That the Council –


      1) notes the continued efforts by certain individuals and formations
         that seek to manipulate the legacy that was first mooted at the
         adoption of the Freedom Charter as a historic founding policy
         directive and a statement of core principles of the SA Congress
         Alliance, which consisted of the African National Congress, ANC,
         and its allies the SA Indian Congress, the SA Congress of Democrats
         and the Coloured People’s Congress;


      2) acknowledges that the ANC sent out 50 000 volunteers into townships
         and the countryside to collect “freedom demands” from the people of
         South Africa, which were later synthesised into the final document
         by the Congress of the People in 1955 in Kliptown, Soweto, under
         the leadership of ANC leaders such as Z K Matthews and Lionel
         “Rusty” Bernstein;


      3) takes this opportunity to condemn in the strongest possible terms
         any efforts by any formations or individuals that blatantly seek to
         blight this historic event of our liberation movement and the
         people of South Africa; and

      4) calls on all ANC structures and alliance partners to rise up and
         defend this significant legacy of our movement, a legacy that our
         children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren will live to
         cherish and defend, a legacy that small-minded and selfish people
         would like to steal from future generations.

May we all live the Freedom Charter in its totality and not selective
clauses!

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Is there any objection?


Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Yes, Chairperson, the DA objects.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: In the light of the objection, the motion may
not be proceeded with. The motion without a notice will now become notice
of a motion.

                      CONTRIBUTION OF YOUTH TO SOCIETY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: I move without notice:


   That the Council -

     1) notes recent reports by the Independent Electoral Commission that
        the youth represented almost 80% of the new voters who registered to
        vote on the weekend of 8 and 9 November 2008;


     2) acknowledges the significant role that young people in South Africa
        have played in the fight for liberation and in mobilising
        communities to rise against the armed forces of the apartheid
        regime;


     3) further acknowledges the important contribution that the youth have
        made in the reconstruction and development of a postapartheid
        society since the dawn of our democracy in 1994, by continuously
        engaging institutions of government to expand opportunities for the
        youth, particularly those from previously marginalised and deprived
        communities; and

     4) reiterates the call of the African National Congress to all young
        people in South Africa to once again rise up and stand firm in
        defence of our hard-won freedom and democracy.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Just to remind the members about time
... Hon Sibiya and Danie, I can hear you from here. You are disturbing the
Chair.

Hon members, please time your motions. The allotted time is one and a half
minutes. I don’t want to, but I will have to cut you short if you proceed
for longer than that.

            PRAISE FOR SAPS ORGANISED CRIME UNIT IN KWAZULU-NATAL

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnu D D GAMEDE: Sihlalo, ngiphakamisa ngaphandle kwesaziso:

   Ukuthi lo Mkhandlu –


     1) uncoma amaphoyisa aKwaZulu-Natali ikakhulukazi uphiko olubhekene
        nobugebengu obuhleliwe olusebenza laphaya eThekwini ngokubopha
        izigebengu ezithintekayo ekubulaweni kwamaphoyisa kwaMaphumulo;


     2) ukhuthaza namanye amaphoyisa akwezinye izindawo ukuthi asebenze
        njenga leli thimba.
(Translation of isiZulu draft resolution follows.)
[Mr D D GAMEDE: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council –


     1) praises the members of the SAPS in KwaZulu-Natal, especially the
        members of the Organised Crime Unit which is based in Durban, for
        arresting the suspects implicated in the murder of police officers
        in Maphumulo; and


     2) encourages other police officers to take a leaf from this unit.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I have two motions to move. I
will start with the one on the Order Paper.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I will come to the motions on the Order Paper.

                 PRECEDENCE GIVEN TO SIXTH AND TENTH ORDERS
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That Orders Number 6 and 10 on the Order Paper be given precedence
  immediately after Order Number 3.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                           ANC MANIFESTO CAMPAIGN

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms M P THEMBA: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council –


      1) notes that on 14 November 2008, the ANC launched a popular
         manifesto campaign inviting all South Africans to define the vision
         for our fourth democratic era;


      2) acknowledges that the campaign, which has the theme slogan “My ANC.
         My vision. My future.” is a renewed call that builds on the vision
         that was first laid by the ANC and its alliance partners at the
         Congress of the People in 1955 when they called all South Africans
         to define their destiny; and


      3) calls on South Africans to heed this call to define the future of
         our country, the goals they want to achieve and the things that
         they will need to improve in their communities to ensure a better
         South Africa for all.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Chairperson, the DA objects. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: In the light of the objection, the motion may
not be proceeded with. The motion without notice will now become notice of
a motion.

Hon Sogoni? Your hand was up.

Mr E M SOGONI: Chairperson, no.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: It has passed.

                          SUSPENSION OF RULE 239(1)

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move:

   That Rule 239(1), which provides, inter alia, that the consideration of a
   Bill may not commence before at least three  working  days  have  elapsed
   since the committee’s report was tabled, be suspended for the purposes of
   consideration of the National Prosecuting Authority Amendment Bill [B 23B
   – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75) and the SA Police Service  Amendment
   Bill [B 30B - 2008]  (National  Assembly  –  sec  75)  on  Wednesday,  19
   November 2008.

Question put: That the motion be agreed to.


IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu- Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Motion accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.
                    NATIONAL ROAD TRAFFIC AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr R J TAU: Chairperson, today, as a select committee, we are tabling a
very important piece of legislation, taking into account particularly the
time of the presentation of the Bill itself. It is the National Road
Traffic Amendment Bill which, in the main, proposes to seek to give effect,
in the short term, to some of the principle strategies contained in the
Road to Safety 2001-2005 plan.

The Bill implements the strategic intervention highlighted in the Road to
Safety strategy. Furthermore, it deals with fraudulent activities with
regard to the issuance of driving licences and roadworthy certificates, and
with curbing incidences of criminal activity by or in relation to motor
vehicles or their operation on public roads.

The Bill amends certain definitions and also provides some definitions. It
is important that as a select committee, whilst we take note that the
report has been printed in the ATCs, we note or mention in the House that,
seeing that we will be going into the festive season, this is one of the
pieces of legislation that seeks to assist the Department of Transport,
particularly in enhancing the Arrive Alive campaign. As we know, many of
the accidents that are fatal are, in some instances, as a result of drivers
who have driving licences that were acquired fraudulently or vehicles that
are not roadworthy being used on our roads.

It is, therefore, with this piece of legislation that we are trying to
bring back some sanity to our drivers and our society, to ensure that we
love our lives, and also assist those who might be reckless and ensure
that, at the end of the day, everybody is safe during the festive season.

As the select committee we are hoping that hon members and also their
families, friends and everybody else will adhere to these proposals, even
if they have not yet been enacted, to ensure that everybody arrives alive
during the festive season. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Bill be agreed to.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, Limpopo, Mpumalanga, Northern
Cape, Western Cape.

ABSTAIN: KwaZulu- Natal.

Bill accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

                   MANDATING PROCEDURES OF PROVINCES BILL

              (Consideration of Report of Mediation Committee)

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, colleagues, comrades and friends, you will
recall that we came to this House and reported that we were  concerned that
whenever committees receive mandates from provinces, there was no
uniformity as to who was supposed to sign the final mandate. That has been
corrected by the senior House, the NCOP, through the committee led by yours
truly.

What we did was to follow all the processes. As a norm, after we have
passed a Bill in this House, our colleagues in the NA have to consider it,
because the Bill emanated from this House. Our colleagues in the NA insert
a clause or clauses in an attempt to improve the original Bill. The clause
that they inserted provided that for each and every question that this
House had to vote on, we had to get a mandate.

That was very problematic because that was going to mean that even for
motions, as moved by my colleagues in this House this morning for example,
we would have to adjourn and ask for mandates from our provinces. That was
going to make our House dysfunctional.

Because we differed with the NA in this regard, we passed a motion
establishing the Mediation Committee. The two Houses met to look into the
particular clause we differed on. Our colleagues conceded that they are not
clued up on issues in the senior House, hence they inserted that particular
clause. But, ultimately, they agreed that it was wrong of them to include
that particular clause, because it was going to render our House
dysfunctional. Therefore, in the Mediation Committee we agreed to remove
that particular clause.

All the mess has been cleared up; things are now back on track. We are now
like a well-oiled machine. If this Bill gets the nod from this House now,
it will mean that each and every final mandate that will come from
provinces will be signed by the Speaker.

I don’t want to bore members with more details, because this Bill has been
in this House a long time. What I’m tabling is the report of the Mediation
Committee. We managed to persuade our colleagues to understand our point of
view. On that note, without taking too much of the House’s time, we are
tabling this report of the Mediation Committee and are commending that the
proposals be accepted. Thank you, Chairperson.

Debate concluded.


Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, KwaZulu-Natal, Mpumalanga, Northern
Cape.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: We were just looking at the voting. I’m
informed that although Gauteng has voted in favour of adopting the report,
we don’t have their mandate in writing yet. So, the record of provinces
that have voted yes is six. I will remove Gauteng province’s name from that
list because we have not formally received their voting mandate. Therefore,
five provinces have voted in favour of the Bill. Mr Sogoni?

Mr E M SOGONI: Chairperson, I think that there is confusion on the part of
Gauteng as far as the Rules are concerned. Gauteng is of the view that it
had sent a final mandate for the delegation head to vote in favour of the
process. However, as Kgoshi Mokoena has explained, the confusion arose when
there had to be mediation. Gauteng was of the view that the original
mandate was the mandate we had to carry. That is why we are voting now in
favour of the report. In fact, we verified this before coming into the
House.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mr Sogoni, that’s precisely why I’m removing
Gauteng’s name from the list of provinces that have voted in favour of the
report. The mandate you have was for the first Bill, not the final Bill
that Kgoshi Mokoena is referring to. I understand the misunderstanding.
However, it should correspond with our Minutes that we have your mandate in
writing for the original Bill, but not the final mandate. If you can send
it, that would be fine. We will note it in our documents.
Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

                BIBLE SOCIETY OF SOUTH AFRICA ACT REPEAL BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, you’ll recall that we passed some of the
church Bills, which were initiated by hon P Gerber, last week. The Bible
Society of South Africa Bill was one of them. We dealt with this particular
Bill and proposed some amendments, because the Bible Society is going to
become a section 21 company, a nonprofit organisation, from now on and we
need to make provision for the smooth transfer of its assets to the new
section 21 company.

In the committee itself we did not have any problems with any political
parties. I therefore make an appeal to all the political parties to support
this Bill that’s before us today. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill, subject to proposed amendments, agreed to in accordance with section
75 of the Constitution.

                      CRIMINAL PROCEDURE AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr B J MKHALIPHI: Chairperson and colleagues, the Bill before us amends the
Criminal Procedure Act, Act 51 of 1977, so as to provide for the
postponement of certain criminal proceedings against an individual who is
in custody, awaiting trial, by using an audiovisual link.

The amendment emanates from the report of the Law Reform Commission, which
expressed the need for this kind of legislation in order to alleviate the
financial burden and the attendant security risks posed by the
transportation of accused persons to and from the courts, who at times
appear for only five minutes, at huge expense and risk.

The provisions in this amendment will also reduce administrative costs. The
Minister, in terms of this Bill, must designate the correctional centre
which may use this audiovisual conferencing facility.

In clause 2 of the Bill certain words are amended in terms of section 271A
of the principal Act, without amending the substance of the section. In
order to provide for expungement of certain criminal records, four new
sections are inserted. The expungement of criminal records occurs after
application by the persons concerned, and expiry of a fixed period in
certain circumstances. There is also automatic expungement of criminal
records of persons who were convicted of criminal offences under the
previous constitutional dispensation.

Here we refer to what we may call apartheid offences under obnoxious Acts,
such as the Group Areas Act, Immorality Act, Separate Amenities Act and
others. The Bill further stipulates that there are three categories of
criminal records that will never be expunged. These are criminal records
appearing in the National Register for Sex Offenders, criminal records
appearing in the National Child Protection Register and, lastly, criminal
records appearing for offences in terms of the Firearms Control Act of
2000.

We engaged the departments in many of the sections about the practice and
applicability in certain circumstances. Our engagement with the department
is on an ongoing basis. We will receive periodic reports about the progress
made. We commend the Bill to this House.

Debate concluded.

Bill, subject to proposed amendments, agreed to in accordance with section
75 of the Constitution.

CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF JOINT BUDGET COMMITTEE – MEDIUM-TERM BUDGET
POLICY STATEMENT

Mr E M SOGONI: Chairperson ... [Interjections.] I hope I will be protected,
as I’m making my maiden speech! [Laughter.] I have 10 pages to read for
members and I’ll just ask for an extension of time.

As we ask the House today to adopt this Medium-Term Budget Policy
Statement, I just want to say that the world markets are facing a financial
market meltdown which started in the USA. Also, some G7 members have
already declared that, because of the globalisation of the economy, their
countries are facing recession. Our country will not remain unaffected, as
developing countries experience the worst impact.

As we know, South Africa is part of this global economy and faces the same
economic challenges. However, South Africa has come up with policies to
weather the storm and it will therefore survive.  Economists are already
predicting that, although South Africa will experience a low economic
growth of about 3%, it will still keep afloat.

Chairperson, on behalf of the Joint Budget Committee, I would like to ask
the House to adopt the Budget Statement as reflected in the ATCs. Thank
you.

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

                          UNPARLIAMENTARY LANGUAGE

                                  (Ruling)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, I said I would look at the word
“mampara” used by the hon V V Z Windvoël earlier on, and it is
unparliamentary. However, it’s not an issue anymore because there was an
objection to the motion. But the word is unparliamentary.

Proceedings suspended at 12:29 and resumed at 14:03.

                              Afternoon Sitting

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you, hon members, and thanks to both of
you, hon Ministers. I see you are here.

There is your chair. [Interjections.] I am just joking, because you would
then be the Chief Whip of the House.

                NATIONAL PROSECUTING AUTHORITY AMENDMENT BILL
                 SOUTH AFRICAN POLICE SERVICE AMENDMENT BILL

               (Consideration of Bills and of Reports thereon)

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, hon members, the South
African Police Service Amendment Bill and the National Prosecuting
Authority Amendment Bill jointly effect the establishment of a new,
integrated division in the SAPS to prevent, combat and investigate national
priority crimes.

Firstly, I wish to thank the Select Committee on Security and
Constitutional Affairs for the role it played in the development of the
Bill now being considered. Normally the committee would only become
involved in the consideration of a section 75 Bill after adoption thereof
by the National Assembly.

In the case of this Bill, the committee was part of all the deliberations,
including the public hearings all over the country and the public hearings
in the joint committee that consisted of the Portfolio Committee on Justice
and Constitutional Development and the Portfolio Committee on Safety and
Security. Despite this, the committee interrogated all aspects thereof
afresh, intensively and critically, once it started deliberations on the
Bill.

The committee also allowed further submissions on both Bills by the
Institute for Democracy in South Africa, Idasa, and the Centre for
Constitutional Rights. It also allowed these institutions to make oral
submissions, although the issues raised were also deliberated upon in the
joint committee.

In particular, I appreciate the fact that the committee requested a report-
back on the implementation of the Bill and that the committee undertook
that, if there are going to be challenges, they recommend that additional
resources be given to the new directorate to conduct its functions
efficiently. The committee also recommended some amendments to further
improve the text.

We must emerge victorious in the battle aimed at the realisation of the
safety and security of all South Africans. The battle against organised
crime and crime in general must be won. Defeating crime is in the best
interests of our democratic transformation. The just dispensation we have
entrenched is based on the principle of equality, including equal access to
peace and security as an aspect of the realisation of the goal of a better
life for all.
Our commitment to the safety and security of every South African has, over
the years, found expression in the many interventions we have made to
strengthen our capacity to defeat the scourge of crime.

The Bills before the House represent a continuation of this effort. They
take our fight against organised crime to higher levels. They will enable
us to rectify weaknesses in our system while ensuring better organisation
and utilisation of our human and material resources.

Bertrand Russell once said:

   What a man believes upon grossly insufficient evidence is an index into
   his desires – desires of which he himself is often unconscious. If a man
   is offered a fact which goes against his instincts, he will scrutinise it
   closely, and unless the evidence is overwhelming, he will refuse to
   believe it. If, on the other hand, he is offered something which affords
   a reason for acting in accordance to his instincts, he will accept it
   even on the slightest evidence.

Mr Bertrand Russell lived in a different time from ours, thus his reference
to “man”, as you would have noticed, when referring to human beings.
Patriarchal nuances aside, opposition parties would derive great benefit
from a sincere consideration of Mr Russell’s words.

Despite the progress that has been made in many areas, government’s review
processes indicated the need to realign state entities mandated to
investigate and combat organised crime. The Directorate of Special
Operations, DSO, was a new and innovative development in the fight against
organised crime. It included prosecutors, detectives and intelligence
operatives in one unit - powerful, no doubt about that. But this
combination created its own problems. All police units are monitored by the
Independent Complaints Directorate, ICD. However, the DSO was under the
National Prosecuting Authority, NPA, and could not be investigated by the
ICD. The intelligence-gathering capacity of our agencies is monitored by
the Inspector-General of Intelligence. However, the DSO was not covered by
this framework.

Our firm commitment to the fight against crime must find expression in
resolute action. We have to address the issues of poor co-operation and co-
ordination that have been revealed in practice. We have to remedy issues of
duplication and parallel investigations. Failure to do so will only benefit
criminals. Prosecutors need to be independent from investigators so as to
better exercise proper balance in their decisions to prosecute or not and
to ensure the realisation of the principle of separation of functions.

There has also been what some have referred to as the “cherry-picking” of
cases - a preoccupation with certain kinds of crime, with the result that
other crimes were inadvertently ignored. The previous arrangements also
resulted in a situation where units which did not report their successes to
the media were unjustly perceived as poor performers. A situation like this
poses potential dangers.

As we traverse along the transformation path, we continually gain
experience and insight into the nature of the reality we seek to change.
This necessitates a continual evolution of our crime-fighting strategies,
entities, arsenal and programmes. We have recognised that, because of its
nature, organised crime requires that we address it through a multipronged,
well-equipped and resourced unit. Through the establishment of the
Directorate for Priority Crime Investigation, DPCI, we shall take our
capacity to fight organised crime to a higher level. Practice will indeed
reveal areas to be improved. However, the collective experience, resources,
commitment and unity of purpose that will already underpin the unit will
ensure a very firm and effective beginning.

The Bills before us provide for, among other things, a smooth transfer of
personnel. This is the task that the Minister for Justice and
Constitutional Affairs and the Ministry of Safety and Security are seized
with.

We must again assure the people of our country that no cases will be lost.
Once the Bill is passed, investigations of the Directorate of Special
Operations, DSO, shall be dealt with as if the Act had always been in
force. The enactment of the South African Police Service Amendment Bill
will enhance our capacity to prevent, combat and investigate priority
crimes. We shall identify and preserve the positive lessons borne of our
various experiences.

It is to be expected that the initial process of merging our experiences
may contain some aspect of pain. There is, however, no doubt that the
resultant sense of unity will be in the long-term interests of the fight
against crime in our country, and it will therefore bring us closer to the
realisation of the goal of a better life for all.

We must commend the profoundly democratic manner in which the Bills on this
matter have been processed. In fact, this is one piece of legislation that
took this long because of the thorough consideration Members of Parliament
attached to it.

We congratulate Parliament and its committees on the thorough effort they
put into the processing of the Bill, that is, both the select committee and
the portfolio committee. The vibrant discussions have enriched our
understanding of the challenges we face. The ideas that emerged have become
our national intellectual assets, and they have enriched the Bills and
nourished our capacity to navigate our own way into the future.

Some in our society asserted a view that some Members of Parliament should
recuse themselves from participating in processes relating to these Bills.
It is fascinating that such moral rectitude never arose when we enacted
legislation to outlaw apartheid on the basis that many of the participants
had not only benefited from apartheid, but had actually also been the
architects of some of the legislative framework. The rejection of the Hugh
Glenister applications by our courts is a confirmation that the principle
of separation of powers is well entrenched in our country.

Freedom includes freedom from fear of criminals and criminality. We shall
do all we can. We invite all South Africans, in all their areas of social
activity, to flex their collective muscle and work with the organs of the
criminal justice system to bring about better, safer and secure
communities.

We are progressively giving life to the demand of the Freedom Charter that
“There Shall be Peace and Friendship!” Thank you. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Just before Kgoshi Mokoena takes the podium,
let me correct myself. I’ve called Order Number 4 only; I should have said
Orders Number 4 and 5 will be debated together. It is one debate.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, welcome to the senior House my two dynamic
Ministers. Hon members, colleagues, comrades and friends, when doing our
oversight function in provinces, people complain that the crime in our
country is very high.

As individual MPs, addressing our own branches in various constituencies,
the same question would arise. When attending social gatherings or church
services, the question we are always asked is: What are those measures that
you are putting in place to fight crime?

The two Bills before this House are a direct response to all those
questions. Contrary to what opposition parties want people to believe,
these Bills address organised crime in an integrated, co-ordinated, and
focused manner. With these Bills we are creating a unit that brings
together the best people for the job. In these units we are bringing
together people with experience and know-how when it comes to organised
crime.

All these ideas came as a result of the intensive process of public
hearings and inputs made by various political organisations. During the
public hearings there were concerns that were raised by people. My
colleagues will address those, but let me, in passing, just touch on a few.
There are people who think the Directorate of Special Operations, DSO, or
Scorpions as it is commonly known, is a panacea or zifozonke. Hence those
concerns that were raised and identified by our people.

There are some members of the DSO who accessed classified information
whilst they didn’t have clearance certificates or were not vetted. The
notorious Hollywood style used when effecting arrests was questioned by our
people. The head prosecutors were at the same time investigators. Hence
they were compromising the separation of powers between the investigator
and the prosecutor. Again, the illegal gathering of intelligence was one of
the issues – if people would care to listen.

The notorious plea bargaining with drug lords, as was rightly said by the
hon Minister, is one of the issues that was raised by people. All of this
proves that the Scorpions were not a sacred cow. As I said, my colleagues
will dwell on this one, so let me just leave it at that.

As the committee in this House, unfortunately, we didn’t win this one, but
our fear is that you cannot have someone who becomes a player and referee
at the same time. Hence, in our report we are saying that this must be
followed up; it must come back to Parliament again and let’s look at this
issue.

The directorate we are establishing will be headed by the deputy national
commissioner. This will not be just another ordinary directorate. The head
of this unit will be appointed by the Minister and the staff that are going
to be appointed in this directorate will comprise people of the highest
integrity. To make sure we don’t appoint unwanted elements in this
directorate, those joining it will have to undergo a vetting or security
clearance process.  Members will remember that there are many officials
working in the DSO who were arrested for corruption.

Hence it is also proposed that members of this directorate have to declare
their financial interests, together with that of their family members who
depend on them or stay in the same household. Those family members must be
those who are dependent on them. To avoid having members in this
directorate who serve as investigators and prosecutors at the same time,
the Bill provides that the directorate can appoint legal officials who will
ensure the multidisciplinary approach which other parties would like to
portray as having been compromised.

I know opposition parties are gearing up for their election campaigns;
hence it is so difficult for them to separate the facts from fairytales. We
have been told many a time by opposition parties that the Scorpions are the
best crime-fighting unit we have ever had in our country.

Let me give you a few statistics of the job that has been done by our
police. What worries some of us is that some parties want to portray a
picture of the SAPS as just a bunch of people who cannot think. They were
ridiculed by some members of the opposition, but guess what? When they
encounter any problem in their families, or by their family members, they
rush to the same police to ask for help.

Let’s remove this myth that the only success story in crime combating can
be attributed to the Scorpions. Yes, I am one of those persons who is not
shy or ashamed to give credit where credit is due. I want to thank members
of the DSO for doing such a good job in many of their cases, except for
those mentioned earlier on.

If I wanted to be naughty, I could suggest that we adjourn the debate and
ask for all the cases that are before court and those that are still being
investigated by SAPS, versus those that are before the Scorpions. You will
be shocked. Yes, let the opposition parties make politics, but they must
not be economical with the truth. The conviction rate that comes through
the police cannot be compared with anything.

To illustrate this point, I asked my colleague in the NA, Annelizé van Wyk,
to assist with these statistics that were in her possession. For those in
the opposition parties who care to know, we have organised crime units in
the SAPS. In the past financial year, a total of 154 leaders of organised
crime were identified and, of those, 131 were arrested. In this financial
year, R49 million worth of assets were forfeited to the state through
investigations by the SAPS.

Just to give a clear picture, let me give this House information on some of
the seizures that were done by the SAPS. Vehicles worth R23 million were
recovered; R8 million worth of stolen property was recovered; cigarettes to
the value of R11 million and abalone worth almost R23 million were
recovered by the SAPS.

Let’s now look at narcotics. Over 209 kg of narcotics were recovered by the
SAPS. Over 5 100 kg of cocaine was recovered. Let’s go to dagga – 317 000
kg of dagga was recovered, not by the Scorpions, but by the SAPS. Let’s
look at Ecstasy – 27 800 kg was recovered by SAPS. Let’s now go to Mandrax
– 5 500 kg was recovered, not by the Scorpions, but by SAPS. Let’s go to
Tik – 22 600 kg of Tik was recovered, not by the DSO, but by our SAPS. Now,
let’s go to heroin – 365 kg of heroin was recovered.

Now, people should not say, simply because they are too lazy to access
information and do not know about it, that our SAPS are not doing a good
job. That is not true. I am left with five minutes so let me finish,
Chairperson.
Let me take the opportunity to thank all political parties for
participating in this debate and the deliberations. To my colleagues I say
well done. If I was to be asked to choose any members to serve on my
committee, I wouldn’t look for any other persons except you. Well done,
colleagues. To the department’s officials, we wouldn’t be where we are
today if it wasn’t for your assistance. Thank you very much, and thank you
for your kindness, Chairperson. [Time expired.]

Mr J W LE ROUX: Chairperson, hon members and hon Ministers, today will go
down in history as the day the ANC killed the Scorpions. Today will be
remembered as the day the ANC stopped the best crime-fighting unit in the
country dead in its tracks. [Applause.]

Most of us in this Chamber know that the real reason for doing this is
simply because the Scorpions made it very uncomfortable for some prominent
ANC members. The decision to disband the Scorpions was taken at Polokwane
and as far as the parliamentary process was concerned – and I differ with
the Minister – the Bills were rushed through, and even today the three-day
rule was waived. [Interjections.]

We all know that the ANC wanted the Scorpions under the control of the SA
Police Service, SAPS, and no matter what the facts were, from the outset it
was a done deal.

Judge Sisi Khampepe, in her report, identified problems within the DSO, but
concluded that the DSO must remain with the National Prosecuting Authority,
NPA. Willie Hofmeyr, one of the most respected crime fighters in the
country, told Parliament that the way the DSO did their investigations, and
other side issues that harmed their image, had been sorted out a long time
ago.

Senior counsel advised Parliament that what the ANC was doing to the DSO
was unconstitutional and would be challenged in the Constitutional Court.
The Institute for Democracy in South Africa, Idasa, agreed that the Bills
were unconstitutional. [Interjections.] Yes, it is the truth. The
committee, however, accepted the opinion of the State Law Adviser. Only
time will tell who was right. Yet, with the facts pointing in one
direction, the ANC chooses to disband the DSO.
The Scorpions fearlessly hunted down fraud syndicates, convicted money-
launderers, confiscated millions of rands worth of drugs, jailed Schabir
Shaik and Tony Yengeni, investigated Selebi, Agliotti and Zuma and exposed
Travelgate and the arms deal. They have done all this and more, yet the
only recognition given was for the unit to be swallowed up by the SAPS.

The people of South Africa, burdened with a crime wave second to none in
the world, are the real losers in this tragic saga. But, Chair, the voters
are well informed and will take revenge when they get to the polls next
year. [Interjections.]

Many of the members sitting in the ANC benches today will lose their seats
and they will regret ... [Interjections.] They will regret this madness of
today. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr B J MKHALIPHI: Chairperson, here in front of us we have a concoction of
two Bills that will ensure that the capacity-building for fighting crime
will focus and enhance the integrated cluster approach so that loopholes,
tactical or legal, are closed or eliminated.
The Bills in front of us emphasise that interdepartmental collaboration
should not boil down to collusion in the investigation and prosecution of
accused persons. While the two Bills can easily be cross-referenced in
several sections, it remains remarkable that the lines of investigation
versus prosecution are clearly demarcated. There are also, in several
sections of these Bills, clear lines of accountability, including checks
and balances.

We will hear more and more stories of the so-called success of the
Scorpions. But, what is remarkable is that we do not see any facts
accompanying these claims. [Interjections.] There are no statistics to say
how far the Scorpions have succeeded in fighting the kind of crime they
were instituted for. [Interjections.]

The hon member just before me stated that they are uncomfortable about
these Bills and, indeed, they should be. It would seem to us that the
Scorpions, in their latter form, were giving themselves a mandate that is
legally not there.

Can we just focus on some of the issues? It is a known fact that they
involved themselves in the unauthorised surveillance of individuals on a
large scale. [Interjections.] As if that were not enough, they nearly threw
this country into turmoil that could have had implications on a continental
scale, involving heads of state of other countries in wild claims that were
not even proved.

We have here claims that the Scorpions were successful. If then you were
not interested in the stability of this country ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order, order! Yes, hon Tau.

Mr R J TAU: No, no, it’s very important. Hon Chair, I want to know whether
if it is parliamentary for a member to say, “Ag sies, man!” [Oh sis, man!]
to a member whilst he is speaking.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Who is that member? Who is that member?

Mr R J TAU: Hon Terblanche.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon Terblanche, can you withdraw that, please?

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Chairperson, I will withdraw if it is ruled that it is
unparliamentary, but I don’t know that it is.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: It’s unparliamentary. That is why I am saying
that you must withdraw it.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Where does it say that in the Rules, Chairperson? I have
a list of Rules and I am not going to withdraw it, Chairperson.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Please, don’t argue with the Chair.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: I am not going to withdraw it, Chairperson. I’m not
going to withdraw it because I don’t think it is unparliamentary.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Then you get out of the House. Where is the
Usher of the Black Rod? Get out of the House for the rest of the afternoon.
Ms J F TERBLANCHE: If the public is misled, I have the right to comment on
it.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Go out of the House; I have ruled. Continue,
hon member. [Interjections.]

Whereupon the member left the House.

Mr B J MKHALIPHI: Thank you very much, hon Chairperson. The so–called
success of the Scorpions in doing their work, especially crime-fighting, is
undocumented and unknown. It can only be ascertained by certain
individuals.

We also looked into how they used their own funds in order to fight crime.
The record, as stipulated by the Office of the Auditor-General, contains a
litany of errors. For a directorate, at that level, not to be able to
account for funds in excess of R1 million! The Office of the Auditor-
General states that it’s only a preliminary figure of R1 million - on
completion of that investigation that amount can be even higher.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon Krumbock, can you be in order, please? Hon
Windvoёl?
Mr V V Z WINDVOËL: Chair, you have covered me in terms of Rule 33. I’m from
Mpumalanga and I can tolerate the noise of mosquitoes, but when a member
makes such a noise, you can’t hear another member. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Continue, hon member.

Mr B J MKHALIPHI: For an institution at that level not to be able to
maintain records, basic records, in terms of the Public Finance Management
Act, can we say that is success? For an institution at that level not to be
able to maintain assets or leave registers, can we say there is capacity in
that institution? Yet the hon member said he is uncomfortable about the
demise of the so-called Scorpions.

I can give an account of many things in the litany of errors that were
found with regard to the Scorpions. But then I will conclude by asking,
after reading this report of the Auditor–General, how can any institution
that does not succeed in maintaining basic records and in managing the
basics of its office and members then succeed in fighting high-level crime?
Will it succeed? Because at one stage it didn’t know how many members it
had on its payroll. Yet a member is saying he is uncomfortable about this.

We table these Bills before this House for it to do the honourable thing
and to pass them so that we can have a real, meaningful crime-fighting
mechanism in the country. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mnu M A MZIZI: Sihlalo, noNgqongqoshe bobabili ngithi unwele olude. Uma
ngiza lapha ngiye ngabuka, ngabuka ngathi ukubhala into oyaziyo ngeke
kungehlule. Angimanga lapha ngoba ngizokwehlulela ukuthi Ofezela bebebahle
kangakanani, amaphoyisa mabi kangakanani njalonjalo. Engikumele lapha
kunye: Ukuthi ngizosekela uma ngabe Ofezela bebuyiselwa. [Uhleko.]
Engikumela lapha ukuthi lo mthimba esikhuluma ngawo uma usungulwa
ngangikhona. Mhla silusungula lolu phiko sasinaye uSekela Ngqongqoshe u-de
Lange ngaze ngambuza mina ngathi kuye ngoba sinaso nje i-Special Branch
kungani singaqeqeshi sona na?

Umhlonishwa u-de Lange wangiphendula ngokuthi: Cha! Waqhubeka wathi phela
labo bangamasosha, futhi nje wonke lawo maphoyisa angamasosha kufuneka
siwaguqule. Wathi bona bafuna ithimba elisha elizolwa nobugebengu
obuhleliwe ngobunyoninco nangobuchwepheshe. Ngabe sengithi-ke mina, cha,
kulungile asihambeni siyokwenza lokho. Sahamba-ke, sawela imifula
siyokwenza lowo msebenzi, sabathola Ofezela.

Ofezela basebenze kahle iminyaka ize yaba mihlanu kungezwakali lutho. Kodwa
kuthe lapho Ofezela sebentinyela ndawondawo wasuka umsindo. [Uhleko.]
Wasuka umsindo kwaba wuthuli lwezichwe, asangabe sisazi ukuthi konakalephi.
Kuthe kusuka lapho sezwa ukuthi umphathi wabo akasezwani noNgqongqoshe
Wezobulungiswa Nokuthuthukiswa KoMthethosisekelo sekufuneka aphenywe izinqe-
ke manje - hhayi bo!

Wenziwa lowo mbiko engingakaze ngiwubone kuze kube yinamhlanje. Yebo
amaphoyisa wona kufanele aqeqeshwe kodwa futhi uma eseqeqeshiwe akusho
phela ukuthi sekufuneka aqukule izimpahla zomsebenzi bese kuthiwa kuliwa
nobugebengu. Ukuqeqeshwa kwamaphoyisa akufuneki futhi ukuthi kufane
nomkhonto wegwala wona ophelela emlalazweni ololwa njalo kodwa kungabikho
lutho olwenzekayo.

Ngakho-ke Sihlalo, iqembu leNkatha yeNkululeko lithi: Cha! Nakuba
kungenzeka mhlawumbe ukuthi kukhona okuthile thina esingakwazi ngofezela
ngoba nalowo mbiko wejaji uKhampepe ngawuthola ngoba sekuliwa kuthiwa
awuze. Mina ngangikholwa ukuthi - ngoba ngangiseKomidini Lezobulungiswa
ngaleso sikhathi – umbiko lo uzolethwa eKomidini Lezobulungiswa ukuze phela
siwubuke futhi siwuhlaziye. Kodwa-ke umbiko lowo awukaze ufike. Ngisho noma
ngabe kukhona abakwaziyo ozakwethu bakaKhongolose ngofezela nabo abakaze
bakuphalaze nathi sikwazi.

Umsindo ususuka manje sekuvela konke lokhu nje ngoba sebeze bayotinyela
ndawondawo. Manje-ke sekuthiwa, cha abahambe! Sekuthi abahambe! Ngiyazi
ukuthi kwenziwa izigcawu zokulalelwa kwabantu kodwa-ke abantu bebedidekile
bengazi ukuthi kukhulunywa ngabaphi bona ofezela noma ofezela laba
abangabameli. Wawuzwa umuntu ethi akazi ukuthi Ofezela bamenzelani ngoba
icala lakhe alikaze laphenywa.

INkatha yeNkululeko yeSizwe ithi: Cha! Ngeke impela Ngqongqoshe sikuveme
lokhu ngoba naleli thimba olifaka manje - uma ngabe kungazange kulungiswe
lapha kofezela - nalo lisazohamba ngaleyo ndlela. Kohamba, kuhambe kuthi
uma sekufika kwindlelamnyama besekuthiwa: Cha.

Nabo laba enibafakayo bazotinyela omunye, asazi-ke ukuthi nizobabiza ngani-
ke bona.  Noma nizobabiza ngamabhubesi bazothi uma bebhodla konakale.
Ngakho-ke ngokukhulu ukuzithoba lokhu iqembu leNkatha lithi: Cha! Ngeshwa
ngeke sikwazi kulokhu ukukuxhasa Ngqongqoshe. Ngeke sivume ukuthi Ofezela
bahambe beyoshona odongeni ngenxa yesizathu esingazange sisizwe. Akukaze
kubikwe cala ngabo. Ngakho-ke uma umuntu engenacala bakithi kuye kuthiwe
akalungise amaphutha akhe, akuvese nje kubhidlizwe umuzi wonke. Ngehlela
ngezansi. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson and both Ministers, I greet you all. As I was
coming here, I was just thinking and I realised that writing about what I
know cannot be difficult. I do not stand here to judge how good the
Scorpions were or how bad the police are, etc. I stand here for one thing
only and that is this: I shall only give my support if the Scorpions are to
be reinstated. [Laughter.] What I stand here for is to say that I was there
when this unit that we are talking about was formed. When we formed it, the
Deputy Minister, hon de Lange, was there with us and I even asked him if
there was any reason we could not use the already existing Special Branch
and retrain them.

The Deputy Minister, hon de Lange said: No! He elaborated and said those
are not the police, but soldiers and he said, in fact, the whole police
force consists of soldiers. He said they wanted a new unit that will fight
organised crime tooth and nail using the latest technology. I said fine,
let us go and do exactly that. We went all the way and crossed the rivers
to do that job and the Scorpions were formed.

The Scorpions worked undisturbed for five years and there were no
complaints about them. But when they started stinging sensitive spots, all
hell broke loose. [Laughter.] There was a huge chaotic situation, and we
did not know what had gone wrong. Thereafter we learnt that there was a
breakdown in the relationship between the former boss of the Scorpions and
the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development and that he was to
be named and shamed – whew!

The report was compiled and I have never laid eyes on it. However, we do
agree that police officers should be trained, but also, in the same breath,
that does not mean that after their training they should just seize items
at workplaces in the name of fighting crime. The training of police
officers should also not be the same thing as the sharpening of a coward’s
spear, which ends up losing its sharpness on the whetstone because it is
forever sharpened, but nothing happens thereafter.

Therefore Chairperson, the Inkatha Freedom Party says: No! It is possible
that there are certain things that we do not know about the Scorpions,
because I got the Khampepe report after a long, protracted fight for it to
be made available. I believed that, because I was a member of the Justice
committee at the time, the report would be brought to the Justice committee
for consideration. But the report did not come. Even if there is something
that our colleagues from the ANC knew about the Scorpions, they have never
brought it to our attention.

And the whole noise started because the Scorpions have stung on a sensitive
spot. And they are now being chased away. People are now saying: Let them
go! I know very well that the public hearings were conducted, but the
people were confused and did not know whether the hearings were about the
very Scorpions we are talking about here or about Scorpion Legal
Protection. People could be heard saying they did not know what the
Scorpions have done for them, because their cases were never investigated.

The Inkatha Freedom Party says: No! Never, hon Minister, shall we allow
this to happen, because even this unit that you are introducing now - and
if the wrongs of the Scorpions had not been made right – will follow the
same route. Things will go smoothly at first and when they get to the
sensitive issues, they will easily get a “No!”

Even the new unit you are establishing is also going to sting someone and
we do not know what you are going to call them. Maybe you will call them
the Lions and when they start roaring, things will be difficult. And, with
all due respect, the Inkatha Freedom Party says: No! Unfortunately
Minister, we are not going to support you. We cannot allow the Scorpions to
go down the drain for reasons we have yet to hear. Not even a single case
against them has been reported. Therefore the logic is that if someone has
never been found guilty of any wrongdoing, he is usually told to mend his
ways and does not simply have his entire house destroyed for sins not
known. I rest my case. [Applause.]]

Mr D A WORTH: Chairperson, Minister, hon members, the two Bills presented
before this House today propose the disbanding of a unit, the Directorate
of Special Operations, DSO, better known as the Scorpions, who represent
world-class standards in institutional independence and operational
efficiency. [Interjections.]

The intention is to replace this unit with a unit called the Directorate
for Priority Crime Investigation, DPCI, that will be substantially exposed
to direct executive control and located within an institutional department
not known to be conducive to or appropriate for the kind of high-level,
specialised and professional expertise that characterises the Scorpions’
investigations.

The effect of this legislation will be to deprive the National Prosecuting
Authority, NPA, of its ability to investigate independently, without fear,
favour or prejudice, allegations relating to organised crime and
corruption, as it will henceforth be dependent on the SAPS for
investigations essential to the prosecution process. In a nutshell, the
Minister of Safety and Security and the ruling party will therefore have
the final say as to who will or will not be investigated by the SAPS, upon
whose investigation the NPA will be dependent for successful prosecutions.

This will, in effect, create the possibility that certain people will be
placed above the law. The fact that the National Prosecuting Authority
Amendment Bill accepts the retention of the investigating directorate
within the NPA is implicit recognition that the proposed de-establishment
of the Directorate of Special Operations, DSO, reflects a political rather
than any rational, legal or operational imperative. [Interjections.]

The Khampepe Commission’s recommendations would substantially and
adequately have addressed any legitimate concerns relating to the DSO -
some minimal cosmetic surgery, not amputation or the removal of the heart
and limbs, as is now proposed. The Khampepe Commission that investigated
the DSO and its relationship with the SAPS and the Department of Justice
recommended that the unit be retained.

The ANC, however, is still perpetuating the single police force argument,
which was rejected by the Constitutional Court in the Potsana case. The so-
called provincial hearings, where cadres and comrades were bussed in at a
cost of some R2 million, were also a farce and a means of electioneering at
the taxpayers’ expense. [Interjections.] Already some 60 members of the
Scorpions, comprising advocates, forensic auditors and specialist
investigators, have resigned.

Mr M A SULLIMAN: On a point of order: I would like to know if the hon
member is prepared to take a question.

Mr D A WORTH: No.

An HON MEMBER: Jy’s ook maar ’n bietjie bang, jong. [You really are a bit
scared, hey.]

Mr D A WORTH: Already some 60 members of the Scorpions, comprising
advocates, forensic auditors ...

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, with respect, I think the hon member is
misleading the House to the effect that he said that members of the public
who attended the public hearings were bussed in. That is not true, because
it was part of the public hearings. So he is deliberately misleading the
House. I think he has to withdraw that.
An HON MEMBER: It is unparliamentary.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Well, let me check the Hansard. I am not too
sure how I can rule on that one, because I cannot confirm the statement he
has made. We will look at the Hansard before we make a ruling.
[Interjections.]

Mr B J MKHALIPHI: On a point of order, Chairperson, is it in order for an
ordinary member to defame a fellow member by insinuating something else
about his surname? A member has called hon Sulliman a “silly man”.
[Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Who said that? [Laughter.]

Mr B J MKHALIPHI: The hon Krumbock.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mr Krumbock, could you please withdraw that?
Hon member, continue please.

Mr D A WORTH: Disbanding a successful unit and transferring its staff and
assets to a dysfunctional or, at the very least, less successful and
significantly different operating environment will be disastrous.
Statistics and information presented shows that the DSO is the most
effective crime-fighting unit in South Africa and its abolition will
constitute a major setback in the struggle against organised crime and
corruption. The DA, therefore, cannot possibly support these Bills.
[Applause.]

Rre A L MOSEKI: Modulasetulo, Ditona, a re thuseng ntate Le Roux pele ka
gore fa a ne a eme fa, o tlhagisitse sengwe se se leng mo moleng, se re
santseng re tla go buisana ka sone mo nakong e e tlang. Kgang e, e ka ga
kgololosego ya kamano le manno a mekgatlho. (Translation of Setswana
paragraph follows.)

[Mr A L MOSEKI: Chairperson, Ministers, can we first try to help Mr Le Roux
because when he was standing here, he presented something that is still in
the pipeline; that which we still have to discuss next time. This issue
concerns freedom of association and the seating of parties.]

Let’s tell him that the ANC has its own cadres who fully understand that
seats in this Parliament do not belong to the cadres, but to the ANC. That
must be clear in his mind.

Sabobedi ke gore ntate Worth o dira phoso ya go se batle go ithuta. Go
botlhokwa mo tsamaisong e ya temokerasi gore re ithute, re tlhaloganye gore
temokerasi e dira jang. (Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[Secondly, Mr Worth is wrong by not being willing to learn. It is
important, in the advancing of this democracy, that we learn and understand
how it works.]

This government is the government of the people, by the people and for the
people. This government has a responsibility to ensure that the public
participate in the lawmaking of this country. Many of those people we are
talking about are the poor communities in the rural areas. Therefore, this
government has a responsibility to bring those people to the venue where
public hearings will take place so that they can air their views. That must
be clear to the hon member.

Today we are dealing with the Scorpions issue, the Directorate of Special
Operations, DSO. Why did government establish this unit? A few years ago
this government of the people, by the people and for the people identified
crime in this country; not just ordinary crime, but organised crime which
is not only committed by local criminal masters, but also by international
criminal masters. The overall objective of establishing the Scorpions was
to ensure the fight against criminals.

The question is: Have the Scorpions been able to deal with organised crime
as expected? People say the Scorpions have succeeded. I was listening to
the public addressing the committee. The public understands that the
Scorpions’ objective was to fight organised crime like bank robberies, the
cash-in-transit robbers, drug lords - those that bring drugs from abroad
into South Africa and distribute them in the learning institutions of our
country and other important institutions, etc. Have the Scorpions succeeded
in dealing with these criminals?

HON MEMBERS: No!

Mr A L MOSEKI: The answer is what you are saying, hon members.

The people went on to mention, as an example of the fact that the Scorpions
have not succeeded, people like Mark Thatcher, who is a crime master. He,
together with others, came to South Africa, organised illegal activities to
topple and destabilise other countries, and they got arrested. What did the
Scorpions do? You know the answer. The Scorpions entered into a plea
bargain agreement with these criminals and released them to go back and
live comfortable lives.

People wonder why the Scorpions did that. They did that because they
probably had a hidden political agenda, to destabilise this government and
also the neighbouring countries. It was on this basis that we then said
that this democracy cannot be taken for granted.

As the ANC we have a responsibility, as the public representatives, to
correct things that go wrong. There is nothing wrong about what we are
doing; we are just taking very responsible action to correct the wrongs
that have been done. With those few words, we support the passing of this
Bill. Thank you.

Mr W M DOUGLAS: Chairperson, hon Minister, let me first say that I am not
speaking here against the Bill on the basis of me being a counter-
revolutionary or not having fought for the freedom of my country.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Order, hon members!

Mr W M DOUGLAS: I fought for my country as much as many of you did. Many of
my people also suffered, but I stand against this Bill today on the basis
of principle. I don’t believe that this Bill is in the best interests of
South Africans.

As was stated in the Glenister High Court application, the issue of the
future of the Scorpions is about crime and accountability. It is about
crime in as much as it is about the rights of all South Africans to go
about their lives in the secure knowledge that the law enforcement agencies
will take reasonable measures to protect them from the scourge of crime. It
is about accountability in as much as it has to do with the fiduciary
obligation of the state to act in our best interests.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Order! Hon members, there is only
one presiding officer. Hon Sogoni, is there a point of order?

Mr E M SOGONI: Chairperson, will the member take a question based on the
principle he is standing for?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Hon member, will you take the
question?

Mr W M DOUGLAS: Sure, I will take the question. Will it come off my time?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Yes.

Mr W M DOUGLAS: No, I want to finish my speech. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Okay, the member won’t take the
question. Please take your seat. Hon member, you may continue.

Mr W M DOUGLAS: The ACDP believes that government has breached this
obligation by reversing its decision on the Khampepe Commission report to
further the narrow interests of the ruling party. By doing so we believe
that government has sacrificed the wellbeing of all South Africans on the
altar of political expediency.

There are many constitutional aspects to this matter. The Constitution
imposes specific obligations on the executive and Parliament when it comes
to enacting legislation that deals with combating crime. These are higher-
order obligations that may not apply when government enacts legislation
dealing with other matters, emphasising that government is not at liberty
to play fast and loose with the security of its citizens.

It was common cause amongst all the parties in the Glenister application,
including the government, that the Scorpions have been extremely successful
in the fight against crime. The government has admitted that the DSO has
scored significant successes in investigating and securing convictions in
organised crime, and accepts that the DSO has made a significant difference
in the fight against organised and syndicated crime. We are mindful of the
shortcomings of the Scorpions, but believe these shortcomings are
comprehensively dealt with by the commission of inquiry.

We cannot afford to lose the expertise built up over the years at great
cost to the taxpayer. The tabling of the amendment to the legislation is
resulting in the destruction of a unit that is valuable. There can be no
doubt that the unit is being decimated. They have been specifically trained
to combat organised crime and we cannot afford to lose more highly skilled
employees.

The ACDP has grave concerns that the principle of constant prosecutable
oversight and investigations that is the cornerstone of the success of the
Scorpions will be lost if they are incorporated into the SA Police Service.
This was the very reason for the creation of the Scorpions and other units
outside the SAPS, because there wasn’t enough capacity within the SAPS,
such as the priority crimes unit, litigation units, asset forfeiture unit,
etc.

I do wish to emphasise that we have a high regard for the SAPS,
notwithstanding some of the problems they face in terms of capacity. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Mevrou die Voorsitter, die Direktoraat: Spesiale
Operasies en die SAPD wysigingswetsontwerp het veral twee groot leemtes.
Die eerste ernstige beswaar is dat die wysigingswetsontwerp die bepaling in
artikel 179 van die Grondwet aan bande lê ingevolge waarvan die Direkteur
van Openbare Vervolging se bevoegdheid om enige funksie te verrig om
strafregtelike stappe in te stel gereguleer word.

Die wetsontwerp verplaas nou die ondersoekfunksie na die SAPD, wat onder
die gesag van die Minister van Veiligheid en Sekuriteit staan, en die
Minister is weer onder die gesag en die sweep van die ANC se Polokwane
heilige koei. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Die afskaffing van die DSO is ’n ernstige terugwaartse stap in die stryd
teen georganiseerde misdaad en korrupsie. Die DSO het ontwikkel in ’n
gedugte eenheid wat hierdie klas misdrywe ondersoek het. Die afskaffing
gaan ’n ernstige leemte laat en dit word gedoen bloot omdat die DSO sonder
vrees, vooroordeel of begunstiging ondersoek ingestel het na, onder andere,
senior politici, polisie-amptenare, LP’s en die sakemanne met wie hulle in
’n noue verbintenis was. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Madam Chair, the Directorate of Special Operations and
the SAPS amending Bill have two major deficiencies in particular. The first
serious objection is that the amending Bill restricts the provision in
section 179 of the Constitution, whereby the power of the Director of
Public Prosecutions to fulfil any task in instituting criminal charges, is
regulated.

The Bill shifts the task of investigating to the SAPS, which falls under
the authority of the Minister of Safety and Security, who in turn acts
under the authority and the whip of the ANC’s holy cow in Polokwane.
[Interjections.]

The abolition of the DSO is a serious step backwards in the fight against
organised crime and corruption. The DSO evolved into a formidable unit
which investigated these types of crimes. The abolition thereof will leave
a serious vacuum, and this is done simply because the DSO investigated,
amongst others, senior politicians, police officials, MPs and the
businessmen who were in close alliances with them without fear, favour or
prejudice.]

Madam Chair, there is a second major objection and that is that it is a sad
day for South Africa’s reputation as cosignatory to several international
agreements such as the UN Convention against Corruption, the UN Convention
against Transnational Organised Crime and the AU Convention on Preventing
and Combating Corruption. All these treaties enjoy international support
and require specialised anticorruption units that must be absolutely
independent.

We now no longer have that independence. This independence is now gone and
South Africa’s credibility to stick to its treaty obligations, to keep
independent units in place, and to combat corruption will now be history.
But I can understand that; there is nothing wrong with the police, the
police do good work, let’s grant them that and I accept that. But the DSO
also did very, very good work.

You see, the problem was that the profile of the DSO was too high for the
liking of certain people and they had the courage to investigate certain
people and that the ANC didn’t like.

We are now in the process of approaching the election. There is also a case
that apparently deals with the registration of Cope’s name. I think that
the ANC must also change their name, from the African National Congress to
the African National Cover-up, and that will more or less sum up the whole
process! Thank you. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

Mr Z C NTULI: Hon Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon members of Parliament,
comrades and friends ...

... Sihlalo, ngifuna ukukhumbuza le Ndlu ngeminyaka yamaseventizi ukuthi
kwakuneqembu laphaya elalingaphansi kwamaphoyisa okwakuthiwa yi-Special
Branch. Ngizwile uMzizi elithinta ukuthi cha usenalo ibhabhalazi lalo. Ama-
Special-Branch ayesatshwa ngoba ayesebenza ngabantu bezepolitiki. Ayebekwe
nguhulumeni wangaleso sikhathi, wobandlululo, ukuthi asebenze ngomuntu
ophikisana nohulumeni, ngakho-ke konke ayekwenza ayekwenziswa yipolitiki.
Yingakho-ke nje uzwa abaningi behambisana nOfezela ngoba bakhumbula leya
ndaba yama-SB. [Uhleko.]

Ama-SB lawa uma ngabe abanye benu bengawazi kahle, ayebulala. Hhayi indaba
yokudlala uyabona nje uma kuthiwa wena usukhonjiwe ukuthi awuhambisani
nohulumeni, ayevele afike ekhaya azokulanda, athi ayokuphenya. Ngemuva
kwalokho kuthiwe uphume ngewindi.

Mhlawumbe uNgqongqoshe uzokhumbula ubaba uMdluli walaphaya eLamontville
okwakuthiwa uMasobiwa uJoseph Mdluli. Amaphoyisa afika amthatha amusa
laphaya ku-Fisher Street eThekwini ethi ayomphenya ngemva kwalokho bathi
uzilengise etafuleni. Bathi uthathe intambo yesicathulo wazilengisa
etafuleni waze washona. Kumanje lelo cala awukaze uzwe ukuthi lagcina
kanjani, kuthiwa wazilengisa ngen tambo etafuleni. Umbuzo uthi-ke: Kanjani?
[Ubuwelewele.]

Thina siwazi kahle ama-SB ngeminyaka yoseventi. Mina ngangifunda laphaya
eVukuzakhe High School ngonyaka ka 1977 sithi sizosekela izingane
zaseSoweto zesikole ngalokho okukade kwenzekile ngonyaka ka 1976.
Ngangingukapteni webhola abafundi bacela ukuthi ngibahole, ngibize
umhlangano ukuthi singawesekela kanjani umzabalazo waseSoweto.

Ngathi ngiphuma nje ngalelo langa kulowo mhlangano ama-SB ayehamba
ngezimoto ezintathu eyisikhombisa kulezi zimoto afika ezofuna mina.
Ngangiziqhamukela esikoleni, ngingumfana wesikole. Athi ngihlanganaphi
nezingane zaseGoli. Kungashona ilanga uma ngichaza ngalaba bantu.

Okungimangazayo-ke ukuthi ngesikhathi sekungena uhulumeni omusha wonke lawa
ma-SB esiwaziyo ukuthi ayesebenza kanjani aphenduka athola izikhundla
zokuba ngokapteni kuhumeni waKwaZulu. Babephetha iziteshi zaKwaZulu zama-
ZP, kwaba yibona omasiteshi.
UMzizi ngiyabona ukuthi akakude kakhulu. [Uhleko.] Kuyamangaza-ke
Ngqongqoshe ukuzwa amaqembu lawa aphikisayo ekhuluma kanje futhi niyakwazi
nokuthi phela bona bangamaqembu, inhlangano nguANC, uKhongolose. Laba
abanye amaqembu ngoba bayaqembuka bahlale beqembuka.[Uhleko.] Ngifuna
ukuthi kucace kubaba uLe Roux ukuthi ... (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs
follows.)

[... Chairperson, I would like to remind this House that in the 1970s there
was a unit in the then police service which was known as the Special
Branch. I heard hon Mzizi referring to it and I realised that he still
longs for it. The Special Branch unit was the most feared unit, because it
only dealt with the political activists. It was put there by the apartheid
government to deal with anyone who was opposing it, therefore, it was
politically motivated. It is for this very reason that you hear most people
here supporting the Scorpions, because they remind them of the SB unit.
[Laughter.]

The SB unit – for those of you who do not know it very well - was a killing
machine. Jokes aside, if you had been identified as being opposed to the
erstwhile government, the unit would come and take you from your home,
saying that they were going to interrogate you. After that there would be a
report that you jumped out of the window.

Maybe the hon Minister will remember Mr Mdluli of Lamontville, his name was
Masobiwa Joseph Mdluli. The police took him to Fisher Street, in Durban, on
the pretext that they were going to interrogate him. And after that, they
said he had hanged himself from the table. They said he used a shoelace to
hang himself from the table until he died. Until today, we have never heard
about the outcome of that case. They just alleged that he hanged himself
from the table. The question therefore is: How? [Interjections.]

Some of us knew the SB unit very well in the 1970s. In 1977, I was a pupil
and captain of the soccer team at Vukuzakhe High School, when I was
requested by my fellow pupils to lead them in our support for the Soweto
uprising. They asked me to call a meeting to find ways to pledge solidarity
with the 1976 Soweto uprising.

After that meeting, on the same day, seven members of the SB unit came in
three cars looking for me. I was just a schoolboy, coming from school. They
asked me what business I had with the Soweto students. We can all sit here
the whole day if I were to start talking about these people.

But what amazes me is that, when the new government came into being, all
those well-known members of the SB unit received captaincy positions in the
KwaZulu-Natal police. They all became station commissioners in the KwaZulu-
Natal police, especially at those police stations which had previously been
known to belong to the ZPs.

I realise that hon Mzizi is not that far off the point. [Laughter.] It is
amazing, hon Minister, to hear the opposition parties talking like this and
you also know that they are just parties, but the ANC is a movement, the
Congress. These others are parties, because they always part ways and
breakaway from other parties. [Laughter.] I want to make it clear to hon Le
Roux that the ...]

... ANC will continue having its conferences and it will take resolutions
...

... ezizobuya zize lapha ePhalamende ukuthi zizohola lo hulumeni oholwa
nguKhongolose. [... which will be brought to Parliament to guide this ANC-
led government.]
We are not going to shy away from that.

Ubaba lo uDarryl Worth uthi uma umuntu egula kufuneka umkhiphe leso simo.
Hayi bekungasekho lapho ungasika khona umdlavuza lona ubusugcwele yonke
indawo. Akukho lapho ubungathi ungakhipha khona bese kungumdlavuza ugcwele
umzimba wonke. Okunye Ngqongqoshe engikwaziyo ukuthi into eyinkinga kakhulu
kulaba abanye abaphikisayo ukuthi phela babewuhulumeni ngalesiya sikhathi
esedlule, babeyingxenye kahulumeni.

Ngakho-ke laba bantu basenalelo bhabhalazi lokuthi Ofezela bebebanika
ithuba lokuthi babaphindiselele ezitheni zabo. Banalelo bhabhalazi lokuthi
sabathola abantu abazosiphindiselela kulaba bantu, yikho ubezwa bekhuluma
kanjena baphethwe yileyo nto nje. Ubaba uvan Heerden ngiyabona ukuthi
ushintsho lukude naye uma ekewezwa nje ukuthi kunoshintsho uvele abe
nohlevane.

Uma ubukisisa ukusebenza kwama-SB nokusebenza kOfezela, uyakubona ukuthi
kufana ncamashi. Uma ngabe ukhona umehluko mncane kabi ngoba bonke
babesebenza ngokuthi balwe nomuntu okuthiwa uvukela umbuso. Nabo-ke laba
uma uthola Ofezela amacala ebebewajaha yilawa abonakalayo ukuthi
awezombangazwe.

Asikakazi namanje ukuthi kungani uPhillip Powell we-IFP owatholakala
nezikhali KwaZulu kwathiwa akayofunda phesheya. Asikaze sizwe namanje
ukuthi zenza njani lezo zikhali. Yinto efanayo lena noAgliotti ukuthi
ungathatha isigelekeqe sezidakamizwa uthi uma nje kubanjwe usopolotiki
uzomnikeza inkululeko. Kusobala abantu ngempela abalwa nabo osopolotiki.

Kwaphuma umbiko kwiKhomishana Yamaqiniso Nokubuyisana, i-TRC, ukuthi laba
bantu abangachazanga kwi-TRC kuyofanele kulandelwe amacala abo. Awukaze
uzwe ukuthi Ofezela bafikaphi nawo, into nje abayaziyo ukujaha osopolotiki.


Uma ngingase ngibuze nje ukuthi ngabe kuwubugebengu obuhleliwe yini ukuthi
umuntu wathola isephulelo ethenga imoto na? Ngabe ubugebengu obuhleliwe
lobo? Ngabe kuwubugebengu obuhleliwe yini uma ngabe usibanibani kusolakala
ukuthi wayefuna ukugwazela usibanibani? Ngabe ubugebengu obuhleliwe lobo?
Kusho ukuthi umuntu lapha bekufanele ashushiswe ngezindlela zonke.

Uma ngingase ngibuze nje ukuthi ingakanani imali esichithiwe ngOfezela
belokhu bezama ukuthi kushushiswe uMongameli we-ANC. Kodwa akukho muntu
okhuluma ngalezo zigidi lapha. Kwakhona nje ukuthi ngabe bazotholani
ngalokhu kulandela lo sopolotiki nathi asazi. Sekungaze kuchithwe izimali
eziningi kangaka ngoba nje befuna ukulandela lo sopolotiki?

Hhayi Ngqongqoshe kulo mbutho esiwakhayo lona okuthiwa yi-Directorate of
Priority Crime Investigation, i-DPCI, lapho khona sizobe sishaya lokhu
okuthiwa yi “Operation washa tsotsi”. Laphaya zizohlehla izigebengu,
zizohlehla ngoba kukhona abaseshi abazobe beqeqeshiwe ngokuba ngabashushisi
kodwa bazobe besebenza umsebenzi wabaseshi. Hhayi lokhu kuhlanganisa
umsebenzi, inxovanxovane. Bazobe belaphaya nolwazi kodwa besebenza
njengamaphoyisa bebika futhi emaphoyiseni.

Sihlalo ngoba ngiyabona lapha ngithi-ke abantu basho bathi kuzoba
nokuthula, nokukhululeka kanye nokuthokomala kuleli lizwe lethu. Basho
njalo abantu eKliptown ngoJune 1955. Ngiyabonga Sihlalo. (Translation of
isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Hon Darryl Worth says that if someone is sick, you must put them out of
their misery. Well, there was nowhere to dissect, because the cancer had
spread to the whole body. The whole body was infected with cancer; there
was no piece of flesh which was not infected. Another thing that we are
facing here, hon Minister, is that some of the members of the opposition
were formerly of the erstwhile government, whilst others formed part of
that government.

Therefore, these very people were pleased to know that the Scorpions were
avenging them against their enemies. They are convinced that in the
Scorpions they had found people who would avenge them against these people,
that is why you hear them talk like this. Well, I can see that change is a
distant goal to the hon van Heerden. When he realises that there is talk
about change, he just becomes outraged.

If you look closely at how the SB unit operated and how the Scorpions
operate, you will realise that they operate exactly the same way. If ever
there is a difference, it must be a slight one, because these forces dealt
with anyone who was suspected of rising up against the state. Therefore,
with the Scorpions too, if you look at the cases which they are pursuing,
you will find that they are political.

We do not know, even today, what happened to the IFP’s Phillip Powell who
was found with an arms cache in KwaZulu-Natal and was later asked to go and
study overseas. We haven’t heard, even now, of what had happened to those
weapons. And it is exactly the same with Agliotti, a drug lord who, should
he give evidence against a certain politician, will be set free. It is
clear that the Scorpions are only happy when chasing after politicians.

There was a report from the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, the TRC,
which stated that the cases of all those who did not appear before it would
be followed up. But we have never heard how far the Scorpions are with
those cases; the only thing they are obsessed with is chasing after the
politicians.

If I may ask, is getting a discount when buying a car organised crime? Is
that organised crime? Is it organised crime if so and so is suspected of
having wanted to bribe so and so? Is that organised crime? It’s very clear
here that someone had and has to be prosecuted at all costs.
If I may ask you. How much has been spent by the Scorpions in their quest
to prosecute the ANC President? And yet there is no one who is talking
about those millions here. And sadly we do not know how they are aiming to
benefit by chasing after this politician. How do they dare waste so much
money just because they want to nail this politician?

Well, hon Minister, the new organisation which we are establishing, known
as the Directorate of Priority Crime Investigation, the DPCI, will deal
with criminals seriously and we will be using Operation Washa Tsotsi. And
definitely the criminals will retreat, because there will be crime
investigators who would have undergone training as prosecutors, yet work as
investigators. And the time for the mixing of tasks, this mix-up, is no
more. These investigators will be there with their expertise, but they will
be operating as police and they will be accountable to the police.

Chairperson, I can now understand what the people said. I therefore say
that the people said that there shall be peace, freedom and comfort in our
country. The people said so in Kliptown in June 1955. Thank you,
Chairperson.]

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Hon Minister of
Safety and Security, hon members, it’s good to be back home. I could talk
about things such as “cherry-picking”; I could talk about deficits in the
methods and methodology of the Scorpions; I could talk about weaknesses;
and I could talk about tensions.

I have already spoken at length about the genesis of the Scorpions, the
Directorate of Special Operations, in the NA. I have spoken about the
problematic relationship between the Scorpions and the SAPS. I have spoken
about the rationale for the amendment to the legislation. I think we are
not here today to say who is right and who is wrong.

I think the DSO has had its strengths; it has had capable investigators and
continues to have capable investigators. It had committed prosecutors –
yes, some of them were indulging in questionable activities and there were
deficits and problems - but I think we must recognise the value of their
contribution to the eradication of crime, organised crime in particular,
and to the eradication of corruption.

My colleague and I are not here to celebrate the demise of the Scorpions,
as somebody has suggested. We are here to ask how, in the context of the
problematic relationship that existed in the past, we can collectively
address it in such a way that we seriously ensure that we continue with our
commitment to the eradication of corruption and organised crime.

Some things must be cleared up from the beginning. The suggestion, for
example, that if it’s a political decision it’s unconstitutional, is
totally without foundation. In fact, the day before the matter was debated
in the NA, the Chief Justice of the Constitutional Court said the
following, and I quote him verbatim:

   In my view, there is nothing wrong, in our multiparty democracy, with
   Cabinet seeking to give effect to the policy of the ruling party

And you could put in brackets “Polokwane”, if you wish.

   Quite clearly, in so doing, Cabinet must observe its constitutional
   obligations and may not breach the Constitution.
The question that we have to ask, in a very mature and dignified way, is:
In doing what we are doing, in amending the legislation, are we achieving
two things? The first one is to ensure that we sustain, maintain and retain
the ability on a multidisciplinary basis of that organised unit to fight
organised crime. That’s the question we have to ask, whether they are
allocated within the DSO or anywhere else.

The second question is – and it’s an important question – whether indeed,
as we pass this law, the provisions of this law are consistent with the
Constitution. I would like to argue, with respect, that indeed we can
answer both questions, quite unequivocally, in the affirmative.

What is it that we are trying to create? I’m trying to speak so that we can
understand there is some rationality in terms of what we are trying to
achieve. We are trying to organise a dedicated unit, the Directorate of
Priority Crime Investigation, DPCI, as my colleague has called it, to
ensure that we deal with organised crime on a multidisciplinary basis,
mindful of the fact that you need a troika - prosecution assistance,
investigation and crime intelligence. Those three elements will in fact
reside in that particular unit. It is not something new.

If you take the commercial unit within the SAPS, currently and in the past,
we have had more than 80 dedicated prosecutors who assisted the SAPS to
ensure that we dealt with commercial crime. The results are very similar to
those achieved by the DSO; they are in the vicinity of 90%. Investigations
conducted by the SAPS yielded the same results, assisted by prosecutors
from the NPA. I think one must understand the context. Indeed, we have
committed ourselves to ensuring that we have a multidisciplinary approach.

What we have to be mindful of – and it’s been raised by more than one
member of the opposition – is that people are leaving. Just this morning,
colleagues, I spoke to the Acting National Director of Public Prosecutions,
and I speak to you now with his permission. He says that since the last
time that we had spoken – and I was appointed as Minister about seven weeks
ago – up to now, not a single investigator has approached him to say they
wished to resign from the DSO. [Applause.] Those are the realities.

Willie Hofmeyr, whom we spoke about, has indicated that the preliminary
indications are that approximately 80% of these investigators are going to
move over to this dedicated unit. Now why is there this myth, this
fabrication, that people are going to leave and that we are going to be
deprived of the capacity and the ability of people who have the experience?
We certainly must do and we should do whatever is necessary to ensure that
we retain their skills.

At the heart of a successful transition lie two things. The first one is
the assurance that we can give to the investigators that they are most
welcome in the SAPS and, secondly, to continue with the fight against
corruption and crime. To that end my colleague, the Minister of Safety and
Security, and I will work extremely hard to create a climate that is
conducive to this.

We have gone out of our way and we really want to thank the chairperson of
the select committee, as well as the chairpersons of the portfolio
committees in the NA for ensuring that they pay meticulous attention to the
labour relations aspects. Nobody, no investigator, is going to be forced to
go to the SAPS. If he or she feels that they want to remain with the NPA
that is a choice that they could exercise. Indeed, if they did not wish to
stay there, they have the entire Public Service where they could be
deployed.

These choices are available. It is not about severance; it is not about
removing the skills and capacity, but it’s about ensuring that the choices
that we make are not choices that we would impose on individual
investigators who are located within the NPA.

The National Director of Public Prosecutions would tell you that I
personally, on more than one occasion, invited him to make submissions to
us, my colleague and myself, in terms of the shape and the model of the
mechanism that would deal with this transition; they are grateful for it.
We do so because we believe that there is no tension – and there should be
no tension – between the Department of Justice and the NPA. We do so
because we are sensitive to their concerns, and we certainly would want to
promote them to carry out the task as prosecutors without fear, favour or
prejudice. That has been our position and it will continue to be our
position.

You cannot quote and speak about international treaties and covenants
suggesting, in a very subtle way, that what we are seeking to do is to
promote corruption rather than eradicate it. That is extremely
irresponsible. That has no moral basis, no legal basis and no rational
basis.

What we should be doing is to say, we recognise that we are at a time where
elections are imminent, and political parties will want to score points.
Glenister tried to vote with the Constitutional Court, but he failed. I’ve
just quoted for you from the Chief Justice. The very next day he came to
the High Court in Cape Town, again on the basis that what we are doing is
unconstitutional, and he failed again. We say that those who wish to
approach the courts and challenge and test the legislation are at liberty
to do so. But we are quite satisfied that in what we are doing we’ve
ensured that those proposed provisions are indeed consistent with the law.

I am aware of the fact that amendments have been brought by this House and
certainly the NA would want to look at them. Let me conclude by saying that
this would not have been possible without your contribution. I feel more
confident and more assured because your committee has sat jointly with the
NA, Safety and Security and the Portfolio Committee on Justice and
Constitutional Development for more than a 192 hours. You visited all the
provinces. You have listened attentively to the voice of the poor, the rich
and those who have an interest. You were open-minded about it. The product
we have here is not the product that was introduced in Parliament. It’s a
product that has been changed, that has been shaped and informed by what
you listened to, what you applied your mind to, and what you feel is in the
best interests of our country.

Central to our task as Members of Parliament – and we, too, as the
executive, are Members of Parliament - is a commitment that we ensure that
we promote the administration of justice and that we eradicate corruption
in whatever form. I would want to give the assurance that for us this unit
here has to do its task, and if there is corruption at the highest or
lowest levels, it must deal with it. Organised crime spreads its tentacles
all over, and we should not regard this unit, a priority unit for priority
crimes, as a unit at the helm of or at the mercy of politicians or simply a
unit that is going to be used by politicians. I think that would be
extremely wrong and irresponsible.
We must begin to understand that we, as a democracy, have respect for the
rule of law. The impartiality of the prosecutors must be recognised, must
be promoted and must be protected. The independence of the judiciary must
indeed be recognised. As a democracy we have done extremely well. We can
take pride in the fact that when people have difficulties, when they wish
to challenge the law, they can go to court. They use that as a forum for
the courts are the final arbiters of disputes. You have Presidents going to
court; you have political parties going to court and everybody recognises
and respects the rule of law.

That says a lot about our democracy and we must recognise that we are less
than 15 years old as a democracy. We can take pride in the fact that, as
citizens in this wonderful democracy of ours, we have shown maturity to be
able to indulge in robust debate – yes, rigorous debate – but, at the same
time, respecting the rule of law. That would be my responsibility as
Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development; that would be the
responsibility of my colleague as Minister of Safety and Security.

Let me conclude by saying that when I was in the NA I said very clearly
that already the Minister of Safety and Security and I are sitting and
looking at the mechanism. We’ve already conceptualised it. We are, indeed,
waiting for the NPA; they are communicating with us informally, but we are
waiting for a formal submission so that we can provide for this mechanism,
get certainty and do an assessment. Then we can actually do an audit in
terms of the skills that we have to make sure that, in anticipation of the
fact that you are going to support this legislation, immediately after the
law is passed we do not have to wait for another six months for this
important DPCI to do its work. It will be a matter of saying everything is
ready and they can integrate easily and serve the interests of justice by
ensuring that they eradicate corruption in our midst.

That is the assurance that I give to you. That will be confirmed by the
NPA. Let me assure you that, indeed, there is no tension. What I think this
would do is to deal with the problem that has haunted this relationship –
the relationship between the SAPS and the DSO. It does not help to say that
this one is better than the other. We should combine the skills and the
strengths to ensure that we are able to best serve the interests of our
country.

So thank you very much for your efforts. May I also conclude by thanking Mr
Johan de Lange, Mr Deon Rudman and Mr Jacobs and his team from Safety and
Security for their extremely dedicated commitment to the portfolio and
select committees. As the Chairperson has correctly indicated, this would
not have been possible without their constant presence, advice and
guidance. Thank you very much for your kind support. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

National Prosecuting Authority Amendment Bill, subject to proposed
amendments, agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

South African Police Service Amendment Bill, subject to proposed
amendments, agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

                    CONSTITUTION FIFTEENTH AMENDMENT BILL

                                  (Debate)

                   CONSTITUTION FOURTEENTH AMENDMENT BILL
      GENERAL LAWS (LOSS OF MEMBERSHIP OF NATIONAL ASSEMBLY, PROVINCIAL
              LEGISLATURE OR MUNICIPAL COUNCIL) AMENDMENT BILL

               (Consideration of Bills and of Reports thereon)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Hon members, before the Deputy
Minister starts addressing us, I just want to appeal to the hon members to
switch off their cellphones, because I think some members have put their
phones on silent mode, and they just keep on going in and out to answer
them.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT:
Chairperson, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon. This has
been a very noisy Chamber this afternoon, so I am going to bring some quiet
and sanity to the debate!

In his dissertation, The mandate of political representatives with special
reference to floor-crossing: a legal historical study, Mr L K Joubert opens
his discussion of floor-crossing with a quotation of the following remark
made by Winston Churchill:

  Some men change their party for the sake of their principles; others
  their principles for the sake of their party.

I think that this remark is a tremendously apposite one for the debate
around floor-crossing.

Floor-crossing, of course, is not a new concept in South Africa; some make
as if it was only thought of yesterday, but if you go and look at the
political, legal and constitutional history of this country you will find
that the issue of floor-crossing has always been part of our legal system.
Even when we were drafting the Constitution it was very much one of the
issues that came up for discussion at all times. But it was as recently as
2002 and 2003 that Parliament, for well-known reasons which I won’t state
here, passed the so-called floor-crossing legislation.

The common objective of that legislation was, firstly, to enable a member
of the NA, a provincial legislature or municipal council to become a member
of another political party, whilst retaining membership of the assembly, of
that provincial legislature or that council; and, secondly, to enable an
existing political party to merge with another political party; or to
subdivide into more than one political party; or to subdivide one
subdivision to merge with another political party.

Apart from the political terrain which necessitated floor-crossing having
changed, a general resistance against floor-crossing has also developed
among political parties. Furthermore, floor-crossing has not only been
strongly criticised in the media, but also by the public in general. I am
convinced that members of the council or of the public who are present here
in today’s debate are acquainted with the main points of criticism against
floor-crossing and therefore I am not going to go into any details thereof.


Government has noted this resistance and criticism and realised that they
needed a reason to abolish floor-crossing. This has led to the introduction
to Parliament of the Constitution Fourteenth Amendment Bill of 2008, the
Constitution Fifteenth Amendment Bill of 2008 and the General Laws (Loss of
Membership of National Assembly, Provincial Legislature or Municipal
Council) Amendment Bill of 2008.

The main objects of the three Bills are to abolish floor-crossing and to
provide for related matters. The three Bills must, therefore, be read in
conjunction with one another; and I imagine that is also why we are having
one debate.

The effect of abolishing floor-crossing would mean that we revert to the
position prior to 2002 when floor-crossing was formally introduced in our
law. In other words, we go back to the position that there is no floor-
crossing at any level of government.

The Constitution Fourteenth Amendment Bill, by repealing Schedule 6A of the
Constitution, abolishes floor-crossing in the NA and provincial
legislatures. It also effects consequential amendments to certain sections
of the Constitution. Although not related to floor-crossing, it further
amends Part B of Schedule 3 of the Constitution in order to further
regulate the determination of political party participation in provincial
delegations to the NCOP.

The Constitution Fifteenth Amendment Bill, by repealing Schedule 6B of the
Constitution, abolishes floor-crossing in municipal councils. It also
effects consequential amendments to certain sections of the Constitution
and provides for the filling of vacancies in a municipal council.

The General Laws (Loss of Membership of National Assembly, Provincial
Legislature or Municipal Council) Amendment Bill effects amendments that
are mainly of a consequential nature and emanate from the provisions of the
Constitution Fourteenth Amendment and Constitution Fifteenth Amendment Bill
as well as several other pieces of legislation.

Those Acts include the Public Funding of Represented Political Parties Act
of 1997, the Determination of Delegates (National Council of Provinces) Act
of 1998 and the Electoral Act of 1998, as well as the Local Government:
Municipal Structures Act of 1998. It further effects amendments to the
Public Funding of Represented Political Parties Act of 1997 by making it
clear that all political parties are accountable to the Independent
Electoral Commission in respect of the monies allocated to them from the
Represented Political Parties’ Fund and to empower the electoral commission
to appoint an auditor under certain circumstances, for example, to audit
the books and records of account kept by a political party.
Chairperson, once the three Bills have been passed by Parliament - and this
is the last stretch in the NCOP - and implemented it would mean that a
member of the NA, a provincial legislature or a municipal council will no
longer be able to become a member of another political party whilst
retaining membership of either the Assembly, legislature or council, and an
existing political party will no longer be able to merge with another
political party; or to subdivide into more than one political party; or
subdivide and one subdivision to merge with another, whilst allowing the
member of the Assembly, legislature or council affected by such changes to
retain the membership either of the Assembly, legislature or that council.

The next window period for floor-crossing, if it is not abolished at a
local government level, commences on 1 September 2009, and therefore it is
essential that we pass this Bill before then and hopefully when we have
done so now, it will be finished. So we would have made it in good time to
avoid the floor-crossing of September 2009. I imagine the DA, in
particular, and other parties are extremely happy, because that means they
will at least keep their members now. [Interjections.]

Mr M A MZIZI: We are all going to be happy!

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: We will all
be happy? I would like to thank Kgoshi Mokoena, the Chairperson of the
Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, and the members of
that committee for the time and effort that they have put into finalising
the Bills before the Council today. I know that the members of the select
committee, despite their very busy schedules, had to make time to visit
their respective provinces to brief their provincial legislatures on the
provisions of these pieces of legislation and to confer negotiating and
voting mandates on their delegations to the Council. The abolition of floor-
crossing also requires amendments to be effected to regulations that have
been made under the Public Funding of Represented Political Parties Act of
1997.

I would like to thank the members of the ad hoc joint committee, consisting
of members of the portfolio and the select committee, for the prompt manner
in which they have dealt with and approved the required amended
regulations.

Lastly, I would like to mention that the Portfolio Committee on Justice, in
its report on the General Laws Amendment Bill in the NA in August,
recommended that my department should conduct a review of the system of
repayment of unspent balances of monies to the electoral commission with a
view to submitting amending legislation, as necessary, to Parliament at the
earliest opportunity, and I undertake that we will do so in due course.

It is therefore a pleasure for me to rise on behalf of the ANC, on this
occasion, to give unrestricted and unconditional support to the passing of
this Bill. May I also just say that when the debate took place around this
same Bill in the NA, I made it very clear that the issue of floor-crossing
is not something to gloat or fight about.

I think there was a time in our history when there was a need to introduce
floor-crossing. It was necessary to break certain political logjams that
existed at the time, as was raised particularly by the DA at the time. What
it helped us do was to at least loosen up those logjams and to stabilise
the political environment.

That experiment now is over and, in a way, I am personally very glad that
it is over and I know my party is also glad, because, unfortunately, the
one thing this did prove to us is that our political system is not mature
enough to be able to deal with this kind of issue.

There can be no doubt that the sight, particularly at the local government
level, of people swopping parties merely for the sake of positions and
their own self-interest was an unedifying one. I think all the parties were
involved in this. I do not think any of us can point fingers and in a way
we should be glad that we have tried the experiment.

It was necessary at the time, but it is over now, so let us try and deal
with it and rid our politics of this unedifying sight. Things are tough
enough already for politicians in the way that we relate to people and our
society. We do not need this kind of unedifying process where politics is
merely used in the self-interest of individuals, because that is what floor-
crossing allowed.

In so far as it helped us to achieve certain things, it was good, and in so
far as it is now something of the past, I hope that all parties will
support the demise of this experiment that was necessary at the time. Thank
you very much. [Applause.]

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Modulasetulo, ke leboga nako ye ke e filwego gore ke
dire ditshwayotshwayo ka Molaokakanywa wo o lego pele ga rena. Gabotsebotse
ke e meraro, go no bea phaa.

Go bose go ba le Tona ya go tseba ditaba, ka gore dilo tšeo go bego go
nyakega gore ke di hlaloše gore batho ba di kwešiše, ba di sware, ba be ba
di anye, o šetše a di hlalošitše, mohlomphegi Motlatša Tona.

A ke mo leboge ka gore ka mehla ge a etla ka mo Ntlong ye ya rena ya go
tsebalega, ya batho ba bohlale, batho ba go tšea gabotse, o re fa ditaba
gabotse gore ba bangwe ba rena re be re palelwe ke go bolela. Fela a ke
dumele gore o re lemošitše gore re se ke ra fošana ka mae a go bola ka gore
re be re leka gore re aga selo, bjale se a re tlaba. Nka no re di loma le
barafi.

A ke efoge, ke se ke ka rerela bao ba šetšego ba sokologile, ka ge a šetše
a boletše gore lebaka la gore re phumole selo se ke eng. Re tla gopola gore
ba bangwe ba rena re tšere karolo ge re bopa molao wo re bolelago ka ona
lehono, ka gore bao bego ba o nyaka gabotsebotse e be e le mokgatlo wa
kgale, e lego Democratic Party ka nako ela. Fela rena ba mokgatlo o mogolo
wa go tšea gabotse, wa bohlale, ra re molao wo ga wa loka ka gore ge re ka
o dumela, o tla tloga o fetša temokrasi mo nageng ya borena, ba se re
kwešiše. Bjale lehono di a ba loma; ga ba sa o nyaka. Bjale rena re re, re
le boditše ra re selo se ga se a loka, le se ke la se dumela. Bjale mošate
ba re kwele, di ba lomile, ba boile go rena ba re selo se ga se phumulweng.

Ke rata go bea taba ye ke re, go nale diphetho tšeo re di tšerego kua
khonferenseng ya Polokwane. Se sengwe sa tšona ke sona sa gore molao wo wa
go dumela gore batho ba ngwege, ga re sa o nyaka, re o phumule. Efela,
Mokgatlo wa Kganetšo ga ba bolele ka ona, gore sephetho se ke se re se
tšerego kua khonferenseng ya rena ya mokgatlo wa go tšea gabotse. Go
nyakega gore le tšona le di tsopole tša gore kua khonferenseng ya Polokwane
e be e se tša bobe, re be re lokiša.

Gona bjale le a bobola.

Le tsebe gore ge molao wo o eba gona, ke rena bao re bego re holega ka
bontši. Ge go etla nako ela re rego ke “window period”, ke gore nako ya go
ngwega, mekgatlo e mentši e be tsenelwa ke meetse ka dintlong ka ge ba be
ba tseba gore ba a nwelela. Batho ba a ngwega, ba tšwa go bona ba ngwegela
go rena le go mekgatlo ye mengwe. Bjale lehono ka gore selo se se ba
lomile, rena re a dumela ka gore rena ga re na megabaru le go ba
majelathoko, re a bona gore ka gore re nyaka gore temokrasi mo nageng ya
rena e gole, e kokotlele, e be selo seo re ka ikgantšhago ka sona, re re
selo “se se nkganago se nthola morwalo”, a se sepele.

Ka gona re tla re mekgatlo kamoka kua komiting yeo re lego go yona, ba ile
ba dumela gore ba a bona gore molao wo ka nnete ga o nyakege, ga o sepele.
Ka gona re re se se nkganago ga se sepele.

A ke fetše ka gore ... [TŠhwahlelo.] (Translation of Sepedi paragraphs
follows.)

[Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, I am grateful for the time allocated to
me to comment on this Bill. To be more accurate, there are three Bills.

It is a pleasure to have a Minister who is well informed, because he had
already expatiated on the issues that I had wanted to explain so that
people can grasp them, hon Deputy Minister.

I must thank him because every time he comes to this august House, he
covers everything and leaves some of us speechless. I also acknowledge that
he indicated that we should not fight amongst ourselves. We were trying to
work together, but it fired right back at us.

Let me avoid preaching to be converted. We should remember that some of us
were present when amendments to legislation were made to fit in the aspect
of crossing the floor, an issue that we are deliberating on today. The
people who actually wanted it back then are the members of the Democractic
Party. Our strong organisation did not approve of it since it would have
put an end to democracy in our country. Now it is firing back at them and
they want to have it abolished.

Let me put it this way: There are resolutions that were taken at the
Polokwane Conference, one of them being that this floor crossing is
unacceptable, and that it must be abolished. Members of the opposition
party are quiet about it – they are not coming out with it – that this is a
resolution taken at our conference. It is necessary that you mention that
we were not only trying to abolish floor-crossing at the conference, but
there were amendments that were made too. At this moment all you are doing
is moan.

You need to know that if floor-crossing is still in existence, we would be
the ones mostly benefiting from it. During the window period most
organisations were concerned because they were standing on shaky ground.
Their members were crossing the floor to other organisations. Now they have
experienced what it is like to lose their members. We are not against them,
we are not being selfish about it and we do not pull aside. We want our
democracy to grow and strenghten so that we can take pride in it.

We therefore say that all the organisations in our committee agree that
crossing the floor is not a necessity. Let it be abolished. If it doesn’t
go down well, then let it be abolished.

In conclusion I would like to say ... [Interjections.]]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Order! Hon member, is it a point
of order?

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, will the member take a question?

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: E re ke fetše pele, Mong’aka Watson, ke tla go botša. A
ke fetše pele.

A ke dumele gore seo e lego dipshešamare ka molao wo ke gore, ge re ka
lebelela Palamenteng gona bjale, go nale batho bao e lego gore ke moetapele
wa lekoko yena ka noši. Ge re nale kopano a re o ile go boledišana le
lekoko la gagwe, o ra ge a era yena a nnoši kua Ofising ya gagwe le
mongwaledi wa gagwe. Ka gona o humana e le gore, lena mekgahlo e mengwe le
a lwa, le a khampeina, le nyaka gore batho ba le boutele. Fela ge motho wo
a ka khampeina a se ka ja selo, ge go etla go lefeleng, ka gore ke
moetapele wa lekoko, le yena go nyakega gore a humane mašeleng a gore a
thekge mokgatlo wa gagwe o lego nnoši. Ka gona re re ke dipšhešamare, molao
wo ga o sepele, ga re o nyake.

Le mphile sebaka, ke a le leboga. Ka gona kere, re dumela gore selo se se
šomile ka nako ya sona. Ga bjale se feletšwe ke nako, a se ye. Bao e lego
gore ba ithekgile ka wona gore batlo holega ka molao wo, re re “mene, mene
tekel upharsin.” (Translation of Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Let me first conclude, hon Watson. I will tell you.
Let me first conclude.

Something which is not pleasing about this law is that if we look at
Parliament at the moment, there are people who are party leaders to
themselves. During meetings they allege that they are going to consult
their parties when, in fact, they are referring to themselves and the
secretaries in their offices. As a result, other parties fight; they go out
to campaign, convincing people to vote for them. If those people go on a
campaign and get nothing, when funds are allocated, they expect to get some
funds for their one-man party too, because they are party leaders. We
therefore say, this is a shame, this law must be abolished, and we do not
need it.

You gave me an opportunity to address you, I thank you. I therefore say
that we agree that this thing was relevant during a certain period. But now
its time has expired; let it go. To those who thought that they would
benefit from this law, we say: “Mene, Mene, Tekel, Upharsin. [The writing
is on the wall.]

Mr D A WORTH: Chairperson, Deputy Minister, hon members, the Department of
Justice and Constitutional Development has tabled three Bills in
Parliament, at times known as the “crosstitute” Bills, namely the
Constitution Fourteenth Amendment Bill, the Constitution Fifteenth
Amendment Bill and the General Laws(Loss of Membership of National
Assembly, Provincial Legislature or Municipal Council) Amendment Bill. The
general premise of the proposed laws ought to abolish floor-crossing at
every level of government and to revert to the position that existed prior
to 2002-03 when floor-crossing was prohibited.

Our Deputy Minister has virtually summed up the whole lot, but if I repeat
a few things, please forgive me. The Constitution Fourteenth Amendment Bill
seeks to abolish floor-crossing in the NA and provincial legislatures,
whilst the Constitution Fifteenth Amendment Bill seeks to do the same in
municipal councils.

The General Laws Amendment Bill seeks to effect consequential amendments to
other legislation affected by the proposed abolition of floor-crossing. The
legislation must be passed and implemented before 1 September 2009.

On a lighter note, I must say, maybe the timing of this Bill was a bit
wrong; it should have been left open for a little bit longer and we might
have seen a different story. This is before the next floor-crossing window
at local government level opens.

Both the Constitution Amendment Bills fall within the ambit of section 74
of the Constitution, whilst the membership Bill falls within that of
section 75 of the Constitution and must, therefore, be passed according to
the procedures set in these sections.

The act of abolishing floor-crossing means that the position reverts to the
one that was applicable prior to 2002. The implications thereof are,
firstly, that a member of the NA or provincial legislature or municipal
council will no longer be able to become a member of another political
party. If a member decides to change party allegiance, that person will
lose their membership of the NA, provincial legislature or council.

Secondly, an existing political party will no longer be able to merge with
another political party, to subdivide it into more than one political
party, or to subdivide in the subdivision to merge with another political
party. Thirdly, a political party will no longer be able to change the name
of the party in the National Assembly, provincial legislature or municipal
council at any time it chooses.

The merits and demerits of floor-crossing have been much debated in South
Africa. As we’ve heard, the legislation that allowed elected
representatives to change political allegiance without losing their seats
was enacted, in part, to cater for the political circumstances that existed
during 2002-03.

Despite the fact that the legislation passed constitutional scrutiny, it
has not received popular support and every floor-crossing window period has
brought with it renewed criticism from the public.

Whilst many countries allow for floor-crossing, in the South African
context it has caused much discontent amongst voters and has possibly
contributed to voter apathy.

Floor-crossing favours larger parties, while minority parties tend to lose
members, which weakens democracy. The current electoral system, which is a
closed-list proportional system, combined until now with floor-crossing,
disempowers the voters as they have no way of calling public
representatives to account for their actions.

In fact, the process of floor-crossing deprives the voter of any guarantee
that the public representatives who were on the list of the party that the
voter voted for would remain on that list until the next election. A closed-
list proportional representative system, combined with floor-crossing,
almost guarantees that public representatives will not be accountable to
the individual voter.

The proposed legislation, therefore, seeks to address the current
discontent with floor-crossing. It is hoped that these changes will
strengthen democracy in a system based on proportional representation and
multiparty democracy. The DA supports the Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mnr N J MACK: Voorsitter, Adjunkminister, lede en kamerade, ek het vyf
blaaie hier gehad, maar die Minister, soos die agb voorsitter van die
komitee alreeds gesê het, het omtrent alles verduidelik.

Ek het tog ’n paar interessante punte wat ek self wil ophaal. Die skrapping
van hierdie wetgewing is eintlik om die demokrasie te verbreed. Nou wil ek
ook darem aan die opposisie noem dat ons as die ANC die meeste voordeel uit
hierdie wetgewing getrek het en ons het volstaan by die skrapping hiervan,
maar ek hoor nie die agb Worth wens ons geluk en sê vir ons dankie dat ons
darem ’n goeie ding ook doen en dat ons nie net na die party se aanwins kyk
nie. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Julle moet ons darem nie net altyd kritiseer nie, agb Watson. Sê darem ook
as ons ’n goeie ding doen, want dis wat die demokrasie verbreed.

Agb Minister, hierdie oorloopwetgewing het veral die Wes-Kaap baie
onstabiel gemaak, maar ons het ’n spesiale afgevaardigde van die Wes-Kaap
wat seker verder hieroor sal uitbrei. U weet, ons vorige LUR, die agb
Richard Dyantyi, het die munisipaliteite in die Wes-Kaap “maak-’n-las-
munisipaliteite” genoem, en alles wat dit tot gevolg gehad het was nog net
negatief en al die redes soos u dit genoem het, is bekend aan ons almal.

Ek wil net op een ding fokus, naamlik die negatiewe uitwerking wat dit op
die amptenary gehad het. Toe die mag in ’n munisipaliteit verskuif het, was
die munisipale bestuurder sy pos kwyt en amptenare was hul poste kwyt. ’n
Baie bekende geval was dié van Mgoqi in die Kaapse Metro, en wat is die
uitwerking daarvan op dienslewering? Nou wil ek amper vra of dit gaan stop.
Ons skrap nou hierdie oorloopwetgewing, maar moet ons nie miskien kyk hoe
ons die termyne van amptenare ook in pas kan bring sodat hulle nie net
enige tyd afgedank of vervang kan word nie en daar in ’n mate ook
stabiliteit onder die amptenary is wat beleid betref? Die termyne van
amptenare is ook belangrik.

Daar is ook ’n ander punt waarop ons moet fokus. Koalisievorming is ook
iets wat die onstabiliteit veroorsaak het en was die gevolg van
oorloopwetgewing. Nou wil ek die agb Watson se vere ’n bietjie omkrap. ’n
Mens kry gevalle waar minderheidspartye bymekaarkom en dan ’n regering vorm
wat die meerderheidsparty, wat immers die meeste stemme op hom verenig het,
die reg ontneem om te regeer. Is dit nou demokrasie in werking, waar die
meerderheid mense die meerderheidsparty ontneem word omdat ’n paar klein
partytjies met een of twee manne saamkom om te regeer? [Tussenwerpsels.]
Ja, ek het geweet ek gaan die vere ’n bietjie omkrap!

Die ander punt waarop ek ook u aandag wil vestig, het die agb Watson juis
genoem. U sien, oorloopwetgewing is nou uit die weg geruim, maar daar is
nou ’n nuwe tendens – raadslede bedank nou en dwing ’n tussenverkiesing af.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Dit kan demokraties wees, maar in hoe ’n mate gaan ons
koalisievorming en bedankings om ’n regering of enige wetgewer om te krap
en te destabiliseer reguleer? Kan ons daarna kyk, want bedankings kom nou
voor uit suiwer politieke motiewe, nie met die doel om die mense of
demokrasie te dien nie. Dit is van die nuwe goed wat nou gebeur. Ons stop
die oorloopwetgewing, maar nou kry mense alternatiewe. Ons is in ’n land
waar ons leer.

Ons het nou uitgevind oorloopwetgewing is nie goed vir die demokrasie nie,
maar daar is ander goed. Een van die goed, agb Watson, wat ek nogal verbaas
is om te sien, en ek het dit in die komitee genoem aan my kollegas, is dat
ek sien die DA adverteer in die koerante dat as ’n mens dink jy is LP-
materiaal en jy kan dit motiveer, kan jy ... Daar is ’n advertensie in die
koerante. [Tussenwerpsels.] Nou wonder ek net, hoe ... (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr N J MACK: Chairperson, Deputy Minister, members and comrades, I had
five pages here, but, as the hon chairperson of the committee has already
said, the Minister has explained just about everything.

I still have a few interesting points that I would like to mention myself.
The scrapping of this legislation will actually broaden democracy. But now
I want to mention to the opposition that we as the ANC actually benefited
most from this legislation and that we have contented ourselves with its
scrapping, but I don’t hear the hon Worth thanking and congratulating us on
this good move and on not having just considered the party’s gains.
[Interjections.]

You shouldn’t always just criticise us, hon Watson. If we do something
right, just say so, because that is what broadens democracy.

Hon Minister, this floor-crossing legislation has made the Western Cape in
particular very unstable, but we have a special delegate from the Western
Cape who will surely elaborate on this. You know, our previous MEC, the hon
Richard Dyantyi, called the municipalities in the Western Cape “make-a-
nuisance” municipalities and what this has led to has only been negative,
while the reasons, as mentioned by you, are known to us all.

I just want to focus on one thing, namely the negative effect this has had
on the officials. When the power within a municipality shifted, that
municipality’s manager would lose his position and officials would lose
their positions. A very well-known case was that of Mgoqi in the Cape
Metro, and what was the effect of that on service delivery? I almost want
to ask if this is now going to stop. We are now scrapping this floor-
crossing legislation, but shouldn’t we perhaps also be looking at aligning
the terms of officials so that they can’t be discharged or replaced at just
any time and so that there can be a degree of stability among the
officialdom as regards policy? The terms of officials are also important.

There is also another point we must focus on. The forming of coalitions,
another factor that creates instability, is also the result of floor-
crossing legislation. And now I want to ruffle the hon Watson’s feathers a
bit. There are cases when minority parties come together to form a
government, denying the majority party, which of course amassed the most
votes, the right to govern.  Would that be democracy in action, when the
majority of the people are denied their majority party because a few small
parties with one or two people have come together in order to govern?
[Interjections.] Yes, I knew I would be ruffling a few feathers.

The other point to which I would like to call your attention has just been
mentioned by the hon Watson. You see, floor-crossing legislation has now
been removed, but now there is a new trend – councillors are resigning and
forcing by-elections. [Interjections.] It may be democratic, but to what
extent are we going to regulate resignations and the forming of coalitions
to upset a government or legislature? Can we take a look at that, because
resignations are now occurring with purely political motives, not in order
to serve the people or democracy. These are some of the new things that are
now taking place. We have stopped the floor-crossing legislation, but now
people are finding alternatives. We live and learn in this country.
We have now come to realise that floor-crossing legislation is not good for
democracy, but there are other things.  One of them, hon Watson, which I
was quite surprised to see, and in the committee I have mentioned this to
my colleagues, is the DA advertising in the newspapers that if you think
you are MP material and you can motivate accordingly, then you can try ...
There’s an advertisement in the newspapers. [Interjections.] I’m just
wondering how ...]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Hon members, can I have order?
Your noisy heckling is very, very disruptive.

Mnr N J MACK: Ek bedoel nie om u vere om te krap nie. Ek sê maar net ek
sien die advertensie in die koerant. Is daar nie genoeg mense in u eie
geledere nie? Is daar te min om vir 12% voorsiening te maak?
[Tussenwerpsels.]

Agb Minister, dis die paar goed wat ek wou opgehaal het. Baie dankie.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr N J MACK: I don’t mean to ruffle your feathers. I’m just saying that I
have seen the advertisement in the newspaper. Are there not enough people
among your own ranks? Are there too few to make provision for 12%?
[Interjections.]

Hon Minister, these are the few things that I wanted to mention. Thank you
very much. [Applause.]]

Mnu M A MZIZI: Sihlalo, angibonge ukuthola leli thuba. Thina laphaya
eqenjini leNkatha yeNkululeko yeSizwe uma into ilungile, ilungile
nayingalungile ayilunganga. Engingakusho ukuthi ukusukuma kwami lapha uma
ngixhasa impela kulo mthetho ngithi le nyoka yezinhloko ezimbili ayihambe.
Ngisho ngoba uyabona igundane nexoxo zahlala ziyizitha ngoba ixoxo lathi
uma lifika emnyango basukuma bonke endlini balinqanda impela balilahlela
ngaphandle. Kwaqhamuka igundane bagxuma bonke baliyeka, ixoxo lakhononda
lathi ngoba mina angoni lutho igundane liyamosa. Yini indaba lona liyekwa
lingene endlini?

Ngithi kuKhongolose impela seniyohlala nisinda ngoba uMongameli sathi uma
siya kuye, wathi yebo kuhle uma ngabe nifuna ukuwuchitha lo mthetho,
hlanganani nivumelane anginayo inkinga naloko ngoba wayesazi ukuthi
uyagwinya.

Uyabona ngabe nikhala esikaNandi namhlanje, ngabe nikhala isimaye-maye.
Nivume ngesikhathi esikahle ukuthi awuchithwe lo mthetho ngakho-ke
seniyohlala nisinda. Nwele olude! awuhambe lo mthetho inyoka yezinhloko
ezimbili kanjena-ke Sihlalo. Amasela abehamba nezihlalo angazange
azivotelwa. [Ubuwelewele.] Nawe bewuzoshaywa bhasobha uhleli phezu
kwelahle. Ithi enye inhloko yalo, ugcogcoma uzohlala futhi lapha phakathi
uyisela, untshontshile. Uthi manje ukhulumela abantu asazi usakhulumela
baphi abantu ngoba abantu bebevotele iqembu hhayi wena. Ngakho empeleni
ukube likhona ibhokisi lomgcwabo ngabe ngiyaqiniseka ukuthi siyalithatha
leli bhokisi silingcwaba manje sivuke kusasa selingcwatshiwe. Hamba kahle
kugcogcoma kwamalunga. (Translation of isiZulu speech follows.)

[Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, thank you for this opportunity. In the Inkatha
Freedom Party when something is right, then it is right and if it is wrong,
it is wrong. What I can say is that I rise in support of repealing this
law. I am saying this because a rat and a frog will always be enemies
because, when a frog enters through the door, everyone in the house gets
up, catches it and throws it outside. When a rat enters they all jump up,
but they do not throw it out, which causes the frog to complain, because it
does not cause any damage to the property, whereas the rat does. So why are
they leaving it inside?

We are saying to the African National Congress that the President saved
you, because when we went to him he said that it is okay if we want to
repeal this law. We must meet and reach an agreement on this; he does not
have a problem with it. He said this because he knew that his party was
gaining more members.

You are crying foul today; you shouldn’t be crying. You reached an
agreement to repeal this law at the right time, thus saving your own skin.
Hooray! Away with this two-headed snake, Chairperson. The thieves were
defecting with the seats into which they were not voted. [Interjections.]
You were also in for a very high jump; you must be careful. Another head
says that you also crossed the floor and you are also seated here amongst
us; you are a thief. You are now saying that you are speaking on behalf of
the people, but we do not know which people you are talking about, because
they voted for the party and not for you. If there was a coffin, I would
make sure that we bury this law so that when we wake up the next day, it
will be done. Goodbye, floor-crossing.]
Mr W M DOUGLAS: Hon Chairperson, hon members, hon Deputy Minister, the ACDP
wholeheartedly supports this Bill and I believe it’s very, very good.

We have been victims of this law. The ruling party was very wise to put a
10% threshold in the qualifications, otherwise they might also have lost
people during that period. [Interjections.]

The ACDP is on record as opposing floor-crossing. We participated in a
partially successful Constitutional Court challenge to the legislation that
allowed floor-crossing. We therefore support these provisions that will
bring an end to floor-crossing.

In a proportional list system such as we have, citizens vote merely for the
party of their choice and its leader and not so much for the candidates on
the party list, whom the vast majority of the voters do not know. It is a
cardinal principle of the proportional representation system that elected
members vacate their seats when they resign from their party or lose their
party membership. This system, according to the electoral commission,
ensures that the will of the people, as expressed in an election, cannot be
negated and substituted by the will of an individual or a group of
individuals. This principle is effectively negated by floor-crossing.

Chiara Carter, a journalist for The Star newspaper stated it well, and I
quote:


   Floor-crossing, a window period when elected representatives get to play
   musical chairs and switch party allegiance or even join one-man-bands of
   their own making, while retaining their seats and salaries, has been
   highly controversial since its inception in 2002.


   The spectacle of politicians, dubbed “crosstitutes”, embracing new, often
   expedient loyalties infuriated the public, swelled the ranks of larger
   parties and provided a lease of life for a good few career politicians.

In the view of the ACDP, floor-crossing presents one of the most serious
threats to our multiparty democracy. Floor-crossing has also contributed
significantly to voter apathy. Voters believe that it is useless to vote
when elected representatives can defect to another party not representing
the initial reason why they voted for them.
Further, it has also engrained negative public perceptions of politicians
as self-seeking opportunists, with voters being outraged at the political
shenanigans exhibited during floor-crossing periods.

The ACDP is very happy that this Bill has come before this House and we
fully support the Bill. I thank you.

Rre A L MOSEKI: O a bua mmarona, Modulasetilo, motlatsatona ntate Johnny de
Lange, le badirammogo, Modulasetilo ke kopilwe gore ke bue ka dintlha tse
di rileng mo Molaotlhomong o re nang le ona fa pele ga rona gompieno.
Molaotlhomo o re nang le ona mo pele ga rona o tla morago ga gore ka 1994
re bone kgololosego ya rona. Ga re bona kgololosego e ya rona, dintlha
dingwe tse di botlhokwa tse di tlhagelelang mo Molaotheong wa rona ke tse
di reng re na le tshwanelo ya “freedom of association” ka puo ya seeng.
Jaanong batho ba bangwe fa ba bona metheo e e botlhokwa e e leng pilara ya
Molaotheo wa rona, makoko kganetso ba ne ba nagana gore ba ka e tsaya ba e
dirisa go koafatsa African National Congress.

Re tla gopola gore Molao o, o o leng fa pele ga rona, batho ba ba neng ba
eme ka dinao ba o batla e ne e le DP e e leng gore e tlhatlhama DA. Mo
dikakanyong tsa bona fa ba ne ba bua ka Molao o gore o nne teng, ba ne ba
re rona maloko a ANC re diaka, ba ne ba akanya gore re diaka. Ba nagana
gore ga Molao o o le teng re tla ngala re tswe kwa ANC re ye kwa go bona.
Ba ne ba nagana jalo. Maitlhomo mogolo a bona e ne e le go koafatsa ANC le
gore temokerasi e ya rona e seka ya gola, e nne bokoa, ka gore fa o
koafaditse ANC o tla bo o koafaditse bagaka ba ba netefaditseng gore batho
ba ga rona ba nne le kgololosego e re nang le yona, ba ne ba akanya jalo.

Se se diregang ke gore fa re ntse re tswelela ba lemogile gore se ga se a
ba tswela mosola. Jaanong e bo e nna bona ba fetogang batlhanka ba mafoko a
bona. Jaanong ba re Molaotlhomo o, o fedisiwe ka gore ke maloko a bona ga
ba na marapo a mokotla, ga ba ikanyege. Ba simolola jaanong ba tlogela
makoko a bona ba ya go ikwadisa le mokgatlo mme re dira pharologanyo
magareng ga Makoko le mokgatlho ba tlogela makoko ba a go join mokgatlho ka
gore bosigo bo boneng bo le mo matlhong a bona bo ne bo apogile jaanong ba
bona fa nnete e leng teng. Fa ba lela, baagi ba Aforika borwa ba tlelwa ke
dikakanyo tsa gore seno ga se tiise temokerasi bogolo thata setšhaba mme re
lwetse temokerasi, fa setšhaba se ne se tlhagisa dintlha tsa bona.
(Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[Mr A L MOSEKI: You said a mouthful. Chairperson, Deputy Minister Mr Johnny
de Lange, colleagues, I’ve been asked to speak about certain points in the
Bill before us. This Bill came into effect after obtaining our freedom in
1994. It is mentioned in our Constitution that we have a right to freedom
of association. The opposition parties looked into these important
principles, which are the pillars of our Constitution and thought they
could use them to weaken the African National Congress.

We still remember that the Bill before us was tabled by the DP, the
predecessors to the DA. When they tabled this Bill, they thought that our
members would not be loyal and thought that we would get angry and leave
the ANC to join them. Their main objective was to weaken the ANC and not to
expand our democracy, because weakening the ANC would have weakened the
valiants who ensured that our people became free.

However, in the process they realised that this was not working for them as
we made them eat humble pie. Now, they want this Bill to be abolished,
because their members are not loyal as they are joining other parties. It
is now that they realise where the truth lies. When they complained, the
people of South Africa raised their views and realised that this thing does
not enhance the democracy that we fought for, especially the nation.]

It was not about the strength of the ANC, it was about the fact that you
need a very vibrant democracy and that a vibrant democracy ...

... o tlhoka le ona makoko a neng a simolola a felela gore bonnye ba nne le
lentswe le rileng ba bue. Jaanong ka gore re mokgatlho wa batho re ANC, re
reeditse dikgatlhego le dikakanyo tsa batho, mme tla ke go gopotse ntate
Watson le ntate Worth gore Molao o o re buisanang ka ona gompieno, ke
mongwe wa di thulaganyo tse di lebisitseng kwa kongereseng ya kwa
Polokwane. Ga ba ema fa ntate Le Roux, jaaka ntate Mack ke gore re nne re
leboga gore dilo dingwe tse dintsi tse di dirilweng ke kopano eo, ke dilo
tse di botlhokwa tota go tiisa temokerasi ya rona, re nne re leboga ntate
Watson, re nne boikanyego mo bathong ka dilo tse di ntseng jalo.

Re le mokgatlho wa batho, re netefaditse gore temokerasi e nna teng re
dumalane le dikakanyo tseo tsa batho mme re be re re ga gona rrapolotiki yo
e leng gore wa itlotla, o tlotla batho ba a buang gore wa ba emela, o a
tshwanetseng gore a itshole jaaka seaka, nako le nako a lebeletse
dikgatlhego tsa gagwe fela le baki ya gagwe gore o apara eng, a sa labelela
dikgatlhego tsa batho baga rona. Borradipolotiki ba ba ntseng jalo ntate
tsweetswee, ga di na nnete waitse, ga di a tshwanela gore batho ba ga rona
ba di tseye ka tlhoafalo borradipolotiki ba ba ntseng jalo. Ke batho ba e
leng gore ba re “ga fela nna ke na le sengwe se ke se tsentseng mo
kgetseng, go siame ga ke kgathale gore ope a reng, mara ka nako e rileng ke
tla boela kwa bathong ba, ke re mpouteleng gape, ga ba sa dire jalo, nna ke
tla iponna tsela”.

Molao o, o re buisanyang ka ona, o ne o dira dilo tse, o ne o letlelela
mokgwa o maswe o le gopola ntate Thetjeng, e ne e le lona le neng le o
batla Molaotheo oo, re rata gore jaaka ANC, re re jaaka re tsere tshweetso
kwa Polokwane gore re batla gore temokerasi ya rona e nonofe e tie, molao o
o na le kemonokeng e e feletseng ya ANC. Ka mantswe a Modulasetilo, ke a
leboga. (Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)
[... also needs small parties so that at least they too have a word. We,
the ANC, are the people’s party; we listened to the interests and views of
the people. May I remind Mr Watson and Mr Worth that the Bill before us
today articulates core views that led to the Polokwane resolution. As they
stand before us, Mr Le Roux, just like Mr Mack, we should be thankful for
the important things that the congress did to enhance our democracy, and we
would also like to thank Mr Watson, and be honest with the people about
such things.

We, the people’s party, ensured that for our democracy to exist, we must
align ourselves with the views of the people. And we say that there is not
a politician, who respects himself or herself and the people, who can claim
to represent them, but who behaves like a prostitute every time by looking
after his or her own interests and being more concerned about what jacket
he or she wears, and not looking at the interests of our people.

Such politicians, Mr Thetjeng, are hypocrites, and our people are not
supposed to take them seriously. They are the kind of people who say, “As
long as I have something in my pocket, it’s fine and I don’t care, but at a
certain time I will go back to the people and ask them to vote for me; if
they don’t, I’ll see how I will sort myself out”. The Bill we are debating
allowed such things to happen and remember, Mr Thetjeng, you were the one
who wanted this Bill. Now, as the ANC, we would like to make our position
known as part of the resolution we took in Polokwane, which is to improve
our democracy. The ANC completely supports this Bill. Thank you.]

Mr J J BRYNARD (Western Cape): Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister De Lange,
hon chairperson of the select committee and hon members, I am here this
afternoon to represent the Western Cape.

The hon Deputy Minister and other members have essentially said what needed
to be said about this Bill. But may I take you back a bit, because
sometimes you need to know where you are coming from in order to know where
you are going.

South Africa has travelled a long road since January 2001 when the DA’s
Tony Leon and Douglas Gibson began agitating for floor-crossing legislation
to enable their party to formalise a marriage of convenience with the New
NP. We all know that the DP was in control of the DA at that time, and they
still are. But even while the national ANC government was contemplating the
request from Leon and Gibson, it quickly became apparent that there were
irreconcilable differences within the ranks of the newlyweds, with some
Nats wanting to walk out.

Nevertheless, when the ANC government introduced constitutional amendments
allowing floor-crossing in 2002 and 2003, the DA was among the parties
which said “aye” with a surprising level of enthusiasm.

Irrespective of what has happened since, I think we need to take some time
to remind ourselves of the purpose of the floor-crossing legislation. The
hon Deputy Minister and other members have already referred to this. The
amendments to the law were promulgated to enable members of the National
Assembly, provincial legislatures and municipal councils to become members
of another political party without having to resign their seats first. Here
is the part that the DA liked - the new legislation also provided an
existing political party with the opportunity to merge with another party;
to subdivide into more than one political party; or to subdivide and to
further allow anyone of its subdivisions to merge with another political
party.

But there is an old South African saying which, I think, goes something
like this: Never wear dark glasses when reading the small print of a
political merger. [Laughter.] It is easy to be wise after the fact. But it
turned out that the marriage between the DP and the New NP wasn’t made in
heaven after all. When the DP and the DA realised their mistake, they
changed from being among the staunchest supporters of floor-crossing to
ones that began shouting “scrap the law!” [Interjections.]

In calling for the abolition of the law, an understandably embarrassed DA
constitutional guru, Ryan Coetzee, was not too keen to admit that his party
was once one of the keenest advocates of floor-crossing. In some ways, I
don’t blame him for having been so embarrassed. When he said, during an
interview, that the job at hand was not to argue over the genesis of floor-
crossing, I could almost see the sheepish look on his face.

He added:

  Our responsibility as legislators now is to look critically at the
  legislation, to assess the manner in which it is being used, to determine
  its impact on our democratic processes and, above all, to listen to what
  the voters are saying about it. Having done that, we must respond in the
  appropriate way.

It was classic mumbo jumbo from a party guru - and I use the word “guru”
with a certain amount of caution - who had been tactically outmanoeuvred by
his political opponents.

As a representative of one of Coetzee’s political opponents, I want to say
to the NCOP today that the ANC government of the Western Cape supports the
scrapping of the floor-crossing legislation as envisaged in the
Constitution Fourteenth Amendment Bill. Allow me to explain why this is the
case.

The Western Cape government wants to see floor-crossing legislation
scrapped, not because we have been unable to use it to our political
advantage, because we have; not because it sends us into a blind panic at
election time – on the contrary, we have always been confident at election
time for very good reasons; not because we have been desperately looking
for ways to occupy the moral high ground with regard to the law as it has
stood for the past few years - we always acted with the utmost integrity in
our dealings with those who wanted to join us from other parties; but
because we believe that the political landscape that necessitated the
promulgation of the law in the first place has now changed, as the Deputy
Minister also mentioned.

We know that there is growing opposition to floor-crossing among
politicians and the general population. But believe me, I know that those
who fought so endlessly to make floor-crossing possible, when they realised
that they were the net losers, referred to those who took the plunge – and
sometimes courageously so – as prostitutes, sell-outs, flip-floppers and,
crazily, even cross-dressers!

We, in the ANC, understand and know why people are opposed to political
representatives simply upping, quitting and joining another party without
first resigning from Parliament, the legislature ... [Interjections.]

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, on a point of order: Will the member take a
question?
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Will you take a question, hon
member?

Mr J J BRYNARD (Western Cape): Chairperson, I will take many questions, but
I would prefer to get into a debate with the hon member once I have
finished my speech.

Mr A WATSON: No! Just tell us why it took you so long to leave.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): You may continue, hon member.

Mr J J BRYNARD (Western Cape): Thank you, Chairperson. While the law was
being implemented, we were more than happy to accept people from other
parties who wanted to join the ANC. We have always said - and we genuinely
believe this - that the policies and value systems of the ANC are
wonderfully persuasive. To put it in another way, the ANC has excellent
policies. In instances where people generally believed in the policies of
our organisation and if there were some years to go before the next
elections, we were always more than happy to accept them as members in our
organisation in terms of floor-crossing legislation. But now, of course,
they will have to wait. But I am sure they will understand.

We understand and accept that the scrapping of the legislation will take us
back to the position we were in prior to 2002. Where were we prior to 2002?
Well, simply this: In terms of the amendments that are under discussion
here today, and I have referred to this, members can no longer join other
parties without losing their seats, unless they resign. We also understand
that an existing political party will no longer be able to merge with
another political party and all that goes with that. We are comfortable
with that.

In conclusion, I would like to say how proud I am to witness our young
democracy preparing itself to take another giant step on a journey that I
am convinced will ultimately lead to the building of a truly great country.
Make no mistake, floor-crossing legislation has tested the commitment of
our country to democracy. The legislation offered us choices. It said to us
that now was the time to look to the future. We must decide which direction
we want to move in. In opting to support the amendments to floor-crossing,
I am thrilled to say that, so far, we have made wise choices. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Chairperson, I was very impressed by the hon Brynard’s
intimate knowledge about what has happened in the DA. I understand he just
missed one person, namely Colin Eglin, who really started it. I remember
that speech in the NA in 1995-96; I think it was then. But I also
understand the hon Brynard’s intimate knowledge about floor-crossing is
because he has personal experience of crossing the floor. [Laughter.]

Voorsitter, die VF was van die begin af gekant teen enige oorlopery, die
rede synde dat ons dit beskou het as politieke prostitusie en politieke
owerspel. Dié woorde is vandag hier gebruik. Die nadelige effek spesifiek
in hierdie Huis ... (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Chairperson, the FF was opposed to any floor-crossing from the start, the
reason being that we regard it as political prostitution and political
adultery. These words were used here today. The negative consequences in
this House specifically ...]
Mr V V Z WINDVOËL: Chair, will the member take a question?

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Chairperson, I think I must take the question. Yes, ask
your question. [Applause.]

Mr V V Z WINDVOËL: The question is simple and short. Has the member never
ever moved from one political party to the other?

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: I thank you for that question. Mr Chairperson, yes, I
have moved, but I didn’t cross the floor. I resigned, hon Windvoël. I left
politics in 1999 and I started my law practice and then I resigned from the
NP and I eventually joined the FF. I didn’t cross the floor. Thank you.

Die nadelige effek is dat oorlopery op ’n stadium ’n lid van hierdie Raad
baie nadelig getref het omdat, wat in sy wetgewer gebeur het, hom baie
nadelig beïnvloed het. Dit was ’n ANC-lid.

Daar word bereken dat sowat 1 miljoen stemme gesteel is as gevolg van
oorlopery. Die VF verwelkom die verwydering van hierdie wet wat ons van die
begin af teengestaan het. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[The negative consequence of floor-crossing is that at one stage it badly
affected a member of this Council, because what had happened in his
legislature had a very negative impact on him. He was an ANC member.

It is calculated that 1 million votes were stolen as a result of floor-
crossing. The FF welcomes the scrapping of this Act which we opposed from
the start. I thank you.]

Mr Z C NTULI: Thank you, hon Chairperson, Deputy Minister de Lange, hon
members and friends. I think hon Darryl Worth, hon van Heerden and hon
Mzizi have missed an opportunity, and that was the opportunity to thank the
ANC for being a progressive movement because, if the ANC was not
progressive, we would not have agreed to change this law. But, because we
are progressive, we have agreed.

I thought as hon members they would be able to be humble and thank the ANC
for being rational. I am saying this because the ANC is the party that
benefited most during floor-crossing and we are the majority; instead of
saying, as we are here, we want to gain more ...

Mr O M THETJENG: Chairperson, is it parliamentary for a member to refer to
us as being horrible?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): I didn’t hear that. I will make a
ruling.

Mr O M THETJENG: He said it: “You are horrible”.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): I will make a ruling at a later
stage.

Mr Z C NTULI: Chairperson, I think I am cutting close to the bone and
that’s why the member could not sit still.

Mr R J TAU: Maybe the member is so horrible that he is not sure of himself.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon Tau, you are extremely out of
order.

Mnu Z C NTULI: Baba uThetjeng mhlawumbe ukuthi isiNgisi akulona ulimi lwami
kungenzeka ngithe ngiyakhuluma wangangizwa kahle, kodwa-ke bengifuna
ukucacisa kahle. Ngesikhathi kunikezelwa ngezimali ngenkathi yokuqembuka
nezihlalo kubonakele ukuthi uma umuntu ehamba lapha uhamba nemali. Kube
khona imali ephumayo eya kwelinye iqembu ngakho-ke kubonakele ukuthi
akukuhle kahle.

Kukhona abanye abantu ikakhulukazi laba bantu ebebevula amaqembu abo
amancane. Laba bantu bazithola sebephethe izigaxa zemali uvese ubone nje
ukuthi phela ubusela lobu ngoba laba bantu badla bodwa futhi abafuni
ukuphathwa. Umuntu usephuma lapha angene laphaya ukuze akwazi ukuzitholela
imali futhi akwazi nokuphatha imali enkulu.

Abanye babo kutholakala ukuthi kuthi bengakaphenduli ngezimali
abebezinikiwe, sebejombile sebeye kwenye inhlangano. Kusale ukuthi izimali
abebenikezwe zona zenzanjani. Ngeke usabafica abasekho sebekwenye
inhlangano.

Lokhu kusho ukuthi kuyasiza ukubakhona kukaKhongolose, kufanele amanye
amaqembu akujabulele lokho. Mina ngiyaye ngithi bangisiza ekhaya bangizala
ngakhulela kuKhongolose ngoba angazi ngisho nokuthi kubanjani uma ukwelinye
iqembu. [Uhleko.]

Ngiye ngimbuke nje umuntu ehamba eqembuka nesitulo ngingazi noma kubuhlungu
kodwa yena ehamba nje. Kodwa-ke manje ngibona sengathi aseyancipha lawo
mathuba okuthi nani ngelinye ilanga nibe ngamalungu kaKhongolose njengoba
usunqamuka lo mthetho.

Okubi kakhulu kithina malungu oMkhandlu Kazwelonke Wezifundazwe ukuthi
beningakwazi ukubamba iqhaza mayelana nokuqembuka nezihlalo kodwa bekuncike
kwabanye abantu ongabazi ukuthi bacabanga kanjani. Uthole ukuthi umuntu
avele anqume ukuthi yena useyahamba bese kuvele kuthinteke nawe.

Kwaba buhlungu kabi lapha kukhona amalungu ahambayo kodwa kutholakala
ukuthi futhi ahamba nje hhayi ngoba ethanda. Isibonelo nje abanye abantu
esifundazweni banquma ukuthi bayahamba kwase kuthinteka ilungu elilapha
sekufuneka nalo lihambe, liphelelwe yisikhathi. Okusho ukuthi kithina
malungu oMkhandlu Kazwelonke Wezifundazwe ngibona sengathi lokhu kuphela
kwalo mthetho wokuqembuka nezihlalo kusisizile.
Sengigcina Sihlalo ngifisa ukusho ukuthi laba bantu abathi abantu
abaqembukayo ngonondindwa, kungcono vese ukuthi bababize kanjalo ...
[Ubuwelewele.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr Z C NTULI: Hon Thetjeng, maybe it is because English is not my home
language, so it may happen that you misunderstood me, but in fact I simply
wanted to give clarity. When the allocations were given to political
parties during the floor-crossing period, it was discovered that if a
person leaves a party, he leaves with the money. There would be an amount
of money that would be paid to the party that is getting a new member and
certain parties took a dim view of this.

Some people who had crossed the floor formed their own small parties. And
they would find themselves carrying big chunks of money, and you would
immediately realise that this is pure stealing, because this person is on
his own and he does not want to be led. You would find them hopping from
one party to the other, just because they knew that they would get money
out of that and be able to carry a big chunk of money again.

Some of them simply jumped ship and crossed the floor again to another
party, just before they could even give an account of the monies given to
them. This would leave everybody in the dark as to what exactly happened to
the monies that had been given to them. No one was able to make them
account for the money, because they had crossed the floor again to another
party.

This, therefore, means that the presence of the ANC helps, and the other
parties should appreciate that. I always say that I am grateful to my
parents, because I was born and bred in the ANC and I do not know what it
feels like to be in another party. [Laughter.]

Sometimes I would simply watch in silence when a member crossed the floor
and wonder how he felt, whether it was painful or not as he crossed the
floor. Unfortunately the chances of you here becoming ANC members are
getting very slim, since this law is now coming to an end.

What was even worse for us, as members of the National Council of
Provinces, is that we were unable to control floor-crossing, and it all
depended on other people, and we did not even know what they were thinking.
A person would simply decide that he was leaving and you would be affected.


It was so sad at one stage here in the NCOP when there were members who
left unwillingly. An example here was when members of the provincial
legislature decided to cross the floor and the member in the NCOP was
affected, and unfortunately the member had to leave, because that was the
end of the term for the member. So this means that the scrapping of this
law will help us, as members of the National Council of Provinces.

In conclusion, hon Chairperson, I want to say that those people who refer
to the members who cross the floor as prostitutes would do better calling
themselves exactly that ... [Interjections.]]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon member, can I take a question or
point of order?

Ms A N T MCHUNU: Thank you, hon Chairperson, is the member prepared to take
a question? May I please know, are you aware that the ANC never won in
KwaZulu-Natal and you are now supporting this legislation because you are
afraid of Cope? Are you aware of that? [Interjections.] It is a question.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon member, that is just rhetoric.

Mnu Z C NTULI: Ngiyabonga. Ilungu lichitha isikhathi sami. Mama uMchunu
mina bengicabangela wena ukuthi uma bekuqhubeka lokhu kuqembuka wena
ubuzohamba lapha [Uhleko.] Ngakho–ke malungu ahloniphelile ngiyabonga
ukuthi lo mthetho sizovumelana ngawo ukuthi siwuqede.

Bengisathi kuyangimangaza kulaba bantu ababiza abanye ngonondindwa ngoba
bethi abawufuni lo mthetho. Ngike ngezwa nobaba uvan Heerden laphaya ukuthi
bona abayifuni le nto kodwa uthola ukuthi uma umuntu eza kubona akabizwa
ngonondindwa ubizwa ngelungu elihloniphekile. Kusho ukuthi kusobala basika
nganxanye njengommese. Ngiyabonga Sihlalo. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of
isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr Z C NTULI: Thank you. The hon member is just wasting my time. Madam
Mchunu, I was just assisting you because, had the floor-crossing continued,
you would have lost your seat here and left us. [Laughter.] I am therefore,
hon members, very grateful that we all agree that this piece of legislation
should be repealed.

I was still saying, I am pleasantly surprised by those people who call
others prostitutes just because they say they do not want floor-crossing. I
have also heard the hon van Heerden saying that they are against this
thing, but you find that if a member crosses the floor to join them, they
do not call that member a prostitute, instead they call him an hon member.
Therefore, it is clear that they are two-faced. Thank you, Chairperson.
[Applause.]]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT:
Chairperson, thank you. Hon members, it is not often that you can
participate in a debate where everyone agrees. The big problem with a
debate where everyone agrees is that you then have to make up reasons and
find things to say! So you’ll find hon Mzizi talking about frogs, and
others about coming out of the light into the darkness and from the
darkness into the light. This is all because they all agree with this
legislation, so they do not know what to say. So it is pleasant to
participate in a debate where all South Africans agree. I think it is an
historic event, probably.
There are some aspects the hon Mack raised that we would hopefully start
discussing in the new Parliament. It is something that worries me and I
know it is done in most countries, but I don’t think we can afford it in a
country like ours, where we have few resources and few skills and every
time we have to change administration.

Of course, there must be some change in administrations. Most countries do
it, but I must say, in our country I have found it very unacceptable, even
as is the case in my own party. Sometimes, in some local governments, we
just change people wholesale and start all over again. It is something we
must discuss and it is good the hon Mack has raised it because it is not an
easy issue to discuss or debate.

People say, “When I come to power and I have the support of the people, I
want people there that I will put there.” So it is a difficult issue, but
it is something that we have to look at maturely. Maybe we should look at
it in terms of the fact that there are certain core jobs that actually
should remain unchanged with the change in administration, because you want
to keep delivery going.

We have been in this game for at least 15 years. Most of us who were not in
Parliament before understand that every time you change staff and people
and policies, it takes a long time to get those things moving again. It is
something we should flag. It is something we should really discuss.

All that is left for me to say is this: History should record that this
country reached a certain stage in the year 2001-02 where there was a
necessity for us to deal with the matter of floor-crossing, which we
introduced to the country. History should also recall that the introduction
of that legislation did achieve some of the objectives that we wanted to
achieve, but history should also recall that the introduction of the whole
concept of floor-crossing had many unwanted effects and many of them were
negative. History should report, very importantly, that in the year 2008,
when it was necessary, we had analysed and concluded that we don’t need
floor-crossing anymore. We as a country and all the parties unanimously
decided to get rid of it.

Let us use this opportunity to try and always put our dealings in politics
and our governance issues at a higher level, a level that we can be proud
of as a country and as a nation, and hopefully this experiment with floor-
crossing will have taught us some lessons, which we probably never want to
go back to. Thank you very much to all the parties supporting this
legislation - and next time, when you support legislation, you do not have
to write a speech to come and explain it. Thank you very much.

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Constitution Fourteenth Amendment Bill be agreed to.


IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Constitution Fourteenth Amendment Bill accordingly agreed to in accordance
with section 65 of the Constitution.

General Laws (Loss of Membership of National Assembly, Provincial
Legislature or Municipal Council) Amendment Bill agreed to in accordance
with section 75 of the Constitution.

Mr V V Z WINDVOËL: Chairperson, I see two provinces have abstained. Is that
Lesotho and Swaziland?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): I will deal with that. I am not sure
whether Lesotho and Swaziland are part of our country. I will not mention
that there are two members here who persistently vote when we call
delegation heads to vote.

Hon members, on a very serious note: This is a procedural and
constitutional issue. You are not committing a crime, but it might create
the impression that we do not understand our Rules and our procedures. I
really want to caution members that we take it quite seriously,
particularly in the context of us being a public forum where everybody – 48
million South Africans – actually looks at us.

The Council adjourned at 16:46.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                          FRIDAY, 14 NOVEMBER 2008
ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills
      1) Correctional Services Amendment Bill [B 32F – 2007] – Act No 25 of
         2008 (assented to and signed by President on 8 November 2008).

TABLINGS

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

         a) Tabling of correspondence from Ms Khoase, a community
            representative of Abazimeli Squatters Association in Parys, Free
            State Province.
         b) Tabling of correspondence from Mr Mokhetea of Henneman in Free
            State Province.


            Referred to the Select Committee on Members’ Legislative
            Proposals.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    REPORT TO THE JOINT COMMITTEE ON ETHICS AND MEMBERS’ INTERESTS ON THE
   FINDINGS OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL WITH RESPECT TO THE AUDIT OF THE
   DISCLOSURE OF INTERESTS BY MEMBERS

   On 13 November 2008 the Joint Committee on Ethics and Members’ Interests
   met at Room V227 Old Assembly Building to consider the report of the
   Auditor General on the alleged non-disclosure by Members of Parliament.

   Present
   Chairperson: Landers, LT (ANC)
   National Assembly
   De Lille, P (ID)
   Delport, JT (DA)




   Gxowa, NB (ANC)
Njobe, MAA (ANC)
   Dudley, C (ACDP)
   Gumede, DM (ANC)

Rajbally, S (MF)
Seaton, SA (IFP)
   National Council of Provinces
   Dlulane, BN (ANC)
   Matlanyane, H (ANC)
   Moseki, AL (ANC)
   Oliphant, M (ANC)
   Ralane, TS (ANC)


   Apologies
   National Assembly
   Baloyi MR (ANC)
   Nwamita Shilubana TLP (ANC)
   Radebe BA (ANC)
   Ditshetelo, PHK (UCDP)


   National Council of Provinces
   Ntwanambi ND (ANC)
   Tolo BJ (ANC)


   Staff
   Adhikarie Z, Mahomed F, Isaacs F


   The Auditor General conducted an investigation on the completeness of the
   Register of Members’ Interests as part of the 2007 financial audit of
   Parliament.  As a result they submitted details of fourteen Members who
   had allegedly not disclosed.


   In terms of the procedure, correspondence was sent to the Members on the
   30 July 2008 to seek their responses to the allegations.
   The report details the companies that the Members have allegedly not
   disclosed; it outlines the Members responses, as well as the findings
   with recommendations as to sanctions where appropriate.


   In findings related to resignations from companies and close
   corporations, it was noted that the process to effect resignations are
   not solely in the control of the person concerned.  The procedures at
   Company and Intellectual Property Rights Organisation (CIPRO) require
   that signatures of other partners/membership/directors are required to
   finalise resignations. The consequence of this is that after an
   individual has resigned from a company or a close corporation they are
   dependent on other parties to effect the change. It is for this reason
   that Members have been given the benefit of the doubt, where they
   indicated that they have resigned.


   In considering penalty, in respect of dormant companies it is noted that
   the Committee made numerous efforts to assist Members to fully comply
   with the disclosure requirements of the Code. Arrangements were made with
   CIPRO to avail their services which allowed an individual Member to check
   his/her disclosure details. About 300 Members participated in this
   process of checking.


   Note 3 on the disclosure of interests form specifies that dormant
   companies must be disclosed. It is further noted that the Joint Committee
   on Ethics and Members’ Interests have in numerous reports adopted by the
   National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces, resolved that
   Members must disclose dormant companies.


   Abram, S Mr
   It is alleged that the Member did not disclose the following:
   Company Information
   Closeprops 169 Registration number 2005/088057/23
   Closeprops 170 Registration number 2005/088053/23
   Ithute Tswelopele Solution Registration number 2000/0209072/07


   Members’ response
   Mr Abram responded that Closeprops 169 and 170 are property holding Close
   Corporations in which he has 50% interests, these properties were
   disclosed.


   Mr Abram indicates that he had resigned from Ithute Tswelopele Solution
   and is trying to establish why the resignation was not affected.


   Findings
   There is no breach of the Code with respect to Closeprops 169 and
   Closeprops 170 as these companies were disclosed in the land and property
   section of the Register of Members Interests. The Member is advised that
   the full name of the Close Corporation must be included in the Register.


   With regard to Ithute Tswelopele that as he had resigned there is no
   breach of the Code of Conduct. The Committee agreed that Mr Abram must
   ensure that the resignation is rectified with CIPRO.


   Bonhomme, TJ Mr
   It is alleged that the Member did not disclose the following:


   Company Information
   Newlands Mashu Community Development Centre Registration number
   1995/003138/08


   Member’s response
   In his response Mr Bonhomme indicated the Newlands Mashu Community
   Development Centre is also known as the Kwa Mashu Newlands Permaculture
   Centre which was disclosed.


   Finding
   There is no breach of the Code of Conduct for Members of Parliament  as
   the interest was disclosed.


   Holomisa, GBH Mr
   It is alleged that the Member did not disclose the following:


   Company Information
   Amalgum Investments Twenty           Registration number 2003/015387/07
   Beat the Clock Investment      Registration number 2006/034220/07
   Ebaleni Property Holdings      Registration number 2006/031986/07
   Holomisa Investments                 Registration number 2000/006258/23


   Members’ response
   In his response Mr Holomisa indicated that he had disclosed Amalgam
   Investments and Holomisa Holdings in the category shares and financial
   interests. Ebaleni Property Holdings and Beat the Clock Investments are
   new interests and had been disclosed in his 2008 declaration.


   Finding
   There is no breach of the Code.


   Maluleka, HP Mr


   It is alleged that the Member did not disclose the following:


   Company Information
   Bay View Trading 20       Registration number 2006/177896/23


   Members’ response
   In his response Mr Maluleka indicated that the company is dormant and
   apologized for the omission.


   Finding
   Mr Maluleka has not fully disclosed, as required and is in breach of the
   Code.


   Sanction
   It is noted that the company is dormant.  In similar cases the Joint
   Committee recommended that Members be issued with a fine.


   The Committee therefore recommends that the penalty is a fine of R500 for
   the non-disclosure of directorship in a company.


   Mashiane, ML Ms


   It is alleged that the Member did not disclose the following:


   Company Information
   Mabopane Community Services Organisation Registration number 1997/003926


   Members’ response
   Ms Mashiane in her response said that the Mabopane Community Service
   Organisation is a not for profit organisation which need not be
   disclosed. Accordingly there is no breach of the Code of Conduct for
   Members of Parliament.


   Matsomela, MJ Ms


   It is alleged that the Member did not disclose the following:


   Company Information
   Jeids Five Marketing Registration number 1997/046999/23


   Members’ response
   In her response Ms Matsomela indicated that the company has been dormant
   since inception and that she will follow up and would advise the
   Committee accordingly.


   Finding
   Ms Matsomela has not fully disclosed, and is in breach of the Code of
   Conduct for Members of Parliament.


   Sanction
   It is noted that the company is dormant. In similar cases the Joint
   Committee recommended that Members be issued with a fine.


   The Committee therefore recommends that the penalty is a fine of R500 for
   the non-disclosure of directorship in a company.


   Mentor, VMP Ms


   It is alleged that the Member did not disclose the following:


   Company Information
   Vakazi Holdings Registration number 2003/004864/06


   Member’s response
   Ms Mentor has indicated that she had resigned from the company six months
   after she was appointed as director. She had formally resigned and asked
   the company to remove her as director.


   Finding
   There is no breach as Ms Mentor had resigned, She must ensure that her
   resignation is finalized at CIPRO.


   Mlangeni, A Mr


   It is alleged that the Member did not disclose the following:


   Company Information
   Centers’ for Community Development   Registration number 1993/000070/08
   Havtoohav Investments                Registration number 2004/029269/07
   Ndiza Empowerment Technology   Registration number 2000/017077/07
   Orlyfunt Holdings                    Registration number 2003/014960/07
   Orlyfunt Strategic Investments       Registration number 2004/030159/07
   Pacific Height Investments           Registration number 2006/039622/07
   Inkwenkwezi Gold               Registration number 2004/002172/07
   Comorant Investments 22              Registration number 2004/002172/07


   Member’s response
   In his response Mr Mlangeni indicated that the Centers’ for Community
   Development was placed under provisional liquidation, the company was
   formed to assist veterans of the struggle and is an article 21 company.
   He had derived no benefit from it.


   Mr Mlangeni resigned from Ndiza and Crowned Comorant.


   In a further response Mr Mlangeni apologised for his non-disclosure. He
   said that Orlyfunt Strategic Investments and Orlyfunt Holdings are
   subsidiaries of Matodzi which he had disclosed. He concedes that he
   should have disclosed the entities.


   He said that he had agreed to the directorships in Havtohave Investments
   and Inkwenkwezi Gold but these entities never “took off”.
   Mr Mlangeni also submitted an affidavit from Mr TR Jones of Pacific
   Heights, in which Mr Jones states that he had not informed Mr Mlangeni
   when the company was registered.


   Findings
   There is no breach in respect of the Centers’’ for Community Development,
   as this is a not for profit organisation and it need not be disclosed in
   terms of the Code of Conduct.


   In respect of Pacific Heights, the company was established in 2007, the
   period of the audit was for the 2007 year, this together with the
   affidavit from Mr Jones shows that this may have been an omission, Mr
   Mlangeni should be given the benefit in this regard.


   Mr Mlangeni is in breach for the non-disclosure of Orlyfunt Strategic
   Investments and Orlyfunt Holdings, Havtohave Investments and Inkwenkwezi
   Gold
   Penalty


   It is recommended that Mr Mlangeni be fined R500 per entity for the non-
   disclosure of directorships in Orlyfunt Strategic Investments and
   Orlyfunt Holdings, Havtohave Investments and Inkwenkwezi Gold, a total
   fine of R2000 is recommended.


   Ngcengwane, ND Ms
   It is alleged that the Member did not disclose the following:


   Company Information
   Mfingwana Projects Enterprises       Registration number 2002/053090/23
   African Pearl Trading 17             Registration number 2005/060146/23
   MMDZ Trading Enterprises       Registration number 2006/208148/23
   Pathway to Educational Achievement   Registration number 1998/013884/08
   Vathisa Vuthela Technologies         Registration number 2005/060933/23
   Just us Women Business Enterprise    Registration number 2003/067822/23
   Mahlanga Business Enterprises        Registration number 2004/063705/23
   Mountain Hill Property               Registration number 2002/097108/23


   Member’s response
   In her response Ms Ngcengwane indicated that:
   Mfingwana is active but currently dormant.
   She has no recall of African Pearl Trading and intends resigning.
   MMDZ is an active enterprise.
   She has resigned from Pathway for Educational Achievement
   Vathisa Vuthela Technologies has not taken off and she has no contact
   with her business partner.
   Just us Women Business Enterprises – she has resigned from the company.
   Mahlanga Business Enterprises, she has no recall of this company and
   would like to resign from this company.
   Mountain Hill Property, she intends resigning from this company.


   Findings
   The Committee gives Ms Ngcengwane the benefit of the doubt regarding her
   resignation for Pathway for Education Achievement and Just Us Women
   Business Enterprise and therefore finds that there is no breach in this
   regard.  She must ensure that the resignations are finalized at CIPRO.


   In respect of non-disclosure of the following companies, Mfingwana
   Projects Enterprises, Vathisa Vuthela Technologies, Mountain Hill
   Property and MMDZ Trading Enterprises, the Committee finds that Ms
   Ngcengwane is in breach of the Code of Conduct for the non disclosure of
   directorships.


   With respect to African Pearl Trading 17 and Mahlanga Business
   Enterprises, the Registrar obtained the copies of the Close Corporations
   founding documents which Ms Ngcengwane had signed.


   Penalty
   With respect of Mfingwana Projects Enterprises, Vathisa Vuthela
   Technologies, Mahlanga Business Enterprises, Mountain Hill Property,
   African Pearl Trading, the Committee notes that these companies are
   dormant and subsequently finds that the Members must be fined R500 for
   each non disclosure, R2500 in for the dormant companies.
   With respect to MMDZ Trading Enterprises which is currently trading. It
   is noted that the company was established in 2006 and that Ms Ngcengwane
   had disclosed in 2008. The Committee recommends that Ms Ngcengwane be
   fined R1 000 for the non disclosure of this company.


   The total recommended penalty is R3500.


   Ntuli, SB Mr


   It is alleged that the Member did not disclose the following:


   Company Information
   Bensat Construction                  Registration number 1998/023522/23
   Modern Era Construction and Projects       Registration number
   2006/001900/23
   Siphiwe Montessori School            Registration number 1996/009654/08


   Member’s response
   In his response Mr Ntuli has indicated that his business partner in
   Bensat Construction passed away a few years ago.  The Company has been
   dormant since.  He indicated that he has no knowledge of Modern Era
   Construction Projects. Mr Ntuli said that he resigned from Siphiwe
   Montessori School which is now closed.
   Finding
   The Registrar obtained copies of the founding statement for Modern Era
   Construction. Mr Ntuli was asked to verify his signature on the documents
   of Modern Era Construction; he indicated verbally that the signature is
   not his, but has not submitted a written response despite numerous
   requests from the Office of the Registrar.


   Mr Ntuli was afforded ample opportunity to respond, his failure to do so
   leaves the Committee no choice as it must base its findings on the bases
   of the signatures on the forms. The Committee finds that Mr Ntuli is in
   breach of the Code of Conduct for the non-disclosure of directorships. in
   respect of Modern Era Constructio. He conceded that he was aware of
   Bensat Construction and is therefore also in breach in this regard.


   Penalty
   As both these companies are dormant it is recommended that Mr Ntuli be
   fined R500 per entity, a total fine of R1000.


   Nzimade, LPM Mr
   Company Information
   CBR Education and training for             Registration number:
   2001/006621/08
   Empowerment
   Eyathu Sonke Drives Training         Registration number 2001/051404/23
   Secretariat of the African Decade          Registration number
   2003/027026/08
   of persons with Disabilities


   Member’s response
   That CBR Education and Training for Empowerment are non-profit
   organizations.
   Mr Nzimande indicated that Eyathu Sonke is dormant.


   Findings
   Mr Nzimande has breached the Code of Conduct  for the non-disclosure of
   his directorships in Eyathu Sonke Driving School.
   Secretariat of the African Decade of Persons with Disabilities and CBR
   Education and Training for Empowerment are not for profit organizations,
   accordingly
   Mr Nzimande is not in breach of this respect.


   Penalty
   Eyathu Sonke is dormant; the Committee recommended a fine of R500.


   Ramotsomai, CMP Ms
   Company Information
   Full Swing Trading 530         Registration number 2005/028722/23


   Member’s response
   Ms Ramotsomai has indicated that she was under the impression that she
   had resigned from this company.
   Finding
   Ms Ramotsomai should be given the benefit of the doubt with regard to her
   resignation from the company. Ms Ramotsomai must ensure that her
   resignation is finalized at CIPRO.  Accordingly there is no breach of the
   Code of Conduct.


   Smith, VG, Mr
   Company Information
   Nambiti Nextwave Consulting          Registration number 2003/012765/07
   Euro Blitz 48                  Registration number 2002/012907/07
   Hlanganani Investment                Registration number 2001/001423/07
   Leshema Finance Management           Registration number 1994/041151/23
   Services
   Member’s response
   In his response Mr Smith indicated that he had resigned from Nambiti
   Nextwave.
   Euro Blitz trades as Qulemar (Pty) Ltd and has been disclosed.  The
   record shows that he has resigned from Hlanganani.  Leshema Finance is a
   dormant company.


   Findings
   There is no breach with regard to Nambiti Nextwave, Euro Blitz and
   Hlanganani Investment.  In respect of Leshema Finance, Mr Smith is in
   breach of the Code.  Mr Smith must ensure that his resignation from
   Nambiti Nextwave is finalized.


   Penalty
   It is noted that Leshema Finance is dormant; it is recommended that he be
   fined R500.


   Woods, GG Mr
   Company Information
   Berg Street Three Properties         Registration number 1985/011149/23
   Imbenge Group                  Registration number 1997/001649/07
   Imbenge Properties             Registration number 1997/001145/07


   Member’s response
   Mr Woods indicated that he was of the view that Berg Street Properties
   was deregistered. He indicated that he has no recall of the Imbenge Group
   and Imbenge Properties.


   The Registrar obtained the founding documents for Imbenge Group and
   Imbenge Properties from CIPRO these show that Mr Woods did not sign the
   founding documents.


   The Auditors listed on the founding documents indicated that they did not
   have any documents for the companies.


   Findings
   It is recommended that Mr Woods be given the benefit of the doubt with
   regard to Berg Street Properties. As there is not evidence to indicate
   that Mr Woods consented to being appointed as a director for Imbenge
   Group and Imbenge Properties.


   Accordingly there is no breach of the Code of Conduct. Mr Woods must
   ensure that he advises CIPRO and removes himself from the companies
   concerned.


   The Committee adopted the report unanimously.


   Report to be considered.


2.    REPORT OF THE JOINT COMMITTEE ON ETHICS AND MEMBERS’ INTERESTS ON THE
   COMPLAINT AGAINST MINISTER BMN BALFOUR.


   On 13 November 2008 the Joint Committee on Ethics and Members’ Interests
   met at room V227 Old Assembly Building to consider the complaint against
   Minister BMN Balfour.


   Present:
   Mr L Landers Chairperson


   National Assembly
   De Lille, P
   Delport, JT (DA)
   Dudley, C (ACDP)
   Gumede, DM (ANC)
    Gxowa, NB (ANC)
    Njobe, MAA (ANC)
    Rajbally, S (MF)
    Seaton, SA (IFP)


   National Council of Provinces
   Dlulane, BN
   Matlanyane, H
   Moseki, AL
   Oliphant, M
   Ralane, TS
     Apologies
     National Assembly
     Baloyi MR (ANC)
     Nwamita Shilubana TLP (ANC)
     Radebe BA (ANC)
     Ditshetelo, PHK (UCDP)


     National Council of Provinces
     Ntwanambi ND (ANC)
     Tolo BJ (ANC)


     Staff
     Adhikarie Z, Mahomed F, Isaacs F


     The Joint Committee on Ethics and Members’ Interests received a
     complaint which referred to a payment allegedly made by Kgwerano
     Financial Services for a Volkswagen Touareg.5.0 V10. It is alleged that
     the Minister had failed to declare payment by Kgwerano as required by
     the Code of Conduct for Members of Parliament


     The Code of Conduct for Members of Parliament stipulate in terms of
     paragraph 8(f) and (g) which require that Members must disclose:


     (f) Gifts and hospitality:
          (i)    A description  and the value and source of a gift with a
                 value in excess of  R1500;
          (ii)   a description and the value of gifts from a single source
which
                 cumulatively exceed the value of  R1500  in any calendar
                 year;  and
          (iii)  hospitality intended as a gift in kind.
     (g) Benefits:
          (i)    The nature and source of any other benefit of a material
          nature; and
          (ii)   the value of that benefit.

     The Committee considered the information provided by:
    • The complainant,
         • The response by Minister Balfour which included documents such
           as the lease agreement for the vehicle, statements of the
           account, his personal bank statements, and a supporting letter
           from the bank,
    • The Department of Transport on the Public Office Bearers Motor Scheme,
    • a signed affidavit by a director of Kgwerano Financial Services,
        • The Committee also received a signed affidavit from Mr Litton on
          behalf of Wesbank

    In making its findings the Committee the Committee noted the signed
    affidavit from Mr Litton of Wesbank Head of Risk, in which he confirms
    the following under oath:

     1. The Minister Balfour entered into a lease agreement with Kgwerano
        Asset Finance a division of First Rand Bank Limited on 21 February
        2006 for the lease of a new Volkswagen Touareg 5.0 V10 TDI TIP.
     2. The vehicle matched the details contained in the invoice from
        Northcliff Volkswagen.
     3. The original contract term of the vehicle was extended, and in terms
        of bank procedures a new contract number was allocated.
     4. He confirms that they did not finance two vehicles and the contracts
        relate to the Volkswagen Touareg 5.0 V10.
     5. Wesbank draws regular monthly instalments from Minister Balfour from
        his personal bank account for payment of the motor vehicle.
     6. In supplementary affidavit Mr Litton responds to the allegation of a
        settlement letter, he explains that a settlement letter is sent out
        when one account is closed. In this instance the first account was
        closed to reschedule the payments, he confirms that there was no
        lump sum payment.

   Findings
   In light of the above the Committee found unanimously that the allegation
   that the Minister received a gift in the form of a payment for his motor
   vehicle was not substantiated, consequently there is no breach of the
   Code.


   Report to be considered.


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Joint Budget Committee on the Medium-Term Budget Policy
Statement, dated 12 November 2008.

The Joint Budget Committee, having considered the Medium-Term Budget Policy
Statement (MTBPS) referred to it, reports as follows:

INTRODUCTION

The Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement (MTBPS) comes at a time of severe
turbulence in the global economy. This is the last MTBPS to be introduced
in the Third Parliament. The economic slowdown and projected decline in
revenue may require changes in medium-term budget proposals.  This in turn
will place greater importance on domestic policies, with the need to ensure
that funds are directed at those sectors and programmes which have the
greatest impact on the lives of South Africans.

The Committee once again agreed to focus on selected sectors and
departments: those expected to be prioritized over the medium-term or those
that have experienced specific budgeting and performance challenges. These
are reflected on in the report. In preparing for the MTBPS, the Committee
drew on a range of submissions including government’s “Towards A Fifteen
Year Review”, and reports of the Auditor-General (AG) and the Financial and
Fiscal Commission (FFC). The Human Science Research Council (HSRC) and the
Public Service Commission (PSC) were also invited to present on relevant
research and findings.

In keeping with Committee practices, Members of relevant portfolio and
select committees were invited to participate in proceedings. The
participation of sector committees remains fundamental to Parliament’s
engagement with the MTBPS as they are able to bring detailed knowledge of
departmental policies and practices to deliberations.

This report is divided into three sections. The first reflects on the broad
medium-term priorities, the second focuses on specific sectors and
departments while the third sets out the Committee’s recommendations.

BUDGET PRIORITIES AND THE DIVISION OF REVENUE
The downturn in the global economy and various domestic constraints are
expected to curtail South Africa’s economy initially, with growth
anticipated to slow to around 3 per cent in 2009, before rising to 4.3 per
cent by 2011. Revisions to tax policy and a shift in the budget balance
allow for the expansion of the fiscus and support for government’s
priorities despite the slowdown in growth.

The challenges in implementing concurrent functions have, at times, led to
serious misalignment between policies and resource allocations, and between
allocations and outputs. The Committee welcomes the proposed reforms in the
local government equitable share formula, in order to take greater account
of fiscal constraints in poor municipalities.

The Committee supports the additional R170.8 billion proposed in the MTBPS
for the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) partially to offset the
effects of higher inflation on salaries, social grants, fuel and capital
projects. There will also be a tranche of R60 billion made to Eskom.

The MTBPS reflects a continuing emphasis on employment creation and poverty
alleviation. Specific medium-term budget priorities, as presented, include:


    • Enhancing the quality of education;
    • Improving the provision of health care, particularly for the poor, to
      reduce infant, child and maternal mortality rates;
    • Reducing the levels of crime and enhancing citizen safety;
    • Expanding the built environment to improve public transportation and
      meet universal access targets in housing, water, electricity and
      sanitation; and
    • Decreasing rural poverty by taking steps to raise rural incomes and
      improve livelihoods by extending access to land and support for
      emerging farmers.

PUBLIC SPENDING PRIORITIES

Enhancing the Quality of Education

Education is central to overcoming poverty and inequality. The MTBPS
proposes additional funding for the sector through an upward adjustment to
the provincial equitable share, to accommodate the extension of no-fee
schools, and a further R4 billion to support the National School
Nutritional Programme (NSNP). Government has also indicated it will step up
funding for school infrastructure and enhance safety and security. A new
conditional grant for the recapitalization of technical high schools is
also envisaged.

The Committee agrees that attention should be given to quality teacher
training. Greater attention should also be given to technical training to
address the needs of the economy. Early Childhood Development (ECD) and
adult education are further priorities. A co-ordinated approach to ECD is
particularly significant as it provides an opportunity to reverse long-term
trends in the sector. There is also an urgent need to address the backlogs
in school infrastructure, including overcrowding and access to basic
services such as water and sanitation, and to ensure that all funds
allocated are effectively and efficiently utilised.

The Committee has taken note of challenges with specific education
programmes, including disparities with the implementation of the no-fees
policy and the NSNP. The Department of Education (DoE) should therefore
develop and enforce specific guidelines to achieve better outcomes.

While progress has been recorded in expanding education opportunities,
international comparisons confirm that the sector is under-performing, and
that allocated resources are not producing the desired outcomes. As
acknowledged in government’s Fifteen Year Review, “the quality of services
leaves much to be desired….This has much to do with management and service
culture in the actual units (schools and hospitals).”

Improving the Provision of Health Services

The health sector continues to face a number of acute challenges including
access to primary health care and the fight against HIV/AIDS and
Tuberculosis. Progress in reducing maternal and infant mortality has also
been slow.  As highlighted by the HSRC, around 60 per cent of maternal
deaths are due to treatable diseases. A severe shortage of health
professionals and inadequate infrastructure has compounded these
difficulties. Funding for the health services currently accounts for 3.4
per cent of GDP and 11.8 per cent of consolidated government expenditure.

The MTBPS indicates that further resources will be made available for
phased-in salary adjustments associated with the occupation-specific
dispensation (OSD), as well as for new medicines and treatments. Additions
to conditional grants total R1.8 billion over the next three years, mostly
to support the HIV and AIDS grant and hospital revitalization. The
Committee has taken account of various proposed reforms, including the
establishment of a National Health Insurance System (NHI), which will
require financial support and an effective implementation plan. The NHI
will ensure that all citizens will have equitable access to health services
and thereby promote socio-economic development.

While further financial support will be required to reinforce health
services, emphasis must also be given to improving management, training and
information systems within the sector. Salary adjustments must be
accompanied by improvements in overall working conditions. Steps must also
be taken to ensure that there is sufficient capacity to drive government’s
HIV/AIDS programmes. Deficiencies with procurement, waste management and
response times for emergency services are further concerns. All these
matters will require dedicated attention. In overcoming these challenges,
the Committee believes there is a need to identify best practices in better
performing health facilities and replicate these throughout the sector.

Crime Prevention and Security

Departments in the justice and protection services have not worked together
optimally to achieve their objectives. The Committee therefore welcomes the
decision to revamp the criminal justice system as announced in 2008. This
is expected to result in enhanced integration, co-operation and improved
performance, although progress with this initiative should be carefully
monitored.

To alleviate shortcomings in the police services, especially over visible
policing and investigative capacity, an amount of R6.5 billion was
allocated to Department of Safety and Security (DSS) over the medium-term.
The MTBPS suggests that further support will be directed at increasing the
number of specialized police personnel and improving information and
management systems. Additional resources and more personnel should
correspond to a marked decrease in the crime rate.

Delays in the adjudication process remain among the most serious
constraints to the justice system. According to the 2008 Estimates of
National Expenditure (ENE), the aim is to reduce the backlog in court cases
by 5 per cent each year over the MTEF period. While the Committee has noted
an improvement in financial management within the DoJCD, with a reduced
level of under-expenditure in 2007/08 compared to previous years, further
attention is needed to ensure that allocated funds translate into
progressively improved performance. The linkages between the department’s
strategic plan and budget may require further refinement in this respect.
Overcrowding within the prison system has been a long-standing problem,
which has negatively affected the ability of the Department of Correctional
Service (DCS) to rehabilitate offenders. To alleviate overcrowding, the
budget allocated an additional R2.9 billion to the DCS, mostly for the
construction of prisons. The Committee finds it unacceptable that the
construction of prisons, as previously announced in the State of the Nation
Address in 2002, have yet to be completed. Furthermore, the six prisons as
stated in the MTBPS do not appear to be new projects. Clarity must be
provided by the Department.

Ultimately, the ability of the justice and protection services to achieve
the desired outcomes depends, to a large extent, on the level of inter-
departmental co-ordination and information sharing. This extends to
departments such as Home Affairs, Transport and traffic enforcement in the
case of events such as the 2010 Soccer World Cup.

The Committee believes that the performance of the justice and protection
services should be closely scrutinized to ensure that Parliament is in a
strong position to assess budget proposals against outputs and outcomes,
and ultimately ensure value-for-money.

Expanding the Built Environment

Public infrastructure and capital investment are necessary for sustained
growth, employment creation and the hosting of a successful 2010 World Cup.
Much of the investment is earmarked for the built environment, specifically
for low-cost housing, public transport, electrification programmes, health
facilities, schools, water and sanitation. The Committee welcomes the fact
that capital expenditure is set to reach 11 per cent growth by 2011/12. The
MTBPS proposes additional funds for a number of key grants and programmes
including R4.1 billion for the infrastructure grant to provinces and R4.3
billion to municipalities. As previously emphasised, it is critical that
funds earmarked for national priorities such as bulk infrastructure are
spent for their intended purposes.

The Committee supports the additional funds proposed in the MTBPS for
housing and community development although it notes that the Department of
Housing (DoH) has acknowledged that these resources will be insufficient to
meet the target of eradicating informal settlements by 2014. As highlighted
by the Committee in previous reports and underlined in the MTBPS,
shortcomings in planning, capacity and intergovernmental co-ordination
continue to hamper the delivery of quality houses.

Additional resources must be complemented by measures to improve
administrative efficiency and reporting systems. All housing units should
comply with the norms and standard as prescribed in the Breaking New Ground
Strategy. Innovation and alternative construction methods are also needed
to mitigate rising construction costs. The Committee has expressed concern
that the DoH did not appear to have made provision for an allocation for
the Housing Development Agency.

Efficient transport systems are pivotal for economic growth and the 2010
Soccer World Cup. The Committee welcomes the recognition by government that
access to integrated public transport should be prioritized.
Notwithstanding this, budgeting and organizational challenges such as
vacancies, a shortage of technical skills and deficiencies in monitoring
and co-ordination continue to pose challenges. The current allocation for
taxi-recapitalization is insufficient and the Committee supports the
position that this should be reviewed by the Department of Transport (DoT).
Government needs to re-establish rail networks especially in rural areas.
In addition, the process of shifting freight from road to rail should be
accelerated as this will reduce both the costs of road maintenance and
improve transport efficiency for rural and urban communities. The proposed
allocation of funds in the MTBPS to upgrade ports should assist in
improving logistics.

The Committee concurs with the recommendations of the Financial and Fiscal
Commission (FFC), specifically that the process of classifying roads should
be finalized, and that the location of the responsibility for the provision
of learner transport should be clarified. The Committee has also identified
serious deficiencies with the funding model for the Road Accident Fund
(RAF). Urgent reform is needed to stabilize the fund before 2010.

Clean water and sanitation are essential for socio-economic upliftment.
While considerable progress has been made in expanding water services and
sanitation, the Committee believes that the departments of Water Affairs
and Forestry (DWAF) and Education should work towards halving the number of
schools and clinics without water. It is unacceptable that there is under-
expenditure while there are still more than a thousand schools without
access to safe water. It is incumbent on DWAF and other departments to
ensure that no school or clinic is without toilets by the end of the first
year of the MTEF.

Although the MTBPS has allocated an indicative R3.1 billion for bulk water
infrastructure over the next three years, the Committee’s injunction to the
respective departments is that they ensure integrated planning and co-
ordination to ensure that these resources are effectively and efficiently
used as planned.

In addition, the Committee remains concerned about the maintenance of
public facilities, particularly schools, hospitals, police stations and
correctional centres. Co-ordinated efforts are required between the
Department of Public Works (DPW) and other departments and entities to
address the evident challenges in this regard.

Rural Development and Agrarian Reform

Agrarian and land reform are integral to government’s rural development,
poverty alleviation and food security strategies. As food security is vital
the Committee urges that departmental capacity be increased and the vacancy
rate be reduced. It is essential that resources are properly aligned and
that post-settlement support is significantly improved so that the
productivity of the agricultural sector can be increased. The Committee
notes the new approach developed by the Department of Land Affairs (DoLA)
to achieve an affordable and sustainable land reform which includes the
development of new financial measures, human resource programmes and
relevant products. The Committee urges the department to accelerate land
redistribution and reform.

Industrial Development and Employment Creation
Sustainable economic growth and industrial development is directly linked
to a sustainable energy policy and strategies and is essential for
government to accelerate employment creation and reduce poverty by 2014 and
beyond. While the Committee largely agrees with the various industrial
policy initiatives, the Committee urges government to ensure that such
initiatives are balanced with the need to promote competitiveness and
protect existing industries such as textiles and clothing industries.
Government support must be carefully targeted and ultimately create
sustainable industries.

The Committee welcomes the new phase of the Expanded Public Works Programme
(EPWP) which is intended to develop and transfer skills and create longer-
term employment. The implementation of this programme needs to be carefully
monitored.

Accelerating skills development must be in alignment with the prescripts of
a developmental state. Together with the financial support for EPWP and
SETAS, attention should be given to refining the programmes, curricula and
operations of these initiatives in order to meet market demands. The
Committee has taken account of progress with the Joint Initiative on
Priority Skills Development (JIPSA) and urges all social partners to invest
in this initiative.

The State-Owned Enterprises (SOEs) are key partners in industrial
development and the public infrastructure build programme. Despite the
expanding role of the SOEs in the economy, the Committee maintains that
there is a need to review these enterprises to enhance their contribution
to the developmental state and ensure that state funds are effectively
utilized. In particular, efforts are needed to ensure SOE projects are
closely aligned with government’s priorities and that they are more closely
monitored by the various oversight authorities.

RECOMMENDATIONS
Based on its observations, the Committee recommends the following:

1.    Co-ordinated and integrated planning is paramount. It is essential
    that national, provincial and local development plans are closely
    aligned.  Such measures must be implemented both vertically, between
    the spheres of government, and horizontally, within and between
    clusters and departments. To ensure co-ordinated planning, government
    should consider setting cross-cutting performance indicators for the
    respective departments.

2.    Further steps should be taken to ensure that funds allocated through
    equitable shares and the various grants are utilized for their intended
    purposes and fulfil national priorities.

3.    The Committee previously called on departments and entities to ensure
    there is a stronger correlation between human resources plans and
    budgets, and to develop innovative recruitment and mentorship
    programmes, as well as measures to safeguard against the loss of
    institutional memory.

4.    Government should prioritize training for specialized, managerial and
    administrative skills in the public service, for example, in education,
    health, trade and police services. In addition, government should
    reopen specialized institutions like nursing and teaching colleges.

5.    Given the inadequate maintenance of many public facilities,
    government should enhance co-ordination and monitoring, especially
    between the Department of Public Works (DPW) and other departments and
    entities.

6.    Further measures are required to address the evident weaknesses and
      lack of overall co-ordination in government procurement processes. For
      example, departments should procure certain services from local
      communities.

7.    Noting the existing agreement between the departments of Health and
      Defence to make hospitals more accessible, the Committee recommends
      that this be expanded to provide emergency services.

8.    The Department of Housing should provide a detailed plan on how it
      intends to eradicate informal settlements in specific areas.

9.    The deficiencies in the funding model for the Road Accident Fund
      (RAF) should be urgently addressed. The Department of Transport should
      report to the Committee on measures taken and the timetable for
      implementation.

10.   The departments of Water Affairs and Forestry, Education and Health
      should work together to halve the number of schools and clinics
      without access to safe water and sanitation by the end of the first
      year of the MTEF.

The Committee would like to thank the Public Service Commission and Human
Science Research Council for their contribution. Finally, the Committee
would like to extend its appreciation to all those who participated in the
proceedings and contributed to the compilation of the report including the
research team and secretariat.

Report to be considered.


“Annexure”: Submissions and Presentations

National Departments
Agriculture
Education
Health
Housing
Land Affairs
National Treasury
Transport
Water Affairs and Forestry

Research Organizations

Public Service Commission
Human Science Research Council

Other Submissions

J Laubscher: Sanlam
G Ballim:  Standard Bank
D Roodt: Efficient Group
Federation of Unions of South Africa (FEDUSA)
People’s Budget Campaign

                          MONDAY, 17 NOVEMBER 2008

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs
on the provisional suspension from office of Magistrate A Bacharam, dated
12 November 2008:

The  Select  Committee  on  Security  and  Constitutional  Affairs,   having
considered  the  report  on  the  provisional  suspension  from  office   of
Magistrate A Bacharam tabled by the Minister for Justice and  Constitutional
Development in terms of section 13(3)(b) of the Magistrates Act,  1993  (Act
no 90 of 1993), reports as follows:

        1. The Select  Committee  noted  from  the  report  tabled  by  the
           Minister for Justice and  Constitutional  Development  that  the
           Magistrates Commission resolved on 7  March  2008  to  recommend
           that Ms Bacharam be provisionally suspended from office in terms
           of section 13(3)(a) of the Magistrates Act, 1993.

        2. The Select Committee noted that Ms Bacharam has been  criminally
           charged for  defeating  or  obstructing  the  Administration  of
           Justice. It is alleged  that  Ms  Bacharam  was  charged  for  a
           traffic offence and that she  was  summoned  to  appear  in  the
           Scottburgh district court on  13  December  2005.   She  had  an
           option to pay an admission of  guilty  fine  of  R300-00  (three
           hundred rand). On 27 October 2005  she  was  approached  in  her
           office by the Sheriff for service of  the  summons.  Instead  of
           accepting service of the summons she called  an  interpreter  to
           her office and requested her to accept service of the summons on
           her behalf. The interpreter subsequently signed on the return of
           service and left Ms Bacharam’s office. On 13 December 2005,  the
           date of trial, all traffic  summonses  were  brought  before  Ms
           Bacharam. She dealt with  the  cases,  including  her  own.  She
           herself struck case no B7309/05 in which  she  was  an  accused,
           from the roll. The case was thereafter filed. She  did  not  pay
           the admission of guilt fine.

        3. A misconduct inquiry was set down by the Magistrates  Commission
           for 30  May  2008.  Ms  Bacharam’s  representative  requested  a
           postponement of the inquiry  pending  the  finalization  of  the
           criminal case against her.

        4. The Select Committee was advised that the criminal matter stands
           postponed until 20 November 2008.

        5. In terms of section  13(3)(c)  of  the  Magistrates  Act,  1993,
           Parliament must, as soon  as  is  reasonably  possible,  pass  a
           resolution as to whether or not the provisional suspension of  a
           magistrate is confirmed.

        6. The Select  Committee  therefore  recommends  that  the  Council
           resolves to confirm the provisional suspension of Ms Bacharam in
           terms of section 13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act.


      Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs
on the suspension/removal from office of Magistrate X I R Masimini, dated
12 November 2008:

The  Select  Committee  on  Security  and  Constitutional  Affairs,   having
considered the report on the suspension/removal from office of Magistrate  X
I  R  Masimini  tabled  by  the  Minister  for  Justice  and  Constitutional
Development in terms of section 13(4)(a) of the Magistrates Act,  1993  (Act
no 90 of 1993), reports as follows:

        7. The Select  Committee  noted  from  the  report  tabled  by  the
           Minister for Justice and  Constitutional  Development  that  the
           Magistrates Commission resolved on 7  March  2008  to  recommend
           that Mr Masimini  be  removed  from  office  on  the  ground  of
           misconduct.
        8. The Select Committee noted that Mr Masimini was convicted  in  a
           court of law of assault with the intent to  do  grievous  bodily
           harm emanating from an incident at a tavern in the  district  of
           Ezibeleni.  He assaulted a woman by pulling her by her hair  and
           hitting her with a glass tumbler on her chin,  causing  an  open
           wound.

        9. The Select Committee further noted that Mr Masimini made a false
           or incorrect statement, when on 1 November 2006 he  applied  for
           an appointment to  the  Regional  Court  Bench,  by  failing  to
           disclose in his application  that  there  was  a  criminal  case
           pending against him and that he had appeared as an accused in  a
           court of law.

       10. The Select Committee was advised  that  Mr  Masimini  was  on  a
           previous occasion found guilty of misconduct on three (3) counts
           in that he had used “foul and/or injudicious language in court”,
           that the Minister for  Justice  and  Constitutional  Development
           suspended  Mr  Masimini  from  office  and  that  Mr  Masimini’s
           remuneration has been withheld.

       11.  The  Magistrates  Commission  resolved  to  recommend  that  Mr
           Masimini be removed from office in terms of section  13(4)(a)(i)
           of the Magistrates Act.

       12. In terms of section  13(4)(c)  of  the  Magistrates  Act,  1993,
           Parliament must, as soon  as  is  reasonably  possible,  pass  a
           resolution as to whether or not the restoration to  his  or  her
           office of a magistrate so suspended is recommended.

       13. The Select  Committee  therefore  recommends  that  the  Council
           resolves to pass a resolution not to restore Mr Masimini to  the
           office as a Magistrate in  terms  of  section  13(4)(c)  of  the
           Magistrates Act, 1993.


      Report to be considered.

3.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs
      on the South African Police Service Amendment Bill [B30B- 2008
      (Reprint)] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 17 November 2008:

      The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
      considered the South African Police Service Amendment Bill [B30B- 2008
      (Reprint)] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it, reports the
      Bill with proposed amendments, as follows:

                                  CLAUSE 3

     1. On page 4, from line 45, to omit subclause (3)  and  to  substitute
        the following:


        “(3) The Head of the Directorate may, if he or she  has  reason  to
        suspect that a national priority  offence  has  been  or  is  being
        committed, request the National Director of Public Prosecutions  to
        designate a Director of Public Prosecutions to exercise the  powers
        of section 28 of the National Prosecuting Authority Act, 1998  (Act
        No. 32 of 1998).
        (4)  For  purposes  of  sub-section  (3),  a  Director  of   Public
        Prosecutions so designated, shall be deemed to be an  Investigating
        Director, as referred to in section 1 of the  National  Prosecuting
        Authority Act, 1998.
        (5)      A Director of Public  Prosecutions  referred  to  in  sub-
        section (3) may designate a member of the  Directorate  to  conduct
        the investigation or part thereof, on his or her behalf and  report
        to him or her.”.


     2. On page 5, from line 33, to omit “, and family  members  living  in
        the same household with”.


     3. On page 6, in line 52, after “necessary”, to insert “, but not less
        than four times annually”.

     4. On page 7, in line 27, after “functions” to insert “, but not  less
        than four times annually”.

                                  CLAUSE 6

       1. On page 10, in line 4, to omit “(2)” and to substitute “(3)”.


       2. On page 10, in line 6, to omit “(3)” and to substitute “(4)(b)”.

4.    First Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
      Affairs on the National Prosecuting Authority Amendment Bill [B 23B -
      2008] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 17 November 2008:

      The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
      considered the National Prosecuting Authority Amendment Bill [B23B-
      2008] (National Assembly – sec 75) referred to it, reports the Bill
      with proposed amendments as follows:


                                  CLAUSE 1

On page 2, from line 12, to omit subclause (c) and to substitute:

           (c)    by  the   substitution   for   the   definition   of
                 "Investigating Director" of the following definition:

                 " 'Investigating Director'[—
                 (a)]  means a Director of Public Prosecutions appointed
                       under section 13(1)[(aA) or] (b)[—
                       (i)   to the Directorate of Special Operations; or
                       (ii)] as the head of an Investigating Directorate
                            established in terms of section 7(1) [(1A) ,
                       as the case may be;  and
                  (b)    in  Chapter  5,  includes  the  head  of  the
Directorate                         of                         Special
Operations];";

           2.    On page 3, in line 4, to omit "section 7(1A)" and  to
substitute "section 7(1)".

                                  CLAUSE 3

      1.    On page 3, in lines 33 and 34, to omit "establish not more
           than two [additional]" and to  substitute  "establish  [not
           more than two additional] one or more".

                                  CLAUSE 8

           Clause rejected.

                                  CLAUSE 11

      1.    On page 5, in line 33, to omit "amended by the deletion of
           subsection (2)." and to substitute:

           amended—
           (a)   by the substitution for the words preceding paragraph
                 (a) of subsection (2) of the following words:
                 "The Minister  may[,  subject  to  subsection  (2),]  make
                 regulations      prescribing―";  and
           (b)   by the deletion of subsection (2).

                                  CLAUSE 13

           1.    On page 6, in line 18, to omit  "(1)"  and  to  substitute
"(2)".


5.    Second Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
      Affairs on the National Prosecuting Authority Amendment Bill [B 23B -
      2008] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 17 November 2008:

      The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
      considered the National Prosecuting Authority Amendment Bill [B23B-
      2008] (National Assembly – sec 75) referred to it, and having proposed
      amendments thereto, recommends as follows:


      The relevant Departments must  report  back  to  Parliament  regarding
      transitional arrangements. Where there are challenges,  the  Committee
      will recommend that additional resources be given to the new  unit  to
      conduct its functions  effectively.  The  Officials  of  the  relevant
      Departments must also report back on the reskilling and retraining  of
      new members of the Directorate of Priority Crimes  Investigating  Unit
      with regard to basic South African Police Service training.

      Report to be considered.

                          TUESDAY, 18 NOVEMBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent


    1) Bill passed by National Assembly on 18 November 2008:


          a) Intellectual Property Rights from Publicly Financed Research
             and Development Bill [B 46D – 2008] (National Assembly – sec
             75).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 13 – Department of Arts and
        Culture for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 13
        for 2007-2008.

2.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

     a) Report and Financial Statements of Amatola Water for the year ended
        30 June 2008, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
        the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2008.


      b) Report and Financial Statements of Umgeni Water for the year ended
         30 June 2008, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
         the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2008.

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

     a) Reports on notices issued in terms of section 106 of the Local
        Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000) in the
        Pixley Ka Seme Local Municipality; Lekwa Local Municipality and
        Nkomazi Local Municipality.


        Referred to the Select Committee on Local Government and
        Administration for consideration.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional  Affairs
   on the Criminal Procedure Amendment Bill [B42B – 2008] (National Assembly
   – sec 75), dated 18 November 2008.
   The Select Committee  on  Security  and  Constitutional  Affairs,  having
   considered the Criminal Procedure Amendment Bill [B42B  -2008]  (National
   Assembly – sec 75)  referred  to  it,  reports  the  Bill  with  proposed
   amendments as follows:

                                 LONG TITLE

1.    On page 2, in the seventh line, to omit “exungment” and to  substitute
      “expungement”.

                                  CLAUSE 3
1.    On page 5, in line 17,  to  omit  “paragraphs  (b)  and  (c)”  and  to
      substitute “paragraph (b)”.

2.    On page 5, from line 52, to omit paragraph (c).

3.    On page 6, in line 3, after “(2)”, to insert “(a)”.
4.    On page 6, in line 8, after “(1)”, to insert:
           “,  unless  the  Director-General  is  of  the  view  that   the
      expungement  of  a  particular  criminal  record   could   bring   the
      administration of justice into  disrepute  or  would  not  be  in  the
      interests of justice, in which case he or she must refer  the  matter,
      together with his or her reasons, to the Minister for a decision.
                       (b)   The Minister  must,  on  receipt  of  a  matter
      referred to him or her by the  Director-General  as  provided  for  in
      paragraph (a), issue a certificate of expungement, directing that  the
      criminal record in question be expunged, if he  or  she  is  satisfied
      that the expungement of  the  criminal  record  would  not  bring  the
      administration of justice into disrepute or would be in the  interests
      of justice.”.

5.     On  page  7,  in  line  41,  to  omit  “271B(2)”  and  to  substitute
“271B(2)(a)”.

6.    On page 7, in line 42,  after  “section”,  to  insert  “271B(2)(b)  or
section”.
                         WEDNESDAY, 19 NOVEMBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent


    (1)     Bills passed by National Assembly and National Council of
        Provinces on 19 November 2008:


        (a) Mandating Procedures of Provinces Bill [B 8F – 2007] (National
            Council of Provinces – sec 76(2)).


    2) Bill passed by National Assembly on 20 August 2008:


          a) Constitution Fifteenth Amendment Bill [B 63B – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 74).


    3) Bills passed by National Assembly on 19 November 2008:


          a) Child Justice Bill [B 49D – 2002] (National Assembly – sec
             75), with textual corrections (see Minutes of Proceedings of
             National Assembly, 19 November 2008).


          b) Broadcasting Amendment Bill [B 72B – 2008] (National Assembly
             – sec 75).


          c) Companies Bill [B 61D – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75).


          d) National Environmental Management Amendment Bill [B 36D –
             2007] (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).


          e) Medicines and Related Substances Amendment Bill [B 44D – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).


          f) Tobacco Products Control Amendment Bill [B 7D – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).


          g) Prevention of and Treatment for Substance Abuse Bill [B 12D –
             2008] (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).


          h) National Qualifications Framework Bill [B 33D – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).
          i) General and Further Education and Training Quality Assurance
             Amendment Bill [B 35D – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).


    4) Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 19 November 2008:


          a) Constitution Fourteenth Amendment Bill [B 62B – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 74).


          b) General Laws (Loss of Membership of National Assembly,
             Provincial Legislature or Municipal Council) Amendment Bill [B
             64B – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75).


          c) National Road Traffic Amendment Bill [B 39B – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).

2.    Withdrawal of Bill

    The Minister for the Public Service and Administration withdrew the
    following Bill on 11 November 2008:

    (a)     Public Administration Management Bill [B 47 – 2008] (National
        Assembly – sec 76(1)).

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson
1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


    (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly and transmitted for concurrence
         on 19 November 2008:


         (a)      Civil Aviation Bill [B 73B – 2008] (National Assembly –
             sec 75).


            The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Public
             Services of the National Council of Provinces.

TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister of Education

    (a)    Revised Strategic Plan of the Department of Education for 2008-
         2012 and the Operational Plans of the Department of Education for
         2008/9.

National Council of Provinces


1.    The Chairperson

      a) Tabling of the correspondence from Mr D Rikhotso and his co-workers
         from Limpopo Province.
         Referred to the Select Committee on Members’ Legislative Proposals.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional  Affairs
   on the Judicial Matters Amendment Bill [B 48B-2008] (National  Assembly),
   dated 18 November 2008:

   The Select Committee  on  Security  and  Constitutional  Affairs,  having
   considered the Judicial Matters Amendment  Bill  [B48B  -2008]  (National
   Assembly – sec 75) referred to it, reports that it agrees to the Bill.

   The Committee, however, wishes to make the following comments:

   The Committee recognises that the Bill is intended  to  address  a  whole
   range of practical issues in the administration of justice,  which  will,
   among others, enhance –
   (a)      access to justice;
   (b)      organisational efficiency;  and
   (c)      the transformation of justice services.


   Although the Committee raised a number of questions and concerns, it  was
   of the view that the Bill should be enacted and implemented  as  soon  as
   possible because of the positive aspects contained in it.

   The  Committee  therefore  requests  the  Department   of   Justice   and
   Constitutional Development to report back to it within one year after the
   adoption of this report by the House on the following aspects/concerns of
   the Bill which were raised during its deliberations on the Bill:

   (a)       Clause  1:  Concealment  of  birth:  Although  this  provision,
        requiring, among others, that there must be a  lawful  burial  order
        before a newly born child’s body can be disposed of, has been on the
        Statute Book since 1935, the Department is requested to  investigate
        and report back on  how  this  provision  could  impact  on  certain
        customary law practices in terms of which the bodies of  newly  born
        children are, in certain circumstances, disposed of, might  seem  to
        amount to the concealment of birth of a newly born child.   The  law
        must take these practices into account so as to ensure that criminal
        charges and prosecutions are only brought where there is an unlawful
        intention to conceal the birth of a child.
   (b)      Clauses 5 to 8, 17  and  39:   Admission  of  guilt  fines:  The
        Department must, during  the  implementation  of  these  provisions,
        consult with other stakeholders,  for  instance  the  Department  of
        Transport in respect of road traffic offences and the provincial and
        local spheres of government to ensure that there is no  conflict  in
        what  these  various  stakeholders  are  striving  to   achieve   in
        implementing their respective policies.
   (c)      Clause 9: Amendment of section 60 of the Criminal Procedure Act,
        1977: Payment of bail money: The Committee requests  the  Department
        to explore other methods of payment of bail money so  as  to  ensure
        that the latest technology  is  used  to  its  full  potential,  for
        instance payment of bail money  by  means  of  credit  cards.  Every
        effort must be made to ensure that cash payments are used only where
        necessary.
   (d)      Clause 18: Amendment of section 18 of the  Matrimonial  Property
        Act, 1984: The Department is requested  to  investigate  and  report
        back on how the law  in  this  regard  could  impact  negatively  on
        children who might be deprived of benefits  accruing  to  them  from
        their parents’ estates as a result of their parents’ litigation. The
        impact of the law in this regard on spouses in  terms  of  customary
        law must also be investigated and reported on.
   (e)      Clauses 23 to 26: Amendments to the Debt Collectors  Act,  1998:
        The Committee  raised  a  general  concern  that  persons  who  land
        themselves in debt often have to pay enormous  amounts  of  interest
        when repaying their debts. The Department  is  requested  to  report
        back on how the Debt Collectors Act  is  intended  to  address  this
        problem and whether its provisions are adequate in this regard,  and
        if not, what further measures can be put in place to ensure that the
        Act achieves its goals.
   (f)      Clause 36: Amendment of section 42 of the Criminal  Law  (Sexual
        Offences  and  Related  Matters)  Amendment  Act,  2007:  While  the
        Criminal Law (Sexual Offences and Related  Matters)  Amendment  Act,
        2007,  correctly  singles  out  sexual  offences  committed  against
        children  and  mentally  disabled   persons,   providing   for   the
        particulars of perpetrators to be included in the National  Register
        for Sex Offenders, it would  seem  as  if  sexual  offences  against
        elderly persons and infirm persons do not seem to receive  the  same
        attention. The Department is requested to revert to the Committee on
        this aspect.

2. Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs  on
   the Draft Rules of Procedure for Applications to Court in  terms  of  the
   Promotion of Access to Information Act, 2000 (Act No 2 of 2000), dated 18
   November 2008:


   The Select Committee  on  Security  and  Constitutional  Affairs,  having
   considered the Draft Rules of Procedure  for  Applications  to  Court  in
   terms of the Promotion of Access to Information Act, 2000 (Act  No  2  of
   2000), referred to the Committee (Announcements, Tablings  and  Committee
   Reports, 7 April 2008,  p  537),  recommends  that  the  Draft  Rules  be
   approved.
   The Committee, however, wishes to make the following additional comments:

These Rules have been outstanding for some  time  and  the  Committee  finds
   this regrettable, as the absence of these Rules impacts on the  effective
   implementation of the Promotion of Access  to  Information  Act;  an  Act
   which lies at the heart of our constitutional democracy.

The Committee is also of the view that the consultation process between  the
   Rules Board and various stakeholders could have been more  comprehensive.
   For that reason, the Committee will forward the  4  submissions  received
   (from ODAC, the South African Human  Rights  Commission,  Eskom  and  the
   South African History Archive) to the Rules Board for its attention.

Given the importance of these Rules and the issues  raised  in  the  various
   submissions, the Committee requires that the  Rules  Board  consider  the
   submissions, review the content  and  implementation  of  the  Rules  and
   report back to  the  Committee  within  6  months  of  the  new  term  of
   Parliament in 2009.


   On the procedure to be followed by the Rules Board for the  amendment  or
   approval of any Rules, the Committee would suggest that  any  discussions
   or consultation around new Rules or amendments to existing  Rules  should
   take place at an earlier stage. In other  words,  that  the  Rules  Board
   should ideally consult various roleplayers and reach agreement  with  the
   Minister  of  Justice  and  Constitutional  Development  before  formally
   submitting the Rules to the Minister for approval.  It  would  also  make
   sense if, in future, the Committee was provided with the  opportunity  to
   comment, albeit informally, before any amendments to the Rules are tabled
   in Parliament for approval.


   Report to be considered.



