---
title: 'National Assembly - 13 March 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2008-03-13
---

THURSDAY, 13 MARCH 2008
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:01.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr G G BOINAMO: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that at the next
sitting I shall move the following motion on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates the current high levels of violence at schools
   across the country and the inability of the Department of Education to
   deal with this problem.


The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are there motions without notice?

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, we proposed one motion, but we have
other speakers who want to propose motions. You didn’t ask if there were
any further notices of motion.

Mrs S V KALYAN: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice I shall move the
following motion on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates the recently released report Every Death Counts
   that reveals that around 75 000 children die in South Africa every year
   before they turn five years of age.

Mr C M LOWE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move
on behalf of the DA:

   That the House discusses the oversight role of Parliament, specifically
   the work of portfolio committees and holding government and Ministers to
   account.

                 DEATH OF CONSUMER JOURNALIST, ISOBEL JONES

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without notice:

  That the House–

     1) notes with profound sadness the death of food and consumer
        journalist Isobel Jones on Tuesday, 11 March 2008;


     2) further notes that she became renowned for fighting for consumer
        rights in her television programme Fair Deal that aired for nine
        years;


     3) acknowledges that as a result of her fearless work the corporate
        industry has become a more consumer friendly place;


     4) expresses its gratitude for her tireless championing of South
        African consumers’ rights; and


     5) conveys its condolences to her family and friends.

Agreed to.

 GOLD MEDAL WON BY GODFREY KHOTSO MOKOENA AT IAAF WORLD INDOOR CHAMPIONSHIPS
                                  IN SPAIN

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without notice:

  That the House –

   (1)      notes that South African long and triple jumper Godfrey Khotso
        Mokoena won a gold medal at the IAAF World Indoor Championships in
        Valencia, Spain, on 8 March 2008;


   (2)      further notes that this is South Africa’s third-ever gold medal
        at a world indoor championship and the first in a field event;


   (3)      recognises that Mokoena celebrated his twenty-second birthday on
        6 March, making him one of the exciting young talents in South
        African athletics; and


   (4)      congratulates him on his win and wishes him well for the
        upcoming Beijing Olympics in August 2008.

Agreed to.


[Applause.]

                      RAILROAD ACCIDENT AT KHAYELITSHA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr B M MKONGI (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, on Monday, 3 March 2008, three
workers who were employed by the Light Bee construction company died
tragically while on duty. The company is contracted to Metrorail to remove
street-light poles for the extension of the Khayelitsha railway line to
Macassar.

These workers were busy pulling out the poles, using a crane truck without
supervision. A pole was hooked through a chain from the truck while the
workers were holding it. The pole touched the live electric cables,
resulting in the tragic death of three workers, two of whom died instantly
while the third worker died later in hospital.

This incident happened a few kilometres from an Eskom substation. As a
precautionary measure to ensure the safety of workers, the company could
have asked Eskom to switch off the electricity before removing the poles.
These workers were supposed to have been working under supervision.

There seems to be a growing problem in the townships in that construction
companies which get state tenders employ inexperienced and untrained
people, and even underpay them.

We call for an immediate investigation into this incident. The ANC conveys
its condolences to the families of the deceased. I thank you.

          TEMPORARY HIGH COURT BUILDING IN POLOKWANE NOT DEVELOPED

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs D VAN DER WALT (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, the DA would like an
assurance from the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development that
the conversion of the vacant magistrates’ building in Polokwane to serve as
a temporary High Court, will definitely be completed by the end of May this
year.

As the matter stands now, the people from Limpopo have to travel to
Pretoria to attend High Court sittings, and this has a negative effect on
people being able to access justice services.

The great distance places an unfair burden on members of the public, and,
in terms of the constitutional right to access courts, clearly something
needs to be done urgently. How was it possible then that no work was done
between March and August last year, given the urgency of the people’s
needs? These matters need to be supervised closely.

We call on the Minister to monitor the developments closely and to
guarantee that a High Court will be operational in Polokwane during the
first half of this year. In fact, as planned, the people want to move in by
the end of May. [Applause.]

                       DISSOLUTION OF LAND BANK BOARD

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr N SINGH (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, last year the Land Bank became
embroiled in a controversy as its board at the time was dissolved amidst
allegations of misspending of about R1 billion. At the time the IFP
applauded Cabinet’s decision to launch a forensic investigation into the
board’s actions.

Recently the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs appointed a new
board for the Land Bank, but what is of great concern is that six members
of the previous board were reappointed. The IFP questions the wisdom of
this step. Surely a board that had to be dissolved should not provide any
members to a future board? What is even more disconcerting is the fact that
the new board appears to lack persons with the experience and knowledge of
agricultural matters.

The IFP welcomes the fact that some of the new members are banking
specialists, but we have to question why there is no one from the
agricultural community on the board. Even AgriSA, representing commercial
farmers, did not succeed in getting its nominee appointed to the board.

These developments are seen against the background of ratings agency Fitch
Ratings’ statement that there is a risk that the bank’s financial position
might deteriorate even further because of the absence of a turnaround
strategy and new senior personnel being employed. The bank is, for
instance, still without a CEO.

Clearly the Land Bank finds itself in a precarious position that could have
numerous negative long-term effects on the agricultural sector. The IFP
therefore urges the Minister and the new board to speedily implement a
turnaround strategy that will place the bank on a sound financial footing,
enabling it to serve its core constituency: the farmers of South Africa.
[Time expired.]

               DEATH OF PRIMA BALLERINA ASSOLUTA PHYLLIS SPIRA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr H P MALULEKA (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, it was with deep sadness and
regret that South Africa learnt of the untimely death of legendary prima
ballerina Ms Phyllis Spira, who passed away in Cape Town on 11 March. In
Phyllis Spira, South Africa was blessed with a highly gifted and creative
artist whose life transcended manmade barriers to become a prima ballerina
assoluta.

At the height of her career in 1984, Ms Spira won the highest accolade in
dance in recognition of her presence and power as a mover and shaker who
was destined to reshape and influence cultural trends, especially in dance.
After her retirement in 1988, Ms Spira remained connected to dance. She
continued to work as a teacher for the next 10 years, channelling her
energies not only into nurturing new talent, but also into creating styles
that had a distinctly South African rhythm.

Significantly, Ms Spira was the founding member of Dance For All, a
pioneering creative project that introduced dance as a career option and a
creative activity to countless youths in the Western Cape townships. Today
there is a plethora of young stars that has emerged from this programme;
young stars who fly the flag of a liberated South Africa around the world.
Her passing is a tragic loss for the dance community and the cultural life
of our country, but she remains a guiding light that will shine blessings
on all our creative endeavours as South Africans. Our deepest sympathies go
to her family. Thank you.

                ROBBERIES AT O R TAMBO INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Rev K R J MESHOE (UCDP): Deputy Speaker, the ACDP notes with great
disappointment reports that police are unable to find evidence to link the
robberies to people who were followed from O R Tambo International Airport
and to a crime syndicate operating from that airport. A number of people
have fallen victim to the robbers after declaring their valuables at the
airport. In most cases, the robbers knew exactly what valuables their
victims were carrying and how much money they had.

Many of these attacks occurred outside hotels and guesthouses, in driveways
and even on the side of the road. For the police spokesperson to call the
robberies opportunistic, coincidental and random is insensitive to the
victims, some of whom managed to recognise the assailants after seeing them
at the airport.

The ACDP calls on the Minister to request the Scorpions to investigate the
existence of an organised crime syndicate targeting travellers who enter
the country through O R Tambo International Airport. I don’t doubt the fact
that the Scorpions will be able to sting where the SAPS and other task
teams have failed.

A decision not to require foreign nationals arriving at O R Tambo
International Airport to furnish customs officials with their addresses in
the country will not solve the problem of robberies. Criminals operating
from there must be removed, even if it means by force, so as to minimise
the damage to our reputation as a country in the eyes of the world. Thank
you.

                       DECREASING BUSINESS CONFIDENCE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs P DE LILLE (ID): Madam Deputy Speaker, according to the Rand Merchant
Bank and the Bureau for Economic Research, business confidence has dropped
to its lowest level in seven years. While the causes of this drop in
confidence are partially global, the Eskom crisis, the related job losses
and talk of a water crisis, amongst other things, all contribute to this
decreasing business confidence.

The ID is extremely concerned about the effect this slump in our economic
outlook will have on the ordinary South African and the poor in particular.
Of primary concern to the ID is the job security of ordinary South
Africans. Our people are facing hard times and we need to assure them that
something is being done at the highest level to ease the increasing
financial burden they face. Thank you.

              SCULPTOR MS NORIA MABASA ACCLAIMED FOR GOOD WORK

                            (Member’s Statement)

Muf T E LISHIVHA (ANC): Ndo livhuwa, dzangano la ANC li khou toda u isa
dzindivhuwo kha mushumo wavhudi we Vho Noria Mabasa vha itela lushaka
lwothe. Vho Noria Mabasa vho bebwa Venda nga 1938 ngei Xigalo Vunduni la
Limpopo. Ndi mutsila a sa ofhi we a shuma zwavhudi lwa minwaha ya mahumi
mararu kha lifhasi la u tatisana nga vhutsila na mashangodavha.

Vho thoma nga 1983 vhe muvhumbi wa vumba. Nga nwaha wa gidi datahe
fumaloina vho dzhia linwe liga la u dzhenelela kha zwithu zwiswa zwa u
vhada nga thanda. Mvelelo dza vhutsila havho dzo vhonala sa muthu ane a
khou vhangisa vhathu vhane vha tevhedza sialala na vhanwe vhatsila vha
vhanna.

Vho Noria ndi munwe wa vhathu vha ndeme vhane vha kha di thogomela ndivho
yashu ya kale na u vha mudededzi vhukuma o dinetshedzelaho u kovha ndivho
na vhukoni havho. Vhunzhi ha mishumo yavho ya vhutsila yo taniwa kha
miziamu ya vhutsila ya maduvha ano ngei United Kingdom, Germany, Miziamu wa
Stodulky, Amsterdam, Holland, Italy na hunwe hunzhi-hunzhi.

Naho zwo ralo, mushumo wavho u di taniwa na fhano hayani. Sa ndila ya u
takalela mushumo wavho une wa dzulela u tutuwedza lushaka, dzhango na
lifhasi, mushumo wa vhutsila ha Vho Noria ... [Tshifhinga tsho fhela.]
(Translation of Tshivenda member’s statement follows.)

[Ms T E LISHIVHA (ANC): Thank you, the ANC would like to convey its
gratitude for the good work that Mrs Noria Mabasa has done for the whole
nation. Mrs Noria Mabasa was born in Venda in 1938 at Xigalo in the Limpopo
province. She is a fearless sculptor who worked very well for thirty years
in the world of art competitions - competing with the international
community.

She started in 1983 as a potter. In 1984 she ventured into something new
–that was art through sculpture. The results of her artistic brilliance
made her look as though she was going against those who adhere to tradition
as well as the male sculptors.

Mrs Noria is one of those important people who are the custodians of our
traditional knowledge as well as being a good teacher who is dedicated to
sharing her knowledge and expertise. Most of her works of art are displayed
in modern arts museums in the United Kingdom, Germany, Stodulky, Amsterdam,
Holland, Italy and many other places.

Nevertheless, her work is also displayed here at home. As a way of
appreciating her work which always encourages the nation, the continent and
the world - the artistic work of Mrs Noria ... [Time expired.]]

    DENUNCIATION OF DECRIMINALISATION OF PROSTITUTION FOR 2010 WORLD CUP

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L M GREEN (FD): Deputy Speaker, in little over two years we will be
hosting the 2010 Soccer World Cup which is expected to draw 3 million
international visitors to our country. South Africa is rich in many aspects
in order to adequately meet the varied needs of our visitors. However, at
one time there was talk of decriminalising prostitution as an added
attraction to overseas visitors.

In fact, the former National Police Commissioner was in favour of such a
move, and one member of this House is reported to have said, “Legalising
prostitution is one of the things that would make 2010 a success because we
hear of many rapes because people don’t have access to prostitutes.”
[Interjections.]

Both these gentlemen were publicly lambasted for their positions. It is in
echoing this denunciation by a broad sector of society that the FD, a
partner of the Christian Democratic Alliance, calls for an end to
speculation that the legalising of prostitution ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon members, please!

Mr L M GREEN: ... will be considered for 2010 or at any other time in the
future.

We wish to remind this House that soccer is a beautiful game and any
attempt to associate it with prostitution is to damage that reputation. The
2010 World Cup is more than soccer; it is intended to showcase the road
this country has travelled in overcoming the past injustices, divisions and
oppression. Decriminalising prostitution should not be viewed as a
progressive act to be counted among the achievements of a free nation.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, order! Hon member, your time has expired.

Mr L M GREEN: Thank you, Chair. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: In future, don’t break our furniture when emphasising
your points. [Laughter.]

       SCHOOLS REPORTED TO BE THE MOST DANGEROUS PLACES IN THE COUNTRY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G G BOINAMO (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, a report of the Human Rights
Commission released this week shows that schools have become the most
dangerous places in the country to be in. This situation must be addressed
urgently and with energy. The DA therefore calls for a parliamentary debate
in which the Minister of Education can explain exactly how she intends to
deal with this crisis.

The DA has already made various proposals in this regard. Firstly, a reply
to a DA question shows that the Department of Education has no database of
violent incidents at schools. This must change if we are to know how to
better deal with this problem. In addition, we need dedicated funding for
security, counselling and education programmes for schools. The DA’s
alternative budget for 2008 makes provision for R350 million to provide a
budget of R23000 a year to each of the 15 most-at-risk schools to address
their security needs.

We also need to ensure that each school has a code of conduct in place in
order that provision is made to take violent learners out of the mainstream
education system, that educators are trained in managing difficult learners
and that the “Adopt-a-Cop” programme is rolled out in every school. Thank
you.

                      INJURIES INFLICTED ON FARMWORKER

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S ABRAM (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the media reports that a bakkie
driven by a young person, accompanied by a passenger, dragged a farmworker,
38-year-old Willem Paulse, by his hair on a farm in the George district of
the southern Cape, inflicting severe injuries on him, inter alia, by
driving over his right leg. This alleged despicable deed again highlights
the plight of farmworkers who are subjected by some in our society to
inhumane treatment and abuse, at times with fatal consequences.

It is reported that the perpetrators, two brothers by the name of
Oosthuizen, appeared in the George magistrates’ court on 7 March 2008 on a
charge of attempted murder and were released on R2 000 bail each. What a
pity; a life worth only R2 000. The ANC calls on the law-enforcement
agencies to pursue this case relentlessly and to thoroughly investigate the
motive informing this dastardly act. Vulnerable members of our society must
be protected against all actions which infringe upon their basic human
rights and dignity.

The ANC conveys to Mr Paulse its best wishes for a speedy recovery from his
injuries, and calls upon all relevant stakeholders to assist and stand by
him, his family and loved ones and other farmworkers who witnessed the
attack in order for them to overcome this traumatic period in their lives.
Hands off our vulnerable citizens! Thank you. [Applause.]

                           LARGE-SCALE CABLE THEFT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr H J BEKKER (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, on several occasions in the past
I have raised the issue of the damage being done to our economy by large-
scale cable theft. The seriousness of this situation forced me to introduce
a private legislative proposal to declare cable theft a form of sabotage
and to make it an economic crime that threatens the national security of
the Republic.

Against this background, the IFP welcomes the arrest this week of 10
persons in Cape Town who allegedly stole copper bronze statues of two MK
veterans. The arrests were made after a scrap dealer alerted the
authorities. The IFP applauds the actions of the scrap dealer, proving that
they are a vital link in fighting this crime. The IFP also welcomes the
arrest of four members of an international copper theft syndicate operating
out of Pretoria.

Police seized copper worth millions of rand and also seized hijacked and
stolen vehicles. What is particularly disconcerting about this arrest was
that two of the arrested persons were former police officers, underlining
yet again the possibility that former and serving police officers are
involved in organised crime, thereby unfortunately tainting the image of
thousands of exemplary, dedicated and honest police officers. I thank you.

              EXCELLENCE AWARDS FOR CORRECTIONAL SERVICES STAFF

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D V BLOEM (ANC): Deputy Speaker, on Friday evening the Chairperson of
the National Council of Provinces, the chairperson of the Select Committee
on Correctional Services and I had the honour of being part of the
inaugural national excellence awards hosted by the Department of
Correctional Services at Emperors Palace. The awards are one of many
initiatives by the department, aimed at fully appreciating its best
resource: the staff and officials.

From a parliamentary oversight perspective, the event will go a long way in
improving service delivery and boosting staff morale. The awards also seek
to inculcate a spirit of pride, dedication and commitment among public
servants and are in recognition of their hard work.

These are men and women who toil hard to ensure that the department meets
its constitutional mandate of providing a professional and ethical service.
These officials are the ones responsible for sustaining the improvement
made by the department in reducing escapes and in improving the overall
performance of the department.

I speak on behalf of many when I say that we take our hats off in
recognition of their excellent performance and that we trust that the
awards will indeed inspire all Correctional Services officials. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

                  UNDERSPENDING BY DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S B FARROW (DA): Deputy Speaker, the DA notes with concern the report to
the Joint Budget Committee yesterday, that the Department of Transport has
only spent 5,97% of its capital expenditure budget for the first three
quarters of the 2007-08 financial year.

Underspending is a direct result of poor planning and management by those
in charge. Those guilty of underperformance must be called to account. It
must not be forgotten that it was under the hon Jeff Radebe, as Minister
for Public Enterprises, that the problem at Eskom began to emerge.

The taxi recapitalisation project and the Gautrain form the nucleus of
South Africa’s transport future, and the government cannot afford to
underspend in this regard. It is unacceptable that the department has not
made use of available funds to implement its overall programmes despite the
fact that South Africa already has a transport infrastructure crisis.

The lack of expenditure puts into doubt the viability of the taxi
recapitalisation project and the Gautrain, but equally important is the
vast backlog on road and rail infrastructure, which is estimated at R200
billion and R25 billion respectively.

Transport is the backbone of the economy, and it is high time the Minister
took heed of its importance in this country. His failure to do so will add
to the current decline in the business confidence index, and as the Cape
Times editorial of last month aptly put it, “We will be on a road to
nowhere.” Thank you.

   INCORRECT PRESS REPORTS OF POLICE NOT RESPONDING TO CALLS ABOUT MISSING
                                    CHILD

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G D SCHNEEMAN (ANC): Deputy Speaker, during the evening of Sunday, 9
March 2008, Gofaone Tyatya, the seven-year-old daughter of Evelyn Tyatya,
was murdered in Zandspruit. On Monday morning, after having been informed
of this tragedy and that residents were marching to the Honeydew police
station, I went to the police station where I interacted with both the
residents and police officials.

According to press reports, it is alleged that the SA Police Service from
that Honeydew police station failed to respond to calls that the child had
gone missing. This is incorrect, and the SA Police Service has issued a
statement to correct the facts that had been incorrectly reported.

I have also had discussions with the station commissioner and the community
policing forum chairperson, who have both indicated that it was incorrect
that the police did not respond.

We would like to commend all those police officials who were involved in
arresting a man in connection with this murder on Tuesday, 11 March 2008.
Further, we would like to appeal to residents of Zandspruit to express
their views within the ambit of the law. The blocking of Beyers Naude
Drive, as happened this past Monday, is both illegal and unacceptable.
We would also like to appeal to members of this House, and in particular to
the hon Mike Waters of the DA, to make statements based on facts, and not
on what they read in newspapers or on what they may hear on the radio. The
ANC conveys its sincere condolences to the family and friends of the late
Gofaone Tyatya. Thank you. [Applause.]

          MILLIONS SET ASIDE FOR ROAD CONSTRUCTION IN EASTERN CAPE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Nksz N M MDAKA (ANC): Sekela-Somlomo obekekileyo, urhulumente oxhuzula
imikhala nokhokelwa ngumbutho wesizwe i-ANC, nobambisene noluntu
ngokubanzi, uya kuthi gqolo usebenzela ubomi obungcono bakhe wonke ubani
ongummi weli lizwe.

Urhulumente wephondo leMpuma Koloni ubekele bucala izigidi zeerandi
ezingama-240 zokwakha indlela eyaziwa njenge-Zithulele Hospital Road.
Umsebenzi wokwakha le ndlela uqalile kwiveki le siyiphethayo. Lo msebenzi
wenzeka kwingingqi yaseMthatha, phesheya kweNciba.

Kukholelwa ukuba olu lwakhiwo ludale amakhulu-khulu amathuba emisebenzi
kubahlali bengingqi, kwaye lukwabonisa ngokuphandle ukuzimisela
korhulumente okhokelwa ngumbutho wesizwe i-ANC, ukuphucula iindawo
zasemaphandleni, apho kugquba indlala nentlupheko khona. Ndiyabulela.
[Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa member’s statement follows.)

[Ms N M MDAKA (ANC): Hon Deputy Speaker, the government in charge, which is
led by the national organisation, the ANC, together with the people in
general, will, without fail, work for a better life for all the citizens of
this country.

The government of the Eastern Cape has set aside R240 million for the
construction of a road called Zithulele Hospital Road. The construction of
this road began this week. This happens in the area of Mthatha, across the
Kei.

It is believed that this road construction will create hundreds of job
opportunities for the residents of the area, and it shows clearly the
commitment of the government, led by the national organisation, the ANC, to
better rural areas, where poverty and starvation prevail. Thank you.
[Applause.]]

                      RAILROAD ACCIDENT AT KHAYELITSHA

                            (Minister’s Response)

UMPHATHISWA WEZEMISEBENZI: Somlomo, kubuhlungu kwaye kulusizi kakhulu ukufa
kwabasebenzi kakubi kangaka, kude kuqatsele ukuba buhlungu xa belinyazwa
besanzakaliswa ngabom, njengale ndlela imanyumnyezi nemasikisi abasweleke
ngayo abasebenzi eJoji.

Kuloo makhaya ahlelwe lilifu elimnyama, egameni likarhulumente ne-ANC,
sithi, “Ngxee!” “Lalani ngenxeba”. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Madam Speaker, It is very sad that workers die in
this horrible manner; it is even worse when they are deliberately exposed
to danger, as shown by the gruesome manner in which workers in George died.

To those families who lost their loved ones, on behalf of the government
and the ANC, we extend our heartfelt condolences.]

There is the Occupational Health and Safety Accord that was signed between
government and the labour movement Business Unity SA on behalf of
employers. It remains the responsibility of the employer to ensure the
safety of his or her workers at the workplace.

Workers should not go to work to die. That is not their main objective when
they look for jobs; they look for jobs in order to be able to pay their
bills and feed their families. These are family members; these are our
brothers and sisters.

Accidents can be prevented, and I’m almost certain that even the accident
in Khayelitsha could have been prevented. I want to assure the hon member
that we will leave no stone unturned. That is why the ANC is in government
and will remain in government. [Applause.]

                ROBBERIES AT O R TAMBO INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT
                       DECREASING BUSINESS CONFIDENCE

                           (Minister’s Responses)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Deputy Speaker, I’d like to respond to two
statements by the hon Meshoe and the hon De Lille. Unfortunately, the hon
Meshoe bases all of his statement on press reports that are very poorly
founded.

The Border Control Operational Co-Ordinating Committee is chaired by the SA
Revenue Service and that is why I am standing here to explain the position.
We will leave no stone unturned, because there have been very many untruths
told about the situation. Recently, a newspaper reported that a customs
form was even found at the house, when that form had in fact never been
submitted, but work is under way on this issue.

There was an issue that arose yesterday too - whether it’s related to the
airport or not, we can’t say. But we will leave no stone unturned in
ensuring that we can deal with this issue at the airport. You don’t need
the Scorpions or anybody; it’s simply a matter of crime prevention and
establishing exactly who might be involved in these matters.

In respect of hon De Lille, again, unfortunately, her statement is based on
a very bad story in one of the newspapers this morning. The Bureau of
Economic Research survey didn’t talk about a slump. In fact, 50% is a
reasonable mark that you would get in most countries. We’ve come off very
strong highs over a period now, and the valuation in this report is 48%. So
the sensationalism in the Business Day today is completely out of order.

There isn’t any question about Eskom in the survey – I’ve looked at it
myself. There isn’t any question. How does a journalist arrive at this
story? Only by sucking it from her thumb.

Similarly, the question about the political impact, namely “What
constraining impact does the political environment in South Africa have?”,
only went to a subsection of the total of 3 300 surveys, and that only went
to manufacturing. And the only answers that you can give to this question
are: “Not at all”; “slightly”; or “very much”.

So, when a journalist takes all of this because they are ill-informed and a
subeditor smokes something that they shouldn’t smoke in a newsroom, and
they put this together, ordinary people think that we are in a slump in
this economy - not true now, and not true for this year. Thank you. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

         SCHOOLS REPORTED TO BE MOST DANGEROUS PLACES IN THE COUNTRY

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Deputy Speaker, I haven’t as yet had sight of
the report that the hon Boinamo quoted as fact in the statement he made. I
would want to read the report. I don’t know if the hon Boinamo has read it.
I suspect that he read the headlines in the Cape Times and based his
statement on that.

I do wish to look at the report, because I’m told that the report indicates
that one in four children do point to schools as places where they feel
most scared or where they have experienced violence, while three out of
four children cite other spaces in South Africa, primarily the home and the
community.

Now, any danger to children is something all of us should act upon. It is
not quite accurate to give an impression that the Department of Education
is not doing anything.

The Department of Education is addressing this matter. We are working with
institutions that are assisting us to address the question of violence in
schools. For example, we have begun a process of collecting information on
incidents in schools. Secondly, we have said that we are addressing the
matter of educational support services, which include the counselling and
psychological services that are referred to.

Since 1996, the Schools Act has required schools to have codes of conduct.
Therefore all of us should be working with schools to ensure that every
school has a code of conduct, and the majority of schools I visit do indeed
have codes of conduct.

The removal of learners is something I myself have spoken of in this House,
and it is something we are addressing. The Adopt-A-Cop programme is a
programme of the Department of Education and the Department of Safety and
Security, and that exists and is working in many schools.

The matter of violence in our schools is not one that we should bring to
this House and glorify; it is a very tragic and worrying situation. And all
of us must work with our schools, work within our communities and work in
our homes to ensure that children in our country are protected and treated
with the safety and dignity that every child deserves. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

               DEATH OF PRIMA BALLERINA ASSOLUTA PHYLLIS SPIRA

              SCULPTOR MS NORIA MABASA ACCLAIMED FOR GOOD WORK
                           (Minister’s Responses)

The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Deputy Speaker, I am responding to two
statements about two South African artists – one from the far south of our
country and the other from the far north. Both of these South African
artists were women.

Ms Phyllis Spira was indeed one of South Africa’s greatest dancers and, to
her eternal glory and memory, she ploughed back into society what it had
given her. Dance for All, a programme she established here in the Western
Cape, will be a monument to her memory. Regrettably, she left this
existence on 11 March 2008 after a short illness.

Noria Mabasa is a wood sculptor from the Limpopo province. She too has
become a world-renowned artist and she derives her work, she says, from
visions and dreams of the people. I don’t know whether or not they are
induced by the substances that Minister Manuel was referring to!

She too ploughed something back into her community and established a studio
from which she taught a number of apprentices. When we discovered that the
workspace she was using was both inadequate and ill-equipped, the
Department of Arts and Culture assisted her in establishing a proper studio
which is now the site from which she operates a training programme for the
youth of her community.
I think both these women deserve to be honoured by this country and, in the
case of Ms Mabasa, she was actually awarded one of our leading awards in
2007. Thank you. [Applause.]

              EXCELLENCE AWARDS FOR CORRECTIONAL SERVICES STAFF

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Deputy Speaker, I would like
to respond to the statement made by the hon Bloem. Firstly, I thank him as
the chairperson of the portfolio committee - and the hon Kgoshi Mokoena as
the chairperson of the select committee - for gracing the occasion of the
excellence awards on Friday evening. I am sure he can confirm that fun was
had on Friday night.

Secondly, I would also like to agree completely with the contents of the
statement made by the hon Bloem. I have always said that money is not the
only thing that can be thrown at people. Simple recognition and
acknowledgment go a long way. Also, I want to reiterate that not all public
servants, as I have said before in this House, are corrupt and lazy. Many
of them, the majority of them, actually go the extra mile in the execution
of their duties and service delivery to the relevant government
departments.

I also want to congratulate all the award recipients. We urge them to do
even more and to encourage their colleagues to do likewise, not just in the
Department of Correctional Services, but across all government departments.
Lastly, I just want to confirm that the Department of Correctional Services
is indeed a place of new beginnings and we can honestly say that we serve
with pride. Thank you. [Applause.]

 INCORRECT PRESS REPORTS OF POLICE NOT RESPONDING TO CALLS OF MISSING CHILD
                           LARGE-SCALE CABLE THEFT

                           (Minister’s Responses)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Deputy Speaker, firstly, I
would like to respond to the statement by hon Schneeman.

I would like to welcome and commend him for his work in making sure that he
corrected and went on a fact-finding mission at Honeydew police station
instead of depending on the media, which tends to distort information from
time to time. I agree with the hon member about the hon Mike Waters of the
DA. Unfortunately, the DA is a party which tends to depend on newspapers.
[Interjections.] All that they are saying in this House is based on
newspapers and, unfortunately, the newspapers are hellbent ...
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, please!

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: ... the newspapers are hellbent
on not reporting the truth about the good work done by the police.
[Interjections.]

Hon member, you were doing your constituency work, hence you were able to
go to the Honeydew police station to verify the facts. We welcome the truth
at all times where it happens.

I have one more issue. Hon Bekker, I would like to bring to your attention
that the issue of cable theft or copper theft in South Africa is an issue
of concern for us as the SA Police Service. We take this seriously. We are
very aware of the syndicates. Currently, we have set up a working group on
the theft of nonferrous metals in our country.

We agree with you that it creates a lot of economic suffering among our
people. The issue I want to raise, though, is that I am not sure whether
the route you are taking - through your Private Members’ Bill - of
introducing the subject of treason to this House will indeed assist us. I
must assure you it is an issue which we are busy with. We intend to make
sure that, at all times, we are seized with it. We are hopeful about the
work done by the police. This does not only concern syndicates. A lot of
people have been arrested in our country who were involved in cable theft.
Thank you. [Applause.]

                   MANDATING PROCEDURES OF PROVINCES BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

There was no debate.

Declarations of vote:

Ms C B JOHNSON: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, the Mandating Procedures
of Provinces Bill is a constitutional requirement and deals with certain
procedural matters in the National Council of Provinces.

Section 65(2) of the Constitution requires that there must be an active
Parliament to provide for a uniform procedure in terms of which the
provincial legislatures confer authority on their delegates to cast votes
on their behalf in the NCOP. There is currently no uniformity in the
various provinces on how such provincial legislatures confer this authority
on their delegations to cast votes on their behalf.

Item 21(5) of schedule 6 to the Constitution does, however, provide that
until such time as this legislation has been passed, each provincial
legislature may determine its own procedure, and therefore what provincial
legislatures have done up to now is to set the procedures out in their
respective standing rules. The proposed uniform procedure, as required by
the Constitution, is now set out in the Mandating Procedures of Provinces
Bill, which is the Bill before the House today.

The Bill aims to set out the procedures to be followed by provincial
legislatures in respect of legislative mandates, voting mandates,
negotiating mandates and final mandates. Initially, the Bill only provided
for mandates in respect of Bills. However, the Portfolio Committee on
Justice and Constitutional Development, in its deliberations, found that
there may be other matters or questions for which the NCOP may require
mandates, such as the election of a chairperson or when a mediation
committee has to be convened. For that purpose, the portfolio committee
inserted the definition of a question, and we’ve defined a question as
being, “any matter affecting a province which requires a decision by the
NCOP”. All other amendments effected by the portfolio committee are purely
technical and/or consequential in nature.

Finally, it should be noted that all nine provincial legislatures, and the
SA Local Government Association, have been consulted in the drafting of the
Bill. Having said that, the ANC supports the Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L K JOUBERT: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, this piece of
legislation is long overdue. Provision for it was made in the 1996
Constitution, by section 65(2). And why it took so long – more than 12
years – I do not understand. Nevertheless, the DA welcomes this Bill and we
will support it.

It is a very short Bill; it has only has nine clauses and the body,
excluding definitions, is but one page. We also approved it in record time
in the committee. Although it took a long time to come to Parliament, this
Bill comes at a very opportune time. Up until now mandates were not very
important, since the ANC controlled all the provinces and the mandates
could, for all practical purposes, be decided in Luthuli House. However,
this is going to change.

With the elections around the corner and the real possibility that the DA
will in the near future govern some provinces, mandates will become very
important from next year. [Interjections.] The Speaker and the premier in a
province will no longer be able to take decisions on mandates on their own.
There will have to be a debate and the smaller parties will have an
opportunity to voice their views, which is more in line with the open and
democratic society that we stand for.

I also envisage that open debates will in future open the opportunity for
bargaining issues between parties, which will also enhance democracy. The
DA supports this Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr N SINGH: Madam Deputy Speaker, the IFP feels that it is appropriate to
deal with the mandating procedures of provinces in legislation. The
mandating procedure is fundamental to the work of the National Council of
Provinces and cannot be left to ad hoc arrangements or decisions by
officials.

We are dealing with two types of mandates in this Bill, the negotiating
mandate and the final mandate. And I want to concentrate on the final
mandate. The IFP’s position is not to prescribe the content of the final
mandate given by the provincial legislatures to the permanent delegates,
but that the detailed procedures that are to be followed in arriving at the
final mandate should be prescribed in law, so that the end product is owned
jointly by the provincial legislature and the NCOP.

One of the features of the final mandate is its validity and compliance
with procedure. In this regard, the IFP supports the provision that the
Speaker of a provincial legislature or a designated person must sign the
final mandate after carefully checking that all formal procedures have been
followed correctly.

Hon members must remember that it is the traditional role of Speakers in
parliaments around the world to ensure that the correct procedures are
followed in House business. The IFP therefore believes that it should be so
in this case. The role of the Speaker would therefore be to certify that
all formal legal steps have been followed, including public participation,
advertising and public hearings. This would ensure the validity of the
final mandate and full compliance with the legal procedures set out in this
legislation.

At the same time, while we support the Bill, the IFP also wishes to
emphasise that it is the responsibility of the Speaker to ensure that due
cognisance is taken of public sentiments on issues. The case in point here
is the Matatiele issue in terms of which the public overwhelmingly gave a
certain view and the committee of KwaZulu-Natal went against that
particular view. I hope that matter is reopened in this particular House at
some time.

Also, being a finance person and being in the provincial parliament at one
time, the unnecessary cost that is involved when members have to travel
from their respective provinces to Cape Town for five or ten minutes is
something that has to be looked at. I do hope that the Chairperson of the
NCOP will look into this and that more use is made of video conferencing,
because I understand that video conferencing facilities have been made
available at certain committee rooms in this Parliament. We will support
this Bill. Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker.

Mr S N SWART: Madam Deputy Speaker, the ACDP has no objection to the
contents of this Bill. Our concern, however, relates to the delay in the
passing of this Bill and the constitutional implications of this.

The enabling constitutional provision, item 21(1) of schedule 6, states
that where, as in this case ...

  the Constitution requires the enactment of legislation, that legislation
  must be enacted ... within a reasonable period of the date the new
  Constitution took effect...

which we know was 4 February 1997. The question then arises whether the
passing of this legislation in March 2008 can be said to have occurred
within that reasonable period.

In the UDM-ACDP floor-crossing case, the Constitutional Court held that:
“In determining what was a reasonable period, it was necessary to have
regard to all relevant facts and circumstances.” The court went on to find
that having regard to all the circumstances, an amendment passed more than
five years after the Constitution had come into force, was not passed
within a reasonable period.

Even setting aside that court decision, by what stretch of the imagination
can it be said that this Bill, passed more than 12 years after the
Constitution took effect, will be passed within a reasonable period?

The reasons given for the delay by the officials, for what is a relatively
straightforward piece of legislation, are not convincing, and we as the
ACDP also did not get a satisfactory answer to this legal issue. Therefore,
we believe that this Bill could be open to constitutional challenge, which
would possible, in turn, open all legislation passed by the NCOP to
challenge.

However, notwithstanding our reservations, the ACDP appreciates the need
for a uniform procedure for provinces, and we will support this Bill. I
thank you.

Declarations of vote made on behalf of the African National Congress, the
Democratic Alliance, the Inkatha Freedom Party and the African Christian
Democratic Party.

Bill read a second time.

   QUALITY EDUCATION, HEALTH AND ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITIES ARE KEY TO SHAPING
               AFRICAN WOMEN’S ADVANCEMENT IN THE 21ST CENTURY

                    (Debate on International Women’s Day)

The SPEAKER: Madam Deputy Speaker, ladies and gentlemen, hon members, good
afternoon. I propose, firstly, to talk about International Women’s Day: its
history, its background and its significance.
I would also like to touch on some new activities that focus on women,
using the opportunity presented by International Women’s Day every year.
Lastly, I will talk about the recent Pan-African Women’s Organisation
congress to which this Parliament sent 15 delegates.

It is important for us to note that the background to International Women’s
Day is a very progressive one, in that in the early years of the 20th
century the labour movement in North America and Europe was preoccupied
with issues of better working conditions for all workers, but, in
particular, there were also demonstrations. And the particular
demonstration from which this day comes was a demonstration in New York on
8 March 1908, at which 15 000 women, led by garment workers who were
fighting for better conditions in their workplaces, demonstrated for their
rights.

The day grew to become a focal point for progressive mankind, womenkind
included. In 1910, at a conference of the Socialist International, a
resolution was adopted that this day be observed every year. This is a very
important day and has since developed into a day on which different
countries and international forums come together around different themes,
depending on the preoccupations of that time.

This year the theme for International Women’s Day is “Shaping Progress”.
You may have seen our own women, led by our comrade, Minister Geraldine
Fraser-Moleketi, also in New York, raising issues that relate to the women
of South Africa, because the United Nations Commission on the Status of
Women has been creating a space for countries and member states of the UN
to report on the progress they have made in terms of addressing the issues
of women in their countries.

We must also remember that from 1975 to 1985 the whole world, under the
United Nations, observed a decade for women. It was during that time that
the world agreed that it was necessary to put in place a system whereby
countries would be compelled to give regular reports on progress in the
various member states.

In particular, countries have to report on the United Nations’ Convention
on the Elimination of All forms of Discrimination, Against Women.
Unfortunately, we can’t be proud when it comes to our reporting track
record. We have reported once to the United Nations.

I must say that we are proud that we are one of the countries that ratified
Cedaw without any reservations whatsoever. However, we have only reported
once, and yet we are supposed to report more regularly. We owe the UN two
reports, and there is a third report coming up.

I believe that we have to make sure that, through our own Joint Monitoring
Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Women, we follow
up on this matter in terms of our oversight role as Parliament, to check as
to when we are going to have another report and to make sure that the next
report comes to this Parliament so that it can be scrutinised before it is
again submitted to the United Nations. This was an issue, actually, that
came up among ourselves here in Parliament on Friday, 7 March 2008, when we
were celebrating International Women’s Day.

I take this opportunity to also ask hon members in the different portfolio
committees to take responsibility for looking at what is happening within
their portfolios, at what we have committed ourselves to in terms of Cedaw,
in terms of the Beijing Platform for Action and other African instruments.
This would enable us to use the opportunity of Parliament and the oversight
played by various portfolio committees to look at the extent to which we
are complying with the commitment we have made internationally.

I now wish to turn to the question of the Pawo congress that I mentioned
earlier. The theme of the 9th congress of Pawo, which took place in
Boksburg from 14 to 17 February 2008, was “Shaping the future of African
women for the 21st Century”. If you look at the international theme, which
is “Shaping progress”, this Pawo theme corresponds well with that
particular theme. Today we, ourselves, are debating the issue, having
decided on our own theme but picking up on some of the issues that were
raised at the Pawo congress.


Perhaps I should go back to the question, “Who is Pawo?” Pawo is the Pan-
African Women’s Organisation, formed in 1962. South African women, proudly
so, are founder members represented by PAC women as well as ANC women.


The Pawo congress that was held in Boksburg has not yet come up with a
report, and we promise that the report will be tabled here in this
Parliament. However, we have circulated and ATCed the declaration from the
Pawo congress.


The Pawo congress, among many issues that it looked at, talked about the
inaccessibility and inadequacy of social infrastructure in Africa in terms
of women’s participation and women’s access to some of the services and the
rights.

The second issue was the ongoing challenges faced by women in accessing
quality education, health and economic opportunities. Those are the issues
we have highlighted in terms of the theme we decided on for our own debate
today. The third issue is the challenges faced by rural women living in
abject poverty and the inaccessibility of information and technology. The
other issue concerns the challenges faced by women in the area of
representativity of women in decision-making processes.

The last issue concerns the large numbers of women who are still subjected
to hunger, humiliation, pain, conflict and other forms of violence, and the
impact of the HIV/Aids pandemic on the survival status and quality of life
of African women. These are some of the problems that are still rampant on
the African continent, where women are really the main victims.

To this end, resolutions were adopted to address the aforementioned issues
of which the following speak specifically to the advancement of health,
education and economic opportunities for women. These were, one, jointly to
work with the African Union in addressing obstacles inhibiting the economic
development of women and to put in place necessary mechanisms designed to
advance women’s economic development.

Secondly, another resolution dealt with working in partnership with
governments, the private sector and civil society in ensuring the
development of a capacity-building project for Pawo members and bodies in
encouraging the usage of information technology.

The third resolution is to continue lobbying for the total eradication of
illiteracy amongst women in Africa and to have access to education by, in
particular, girl-children; fourthly, to monitor and to evaluate the impact
of all mechanisms created for credit and funding for women.

The last resolution is to continue to popularise, monitor and evaluate the
implementation of the AU, African Union, health strategy by member
countries, to establish the African infrastructure development fund and
encourage compulsory reproductive health education amongst women.

These are some of the resolutions that were adopted by the 9th congress of
Pawo. May I, again, take this opportunity to say that South Africa must
congratulate itself because at the end of its deliberations, the Pawo
congress elected a new structure, and in that new structure South Africa
has been given the responsibility of becoming secretary-general of Pawo for
the next five years.

I also wish to take this opportunity to propose to the House that it sends
a congratulatory message to Angola on having housed Pawo for the past 22
years, throughout the years of the war and up to this day. It is now the
turn of South Africa to consider being the headquarters of Pawo while it is
secretary-general.

Of course, we have the next five months to deliberate on this matter, to
apply our minds and to take the correct decision in terms of our
responsibilities to the continent. The Pawo secretariat approached us with
an offer to become secretary-general, it said: “South Africa, it is now
your turn to take responsibility and to make sure that Pawo does not die.”

Lastly, I believe we owe it to the woman who has kept Pawo alive, has
worked flat out and has been away from her own home country, Senegal, for
all these years, taking her seat in a war-torn Angola. This is the woman
who has been secretary-general for many years; she is Assetou Koite from
Senegal. Assetou was then elected president of Pawo by the Boksburg
congress, which we hosted.

Briefly, we are tabling that verbal report on the Pawo congress, but we
will subsequently, of course as soon as we have the report, formally table
it. Thank you very much, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

Ms C N Z ZIKALALA: Madam Deputy Speaker, before the 21st century,
traditionally and culturally, women’s so-called place was in the kitchen,
bearing and raising children. Thankfully because culture and tradition are
dynamic and not stagnant, things have changed drastically. Today, women can
be found at all levels of government and the private sector occupying
positions from the bottom to the top. Even better is the fact that men and
women are equal and share the same human rights.

Our Constitution, reinforced by pronouncements by the Human Rights
Commission, makes it very clear that every woman has the right to education
and other primary human rights such as proper health care and work. Without
quality education, a woman’s world is very limited. Many are still
subjected to obstacles that will hinder progress in their wellbeing as
women and in their families. The enjoyment of the right to health is very
important in all aspects of a person’s life and wellbeing.

Having women in boardrooms, female astronauts, female Ministers and so many
female Members of Parliament in South Africa has enabled us to tackle the
issue of educating women.

Every woman has the right to a source of income and work and norms and
standards that guarantee women full equality in all aspects of economic
life. The increased participation of women in the labour force has the
great potential to contribute to economic development, but only if the jobs
in which women are employed are fruitful and positive. To its credit, our
government is continually considering ways to improve the economic
conditions of women, including a wage subsidy to help bring low-income
workers into the economy and by creating jobs with its Expanded Public
Works Programmes.

It is my party’s position that the advancement of women on the African
continent is still in its infancy, and progress is slow. There are still
millions of women in Africa without access to quality education, health and
economic opportunities. While International Women’s Day is an important
celebration of women’s rights and achievements, it would be remiss not to
draw attention also to the fact that a long way still lies ahead of us.

Women’s advancement can only be accelerated if it remains at the top of the
political, social and economic agendas of the women of this world, women
governments and leaders. If the necessary political will exists and
appropriate policies are aggressively implemented, we will see faster
progress in years to come.

Before I leave this podium, I would like to invite and request our male
parliamentarians to join us whenever we invite them to our meetings,
because at a certain stage we have to sit together and try to solve some of
the problems that affect our women, such as domestic violence. I thank you,
Deputy Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

Ms N C NKABINDE: Chairperson and hon members, the annual celebration of
women’s rights provides us with the opportunity to assess our progress in
the fight for gender equality. Unfortunately, this process always forces us
to recognise recent topical events, and then we realise that there is still
a long road ahead of us.

I say the road ahead is still long because four young men, barely older
than boys, can film female workers eating food from bowls like animals, on
their hands and knees, and, in the ensuing outrage, the obvious gender
abuse is only a small footnote. Yet it is exactly the fact that they are
women that contributed to them being picked as likely victims.

I say the road ahead is still long because taxi drivers can harass and beat
a woman, even strip her naked, because they do not like the skirt or the
pants that she wears; because, once again, as we saw during the patronising
debate on the appropriateness of a kanga, what a woman wears determines
weather her inherent dignity or human rights will be respected.

I say the road ahead is still long because rape in this country has become
so endemic that a recent Human Rights Commission investigation found that
our children play games at school called “rape me” in which they chase each
other and pretend to commit this despicable crime.

We have achieved many great things since the advent of democracy, and we
have many outstanding female role models. But the road ahead is still long.
We would be foolish to think otherwise when evidence to the contrary is
seen around us every single day. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms B T NGCOBO: Chairperson, as we celebrate this day, women are looking
back and reflecting on the struggle to participate on an equal footing with
men.

The day itself came into being as a result of the different experiences of
gender-based violence at different levels by ordinary women, including the
student massacre at Montreal where a young student shot 14 women because
they were doing courses on engineering.

The United Nations has generated its support and proclaimed gender equality
as a fundamental right. Gender-based violence is a global phenomenon which,
among other topics, has been discussed at four United Nations’ conferences,
namely in Copenhagen, Mexico, Nairobi and China.

Gender-based violence and efforts to prevent its spread need more
collective efforts and a response that will support violence-prevention
initiatives, and sharing and partnership-building between men and women.

Gender is what helps us to conceptualise violence in broader terms, and
understanding gender is the key to developing strategies of personal and
social transformation and to ending violence and achieving state-related
development goals.

While encompassing other descriptions of violence, it is framed in broader
terms with the understanding that causes and solutions are personal,
political and structural. Gender-based violence may take many forms,
occurring in both private and public domains. Men, women and children fall
prey to this gendered form of violence. It is predominantly men’s violence
towards women, children, other men and the self. It is indeed warfare: wife-
beating, bullying, child abuse and rape as well as gay-bashing.

Men are primarily the ones who use violence and men, especially young men,
are implicated the most in other types of violence as victims and as those
who use violence. Among other things, women never sit at a round table to
plan which country to wage war against, but men do.

Gender-based violence is distinguished from other types of violence in that
it is rooted in prescribed behaviours, norms and attitudes based on gender
and sexuality. It plagues every society in the world regardless of culture,
class or location. No one is immune to its devastation; it spreads fear and
self-loathing like a virus. It further restricts the achievement of peace,
justice, equality and development.

Son preference affects many people in many countries, particularly in Asia,
with consequences that can be anything from fetal to female infanticide and
to neglecting the girl-child over her brother in terms of nutrition, health
and education.

The problem of son preference is present in many countries. Asked how many
children he had fathered, the former US boxing champion Mohammed Ali told
the interviewer: “One boy and seven mistakes”. Those were girls!
Early marriage, especially without the consent of the girl, is another form
of human rights violation. Early marriage followed by multiple pregnancies
can affect the health of women for life.

Rape is still used as a weapon of war whenever conflict arises between
different parties. Women and children are frequently victims of rape from
all sides of a conflict. Soldiers impregnate women of different groups and
abandon them when it is too late to get an abortion. Rape in times of
conflict is regarded as a war crime and under certain circumstances could
be considered genocide, as declared by the Beijing Platform for Action.

In 1994, the UN Special Rapporteur on Violence against Women focused on
three areas in which women are particularly vulnerable: in the family in
the form of domestic violence, traditional practices and infanticide; in
the community through rape, sexual assault, commercialised violence in the
form of trafficking in women, labour exploitation and female migrant
workers; and in the state through violence against women in detention in
situations of conflict and against refugee women.

In this millennium the need to work with men to end gender-based violence
is a necessary component of effective prevention. It is important to work
with men and women. Men are central to most acts of violence and violence
is central to being a man in many cultures. Most political, cultural and
religious leaders around the world are in better positions to influence
change. Working towards strong partnerships with men and women and the
various acts to end violence will have the benefit of improving lives and
relations between men and women and children and communities and will
improve development gains. Working with men will further help to move away
from seeing men as part of the problem and begin to envision them as part
of the solution, thus representing them in prevention and intervention
strategies.

As a response to the epidemic of gender-based violence, initiatives,
programmes and policies have been put in place over the past decade to help
prevent violence. These include international conventions and campaigns,
national prevention and equality policies, advocacy and media coverage -
media that is nonbiased – organisational policies, gender-focused civil-
society organisations, local and community-based interventions and
individual activism. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chair, quality education, health and economic opportunities
are without doubt key elements in shaping African women’s advancement in
the 21st Century. Of particular concern, however, to the ACDP is the fact
that South Africa’s progress is marred by rising infant and maternal
mortality rates, with more than 1 600 mothers dying every year due to
complications from pregnancy and childbirth.

While the Health Minister’s arrogant attitude toward HIV and Aids is
clearly responsible for much of this, there is much more to the story and
the ACDP calls for a thorough investigation. This impacts on women directly
and seriously misshapes progress.

According to medical doctors, two-stage abortions are a significant cause
of the increase in maternal mortality. Let me give a real life example:
doctors from a hospital in KwaZulu-Natal revealed that five mothers, not
those undergoing two-stage abortions, but in labour, recently died within a
10-day period at their hospital. During that same period, about 50 women
required theatre time, having used Mysoprostil to induce their abortions.
In total, they required 40 pints of blood to resuscitate and took up to 50
hours of theatre time - an average theatre operates only 40 hours a week.
The result was that women with complications during labour could not be
rushed to theatre and five died. Similar scenes are sadly repeated in one
state hospital after another in rural areas.

Wherever you go, you find that critical staff shortages are made far worse
by abortion overloading. Many, if not most, South African abortions
nowadays are initiated by Mysoprostil - a prescription medication for
peptic ulcers with a side effect of inducing labour. The ACDP has called on
government many times over the years to ban the use of this drug for
abortions. Mysoprostil does not normally kill the baby, it merely expels
the child. The drug is provided by general practitioners, pharmacists,
legal and backstreet abortionists. Women and girls are told how to take the
pills and to visit a clinic if bleeding persists after the baby is
delivered - often that baby is flushed live down a toilet.

Apart from the trauma of those many unsuspecting women and girls, the
constant hijacking of theatre time, hospital beds, blood and hospital
staff, which are all in short supply, impacts heavily on already
overstrained health services. Government has chosen to turn a blind eye and
women are paying with their lives. Women’s health needs serious attention
as we try to shape this 21st century in favour of African women. Thank you.

Ms M M MDLALOSE: Sihlalo, i-Nadeco iyafisa ukwazisa nokumukela
inkulumompikiswano ngosuku lokugubha usuku lwabesifazane emhlabeni wonke.
[Chairperson, Nadeco accepts and acknowledges this debate which takes place
on the International Women’s Day.]

As women we pride ourselves on the fact that we have a Constitution that
guarantees the right to gender equality and a Commission on Gender Equality
and the Office on the Status of Women located in the Presidency, tasked to
oversee the implementation of women’s rights. South Africa has reached its
target of 30% women parliamentarians and has a Cabinet made up of 40%
women, including the Deputy President.

There are numerous other achievements which South Africa can be proud of.
We are all aware of major obstacles hampering the empowerment, security and
growth of women in South Africa.

The South African government needs to focus immense energies on education.
According to Statistics SA, only 26% of students enrolled in tertiary
institutions to study science, engineering and technology are women. To
ensure that more women pursue these careers, we need to equip young women
with the most powerful tool and that is education. By increasing spending
on education and skills development, especially on further education and
training in science, we will contribute to more rapid economic growth and
higher levels of employment. Thus, educated young women of this country
will be fully aware of the economic opportunities available to them.

According to the Labour Force Survey: Statistics 2007, the unemployment
rate among women, in particular black African women, is substantially
higher than that of their male counterparts. Women’s empowerment agencies
such as the Progressive Women’s Movement, gender focal points and the
Office on the Status of Women need to ensure that there is no duplication
of tasks, but a progressive approach towards empowering women.

The gender focal points are also currently taking various forms. For some
departments, it is an individual effort. In other departments, it is the
whole unit catering for the cause of women. Also, in this Parliament, to
further the cause of women, the women’s caucus will be having the much-
awaited launch of the Multiparty Women’s Caucus, which will be held on
Tuesday in the Old Assembly dining hall on 18 March 2008, and all Members
of Parliament are invited.

We are saying that we need to focus more on the health of women. A healthy
woman has an energy-empowered body. For progress in South Africa, we need
to enhance girl-children and women’s health to be at its highest form so as
to be productive in our country. I thank you.

Nk M D NXUMALO: Sihlalo, oNgqongqoshe abakhona, amalungu ahloniphekile,
amaqabane nabangani, ngibonga leli thuba elihle kakhulu ukuthi ngethule
inkulumo yami kule nkulumompikiswano emayelana nokulwa nendlala, inhlupheko
nezenhlalakahle ikakhulukazi emkhakheni womama.

Kuzokhumbuleka ukuthi le nkulumo yenzeka ngesikhathi esibaluleke kakhulu
okuyinyanga kaNdasa, njengoba omama emhlabeni wonke begubha usuku lwabo
olwalwelwa omama eMelika. Sigubha inzuzo eyenziwa omama eminyakeni
engamashumi amaningi edlule bekade belwa nezinto eziningi ezingenabo
ubulungiswa, njengezimo ezingezinhle zokusebenza kanye namaholo aphansi
komama.

Kuningi osekuzuzwe uhulumeni waseNingizimu Afrika kanye namanye amazwe
kepha ububha buseyinselelo enkulu ezweni lakithi ikakhulukazi komama.
Ububha buchazwa njengokungakwazi komuntu ngamunye nomndeni kanye
nemiphakathi ukuziphilisa mayelana nokuba nezinsiza. Ezinye zezinto
esizibalayo njengobubha komama, imfundo engeyinhle kanye nezempilo.
ENingizimu Afrika ububha nokungalingani bunobuhlobo obuqinile nebala kanye
nobulili, futhi into ebonisa ukuthi abantu baphila endlaleni noma
emnothweni kuba yimisebenzi abayenzayo kanye namaholo abawaholayo.

Emva kweminyaka eyishumi nanye yentando yeningi, abantu baseNingizimu
Afrika basabhekene nenselelo yamazinga aphezulu obubha nakuba imithetho
nemigomo ithi akube namathuba namalungelo alinganayo ngokulandela
uMthethosisekelo.

UMongameli waleli lizwe enkulumweni yakhe yokuvula iPhalamende waphawula
ngalokhu esikubiza nge-Apex Priorities okuyizinhlelo ezibhekiswe ebantwini
abampofu nokuqedwa kwendlala. Lokhu kusitshela ukuthi indlala kumele kube
wudaba oluphezulu ezinhlelweni zethu.

Izinhlelo zikahulumeni kumele zigxile kubo bonke abantu abangavikelekile
ikakhulukazi omama nabantwana. UMongameli wakubeka kwacaca ukuthi asibe
sempini yokulwa nobubha banoma yiluphi uhlobo inqobo nje uma lubhekene
nomama. Umgomo kahulumeni uthi imali ewumxhaso ovela Emnyangweni
Wezokuthuthukiswa Komphakathi ayibe nje usizo okwesikhashana ngaphandle uma
kuthiwa umuntu usemdala noma ukhubazekile ngangokuthi yokuthi akakwazi
ukuthi azisebenzele.

SinguKhongolose siyaluthokozela lolu suku enyangeni yomame emhlabeni
jikelele ngenxa yegalelo esilibonile komama baseNingizimu Afrika kanye ne-
Afrika yonkana emizabalazweni eminingi eyehlukene. Singabala omama uBertha
Gxowa, Lillian Ngoyi nabanye abaningi.

Siyalibonga ihhovisi likaMongameli ngegalelo lalo entuthukweni
nasekukhululweni komama baseNingizimu Afrika emaketangweni endlala,
ukucindezelwa, ukubukelwa phansi ngokobulili nezinye izenzo zokungalingani.
Siyalibona iPhini likaMongameli lezwe ligijima zonke izinkalo lisiza omama
baleli lizwe. Kungaba isemakhaya noma emadolobheni kodwa uthi i-Accelerated
and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa, i-Asgisa, ayibahlomulise
omama nentsha yaleli lizwe. Siyalibonga futhi iPhini lika Mongameli
ngegalelo lalo empumelelweni yesi-Vande Women’s Fund.

Uhulumeni kumele akhe umkhankaso wokufundisa omame izifundo zezibalo
nezobuchwepheshe kusuka emabangeni abasebenzi basendlini kuze kufike
kubasebenzi basemapulazini. Omama abaningi nabantwana bayohlomula
ezinhlelweni ezivela nohulumeni oholwa wuKhongolose. Singabala imali
engumxhaso yesondlo sabantwana, nemali yesabelo sabakhubazekile, kanye
nemali eyisabelo kwabaphila negciwane lengculazi nezinye izinhlelo eziningi
zokuthuthukiswa komama nentsha yaseNingizimu Afrika. Ngiyabonga [ihlombe].
(Translation of isiZulu speech follows.)

[Ms M D NXUMALO: Chairperson, Ministers present, hon members, comrades and
friends. I am thankful for this good opportunity to present my speech in
the debate on the fight against hunger, poverty and social injustices
against women.

It must be remembered that this speech is presented in this very important
month, March, as it is the time when all women in the world are celebrating
the International Women’s day which was fought for by women in America. We
are celebrating the benefits that were achieved by women many decades ago;
when they were fighting against many injustices like unfavourable working
conditions and low wages.

Much has been achieved by the SA government and other countries but poverty
is still a great challenge in our country, especially against women.
Poverty is defined as the inability of an individual, a family or a
community to provide for their needs with regards to services. Other
factors contributing to poverty on women, are insufficient education and
health. In South Africa poverty, inequality, colour and gender have a
strong connection. And the factors indicating that people live in poverty
or in riches, are the kinds of work that they do and their wages.

After 11 years of democracy, people of South Africa are still facing high
levels of poverty although laws and policies state that there must be equal
rights and equal opportunities as per the Constitution.
The President of this country in his state of the nation address spoke
about the Apex Priorities, which are programmes that are directed at poor
people and the eradication of hunger. And these tell us that hunger should
be the top priority in all our programmes.

Government programmes should concentrate on all vulnerable people
especially women and children. The President stated very clearly that we
must be at war and fight against any form of poverty as long as it is
directed against women. The government policy states that the grant from
the Department of Welfare and Social Development must only be of a
temporary nature except for the aged or people with disabilities who cannot
work for themselves.

As the African National Congress, we are very grateful for this day in the
women’s month throughout the whole world because of South African women’s
role and that of Africa as a whole for being involved in many different
struggles. Here we can mention women like Bertha Gxowa and Lillian Ngoyi
and many others.

We are grateful to the President’s office for the role it played in
developing and freeing South African women from the chains of hunger,
oppression, being looked down upon because of gender and other acts of
inequality. We have also seen the Deputy President of the country going all
over the country and helping South African women. She is all over; be it in
rural areas or in towns. She is saying the Accelerated and Shared Growth
Initiative for South Africa, Asgisa, must empower women and the youth of
this country. We are also grateful to the Deputy President about her role
on the success of the Isivande Women’s Fund.

The government must be engaged in a campaign of teaching women mathematics
and technology, from domestic workers to farmworkers. Many women and
children will benefit from the programmes of the ANC-led government. Here
we can mention the child support grant, the disability grant and the grant
for the people living with HIV/Aids and many other programmes which are
meant to develop women and the youth of South Africa. Thank you.
[Applause.]]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Chairperson, in 2005 the hon Minister Dlamini-Zuma reported
that 70% of the world’s poor were women. She also pointed out that no
matter how much the world had been trying to instil democracy, women
remained victims in society, living under harsh conditions, being victims
of domestic violence and having limited access to education, health and
political decision-making.

We are pleased to acknowledge though that in 2008 we have a large
percentage of women in government in South Africa and the economy. However,
challenges do still exist and the way needs to be paved for women to
explore their full potential in boardrooms.

While legislation allows for equality in education and equal access to
health care in South Africa, we need to realise that both departments
remain challenged in many parts of South Africa in terms of inadequate
resources and facilities in order to operate effectively. Further, we need
to realise that in turning around this inaccessibility to health care in
the country we need to see a reduction in infectious diseases and deaths.
Education, on the other hand, will also benefit by female skills being
resourced, skills that have been dominated by males, and we will perhaps
even assist in the skills shortage.

As we rid ourselves of the inequalities of the past, let us liberate South
Africa by endorsing the potential of both sexes. Let us address the
shortfalls experienced by women. Let us tackle the poverty that keeps our
families separated and our women harnessed in disgraceful lifestyles.

Parliament has a pivotal role to play in drafting legislation and policies
that will further benefit the advancement of women in South Africa. We
celebrate our women on this great Women’s Day as we commemorate the
heroines of the past. Let us applaud the future female leaders of South
Africa.

This progress promises a domino effect on the progress and development of
health care, education and the economy as a whole for both sexes. Thank
you.
Dr S E M PHEKO: Chairman, on this important Women’s Day, the PAC of Azania
honours the millions of women who lived at a time when women’s rights had
no name. There are still women whose names will never be known. They fought
injustice so that their daughters and granddaughters could live in the sun.


There are still many untold stories of these courageous women who inspire
and remind us that women can act to make change. The PAC believes in the
importance of investing in women’s leadership, because we know that the
kind of change we want to see in the world can only evolve from the joint
efforts of both men and women. Our women, in particular, must be given
educated en masse. As the Pan- Africanist Women’s Organisation, Pawo, has
said so consistently “to train a woman is to train a nation”.

Our efforts to fight the scourge of HIV and Aids in our country must gain a
new impetus. Women and young girls must have access to HIV and Aids
medicines, both mainstream and African traditional remedies. There must be
a renewed political will and leadership aimed at combating the epidemic
holistically by not only distributing affordable drugs, but also by
empowering women and young girls with the rights, access and power to
protect themselves. Then only will the ravaging rates of infection decline.
I want to honour all the women. [Time expired.]

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, allow me to begin by congratulating
Madam Speaker on bringing this important subject to the House.

International Woman’s Day provides us with an opportunity to reflect on the
progress of women, particularly in South Africa and Africa, with respect to
achieving full gender equality. It is a time to celebrate the progressive
policy framework that we have put in place to support transformation in
South Africa. And it is a time to reflect on the positive changes that have
taken place in our education system, while also acknowledging the
challenges that we still have to confront.

It is important that we distinguish between gender parity and gender
equality at school, at college and at university. We have achieved gender
parity in school enrolment figures in South Africa. This has been the
positive case for many years now. While this is welcome, it masks some
areas of inequality at provincial and district levels. Nevertheless, our
achievement of parity in school enrolment is a substantial achievement for
South Africa.

However, we do need to look beyond the equality of participation to areas
of general concern. Overall, a greater percentage of boys still pass the
Senior Certificate exam and more boys achieve endorsement outcomes than
girls. However, in some provinces there are pockets where girls achieve
better pass rates than boy learners. So, the overall picture we see masks a
diversity that exists in the entire system.

At the highest performing level – that of candidates who achieve
distinctions – girls tend to do better than boys overall. So we, as
Parliament, need to analyse these figures more closely to obtain a much
more nuanced picture of what is happening in education and other sectors as
it is likely that social class does play a role in high-performing groups.

In education, we are also addressing the need for greater numbers of young
women to do technical subjects in our FET colleges and in the higher
education system. We are very unusual on our continent in having such equal
participation rates between boys and girls, and, as I have indicated, in
some cases, strong performance by girls.

We have to begin, though, to move towards gender equality in all our
institutions. This means we must tackle the social issues that keep girls
away from school and make sure that our policies do not discriminate
against girls and women in education.

We need to tip the balance in favour of girls and do this, for example, by
addressing issues of security, sanitation and girl-friendly institutional
cultures. We must also make the content of education much more helpful and
interesting to girls, as indicated in Goal 5 of Education For All.
In response to this, South Africa does have a number of programmes in place
that are addressing the qualitative aspects of the experience of girls in
our schools. The child-friendly schools framework concept, a partnership
with Unicef, is being implemented in a number of our schools. The Hlayiseka
model, a model that encourages learners to report bullying and other forms
of physical intimidation at school, is being extended throughout all the
provinces in our country.

Another serious aspect of the qualitative experience of girls in the
education system relates to a broader social problem which is endemic in
South Africa, and that is violence against women. It is one of our most
grave social problems. Violence against women, including sexual harassment
in all forms, features prominently in many of our educational institutions.


We have to empower women and girls at all levels in our institutions to
understand and confront problems of sexual harassment and violence, so that
it is seen as something that everyone must take responsibility for.

Schools are located in communities, and to a certain extent the problem
within schools mirror broader social problems. Our education system cannot
be the only place for addressing these problems. We have established
welcome partnerships with other government departments such as the
Departments of Health, Social Development, Correctional Services, Justice
and Constitutional Development, and Safety and Security.

Now, it is possible for us to put in place as many controls and mechanisms
as we have in the world. This may improve the qualitative experience of
young people, but, without community action, without community support for
all these interventions, we will make no difference to the lives of girls
and women in education.

In the higher education system, women’s participation has improved since
the advent of democracy in South Africa. There have been significant
changes in the race and gender profile of the student body in our higher
education institutions.

The proportion of female students in universities rose from 43% in 1993 to
54% in 2003. While this is a positive shift, we have again begun to focus
on the deeper, underlying inequalities that are often masked by these
positive statistics. It is a matter of serious concern that the spread of
women students across different programme areas remains uneven, with women
students clustered in the humanities and underrepresented in science,
engineering, technology and in postgraduate studies.

We are also focusing on attracting women students to areas of particular
underrepresentation. We have many women students who do enter science, but
25% of them are in the life sciences. So we need to have many more in the
mathematical sciences, many more in engineering and many more in computer
science, Deputy Minister Hanekom.

The overall figure for women in health sciences and in commerce has shown
significant improvement, but black women are underrepresented in almost
every discipline in our higher education system.

We also know, of course, that there are very few women in the management
echelons of our universities. Recent studies have shown us that, while
women are increasingly entering the labour force, we don’t see them
entering the senior management levels in the labour sector.

This, of course, means that we must do much more to ensure that our
policies of employment equity and affirmative action increase women’s
participation at senior levels of appointment.

The female share of employment has increased from 39,1% in 1995 to 46,8% in
2007 - a significant shift. But, again, this is in the services sector. It
is underrepresented in nonservice sectors, underrepresented in mining
management and not at all recognised in other areas, particularly the
financial sector.

The financial sector is one of the fastest growing sectors of employment in
South Africa. So it is disconcerting that women haven’t enjoyed opportunity
of employment in this particular area of formal economic activity.

So it is vital that we recognise that progress has been made in our country
with regard to the issues facing women in education and several of the
issues that confront women as far as entry to the labour force is
concerned. But, while we mark this progress, let us not be complacent about
the areas that still need to be addressed.
Hon members speaking in this debate have indicated the important attention
we must give to infant mortality, the important attention we must give to
health services for women, the important attention we must give to the
impact of HIV and Aids on women and girls in particular.

Many of us know that in a home left without parents, it is the girl-
children and their schooling which is most affected by a child-headed
household. It tends to be a girl, whether young or old, who is the one who
has to remain at home to care for the siblings in the home. Therefore the
HIV/Aids situation is one in which we do face the danger of reversing the
gains of parity before we’ve even achieved equality.

It is thus vitally necessary that we do give attention to the impact of
health on the advance of young women and women in our society.

I’d also like to recognise, as the hon Pheko did, the contribution of the
women and men in the struggle for liberation in South Africa. In
particular, I’d like to acknowledge the heroines who struggled for equality
in all spheres of life, but who were not able to see the benefits of their
struggle in the huge improvements that have been made in women’s lives.

Chairperson and Madam Speaker, as you are present here, I think it is very
positive for us to be able to say, both in South Africa as well as in all
other countries on the continent, that due attention is being given to
ensuring that in education, in health, in the provision of economic
opportunities, more and more girls and African women are beginning to feel
that International Women’s Day does make a difference to their lives.
[Applause.]

They are beginning to see that they can enter what were fields that were
denied to them in the past. It is absolutely incumbent on our Parliament to
ensure that it keeps on, on a regular basis, paying attention to measuring
the progress that girls and women are making through the very modern
policies that our Parliament and country have adopted in the past 14 years
of democracy.

The advance of women cannot be left to chance. This does require studied
attention by policy-makers. It does require that executive action has, at
the forefront of action, attention to equality and the advancement of
women.
As I began, we are making strides. There is progress, but the challenges
remain immense, the challenges are for us to confront. I am sure that this
Parliament, and this House in particular, will ensure that women are not
left behind and that we do not take 200 years to ensure that parity
translates into equality. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

        PEACE-BUILDING AND RECONCILIATION FOR A BETTER WORLD FOR ALL

                 (Debate on Inter-Parliamentary Union topic)

Mrs S M CAMERER: Chairperson, in view of the fact that we are focusing on
women today, I will speak about the role of women in relation to peace and
security which is increasingly being acknowledged internationally. The UN
Security Council Resolution 1385 adopted in the year 2000 on Women, Peace
and Security has become the reference point also for the Inter-
Parliamentary Union.

Last week, prior to International Women’s Day, over 50 women leaders from
around the world met in Brussels to discuss the role of women in
stabilising an insecure world still ravaged by conflict and violence.

Why this is important is that women are disproportionably affected by
violence and conflict. Eighty per cent of all refugees are women and
children, and sexual violence and rape are still used as weapons of war in
conflict situations, in spite of a UN resolution that this should be
treated as a war crime.

This meeting followed a number of other high-profile get-togethers last
year with the same focus of acknowledging the importance of women’s voices
in building lasting peace and security. Emphasis was also placed on the
problem of viewing women as victims rather than as active participants in
the process of building a more stable and secure world.

Coming closer to home, it is essential that we women in South Africa also
shed the victim posture, fight back and become active participants in
building a more secure country, for ourselves, our daughters and our
granddaughters. But we have a steep mountain to climb.

Almost like no other country, women in South Africa bear the brunt of
violence of all kinds. Police statistics show that nearly 53 000 cases of
rape were reported last year, making South Africa once again the rape
capital of the world. All government efforts so far, including the annual
16 days of activism, have failed to get us off this plateau of between
52 000 and 55 000 rapes a year, and up to 75% of these rapes are estimated
to be gang rapes.
But most rapes go unreported and the NGOs estimate that at least 500 000
women and children are forced every year to have unwanted sexual
intercourse. Not only does this place an impossible burden on our justice
system – only 7% of reported rapes result in a conviction – but also a
psychological and emotional burden on the nation as a whole.

It is encouraging therefore that there are signs that women in our country
are beginning to make a stand. The rape of 21-year-old Jessica Foord 10
days ago, resulted in a 1 200-strong furious crowd of women and men of all
races demonstrating outside the Pinetown magistrates’ court demanding
justice when five of the alleged rapists appeared in court.

The assault and sexual molestation by taxi drivers of Nwabisa Ngcukana at
the Noord Street taxi rank merely because she wore a miniskirt, sparked a
nationwide protest by women’s groups. An intervention by the Commission for
Gender Equality, as well as the Human Rights Commission, eventually forced
the SA National Taxi Council to apologise after nearly four weeks.

Yes, women are beginning to find their voice about this national scourge,
but it seems we are being let down by our courts. Recent reliable research
by UCT’s Gender Health and Justice Unit has shown that judges are still
dishing out light sentences to rapists, although the law requires minimum
life sentences, in other words 25 years, for cases in which a victim is
raped more than once or is younger than 16 – this, unless the judge can
make a finding that there are substantive and compelling circumstances for
imposing a lesser sentence. This discretion was further curtailed last year
by Parliament to exclude certain so-called “compelling circumstances”, such
as the victim’s previous sexual history, among other things.

But in spite of this, recent judgments exposed by this study give cause for
concern. For example, Judge Hendrick Musi - who the Judicial Services
Commission recently recommended as the new Judge President of the Free
State - sentenced a man to only 13 years in 2004 for raping five under-age
girls on the basis that, as he said, “The rapist intended no harm other
than to satisfy his sexual lust.”

I am a member of the Judicial Service Commission and I believe that if this
unreported judgment in Ntholeng v the State had come to light we would
certainly have challenged Judge Musi to justify his suitability for a
leadership position in the judiciary.

Judge A J Visser, another example, sentenced Joseph Ntuli to only eight
years in jail for raping a 14-year-old girl twice, commenting that the
victim, “being the pretty girl she is, might have brought out the animal in
the accused”.

Also Judge Jeremy Pickering sentenced a man to only 15 years last year for
raping his six-year-old daughter, which he did, said the judge “on the spur
of the moment” – as if this is an excuse!

Many other cases are listed by the unit which is to be congratulated on
naming and shaming these judges and for bringing to light these flimsy
excuses made by judges for imposing light sentences and thus getting around
the minimum sentence legislation. The unit could lodge its report with the
Judicial Service Commission as a complaint against the judges concerned.

We women in our country are not secure and at peace. The law is there to
protect women from the scourge of rape and we should not continue to
tolerate presiding officers in our courts sidestepping it. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. [Applause.]

Mr M J BHENGU: Chairperson, as a result of our violent past and gross
violations of human rights, we as South Africans are bound to make an
immense contribution in restoring world peace and reconciliation. Nowhere
is this experience of peace-building and reconciliation more acute than in
South Africa.

South Africa is seen as a beacon of hope by many countries and peoples who
are crippled by conflict and violence. Despite the daily realities of
poverty, joblessness, crime, hunger, HIV/Aids, racism and sexism and poor
education, our country has made a lot of gains towards peace and
reconciliation.

Our country can highlight a number of important changes, including a new
democratic order with the right to vote and elect representatives in free
and fair elections and a new Constitution with guaranteed political, civil
and socioeconomic rights.

However, we still have to make our own home-made starting point to
concretise this. And this would actually revolve around the revival of the
African concept of ubuntu not only in the South African milieu, but
throughout the whole world. We recognise ubuntu as the foundation of all
human interaction.

This means that no person or country is an island. We are part of one
global village. We must respect and treat everyone with compassion and
empathy and in a manner that recognises their intrinsic human dignity. For
example, what we saw at the University of the Free State recently is indeed
indicative of the fact that we haven’t actually been able to ensure that
peace and reconciliation amongst our races and our cultures are indeed put
in place.

All the noble values come with the spirit of ubuntu. Therefore we
recommend, as the IFP, that we consider putting this into place. We must
embrace our differences and accept the notion that we are all equal under
the law, and that, of course, the world and its countries are nonetheless
made up of many different cultures, groups, races, religions, communities
and peoples.

Reconciliation demands openness, dialogue and space. There are occasions
that bring peace but not reconciliation. For instance in Rwanda, people
look to peace and reconciliation as the only way to have hope in the future
of a country, a country that has undergone genocide. Peace for South
Africans at this current juncture is an end to violent crime, racism and
gender violence.

But the effort to secure international peace and reconciliation is a task
that concerns everyone. Individual countries cannot simply leave it to the
UN to find solutions that do not directly concern them. All countries are
morally obliged to work for international peace and reconciliation,
especially in cases in which the UN and the Security Council are not able
to solve the problems on their own. We are all aware that conflicts in
neighbouring and even distant countries increasingly have a direct effect
on domestic security, for example, through the increased flow of refugees,
organised crime and growing terrorism.

Political conflicts in countries such as those of the Middle East, the
Sudan, Somalia, Sri Lanka, etc, stretch back many years but solutions can
be found if parties to the conflicts and international communities join
forces and pull in the same direction. It is our belief that global poverty
is the biggest threat and stumbling block to sustainable peace and global
reconciliation.

If we don’t eradicate poverty and inequality, sooner rather than later, we
must recognise that the movement towards building human dignity in peace
and reconciliation is fragile.

We must therefore deepen our democracy, promote fair trade, promote respect
for the sovereignty of nations and spread the prosperity of all our people
with what we have in our country. Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Chairperson and hon members, building peace and
reconciliation is an often-spoken-about objective. But the reality is that
South Africa is one of the few examples of this being achieved in what
seemed a genuinely intractable conflict and over relatively short span of
time. Other modern examples, like the situation in the Middle East, are
demonstrations of a never-ending cycle of recrimination and retaliation.

There was a golden era for a few years in the early 90s when the apartheid
and other oppressive regimes collapsed and the Berlin Wall came tumbling
down, that it seemed the world was on the cusp of an era of peace and
reconciliation and when it seemed that indeed the dangerous and needless
power struggles and conflicts of the Cold War would give way to a time of
negotiation and consensus-seeking. That multilateral spirit infused many
initiatives and found expression in such grand schemes as the Millennium
Development Goals.

But, alas, the spirit of that short golden era has been swept aside by the
persistence of longstanding conflicts as well as the emergence of a new
dangerous polarity based on religion, conquest and terrorism.

What we are seeing is a return to the politics of division and conflict in
international affairs. It is our duty as a member of multilateral
institutions such as the Inter-Parliamentary Union to remind our fellowmen
and women of the South African experience and of the inherent value of
genuine negotiation and reconciliation. We cannot sit by and watch the
world slide back to the dangers of mutually assured destruction.

The UDM commends the government of South Africa for the role it has played
in Africa in particular and abroad in efforts to marshal the very elusive
peace in the world. This has been in the form of facilitating political
settlements; military assistance in the form of peace-keeping operations;
the IEC and observation missions to ensure credible and fair elections on
the continent. This we have done for no price but the price of continental
and world peace. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Thank you, Chair. Hon members, due to unforeseen
circumstances this debate bounced my way at the very last minute. So here
goes! It has been said that the fundamental mission of building peace is to
create a stable society in which the surfacing of new disputes does not
spiral into future violence and war. In today’s world, conflict within
nations is as devastating as conflict between nations if not more so.

Forgiveness, of course, is a vital first step to ending conflict - not only
in our families and communities but between nations before there can be any
hope of reconciliation. Most conflicts start because one person or group
feels they have been wronged by another person or group. Saying sorry is a
nice gesture, but the real power lies in forgiveness.

Learning to let grievances go and to forgive isn’t always easy, but when we
truly forgive, it is largely for our own benefit: it helps promote better
health, better relationships, a deeper sense of purpose and self-worth and
a feeling of connection to others.

The healing power of forgiveness reached international attention after the
end of apartheid in South Africa when the then President Mandela modelled
this critical gesture and the Truth and Reconciliation Commission attempted
to bring together a bitterly divided nation after decades of segregation
and violence.

Holding on to hurt creates bitterness and hatred and harms the person, the
community and the nation that does not forgive as well as all those around
them.

The quest for peace and security is a universal challenge. No individual
state, of course, can alone bring peace because co-operation and
partnership are needed in order to reach common goals. Compromise is
important, and agreeing to disagree is a critical ingredient.

There will be no lasting peace, however, if human rights are abused, if
people are hungry, and if children are dying or deprived of equal
opportunities.

There is much we can do as individuals and collectively, and, as with most
things, when we get it right close to home, we have a greater chance of
getting it right on a broader scale.

To conclude, Maya Angelou said, and I quote:

    We cannot change the past, but we can change our attitude toward it.
    Uproot guilt and plant forgiveness. Tear out arrogance and seed
    humility. Exchange love for hate – thereby, making the present
    comfortable and the future promising.

I thank you.
Nk M M MDLALOSE: Mphathisihlalo, siyiNadeco sithi ukwakha ubuzwe nesizwe
kuqala enhlonipheni. Ukuhlonipha ukwehluka kosikompilo; ukuhlonipha
ubunikazi bezinto; ukuhlonipha isiqu somuntu; nokwemukelana njengabantu
baseNingizimu Afrika ngokwehlukana kwethu, ngezilimi zethu nangamasiko ethu
kuwukwakha ukuthula. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Ms M M MDLALOSE: Chairperson, we in Nadeco believe that nation-building
starts with respect for one another. Here we mean respect for other
people’s cultures; respect for other people’s property; respect for another
human being and the acceptance of other people’s cultures and languages in
South Africa. And this we call the building of peace.]

Holding ourselves and our fellow citizens in high esteem is the start of
peace and reconciliation. To recognise that we are all different and that
we are all deserving is a start on the road to peace. Peace is equivalent
to neighbourliness.

Ake siphile kahle futhi sazisane lapha ePhalamende ... [Let us respect and
recognise each other here in Parliament ...]

... as parliamentarians, neighbours and families.

Esikwenza sisodwa lapha kunomthelela ezweni. Ngingabeka nje isibonelo
njengase-Newcastle qobo lapha ngihlala khona impi yobuhlanga isekhona futhi
inkulu. Nakwezinye izindawo iyabonakala futhi nakhona inkulu lapho ilwa
khona buthule. Ake siqale ukuzihlonipha futhi semukele nabanye abantu ukuze
sibe nokuthula nenhlalakahle ezweni lakithi. Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.]
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[What we do here in Parliament alone has an impact on the whole country. I
can elaborate more on that and use Newcastle where I come from as an
example. The war on racism is still rife. Racism is also evident in other
areas but it is very subtle. We must start by respecting ourselves and
accepting others so that we can have peace and social cohesion in our
country. Thank You. [Applause.]]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Motlatlegi Motsamaisa tiro e ... [Hon Chairperson ...]

... the world is beset by conflict and the only resolution thereto can be
found if the ravaged hearts and minds acknowledge it. For peace to take
root, antagonists have to put their past behind them.

In many countries, the ways of the antagonistic groupings finding one
another have been contrived. The SA Truth and Reconciliation Commission is
being used as a benchmark in most countries in their quest to find peace,
as the moral, political and legal questions generated by the TRC remain the
subject of many a debate.

Research has indicated that successful reconciliation between alienated
groups can take place only when there is a genuine dialogue and conflict
analysis of a mutual, interactive nature. It calls for eyeball-to-eyeball
and heart-to-heart communication and discussion.

Such interaction is to be facilitated by a neutral third party, someone
acceptable to both groups. The example of former Secretary-General of the
United Nations Kofi Annan facilitating the current “toenadering”
[rapprochement] in Kenya is a classic example.

The South African model of the TRC has achieved much in the time given to
it. We all know that transformation or management of any change has those
who readily accept, those who remain in doubt, while others reject it
outright. However, the majority do accept the need for reconciliation and
living in peace.

The Biblical injunction that, “Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall
be called the children of God,” should be the guide to all peoples of the
world. We accept that building sustainable peace in societies that have
suffered protracted conflict calls for long-term societal transformation.
We have to seek peace all the time, because if that is not done the
collective trauma left behind by violence is passed from generation to
generation, perpetuating cycles of violence.

Appeals should be made to alienated groups to demilitarise after being
demobilised. Situations such as the one in the eastern part of the DRC,
where General Laurent Nkunda is hard-put to go to the discussion table,
have played themselves out, even in South Africa, where racism is still the
order of the day, though in benign fashion.

We in the UCDP maintain that peaceful coexistence can be realised if we
love and respect one another and are ready to serve, consult with and be
tolerant of one another.

Masithandaneni, sihloniphane, sisebenze ngokuzimisela, sixoxe, sibonisane,
kwaye sinyamezelane; singacaphukelani. Ndiyabulela. [Let us love one
another; let us respect one another; work diligently; discuss, share views,
and be tolerant of one another; and not hate one another. Thank you.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Chairperson, for a vision of Africa I turn to J Obi
Oguejiofor’s words:

   Africa is one continent of the world which has acquired the image of a
   conflict zone. With the numerous colonial and postcolonial wars,
   political instability, oppression, economic stagnation, farming, crop
   failures and other natural disasters, pandemics of malaria, HIV/Aids and
   other deadly diseases one may be pardoned if he were to doubt the
   possibility of peace under such conditions. But those who really know
   Africa know that there are other sides to the continent. They know the
   bad news catch the eye and the interest of all more easily, and these
   are very often deliberately highlighted to reinforce an already negative
   image. Such a scenario has the natural tendency to hide very positive
   aspects of the life of the continent, a continent with rich traditions.
   Among such traditions must be counted the tradition of peace that is
   connatural with the African world.

I truly believe that many may have thought progress in South Africa would
never take place, not with the calamities and retardation left by both
colonialism and the apartheid regime. But we have stood up and we are
walking to a successful democracy.

Reality does, however, set in when we find the crevices of racism and
sexism still evident in our communities, but we need to deal with these
situations as a civil nation. We need to take this behaviour as a reminder
of what we don’t want, and correct it. But this correction is not through
stereotyping race, as this is itself reverse racism. We need to dig deep
into African culture and tradition that firmly, in its proverbs, speaks of
ubuntu and the nation-building we so deserve.

As the Dalai Lama so aptly put it:


    There is nothing new about the new millennium if the people of the world
    do not adopt new attitudes and ways of thinking.


There is so much truth in these words. If only it was as easy to put into
action. We, however, pray for peace on the African continent, for respect
of life and for the elimination of poverty and greed. I thank you.

Dr S E M PHEKO: Chairman, there is no nation that can prosper without
peace. Peace is the mother of prosperity. King Moshoeshoe was right when he
said, “Kgotso ke kgaetsedi” – peace is my sister. His mentor, King Mohlomi,
had taught him the philosophy of peace.

The world suffered in two world wars when peace was disturbed. A number of
wars have caused suffering in Africa when there was no peace. Palestine has
suffered since the Balfour Declaration of 1917. Burundi has just emerged
from a situation of genocide. Kenya shocked everybody just recently.

Let us also be reminded in this world of multipartism, that rights are
derived from citizenship, not from membership of a political party.
Therefore, jobs, houses, education, honour, etc, must not be given on the
basis of membership of a particular political party. Such acts lead to
discrimination, discontent, revolt and, ultimately, disturbance of the
peace.

On reconciliation, let me say that genuine reconciliation cannot happen
when there is no justice, equal sharing of resources or equal and
affordable opportunities. Reconciliation is not appeasement. Reconciliation
is not the friendship of a jackal and a lamb or a hawk and a dove. In
reconciliation we are either all hawks or all doves. Reconciliation is not
a one-sided exercise. That is why I repeat that Robben Island is the wrong
place for honeymoons. Let us respect our former freedom fighters. These
honeymoons are desecrating their memory. This is like dancing on their
graves. Izwe Lethu! [Our Land!]

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, building peace and building reconciliation are
interventions which unfortunately, in most cases, happen only after wars or
conflict have caused vast injury and the deaths of people and devastation
to infrastructure. The great challenge in building peaceful societies is to
put in place preventative mechanisms which may help in reducing the
possibility for situations of conflict.

There are a glut of treaties and conventions, which a number of states have
signed, to uphold human rights, democratic governance and developing
peaceful societies. These have not prevented ongoing wars and conflicts
around the world. Surveys state that as at mid-2005, there were eight major
wars and about two dozen lesser conflicts worldwide, of which most were
being fought on racial, ethnic and religious grounds. Africa, suffering
from more wars than any other continent, has been marred by more than 20
major civil wars since 1960.

The energies and efforts of relief and mediating organisations are usually
focused on reparation and working out reconciliation packages in
postconflict or ongoing war situations, but too little resources and time
are put into designing preventative mechanisms that may help to allay
potential conditions of conflict.

The FD is of the opinion that governments must call for action to reduce
conflict worldwide; submit to a universal code of humanitarian values which
seeks to address the problems associated with ownership of resources among
nations; and aim at bringing nations and governments together to work
towards world peace.

Finally, the FD suggests that a preventative policy framework be put in
place, gaining worldwide support, requesting that governments develop
legislation to this effect. Chairman, I thank you.

Mr W J SEREMANE: Chairperson and hon members, I am of the opinion that our
debates and discussions should take place within the context and the need
and meaning of the International Women’s Day focus and concerns. I am happy
to mention that.

That being the case, allow me to borrow from the Beijing Platform for
Action, as quoted in the Karam 1999:
  Without the active participation of women and the incorporation of women
  perspectives at all levels of decision-making, the goals of equality
  development and peace cannot be achieved.

We are aware that equality, development, peace and reconciliation are not
necessarily givens, or manna from heaven, conditions that merely happen on
their own like the undisputable fact that the sun rises in the East and
sets in the West. These essential societal building blocks or constituents
have to be laboured for consistently and persistently, like the women’s
battle song in the villages: Re a leboga, Motlotlegi. Dilo tsena dia
sebeletswa. [Thank you, hon member. These things you must sweat for.]

We cannot just proclaim, “Peace, peace” and merely mouth rhetorics such as
reconciliation, reconciliation, where there is no peace nor reconciliation.
We have to create conducive conditions in which peace and reconciliation
can sustainably and convincingly be seen to be having an impact on the
entire social fabric and on spheres of our society.

Building peace and reconciliation demands that there be, inter alia,
prerequisites such as justice, a willingness to forgive and to accommodate
other beings and their viewpoints. Tolerance and forbearance seem mundane
issues, but they are of fundamental importance in peace-building and
reconciliation. I do admit that simple and trite as they may be, they are
indeed very elusive but we must strive for building peace and
reconciliation, defusing tensions and conflicts in our societies to realise
a better world for all.

The modern world, ourselves included, boasts of enlightenment, of being
progressive and of being guided by democratic imperatives and tenants as
found in our various constitutions, embodying fundamental human rights. Why
then is it that these almost sacred values have been trampled upon willy-
nilly from time to time in human history?

Kofi Annan - if I may quote him - in his assertions towards culture for
preventing deadly conflict, maintains that –

   There are in my view three main reasons for failure of prevention of
   deadly conflict when prevention is so clearly possible.

Thank you very much. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr O E MONARENG: Hon Chairperson, hon members, my intention was to speak
for 50 minutes, but all the hon members who spoke before me have made my
job much easier. I would like to congratulate them. They did not focus on
party politics, but on nation-building and making sure that their inputs
were as constructive as possible. Thank you very much.

I just want to say that the ANC has applied its mind in making sure that
there is peace-building and reconciliation in South Africa, and in the
African region and the world. So it is very important that we should
reiterate the positions we have taken before.

The world today has become complex and is characterised by inequalities and
conflicts. Hence, the case for peace and reconciliation has become relevant
more than ever before. The hegemony of superpowers has given rise to
exploitation, imperialism and violent global conflicts. South Africa is not
the first country in the world to confront racism and exploitation, nor
will it be the last. It is not the only country to have achieved resounding
progress in securing peace and working towards reconciliation. It is seen
by many people as a symbol of hope - that what is desirable in human
affairs can also become possible. It is an indication that there is a way
out of conflict; an answer to hatred; a bridge for every gap.

This does not mean that South Africa has overcome the many problems of its
colonial and apartheid past. There still exists a massive gulf between
black and white in South Africa. The black majority is overwhelmingly poor
while, on the other hand, the white minority is generally perceived to be
affluent. Unemployment, poverty, underdevelopment, crime, violence and
racism continue to make life an ongoing battle for the majority of people.

However, since the 1994 democratic breakthrough, South Africa as a nation
has become well positioned to tackle the terrible legacy of colonialism and
apartheid. The democratic breakthrough created opportunities for all South
Africans to enjoy equal rights, which lay the foundation for peace,
stability and harmony. So at least in South Africa there is progress. South
Africa is a beacon of hope and it is a microcosm of those people prepared
to fight for peace and reconciliation. We should applaud South Africans in
the various roles they are playing.

It is important that we should continue with the effort, because in our
Cabinet in Parliament our contribution is important. In the process of
budgeting, it is important that Parliament take the lead in guiding its
country and its citizens in making sure that contributions are made in the
most appropriate way. If there are lessons to be learnt for other parts of
the world from the South African experience of resolving conflict and
initiating reconciliation, they are lessons in principle rather than in
actual detail.

This means that each case has its own merits, yet if there is one lesson
which South Africans have learnt and which is probably applicable to many
similar situations, it is that freedom cannot be imposed on a people. In
fact, for freedom to be meaningful and sustainable, the people must be the
agents of their own liberation. It is they who must free themselves. This
is a great lesson: that the people are at the centre of this liberation and
reconciliation.

During the long struggle against apartheid the people of South Africa had
many friends around the world who did much to hasten the demise of
apartheid. Yet it was the South African people themselves who directed this
global campaign and turned out in their millions to challenge the force of
the apartheid state. The South African people sat down among themselves and
negotiated an end to the violent apartheid system. South Africans wrote the
country’s new democratic Constitution and worked together to build the
institutions of the new democratic state with a view to creating, building
and sustaining a society founded on peace and reconciliation.

It is true that what has been achieved in South Africa would not have been
possible without the active assistance of many people around the world. In
this discussion and topic it is imperative to note that the people who are
oppressed are their own liberators and, at the same time, the manner in
which we mobilised and galvanised the international community was very good
in the sense that it assisted in making sure that our liberation was made
possible. That is why, since the 1994 breakthrough, South Africans have
taken it upon themselves to spearhead and be the mainstay for the fight for
peace, harmony and reconciliation.

It is important to also remember what Comrade O R Tambo said: that no true
alliances can be built on the shifting sands of illusion. What we want to
say, relevant to the topic today, is that no true peace can be built on the
shifting sands of illusion. It is important that whatever we do in our
deployment elsewhere in the world, we make sure that we don’t entertain any
illusions and issues which will result in our not being glued together and
that we make sure that we fight for peace.

In diversity there is more that unifies people as humans than could
possibly divide them. The challenge is to find and nurture those values
which are shared by all the people, despite their differences, while
creating a space for the culture, history and experiences of all to be
celebrated. In a society recovering from conflict, tolerance of differences
and the accommodation of all are critical to reconciliation. However, it
must be acknowledged that reconciliation is not simply about the oppressed
being willing to accommodate the oppressor. It is also about the oppressor
acknowledging the errors of the past and relinquishing the privileges that
have kept their fellow citizens in servitude and consigned them to
underdevelopment.

South Africa has taken many important steps towards reconciliation, yet
this reconciliation can only be fully achieved once the very material
inequalities which divide South Africans into rich white and poor black are
overcome. True reconciliation requires the dismantling of the entire
economic basis of apartheid, racially based exploitation and a wholly
skewed distribution of resources. It requires that those who, for decades,
been forced off their land, who have been excluded from beneficial
participation in the economy, who have been denied access to education and
skills development opportunities now have the chance to partake in the
economic life of their country.

Be that as it may, inequalities are noticeable and are widening among South
Africans, because only the few, or the minority, are in better paying
positions since the 1994 democratic breakthrough.

Given the historical denial, South Africa’s black majority needs to be
empowered economically, because this is central in the search for lasting
peace and reconciliation. South Africa may have one of the highest levels
of income inequality in the world, but the situation in which the country
finds itself is not unique.

Huge inequalities in wealth within and between nations are one of the
defining features of the world today. Much of the conflict and instability
which plagues the world, much of the prejudice and the hatred, much of the
xenophobia, racism and sexism are borne of global and national inequality
and a fierce competition for resources – rampant imperialism. The wars
being fought and the terror attacks witnessed are not so much caused by
culture clashes or religious fundamentalism as they are caused by the
failure of humanity to find fair and equitable ways to manage distribution.
I thank you one and all. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

                  COMBATING OF POVERTY – INVESTING IN WOMEN

                            (Debate on IPU topic)

Ms M R MORUTOA: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, I feel
honoured to speak to our constituencies during the period of celebrating
International Women’s Day. Malibongwe! [Praise!]

HON MEMBERS: Igama lamakhosikazi! [The name of women!]

Ms M R MOROTOA: The ANC’s objective is to improve the lives of all. In this
case, we particularly focus on the women who are most affected by poverty,
and they are the sector that is left out of the first economy.

Hence, the President of the country, in his state of the nation address,
stated clearly how this government, led by the ANC, focuses on the
identified Apex priorities, which are meant to accelerate progress towards
the achievement of the objectives the people of South Africa have mandated
us to pursue.

In South Africa there are challenges facing women in trade, international
agreements, the World Trade Organisation, the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund, the first and second economies and their instruments.

Escaping the poverty trap and translating trade into higher national income
is a challenge for African women. The economic task is to move the economy
from a path of continued debt towards a growth trajectory. Noteworthy is
that the expansion of trade does not automatically improve human wellbeing.

Ndifuna ukwenza umzekelo apha, ngeenkqubo zeSebe lezoRhwebo noShishino.
Ohloniphekileyo uSekela-Mphathiswa uElizabeth Thabethe wenza umsebenzi
omhle kakhulu kumaphondo ngokuqokelela oomama abafundise iindlela
zokurhweba ngaphakathi eMzantsi Afrika naphesheya kweelwandle.

Mna ke ndikhe ndiye buqu xa enembizo. Uyayichaza into yokuba kufuneka
uzilinganisele xa uqala, ungalumi umthamo omkhulu ze ukome, uphele ungabi
nangeniso. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[I want to give an example here of the programmes of the Department of
Trade and Industry. The hon Deputy Minister, Elizabeth Thabethe, is doing a
very good job in the provinces by bringing women together and teaching them
how to trade in South Africa and abroad.

I usually attend when she has an imbizo. She explains that one has to start
small at the beginning, and not bite off more than one can chew and then
end up not being able to make any profit.]

Economic growth should generate more resources that can be used for poverty
eradication programmes. Indeed, while the promotion of trade can benefit
the poor in general, not all trade-related ventures that have a bearing on
poverty are positive. In general, changes have the potential to disrupt
social stability, leading to unsettled conditions, particularly for those
on the margins of society.

Another key intervention strategy is the Expanded Public Works Programme,
EPWP. This programme will be expanded beyond its original targets. It will
entail about R4,5 billion in additional funds, which will be spent on
women.

The focus will be on human resources training, ensuring that women have
access to finance across the board, fast-tracking them out of the second
economy, ensuring their significant participation beyond small, micro and
medium enterprises, SMMEs, improving their access to basic services, and
increasing their participation in the EPWP.

IKomiti yezeSini yalapha ePalamente ikhe yandwendwela eThsoreni, apho sathi
sadibana namakhosikazi esenza imisebenzi yezandla. Omnye kula makhosikazi
uneshishini lezitena zokwakha. Usebenzisana nabakhi abakhulu apha eNtshona
Koloni. Loo mama uthi wafundiswa yile nkqubo ibizwa ngokuba yiNkqubo
yeMisebenzi yoLuntu eNatyisiweyo.

Kwalapho eThsoreni saya kubona intokazi eyayithengisa ezitalatweni zalapha
eKapa, ihlupheka. ISebe leMisebenzi yoLuntu layinika iiakilana zomhlaba –
phofu owawusele wonakele – ukuze ilime kuwo iintyatyambo ezibizwa ngokuba
ziziqwane okanye iiprotea. [Uwele-wele.] (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[The Gender Committee of Parliament recently visited Oudtshoorn, where we
met women engaged in handicraft. One of the women has a brick-making
business. She has a working relationship with big construction companies in
the Western Cape. She says she got training through the Extended Public
Works Programme.

Again, in Oudtshoorn, we went to see a woman who used to sell in the
streets of Cape Town, being poor. The Department of Public Works gave her a
few acres of land – which were already damaged – to plant proteas.
[Interjections.]]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon members, please lower your
voices. We couldn’t hear what the hon member has just said. Please
continue, hon member.

Nksz M R MORUTOA: Yhuu! Sihlalo, samangala xa isibonisa eso sixa somhlaba
isilimileyo ngoku, kunye neentyatyambo esele izithengise phesheya
kweelwandle. Viva, makhosikazi, viva! (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph
follows.)

[Ms M R MORUTOA: Gosh! Chairperson, we were surprised when she showed us
the piece of land she has cultivated now, and the flowers she has already
sold overseas. Viva women, viva!]

How does globalisation impact on the poor and vulnerable groups, especially
women? Policy responses by individual African countries to globalisation
have included economic restructuring, technological upgrading, skills
training, the relaxing of exchange controls, the reinsertion of national
economies into international financial markets, focusing on export and
growth, the lowering of budget deficits, and focusing on the growing
inability of governments to independently shape their national economies.

The economic policy responses to globalisation have not been gender-neutral
and have had a direct impact on the lives of vulnerable African women.

There are three important factors to note when looking at the globalisation
process: One, the process is gendered and is a social construction; two,
production and reproduction are intrinsically linked and are constituted
through relations of power; three, women and men often enter into, and
participate in, trade on differential terms.
Though globalisation has opened up avenues for development, the benefits
have not been equally distributed, thereby impeding efforts to promote the
advancement of women, particularly those living in poverty.

The negative impact of globalisation on the world economy is
disproportionately borne by women. As the economy becomes linked to global
markets, it often leads to a reduction in public spending and social
programmes, thereby pushing the cost onto the family, where it is often the
women who shoulder the added burden.

Kwekhu, ndiyavuya ngokuba ndinikwe ithuba lokuba ndithethe ngezi nkcukacha.
Siya kuphinda sibuye. Gee! I am happy to have been given the opportunity to
speak about these details. We shall come back.]

Thank you very much, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Ms J A SEMPLE: Chairperson, women in South Africa are deeply affected by
poverty. I will argue that the education of women and girls is probably the
best investment in combating poverty this country can make. Education is a
basic human right, and gender equality in education is essential for
sustainable development. As a result, education in general and girls’
education in particular are priority issues in the Dakar Framework for
Action and the Millennium Development Goals.

Educating women is more productive than educating men, according to Dr Alan
Hedley, the Professor of Sociology at the University of Victoria. This
especially applies to developing countries because of the universal sexual
division of labour in which women are assigned the primary responsibility
of nutrition, health and raising children. The results of education are
more immediately translated into tangible benefits, yet, throughout the
world, again more so in developing countries, men are given significantly
more opportunities to learn than women.

It is widely accepted that a low level of literacy amongst the female
population not only has a negative impact on the women’s lives, but also on
that of their families and their country’s economic development. Numerous
studies show that illiterate women have higher levels of fertility and very
little autonomy within the household, so they cannot take control of their
reproductive functions, for example. A woman’s lack of education also has a
negative impact on the health and wellbeing of her children. For instance,
a survey in India found that infant mortality was inversely related to the
mother’s educational level, while the pervasive influence of traditional
beliefs and practices was often harmful to the promotion of the education
of girls and women.

For development to be sustainable, it has to recognise the full value of
woman’s work – paid and unpaid - in all spheres of life in which women’s
contribution is currently invisible and not valued. At the International
Social Security conference held in Cape Town this week, Dr Jean Triegaardt
pointed out that there is an assumption by government and other role-
players that the role of women as caregivers is taken for granted.

There is also a tendency to depend on women’s reproductive role of caring
for children and family members with HIV/Aids, so much so that when the
chips are down and the older women in the family are not available for the
role, it is the young girls who are taken out of school to take up the
caregiver role. They are then unable to complete their education or gain a
skill and so begin a lifelong cycle of poverty.

The same applies to school-going girls who fall pregnant. In reply to my
recent question to the Deputy President as to how we could incentivise
young women not to have babies before they finish school, she talked about
continuing their education after the pregnancy. Yes, they must be
encouraged to do this, but we also need to prevent pregnancies in the first
place. Dr Triegaardt demonstrated how the labour market in South Africa has
become more feminised. Women hold more lower paying jobs than men and
unemployment rates are higher for women. Similarly, the patterns of poverty
are generalised. Women are generally poorer than men and girls are more
vulnerable than boys.

The benefits of the social grant system are also felt more by women. Ninety
percent of the child support grants are given to mothers. The positive
effects of social grants in South Africa are seen in the developmental
benefits. Social grants facilitate what is called “prime age women”
entering the job market. Some would argue that this is why young women fall
pregnant in the first place because they actually need the money. This is,
surely, a good argument for another form of a universal cash grant, which
is not reliant on having a baby.

The opposite side of the coin is that social security grants empower women
and assist in alleviating poverty, as women are mostly responsible for
taking care of their children, grandchildren, foster children, family
members with disabilities and HIV/Aids and aged family members. A minimal
level of education, such as more than that of five or six years, must be
achieved before any significant improvements can be seen in female
autonomy. Primary education may not be sufficient to meaningfully improve
the status of these women. Even if school attendance is free, the cost of
books, uniforms and transport can be too much for poor families.

Poor families are more likely to keep girls at home to care for their
younger siblings, the aged or those suffering from HIV/Aids, including
their parents, or even to work for the family in the fields or in the
family business. If the family has to choose between educating a son or a
daughter because of financial reasons, typically it is the son who will be
chosen to go to school.

The DA welcomes the formalisation of early childhood development in the
recently passed Children’s Amendment Bill. New analysis by the Global
Campaign for Education suggests that if all children received a complete
primary education, the economic impact of HIV/Aids could be greatly reduced
and thousands of HIV/Aids cases in young adults could be prevented each
year.

The problems of promoting the education of girls and women are not just
educational problems, neither are they just gender problems; they are
intimately linked with the wider issues of national development and
economic growth without which we cannot eradicate poverty. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Ms C N Z ZIKALALA: Hon Chairperson, to educate a woman is to educate a
nation. So, giving them a chance to acquire knowledge and skills is just
like planting a seed and nurturing it throughout, because you will get a
rich reward at the end of the day. In the eradication of poverty, women can
be used as examples and vehicles because they have a history of being able
to fight poverty despite all the odds.

Women can play a very important role in eradicating poverty. Empowered with
the necessary knowledge and skills, women can do wonders. A woman can
function in all different walks of life and still be able to fulfil her
duties as a mother, wife and successful businessperson. She is able to
embrace several children at the same time, and give them hugs that can heal
anything from a bruised knee to a broken heart, and she does all this
despite the fact that she is wealthy or poor.

Women have supernatural powers, I think. She is able to multiply her
earnings no matter how low they are. She is also able to provide for a big
family and still have remaining cash for other household necessities. It is
high time that women came together and formed clubs, such as society
stokvels, in order to get to know each other in our respective communities.
We need to plan our way forward in eradicating poverty.

Asivuke sizenzele futhi sisebenzise ubuchopho  bethu  kanye  nezandla  zethu
singalindeli  ukukhangezwa.  Masingalingi   sizifanise   namaphuphu   enyoni
okhamisa  ngithele.  Kufanele  lapho  siqinise  ngempela.   Masilime   futhi
sitshale imifino okuyiyona esinikeza umsoco osisiza kakhulu  nasekuvikelweni
ekuhlaselweni yizifo kalula. Siyazi  ukuthi  nalaba  abakhungethwe  igciwane
lengculazi  kufanele   badle   kakhulu   imifino.   Ngiyabonga.   [Ihlombe.]
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Let’s get up and do things for ourselves. Let us use our brains  and  hands
and not wait to be fed. Let’s not dare to compare ourselves with  hatchlings
that wait to be fed. We must put more efforts there. Let us plough and  grow
green vegetables which give us nutrients which in turn help us  a  lot  from
being easily affected by diseases. We also know that those who are  affected
by Aids must eat lots of green vegetables. Thank you [Applause.]]

Ms S N SIGCAU: Chairperson and hon members, we know that in this country
and in every other country that poverty and gender are linked. We know that
whenever economic, military or natural disasters strike, it is women who
are left to fend for themselves and their households. We also know that in
most societies patriarchy still plays a role and that women are less likely
to have equal access to opportunities and resources, even in times of
prosperity. Finally, we know that if you uplift a woman, automatically she
will uplift her family, community and, of course, the whole nation.

In light of these facts, it goes without saying that no attempt at fighting
poverty can succeed if women are not at the centre of that policy.
Regrettably, we do not see this awareness actually being put into practiced
in policy. Indeed, it is one of those things that is always said: Women are
at the core of this or that effort.

But what is actually being done specifically to assist women in poverty
eradication? Is there a means test that identifies women in need? Is there
a grant that is aimed at women in need specifically? Indeed, are there any
mechanisms in place to ensure that the poverty assistance women receive is
not afterwards taken or exploited by men? In South Africa, we are far away
from achieving gender equality but we know that, in comparison with other
countries, we are still relatively well off. In the long run, we need to
acknowledge that social and cultural equality must be achieved without
delay so that we can pursue economic equality and so bring about a
permanent end to poverty instead of relying on poverty relief, which does
not resolve the actual problem. I thank you, Chairperson.

Ms M M MDLALOSE: Chairperson, democracy will not be achieved unless we see
in visible and practical terms that the conditions of women in our country
have radically changed for the better and that they have been empowered to
intervene in all spheres of life as equals of any member of our society.
This was said by the former President of South Africa.

Poverty relief is closely connected to unemployment and the scarcity of
skills, and this phenomenon mostly affects women. Reducing joblessness
remains South Africa’s most critical challenge. With unemployment at 25,5%
and the highest amongst black women, government needs to create greater
labour-intensive programmes in order to address the unemployment challenge.


As we all are aware, South Africa faces skills shortages and needs to step
up investment in training while shifting production towards more labour-
absorbing activities. It is therefore imperative that South Africa
establish a platform for educational programmes to be facilitated in
strategically built empowerment centres that are closely located to poor
women in order to deal with the poverty of education that many African
women are still grappling with today. In order for poor women to create a
new culture of education that they can pass on to their girl-children, it
is imperative for them to actively take part in educational and empowerment
programmes, to build themselves up and to change the face of poverty and
the future of girl-children in South Africa.

Empowerment programmes for poor women are imperative and should be jointly
administered by the Departments of Education, Social Development, and Trade
and Industry. Programmes ranging from entrepreneurship to various career
opportunities can be offered in order to curb a dependency syndrome on
social grants by beneficiaries. Empowerment programmes for poor women will
definitely push forward the process of bringing women into the mainstream
of economic activity. Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson and hon members, one of the Millennium
Development Goals is to condemn discrimination against women. We also know
that Goal 3 of the Millennium Development Goals calls for the empowerment
of  women and for gender equality. Women are a good investment and that is
why sages of old said, “If you educate a man you educate an individual, but
if you educate a woman you educate a nation.”

The “Women Deliver” conference held last year summed it up well. Its theme
was: “Invest in Women; it pays”. If you invest in women, education levels
increase, economies grow and political participation widens as women are
central to the economic, social and political health of nations. Women have
always come up as the vulnerable group. It is unfortunate that in the
African context they would rather invest in educating their sons,
regardless of their aptitude, than invest in educating women. In this case
we need to be reminded of the Setswana saying that goes “Mo tshware gantle
ke galase e a thubega”. This simply means that women deserve tender care as
they are fragile. The UCDP has always put it clearly that women were not
made from the crumbs of dust that fell from the Master’s table when He
created man. Women are human beings in their own right and have to be
accepted as such.

It is pleasant that the leadership qualities of women are gradually being
recognised across the globe. They run governments after beating men in
national elections. In the 14 years of this democratic Parliament, the
National Assembly has been run by Eve’s descendants and it is growing in
leaps and bounds.

In the rural areas women are known to face poverty squarely in the face.
They know what has to be done in the home when there are no basics, be they
food or clothing. In fact, in child-headed families girls always come up
head and shoulders above boys.

Most burial societies and stokvels are run by women and they turn these
women into agents of change and architects of their own destiny. In
instances in which men have their burial societies, whenever the male has
to host he can’t even do it without a woman, his wife or someone else if
he’s unattached, but where the woman is a member in her own right, the
husband may go away and all will run well.

It is a known fact that in most cases family businesses collapse on the
deaths of wives of men who run such businesses, but if the head of the
family who ran the business dies, the business prospers under the new
management of the widow. With such natural talent of nurturing people and
events we cannot agree more that natural abilities need pruning by study.
Let us support our womenfolk as this is an investment in the future. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Chairperson, it has been pointed out that 70% of the world’s
poor are women and that in South Africa it is the rural women who are
struggling the most in the battle against poverty. While we acknowledge
that we have in place legislation that will turn around the aggression of
poverty in our country, the reality still shows that rural South Africans
still face poor education and health facilities and minimal economic
growth.

Of this, women still benefit the least by this as they fend for their
families from the little they take home. While legislation is in place and
in line with global trends, one expects a quick turnaround in circumstances
but we soon realise that overcoming poverty it is not easy fight and that
we have quite a battle up ahead. While it is reported from the South
African Survey of 2006-07 that South Africa is becoming more urbanised, we
need to embark on a campaign to empower women in both urban and rural
communities in terms of the rights and the opportunities that they should
seize.

Whilst South Africa is promising in talent, we need to expose this
potential to the outside world so that the private sector may invest in
this development. We have had a number of facilities set up to teach skills
to women, but we believe that these skills should expand beyond sewing and
vase-making and teach all skills that will facilitate a growth in skilled
labour.

We need to realise that women make up a large percentage of the South
African population and that if we invest in this human supply we stand to
benefit as a nation and further progress in liberation in terms of gender
equality. We need to abandon the patriarchal system of tradition and
culture and realise that in the modern South Africa women have as an equal
voice and valid input as us males. We further need to realise that the
patriarchal societies in which the men were always the heads of households,
it was the woman who was the neck. I thank you.

Ms S D MOTUBATSE-HOUNKPATIN: Chairperson, hon members, today’s debate opens
another window for us to reflect on and assess how we are faring on gender
issues. All three topics today have really helped us as a nation to look
back at where we came from and to look ahead to where we are going.

With regard to the first topic: International Women’s Day, we know that
this was about women fighting for better working conditions. But what is
interesting about women’s battles is that there is the humane side to them.
This is because when you ask these women why they were fighting for better
working conditions, they will tell you that they also want to have more
time for their loved ones as well – meaning taking care of their children
and their husbands.

With regard to the debate on peace-building, we know peace is a
prerequisite for development. And what women are concerned about is
development. If any state or developing state puts resources aside and
invests in women, it is guaranteed that it will be alleviating poverty. And
surely changes can be seen in that society.

As women we also know that peace starts in our homes. Doing away with women
and child abuse; doing away with violence against women and planting some
resources will definitely make a huge difference in society and in the
communities at large.

We cannot deny that there are certain virtues which women possess and that
as women we cannot shy away from these. To name just a few: there is
service and compassion and women naturally have that love, and women care;
they care a lot. If you look at the nature of women,   at how they do
things, they are very embracing; they always embrace. It is very seldom
that you would find women talking about “I, I, I” and “I want”. You always
find women talking of “we”: “We need this”. And that is what makes women
different from men, in most cases.

We should also agree that women, much as they serve their nations and much
as they do all these things, they do these things because they care about
the nation as a whole and not just about individual needs.

In many homes you will find a wall hanging that states: “What is a home
without a mother?” This shows that if there is a woman in a house, the
house becomes a home, but if you have a house with no women there is no
home.

I also want to speak briefly about the girl-child. We have heard from
previous speakers how girl-children are sacrificed in most cases to take
care of sick people in the homes, to help the younger children when parents
die. This is also because of the strength - the virtues - that I spoke
about in that the girl-child, when the mother is sick, is the one that will
think of giving her tablets and water. We are saying that if we invest in
these children, opening opportunities for them, we can definitely do away
with poverty as a nation.

The South African government under the ANC has actually opened up
opportunities for our womenfolk. The previous speaker, the hon Semple,
spoke about the education opportunities that are there. We must also take
these opportunities seriously and ensure that our girl-children are being
enrolled in the FET colleges, the nursing colleges and the teachers’
colleges to ensure that they have professions. We know it is only through
this that they can have stable jobs; have job security. And job security
means a guaranteed income and a guaranteed income means doing away with
poverty.

We also have a programme from the Independent Development Trust that the
hon Morutoa spoke about. But I think it is important for us to monitor the
implementation of this. We have also passed laws here. Hon members will
remember the Preferential Procurement Act. But I don’t think that we share
information on how this is implemented and whether it is yielding the
results that we envisaged when we passed this law.

We should also hold our government departments responsible for showing in
their statistics if and how the services they render - their output - are
benefiting women from them, because we know that if we invest in women we
change the face of our continent. We know that if we want to build a
better, a better world can only be realised if women are free. And freedom
of economy is what is important.

I am from the school of thought that says economy is decisive. It is
decisive because it determines your place in society. It is decisive even
if you go look at other levels. Take, for instance, the UN, which is a
family of nations, we know that the poor countries normally don’t have much
say and are dominated by rich countries because of poverty.

I think our nation should really invest more in women - and women do
reciprocate. If there is investment in women, results will be very clear
and will be seen from afar.

I must conclude by saying that the country at the moment has given us a
chance to bring all those IPU countries here to share with us, and also for
us to give something for them to go back with. I think that if those
countries, which are coming here, descending on our shores next month, if
they take the importance of women seriously and invest in women, the
developing countries will definitely change, the face of Africa will
change, the face of our homes will change because women will command more
resources and will make a difference.

Lastly, I must also thank all the hon members who participated in this
debate. Surely, we will also be teaching some of the IPU participants on
how, as Members of Parliament coming from different parties, we can work
together and ensure that there are changes in our society and in our
nation.

Ge ke ruma polelo ya ka, re a tseba gore mmagwe bana o swara thipa ka
bogaleng le gore ge legae le se na motho wa mosadi ga nke e ba legae le le
feletšego ka ge mosadi e le yena a tsebago gore ge letšatši le dikela go
swanetše go be le seo se yago ka teng. Ge go se na seo se yago ka teng, ke
yena a kalokanago a dira gore bana le mokgalabje ba be le seo se yago ka
teng. Ke a leboga, Modulasetulo. [Legoswi.] (Translation of Sepedi
paragraph follows)

[In conclusion, I will say that we all know that women are very brave and
they can do anything for their families. They play a very important role in
the family and without them nothing will ever go right. They are the
cornerstone of the family and they always make sure that they provide for
their families even when life is tough. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Ms J L FUBBS: Hon Chairperson, I just want to switch my phone off, if you
don’t mind.

Hon Chairperson and hon members of this House, when you look at the title
of this debate, “Peace, investment and women”, it clearly manages to
encapsulate the two core areas facing our world today and the world of
women. I think, as we come to this part of the debates, the Inter-
Parliamentary Union debates, we look at issues ...

Ms J A SEMPLE: Chairperson, on a point of order: May I just remind Ms Fubbs
that actually what we’re talking about is, namely “Debate on Combating
Poverty – Investing in Women”.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr B M Skosana): Please, that’s not a point of
order. Continue, hon member.

Ms J L FUBBS: Well, I think, in all honesty, the Speaker will realise
herself – that’s why she smiled – that I said, “poverty” ... you know,
“campaign”. It really is all the same thing. [Interjections.] If you’re
talking about poverty and you know that, the point I wish to make in this
short debate is this: that at this time in our world history women remain
among the poorest of the poor. That’s the one aspect.

The second aspect is in terms of the Millennium Development Goals.
Internationally, the world took a decision that, as a group of nations, we
need to actually transform and turn around that situation.

One of the ways in which this can be done is not simply through pure
financial investment, because that is often what investing is seen as, but
actually the investment of resources by respective countries: South Africa,
African countries and other countries internationally, and including the
institutional orders. It is that kind of investment that I wanted to talk
about and not a pure financial investment.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr B M Skosana): Hon member, just a moment. Is that
a point of order, sir?

Mr C M LOWE: No, Mr Chairman. I wonder if the hon member would take a
question.

Ms J L FUBBS: Well, normally I don’t, hon Chairperson, but if the member
has a question.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): So you would take a question now?

Ms J L FUBBS: I will at the end.

Mr C M LOWE: But not now? All right.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Continue then, hon member.

Ms J L FUBBS: I certainly will. Thank you, hon Chairperson. Members of this
House, I think all of us have realised - those of you who at least take
serious cognisance of what the debate is about - that these debates before
us are not simply about the issues facing one country, but about the issues
facing women internationally, women in Africa, women in Brazil, women in
India, women in America, women in Britain.

An HON MEMBER: ... women in Zimbabwe?

Ms J L FUBBS: I sat today ... Indeed, in Zimbabwe, although I’m not sure
why that is always your favourite topic, hon member.

But the reality is this: that today the poverty that we see is not a
poverty created purely by floods, by international anathema and so on, it
is often because of wars of one kind or another. And it is these wars on
various continents – some of a country’s own creation, but many, many of
the wars that are fought today - are invariably wars to impose another’s
ideology of one kind or another or in fact to access the resources of a
respective country.

The people who are the greatest sufferers, who are most vulnerable, are the
women in that particular country or territory. Being as vulnerable as they
are, very often - unlike our own country, which has a Constitution of which
we can be proud and certainly if it’s fully implemented - women will be
able to transform their situation into one of genuine economic equality and
not one purely of political equality.

My appeal to all members, my own comrades and indeed also my colleagues
with whom I have a very, I would call it, pleasant engagement from time to
time ... And I am aware, knowing from where they come, that the members who
are on my left here equally support the idea that we must, as a country,
contribute to the resource transformation that is currently impeding the
development of women. I don’t think there’s anyone on my left who would
disagree with that.

Having said that, I think if we look at our papers today, internationally
as well as nationally, we become aware that the gap economically continues
to rise between men and women. Now I don’t want to get into a debate as to
whether economically good or bad.

What I do want to get into is to say that in most developing countries you
find that women carry the greatest burden in society economically in
raising families and extended families. Yet, with the huge expenditure that
that would demand, in time, effort and financial resources, women do not
have or enjoy the same opportunities in practice, internationally and
indeed in our own country, although we have gone a long, long way with the
legislation that we have enacted in the past 13 years to achieve this. Not
only have we gone a long way to achieve this, we have undertaken audits
that can identify the more critical challenges that face us, whether on the
health scene, the education scene, the social scene and indeed in the
corporate sector itself.
What has this got to do with peace? As anyone will tell you ...
[Interjections.] As anyone will tell you, peace and poverty are linked,
gentlemen on my right! I suggest you do your reading. [Interjections.]
Well, at this stage, they are on my right. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr B M Skosana): Order! Order, please!

Ms J L FUBBS: But if I may continue, hon Chairperson, as I was saying,
peace and poverty are linked. Without peace you will indeed have poverty,
but you may also have poverty even while there is peace.

And may I say that on the financial side, the practices that have currently
prevailed in this country, that have only recently been directly addressed
by legislation in terms of credit, are very important instruments in
ensuring that those women who are employed are not among the thousands who
find themselves taking home a deduction, instead of taking home a pay-
cheque. And there are people in companies and wherever else who have
actually fallen victim to this kind of practice. I want to appeal to this
House, finally, that we take ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon member, your time has expired.

Ms J L FUBBS: Thank you very much. I believe there is a question, hon
Chairperson. [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): No, your time has expired.
[Interjections.]

Ms J L FUBBS: Well, there we are! Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr C M LOWE: Hon Chairperson ...

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): No, hon member, the time has
expired; she’s no longer at the podium.

Mr C M LOWE: I just wanted to ask the hon member how she could make such a
wonderful speech without speech notes. [Interjections.] Congratulations!
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr B M Skosana): Hon member Fubbs, I must say that
you brought some life and I give you credit for that! [Laughter.]
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 17:23.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

      1) Refugees Amendment Bill, 2008, submitted by the Minister of Home
         Affairs. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs and
         the Select Committee on Social Services.

      2) Prevention of and Treatment for Substance Abuse Bill, 2008,
         submitted by the Minister of Social Development. Referred to the
         Portfolio Committee on Social Development and the Select Committee
         on Social Services.

      3) Expropriation Amendment Bill, 2008, submitted by the Minister of
         Public Works. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Public Works
         and the Select Committee on Public Services.

2.    Introduction of Bills
     (1)    The Minister of Home Affairs


          a) Refugees Amendment Bill [B 11 – 2008] (National Assembly –
             proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
             of its introduction published in Government Gazette No 30835
             of 4 March 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Home
             Affairs of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
             Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
             Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)    Proclamation No 47 published  in  Government  Gazette  No  30594
         dated  14  December  2007:  Commencement  of  the  Corporate   Laws
         Amendment Act, 2006 (Act No 24 of 2006).

 2. The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)    Report of the Independent Commission  for  the  Remuneration  of
         Public Office Bearers for 1 January 2007 to 31 December 2007.

    (b)    The Speaker of the National Assembly and the Chairperson of the
         National Council of Provinces, as co-chairpersons of the Joint
         Rules Committee, present the Second Report of the Joint Rules
         Committee for 2007, as follows:

                SECOND REPORT OF JOINT RULES COMMITTEE, 2007

         The Joint Rules Committee, having on 28 February 2007 considered
         the report of the Joint Subcommittee on the Review of Joint Rules
         regarding Order in Joint Sittings and Rules of Debate, recommends
         the following amendments to the Joint Rules:

         1. Joint Rule 11 pertaining to “Relief of presiding officer” is
    substituted as follows:

             Relief of presiding officer

             11. An elected presiding officer of either House must take the
                  Chair whenever requested to do so by the Speaker or the
                  Chairperson of the Council.

         2. A new Chapter 2A entitled “Order in Joint Sittings and Rules of
             Debate” is inserted as follows:

                                 CHAPTER 2A

                 ORDER IN JOINT SITTINGS AND RULES OF DEBATE

                       Part 1: Order in joint sittings

             Conduct of members

             14A (1)   Every member, when he or she enters or leaves the
                      Chamber or moves to any other part of the Chamber
                      during a debate, unless the presiding officer directs
                      otherwise, shall bow to the Chair in passing to or
                      from his or her seat.

            (2)  No member shall pass between the Chair and the member who
                    is speaking nor stand in any of the passages or
                    gangways.

             Members not to converse aloud


             14B During debate no member shall converse aloud.

             Member not to be interrupted


             14C No member shall interrupt another member whilst speaking,
                  except to call attention to a point of order or a question
                  of privilege.

             Order at adjournment


             14D When a joint sitting rises, members shall rise and remain
                  in their places until the presiding officer has left the
                  Chamber.

             Precedence of presiding officer


             14E Whenever the presiding officer addresses members during a
                  debate, any member then speaking or seeking to speak shall
                  resume his or her seat and the presiding officer shall be
                  heard without interruption.

             Irrelevance or repetition


             14F The presiding officer, after having called attention to
                  the conduct of a member who persists in irrelevance or
                  repetition of arguments, may direct the member to
                  discontinue his or her speech.

             Member ordered to withdraw


             14G If the presiding officer is of the opinion that a member
                  is deliberately contravening a provision of these Rules,
                  or that a member is in contempt of or is disregarding the
                  authority of the Chair, or that a member's conduct is
                  grossly disorderly, he or she may order the member to
                  withdraw immediately from the Chamber for the remainder of
                  the sitting.



             Referral of member’s conduct to House



             14H If a presiding officer is of the opinion that a
                  contravention committed by a member of either House is of
                  so serious a nature that an order to withdraw from the
                  Chamber for the remainder of the sitting is inadequate,
                  the presiding officer may refer the matter to the Speaker
                  or the Chairperson of the Council, whichever is relevant,
                  for appropriate action.

             Expression of regret


             14I  (1)  A member who has been ordered to withdraw from the
                      Chamber may submit to the Speaker or the Chairperson
                      of the Council a written expression of regret.

             (2) A written expression of regret approved by the Speaker or
                      the Chairperson of the Council shall be recorded in
                      the Minutes of Proceedings.


             Reflections upon judges, etc


             14J No member shall reflect upon the competence or honour of a
                  judge of a superior court or of the holder of any other
                  office (other than a member of the Government) whose
                  removal from such office is dependent upon a decision of
                  either House.

             Grave disorder


             14K In the event of grave disorder at a sitting, the presiding
                  officer may adjourn the sitting or may suspend the
                  proceedings for a period to be stated by him or her.


                           Part 2: Rules of debate

          Member to address Chair


           14L    At a Joint Sitting a member may only speak from the
      podium, except —

        a) to raise a point of order or a question of privilege; and
        b) to furnish a personal explanation in terms of Rule 14R;
        c) if the member is unable to do so due to a physical disability; or
        d) with the prior consent of the presiding officer,

                  when he or she may address the Chair from a microphone on
                  the floor of the Chamber.

         Calling of members

         14M      A member shall be called in a debate by the presiding
             officer in accordance with a list of scheduled speakers.

         Time limits for speeches
         14N      Members shall be restricted, in regard to the length of
             time they speak, to the times allocated to them in the list
             contemplated in Rule 14M.

         Reference to member by name


         14O      No member shall refer to any other member by his or her
               first name or names only.

         Offensive language


        14P      No member shall use offensive or unbecoming language.
        Matters sub judice

         14Q      No member shall reflect on the merits of any matter on
             which a judicial decision is pending.

         Explanations


        14R      (1)   An explanation during debate is allowed only when a
                       material part of a member's speech has been misquoted
                       or misunderstood, but such member shall not be
                       permitted to introduce any new matter, and no debate
                       shall be allowed upon such explanation.


                 (2)   A member may, with the prior consent of the presiding
                      officer, also explain matters of a personal nature,
                      but such matters may not be debated, and the member
                      shall confine himself or herself strictly to the
                      vindication of his or her own conduct and may not
                      speak for longer than three minutes.


         Points of order


        14S      (1)   When a point of order is raised, the member called
                      to order shall resume his or her seat, and after the
                      point of order has been stated to the presiding
                      officer by the member raising it, the presiding
                      officer shall give his or her ruling or decision
                      thereon either forthwith or subsequently.

                 (2)   A ruling to be given after the sitting has adjourned
                      shall be given in the National Assembly or in the
                      National Council of Provinces, depending on which
                      House the offending member belongs to.


                 (3)   A ruling to be given in accordance with Subrule (2)
                      may, by agreement of the presiding officers, be
                      delivered and enforced by a presiding officer of the
                      House to which the offending member belongs on behalf
                      of a presiding officer from the other House.
         Acting for absent member


         14T      A member may take charge of an order of the day in the
             absence of the member in charge, provided he or she has been
             authorised to do so by the absent member.

         Right of members to speak


         14U      A member may speak -


             (a) when called upon to do so by the presiding officer; or
             (b) to a point of order.

         When reply allowed


         14V      A reply shall be allowed to the member introducing a
             subject for discussion (except in the case of the President's
             state-of-the-nation address) or to the member in charge of an
             order of the day.



         Debate closed



         14W      A reply to a debate closes the debate.

      Report to be considered.

CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - T080313E-insert1 PAGES 443-457

National Assembly

1. The Speaker

    (a)     Reply from the Minister of Education to recommendations in the
        Thirty-Fifth Report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Department
        of Education), as adopted by the House on 21 November 2007.


        Referred to the Committee on Public Accounts.

    (b)    Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on  the  Oversight
         Report on the Verification of Qualifications in the Public  Service
         – November 2007 [RP 6-2008].


     c) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the Implementation
        of the Performance Management and  Development  System  for  Senior
        Managers in the North West Province – January 20087 [RP 13-2008].

CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - T080313E-insert2- PAGES 458-465

National Assembly

1.    Report  of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Environmental  Affairs  and
    Tourism on the National Environmental  Management:  Integrated  Coastal
    Management Bill [B40-2007] (National Assembly – sec 76), dated 12 March
    2008:

       The Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and Tourism, having
       considered the subject of  the  National  Environmental  Management:
       Integrated Coastal Management Bill [B40-2007] (National  Assembly  –
       sec 76), referred  to  it,  and  classified  by  the  Joint  Tagging
       Mechanism (JTM) as section 76 Bill, reports the Bill with amendments
       [B40A-2007].


CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORTS - T080313E-insert3 – PAGES 466-488


