---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 17 June 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2008-06-17
---

TUESDAY, 17 JUNE 2008
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:05.

The House Chairperson (Mrs M N Oliphant) took the Chair and requested
members to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the Council I shall move on behalf of the DA:

  That the Council–

     1) notes with concern that the negative influence of the internal
        strife within the ANC is now manifesting itself at all levels of
        society on a daily basis or, as a prominent daily newspaper often
        quoted by the ANC puts it, “The North West congress of the ANC
        Women’s League was adjourned yesterday without even a credentials
        report being presented to delegates amid spiralling turf battles in
        the ruling party’s structures countrywide”;

     2) further notes that this comes shortly after the ANC’s provincial
        secretary was attacked and stabbed by angry members at a party
        meeting in Worcester, Western Cape;

     3) therefore, whilst understanding the frustration and anger of the ANC
        members and structures, in the face of so much instability within
        its ranks, calls for calm amongst ANC members and structures; and

     4) realises that nepotism, corruption, inability to govern, slander and
        backstabbing by and amongst its top leadership is no reason to
        destabilise the entire country.

[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Order, please! Hon members,
order!

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chair, I would like to move an amendment on that motion.
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Order! No, hon member, it was a
notice of motion.

                    LEAVE OF ABSENCE GRANTED TO MS NYANDA

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council–


     1) notes that the hon Ms F Nyanda has been booked off sick;


     2) resolves to, notwithstanding the provisions of Rule 17(1) of the
        Rules of the National Council of Provinces, grant the hon Ms Nyanda
        leave of absence from proceedings of both the Council and
        committees of the Council in terms of Rule 17(2) until she has
        recovered to resume duty; and


     3) takes this opportunity to wish the hon Ms Nyanda a speedy recovery.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT ON NCOP VISIT TO WESTERN CAPE IN TERMS OF PROGRAMME
                     OF TAKING PARLIAMENT TO THE PEOPLE
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members of the NCOP and special delegates
who are here today, I wish to thank you for giving me this opportunity to
table the report before the Council. Before I do so, please allow me to
join the Chief Whip of the Council in wishing Mrs Nyanda a speedy recovery.
We say may God be with her so that she may recover very soon and return to
the House and be with us again.

This afternoon we are placing before you the report on the Taking
Parliament to the People Programme, which took place from 29 October to 2
November 2007. I am actually very disappointed to be debating this report
so late when we could have done it much earlier. It’s been seven to eight
months since we’ve been in that particular area in the Western Cape.
Anyway, this is an example of some of the hiccups that we are faced with
during our work.

I would like to thank the members of the NCOP, provincial legislatures and
the Cape Winelands Municipality who participated during the visit to make
it a success. It became clear, though, that the relationship between the
public representatives of the different spheres of government needed to be
enhanced in order for them to be able to work together to address the needs
of the people.

I would like to emphasise, hon members, when we take Parliament to the
people, it is very important to honour co-operative governance and
intergovernmental relations, because we have to relate to one another as
three spheres of government and also as legislatures. This becomes very
important. Therefore, working together towards achieving the objectives of
this programme becomes very important and very pertinent because this is a
constitutional mandate that we are offered by the Constitution to engage
with.

I hope that in the future, wherever we go, people will recognise the
constitutional mandate as the fundamental role that we are playing as a
Council and as an institution. Members will remember that when we were
sitting at Pniel, quite a number of issues were raised, and we had to
respond to those issues and had to take some of them and include them in
the report. I am sure people have seen the report and that hon members will
be touching on those issues that have been raised in the report. I will,
perhaps, also dwell on the issues of committees to establish what it is
that they need to do when they visit those areas.

Firstly, let me start by making my comment in terms of the ward committees.
When we were in that area we observed that there appeared to be a
disjuncture between the views expressed by the people and those expressed
by the authorities with regard to the use or functioning of ward
councillors, especially in the Stellenbosch local municipality and other
affected municipalities.

For instance, in its Integrated Development Plans, the Stellenbosch
Municipality highlights the steps that are taken with regard to community
participation in the formulation of IDPs working through ward councillors.
On the one hand, some members of the public claimed during the public
hearing that the ward committees were not functioning or that ward
councillors did not report back to ward committees, or at worst, issues
raised by the committees were not being implemented. On the other hand,
communities were blamed for not attending ward committee meetings.

I would like to make it very clear that the ward committees are established
by law; they are not just there as structures which are merely elected by
the people. They are elected by law to do specific work and to co-ordinate
the communities’ work on the ground. One of the most important of these
duties is that of participating in the IDPs, because the programme of the
IDP should be developed from the bottom up and not from the top downwards.

Therefore it becomes very important that I request today that whenever they
have a meeting, councillors should invite ward councillors to participate.
And ward councillors, if they want to have a meeting, should also invite
the councillors so that these two  structures work together to identify
exactly what the issues are that the communities want to place on them and
what the issues are that have to do with the IDP.

I’m raising these issues because the issues that go into the IDP become
part of a strategic plan when they get to the municipality, and once they
form part of the strategic plan they dictate the budget of that particular
municipality.  In this way municipalities know what issues they are
budgeting for in a particular financial year. They can then watch how they
should budget for the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework, MTEF, period in
the coming years and look into the programme that that particular
municipality is facing. Therefore a good working relationship between the
two structures, the ward committees and municipality councils, becomes
vitally important.

The proper functioning of ward committees is very critical to ensure
community-driven development under our democratic dispensation. This area,
therefore, warrants some attention and I would like the hon members, when
they are doing their constituency work, to focus on that issue also because
that’s where we notice these things and that’s where you can address them
as an individual matter in your own constituency.

Go and find out what is the relationship between the ward committees and
councillors. If there is no relationship, find out what is the problem and
what can you do to broker that type of relationship to make sure that they
work together. This is part of our job, not just when taking Parliament to
the people, but also when we do constituency work.

It is very important that issues agreed to during ward committee meetings
are actually implemented. That’s another point that I want to raise,
because those are the issues which have been raised by the communities. At
times you find the issues are being raised, but they are not found in the
implementation plans of the municipalities. I know that there might be a
shortfall in the budget; one cannot implement everything which is there,
but at least let’s see those issues in the strategic plans of the
municipalities so that as and when they budget, those issues can be
implemented.

Commitments made during meetings with the people must actually be followed
up. That’s another very important thing. If you make a commitment, Mr and
Mrs Priscilla, Mr Themba and Mr Tolo, that you would do certain things with
your communities, you can’t just leave those things lying and not follow
up. Did you hear what I said? [Interjections.] Did you? Ok. [Laughter.]

One of the issues for Members of Parliament is precisely to make sure that
the commitments that have been made by the councillors and ward councillors
are followed up. Let’s check and assist the national government on those
issues to see if they are working or not. Failure to do so will result in
the demobilisation of our people and a delay in the efforts to create a
better life for all our people.

When we were in Pniel we made a few visits and I would like to touch on the
following issues that were raised, for example, under housing. We
discovered that communities raised concerns around the provision of houses
and the system used in the allocation of available houses. I guess this
problem is not just found in the Western Cape; it’s a problem that is to be
found almost everywhere in the country.

You will have noticed recently, during what we called xenophobic attacks,
that the people of our communities have been complaining that the people on
the housing lists seem to be jumping around so that people who have
registered earlier on find new people are coming in and getting houses.
Those are some of the things we have to monitor from time to time, also as
Members of Parliament.

We need to try to find out about and get into some of the issues as to what
is happening because we may find, as some community members allege, that
there is corruption in terms of the allocation of the houses because some
of the people take bribes and that is why there is jumping on the list. New
people who have requested accommodation then get in before the people who
registered earlier on. That’s a very critical issue on the ground that we
need to open our eyes to and always check up on when we do our constituency
work. In particular, the meeting on local government attended by the MEC of
the province, hon Dyantyi, recommended that the MEC looks at the issue of
housing development in general as far as it affects the community in the
Cape Winelands District.

Allegations about abuse on farms and other issues relating to land and
farms were also raised. During the public hearing, especially during the
meeting with farmers and farmworkers, allegations of abuse of farmworkers
were raised.

These include problems with regard to transport for farmworkers. Members
will recall that accident last year involving vehicles ferrying farmworkers
at Piketberg and De Doorns in the province in which a total of 13 people
were killed. This is one issue that is still happening on our farms,
particularly on the farms of farmers who don’t want to adhere to the labour
laws of this country.

I must repeat that it’s not all the farmers who are doing this. Although
there are a few of them who still don’t respect the labour laws of the
country, there are good farmers who are really looking after their people.
I think we need to congratulate those farmers who are looking after their
employees, but we should condemn in stronger terms those farmers who still
treat people as if they don’t exist as human beings in this world.

We also visited some prisons and there were issues relating to overcrowding
in the prisons as well as rehabilitation programmes for offenders in the
prisons. I think it’s not only in the Western Cape. You may share with us
very broadly that it is also a general trend, particularly throughout the
country. I think through your committee we can work on certain inputs or
proposals for the Minister of Correctional Services as to what can be done
to resolve these problems. I leave it entirely with your committee because
I know you are dealing with these things and that you can be of assistance
to us as a Council to deal with these matters.

In terms of Education, hon Tolo, with regard to schools, there were calls
for funding to build more classrooms at some schools and acquire teaching
resources and for other training needs, as well as questions about the
suitability of the curriculum for special learners, among other things.

School feeding schemes was the second issue that was raised very sharply
and we know that government’s commitment in this area is still relevant.
During the public hearings, a number of people from different
municipalities in the district raised the issue of challenges with regard
to the provision of school transport.

These issues are not only in this province; other provinces are also unable
to afford the necessary transport required for learners or to address the
feeding scheme issues and the shortage of classrooms, resulting in learners
still receiving education under a tree. We need to keep on emphasising
these issues so that the budget can be biased in favour of those issues we
think are vitally important. Remember, the issue of education, particularly
this year, should be our focus when we do our work in the field.

Hon members, these are but a few things I’m raising with you. I’ve left out
the issue of health which was raised there. I’ve left out the issue of
social development which I think other people will raise. I raised the
issues of unemployment which was raised there. There are quite a number of
issues, such as social transformation and economic development, that other
people will perhaps raise in the debate and which are captured in the
report itself.

I hope that our committees will find time to follow up on these and other
issues contained in the report. I’m not sure, as I haven’t received a
report from the House Chairs on whether our committee was able to go and
set up camp there. I promised the committees of the Winelands District,
particularly in the Stellenbosch area, that they would go and follow up but
I am told that the committee on Public Service was there. Is that correct?
[Interjections.] You postponed it after you promised? That’s why I’m
checking. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Order! Hon Mahlangu, you should
address the hon members through me, the Chair.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I will address them through the Chair, Madam
Chair, thank you very much.

I want to ask the committees to really concentrate on that score. I am
aware of the scheduled work that you have for this year. The programme is
very tight and the schedule is very packed and you may not have the
necessary time, but please prioritise some of the issues that you think you
can follow up in that particular area.

Lastly, I present a comprehensive report on “Taking Parliament to the
People” in the Western Cape, which considers the issues that were raised by
the public last year when we were sitting in this province. I hereby table
the report, and I thank you very much.

Ms D ROBINSON: Hon Chairperson and hon members, it is a pleasure for me to
report on one of the activities that is most central to the work of
Parliament, that is, connecting with the conditions faced by ordinary South
Africans and then doing whatever we can within our power to impact on those
conditions.

Even though this visit took place some months ago, back in November 2007,
it is nonetheless critical that we reflect on the week that we spent taking
Parliament to the people in Pniel. Let me at the outset congratulate those
who compiled the report for a largely accurate and insightful account. The
theme for last year’s visits around the country was “Deepening the debate”
and this time it was “Deepening the debate on transformation for a better
life for all”.

Matters such as co-operative government, poverty alleviation, the plight of
children, youth, people with disabilities, gender and water provision were
amongst those considered. Provision of water is vital for good health and
also the dignity of life. A good initiative of the Expanded Public Works
Programme was to encourage the clearing of alien vegetation both for
conservation purposes and for preserving our scarce water supplies.

Although the report was a good one, I think we should have had a more
accurate reflection of the negative feedback we received from the people of
the Western Cape and the many challenges that they highlighted to us as
their representatives. After all, it is these things that we need to take
cognisance of if our efforts to deepen the debate are to show any fruit.

Without doubt, the message was resounding that we need to focus our efforts
on fixing the education system, with particular emphasis on early childhood
education as that is what forms the foundation, the basis, for any future
education achievements of young people. We must ensure, through our
committees, that the call for the review of the Slanghoek Primary School
budgeting process is completed by the Department of Education.

Another resounding message was that our communities are heavily burdened by
the vice-grip of crime. The communities of Khayamandi and Cloetesville
requested that we help them to obtain two dedicated and fully staffed
police stations. Sometimes, in other communities, we have mobile police
stations, but the tragedy is that many of these are not operational around
the clock and that is something we need to appeal for. Police stations are
vital for protecting people and giving them security; and this is the first
duty of government. We should consider this as a priority and something
that we should all agitate for in our various capacities.

One measure that we can take pride in, and a measure for which all members
deserve applause, is the success of the school feeding scheme in poor rural
areas. We can only add our voices to the many who have called for the
extension of this scheme.

Education is vital to progress and strengthening democracy. Hungry children
cannot study and perform to the best of their ability so we need to extend
these programmes. I would like to appeal to all the members - that includes
me - to encourage people, whether they are in urban or rural areas, to
plant vegetable gardens. We know that there is a scarcity of food today yet
so many people just plant flowers. While we enjoy the flowers and they are
beautiful to look at, we need to look at food. I think in our own personal
capacities we should try to encourage this. This should be done to
supplement our dwindling food supplies.

Chairperson, when we take Parliament to the people, they expect delivery
from us as their representatives. We cannot allow a situation where our
visits are merely seen as talk shops which have no effect on the conditions
in which South Africans live. Let us hear the complaints of our
constituents and respond effectively, bringing all that we have to bear on
those problems and doing all that we can to improve them. Only then can we
really claim to have taken Parliament to the people and shown them what
Parliament can do for them. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mnu M A MZIZI: Angibonge, ngithokoze futhi ngibingelele uSihlalo wale Ndlu.
Cha, Sihlalo, uma kuthiwa sixoxe ngombiko esasinawo laphaya eNtshona
Koloni, kimina kusho ukuthi sasiyolalela ukuthi abantu bathini. Abantu
bakhuluma. Amakhansela, oNgqongqoshe bezifundazwe noNgqongqoshe
bakaZwelonke bathembisa ukuthi bazokwenza lokhu, nalokhu nalokhuya.

Ngokwami-ke ngithi asikaphindeli emuva. Ngivumelana noSihlalo. Uma
sesiphindele emuva sesiyophawula ukuthi yikuphi okungakenziwa ngoba
okwamanje kungase kube ukuthi sesisheshile uma sesiphawula ukuthi kuzoba
yilokhu, nalokhu nalokhuya okungenziwanga ngoba abantu babebika.

Angize kulokhu-ke. Empeleni khona ekuqaleni abantu babengakuboni kuyisu
elihle lokuthatha iPhalamende silise kubantu. Babethi ngumdlalo noma
umbuthano noma ukukhankasela ukhetho.

Angisho-ke mina ukuthi ngifunde lukhulu uma sengifika lapha eMkhandlwini
kaZwelonke weziFundazwe. Ngibe sengibona-ke ukuthi empeleni angilona ilunga
lesishayamthetho kodwa ngiyisikhonzi sabantu, ngakho kufuneka ngibuye
ngiphindele kubo ngiyokuzwa ukuthi abantu bathini. Sishaya imithetho bese
kubakhona okufuneka bayenze isebenze le mithetho. Thina-ke kufuneka ukuthi
sibuye siyobona ukuthi ngabe bayenza ngendlela yini.

Ngiyabonga-ke Sihlalo ukuthi ngisho kuwe ukuthi-ke, cha, ukuya kwethu
kubantu kwenza bakwazi ukuthi bathintane nathi manje. Sengize ngaya kabili
mina eKhayamnandi ngibizwa ngabantu bethi ake ngizobona nazi izinkinga
abanazo. Asiyi kubantu noma uma sisa iPhalamende kubantu, siya ngepolitiki.
Sisuke siyobheka izinkinga zabantu, hhayi ngoba siyokhankasa. Uma abantu
sebekhulumile, bayakwazi-ke ukubuya kuwe bathi wozani-ke sebenibiza
ngabanye ngabanye.

Ngiyacela-ke ukuthi uma sebesibiza asitholakala phela. Empeleni njengoba
sikhuluma namhlanje ngalo mbiko, sikhuluma khona enjikampunzi impela.
Seziyabuya manje emasisweni ngoba abazobe bekhuluma ngokuzayo kuyobe
sekungabanye hhayi thina, ngoba sesifike khona impela enjikampunzi manje
lapha ezibuya namajokwe sekufanele ziye ekhaya kubonakale ukuthi ngabe
zisazophinde zibuye na.

Yingakho ngithi-ke kusemqoka ukuthi sikusho lokhu ukuthi kubaluleke
kangakanani ukuthi asingahlali lapha ePhalamende sishaye imithetho kodwa
singaphumeli ngaphandle. Ngiyalivuma elikaMongameli wezwe elokuthi
asichithe ama-30% lapha kodwa ama-70% sibe ngaphandle. (Translation of
isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr M A MZIZI: It is my pleasure to greet the Chairperson of this House.
Chairperson, if we are asked to report on our visit to the Western Cape, I
take that to mean that we had gone there to listen to the people. People
spoke. Councillors, provincial Ministers and Ministers promised that they
will do this and that and many other different things.

I personally feel that we have not gone back to the people. I fully agree
with the Chairperson on that after having gone back to speak to the people,
we would have been able to clearly know and indicate what it is that has
been done and what has not. Right now it would be premature to say these
are the things that were not done as people have reported.

Let me say this. Initially, certain people were against the idea of taking
Parliament to the people. They believed this to be a fruitless waste of
time, a rally or an election campaign.

Let me say that I personally have learnt a lot since I arrived here in the
National Council of Provinces. I have since realised that I am not a Member
of Parliament but I am a people’s representative, therefore I should go
back to them to listen to what they have to say. We pass laws here and
there are people out there who have to implement these laws. We should go
back and see if they are implementing them in the right way.

Chairperson, it is my pleasure to tell you that the Taking Parliament to
the People programme has given our people a new way to communicate with us.
I have since gone to Khayamandi twice after having been called by the
people to come and see for myself the problems that they have. Taking
Parliament to the People is not a political ploy, but we only go there to
observe the people’s problems and we do not go there to canvass political
support. And when the people have spoken, they are later on able to come
back to you and call you to come back to them, one by one.

Can we please, therefore, if called, avail ourselves to the people. In
fact, as we are presenting this report today, we are indeed at a turning
point. The time has come for us all to go back home and reflect, because
the people who would be speaking on this podium next time would be other
people. The time has come for us to see if we make the grade to come back
to this House again.

And it is against this background that I say it is important for us not
just to rest on our laurels and just relax here in Parliament and pass laws
without going out to the people. I support President Thabo Mbeki’s call
when he says we must spend 30 per cent of our time here in Parliament and
70 per cent outside of Parliament.]

To me, Parliament is more about oversight and taking Parliament to the
people. It is only then that we are doing the work; not when you sit here
and debate and tell us how well your party can do this, that and the other.
Go to the people and listen to the people.

Uyabona lapha kuye kuthiwe uboyibheka intuthwane. Intuthwane isebenza
kusakhanya, yenze konke kuyothi uma kufika loluya suku olungaziwa yingakho-
ke bethi ... [You know, there is a verse that says you should take a lesson
from the ant. An ant stores its provisions in summer and gathers its food
at harvest so that when that day comes, it is safe and sound, that is why
they say ...]

Thou sluggard, go to the ants and see their ways and consider their ways.

Siyabonga. [Thank you.] [Applause.]

Mr N J MACK: Chairperson of the NCOP, hon members, special delegates, there
is one important thing that I need to raise. It is something that happened
to one of our members while we were on the visit. I think we need to look
at security because the hon Kgoshi Mokoena’s cellphone was stolen from his
room while he was asleep. There was a little window at the back that was
open and someone put his or her hand through and took the cellphone. This
incident alerted us to the whole thing about security and made us aware of
it, so we have to pay more attention to it. I thought I needed to mention
that.

Voorsitter, as ons nou kyk na die terugvoering, wil ek nie saamstem nie,
maar wil ek ook saamstem met die agb Robinson met van die negatiewe
terugvoering. [Chairperson, when we look at the feedback I want to
disagree, but I want to agree with the hon Robinson with regard to the
negative feedback.]

... negative feedback from our people, but if our people give feedback ...

As ons mense terugvoering gee of as ons mense by ons kla, is dit negatief
of is dit omdat hulle voel ons moet sekere goed vir hulle doen? Ek kan nie
sê dat dit negatief is nie. Vir my is dit ’n goeie ding. Dit kán negatief
wees en ek kán dit negatief vertolk. As ek nou vir die agb Robinson moet sê
dat Stellenbosch onder die DA was en dat dit deur die DA beheer is, so as
daar negatiewe “feedback” kom dan is dit as gevolg van die DA. Verstaan u?
Dit kan ook anders vertolk word. So ek wil dit nie in daardie lig sien nie.
Ek wil liewer sê wanneer ons mense vir ons terugvoering gee, moet ons dit
as positief beskou. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[When our people are giving feedback or when our people are complaining to
us, is that negative or is it because they feel we must do certain things
for them? I can’t say that it is negative. For me it is a good thing. It
could be negative and I could interpret it in a negative way. What if I
have to tell the hon Robinson that Stellenbosch was under the DA and it was
controlled by the DA, so if there is negative feedback then it is because
of the DA. Do you understand what I am saying? It can also be interpreted
in another way. However, I don’t want to see it in that light. I rather
want to say that when our people are giving us feedback, we should see it
as positive.]

It is indeed an honour and a privilege to present to this august House
today a statement on the NCOP’s “Taking Parliament to the People” visit to
the Western Cape from 29 October to 2 November. Let me state from the
outset that this visit, and future visits, derives from the constitutional
prescripts which compel us as public representatives to exercise our
oversight and intervention in national, provincial and local government
spheres.

The visit was structured to include public hearings, site visits and a
plenary session. And we adopted the main theme of “Deepening the debate to
get participatory democracy”. That is what we want in this country. Other
things that we focused on were co-operative governance; poverty
alleviation; agriculture as a tool to alleviate poverty; structures to
address the challenges faced by children, youth and people with disability;
and also the impact of the Extended Public Works Programme.

With regard to providing ordinary citizens with a platform to share in
debates with its government, it is indeed the ANC that was the first
political party in our country to create such platforms. The DA has proved
to be a party that does not want the concept of participatory democracy,
hence their lack of giving proper and meaningful alternatives to issues
that we debate at government level.

Weer eens wil ek vir u verwys na wykskomitees. Die agb Voorsitter het
daarna verwys. Ek het dit ook in die plaaslike regeringsdebat genoem en dit
het opgekom toe ons die Parlement na die mense toe geneem het. Die
wykskomitees werk nie; hulle fungeer nie. As ons plaaslike mense dan nie
daar ’n inset kan lewer nie, hoe weet enige raadslid of enige regering wat
om te doen? Die verskil is, en ons moet oop wees oor die ding, dat wanneer
dit by DA-wyke kom, dan wil hulle nie wykskomitees hê nie. Dit is ‘n saak
van wyksforums; hulle wil ’n wyksforum hê en dit is ’n heel ander tipe
konsep of samestelling.

Die einste wyk waarin ek bly, word deur die DA beheer en ek weet waarvan ek
praat. Ek is die ANC-voorsitter van daardie wyk. Hulle wil nie ’n
wykskomitee daar hê nie, maar ’n wyksforum waar jy sommer ’n breë klomp
mense nooi. Jy nooi nie organisasies nie, so dis ’n “free for all”. Dan
moet ons ook sê dat hulle hier in die Wes-Kaap op ’n slag uit Salga wou
onttrek het en toe het hulle maar weer agterna teruggeskerm.
[Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Once again I want to refer you to the ward committees. The hon Chairperson
referred to it. I also raised it in the debate on local government and it
came up when we took the Parliament to the people. The ward committees are
not working; they are not functioning. If our local people cannot even make
an input there, how will any councillor or government know what to do? The
difference is that, and we must be open about this kind of thing, when it
comes to DA wards the DA does not want ward committees. It is a matter of
ward forums; they want a ward forum which is a totally different concept or
composition.

The very ward in which I live is controlled by the DA, and I know what I am
talking about. I am the ANC chairperson of that ward. They don’t want a
ward committee there, but a ward forum where you just invite various people
across the board. You don’t invite organisations, so this is a “free for
all”. Then we also have to say that, here in the Western Cape, they once
wanted to withdraw from Salga and afterwards they sneaked back.
[Interjections.]]

During our visits major concerns were raised by the communities and it was
clear that most of these concerns related to municipal service delivery.
Let me mention some of these concerns: the nondelivery of houses promised
to the community; the lack of playground facilities; and poor employment
opportunities at municipal level. And I want to thank you, Deputy
Chairperson, for taking us to Pniel, as it is one of the poorest areas in
the Western Cape and it is a rural area.

Die beplanning is nog steeds nie reg nie. Ons beplan nog altyd soos in die
ou dae waar ons elkeen in sy hoekie wou beplan. Ons hou jou maar net daar
en ons verbeter min sodat jy daar vasgevang bly. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[There is still no proper planning. We are still planning like in the olden
days where we planned in such a way to get everyone in their own little
corner. We just keep you there and make few improvements so that you stay
trapped in your corner.]

During our visit to Cloetesville Police Station, we learned that important
locally based structures or forums such as the Community Police Forums,
CPF, are a major vehicle in addressing crime. We learned, for example, that
most of the drug dealers have been chased out with the help of the
neighbourhood watches and the CPFs.

As die mense bereid is om met die GPF’s saam te werk, hoe meer is hulle dan
nie bereid om in wykskomitees te dien nie. Nou iets is nie reg nie. Hoekom
wil hulle dan in ’n GPF werk? Dan kan jy nie vir my sê hulle wil nie in die
wykskomitees wees nie. Daar is iets, maar dit word net nie gestruktureer
nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[If people are willing to co-operate with the CPFs, they will be even more
willing to serve on the ward committees. Now, something is not right. Why
would they want to work in a CPF? Hence you cannot tell me that they are
not prepared to be part of the ward committees. There is something, but it
is not being structured.]

They are not organising. With regard to the public hearing on women, a
particular concern was raised by a member of the public. The concern was
that women working on farms have their own projects, but some of the white
farmers do not give them opportunities to market their products. This is
indeed sad and needs to be addressed.

Whilst we notice that our Western Cape provincial government moves in the
direction of understanding and taking on challenges facing them,
unfortunately it appears as if these challenges are not eagerly being
addressed at municipal level. This is indeed a great concern and challenge
for us. It also appears that in some instances we lack the capacity within
some of our departments. I am confident that those challenges are being
monitored for redress.

The President of South Africa stated in his address at the plenary that the
main theme, deepening the debate -

   ... seeks to galvanise all of us South Africans ... into an ongoing and
   vigorous process of engagement so as to enhance the quality of the
   national debate in the process ...

The DA’s politics and racial handling of important concerns, matters or
issues can again be seen in Cape Town currently, where they do not want to
make available municipal halls. They have made them available, but they do
not want to make available those that are in predominantly white areas to
our brothers and sisters who were left homeless during the current attacks
on foreigners.

HON MEMBERS: Dis ‘n skande! [This is a shame!]

Mr N J MACK: The whole issue of “Taking Parliament to the People” in the
Western Cape was a success in the sense that it demonstrated again the
importance of taking the community on board regarding issues. Thank you.

Ms M VENTURA (Western Cape): Chairperson, it is pleasure and honour for me
to speak on behalf of the Western Cape Provincial Parliament.

I was a delegate to the NCOP week at the end of October, beginning of
November, and I spent the whole week in Pniel. It was wonderful, spending
the week there with the Chairperson.

Chairperson, in nine days’ time we will be celebrating the 53rd anniversary
of the gathering of the people of South Africa at Kliptown, where we
declared bravely that “The people shall govern!”.

During those times, it was the idea and ideal that all the people will have
an equal say in the management of the country, its affairs and resources.
The intention was to involve those who installed the government and for
those who maintained it to be at the forefront of its development as a
responsible government that owes its existence to the voters and the
conscience of the wishes of the voters.

In the Preamble of our Constitution that was adopted in 1996, we again
declared that this august document lay the foundation for a democratic and
open society in which government is based on the will of the people. So
when we take Parliament to the people, we are not only demonstrating our
commitment to the first Congress of the People held in 1955, neither are we
only giving credence to what we said in our 12-year-old Constitution, but
we are, indeed, assuring our communities that they are an important element
in the law-making processes and also a cornerstone in our pursuit to
deliver services that are relevant, necessary and of the highest quality.

While this is an annual event, we illustrate in no uncertain terms that we
are committed to establishing a government that is in sync with the demands
and aspirations of the people it serves. Vicente Fox, the former Mexican
President, once said that:

  One of the fundamental ingredients of the new governance is good
  government. A government close to society, always ready to listen to it;
  a government fully respectful of legality, honest, transparent and
  efficient; but above all, a government conscious of its mission of
  promoting human and social development as the basis for attaining a more
  just and prosperous society.
During the visit to the communities of the Western Cape at the end of
October and the beginning of November, last year, we again experienced this
government which is close to society, always listening to it. Again, we
could engage with our communities on matters close to their hearts. We
could also look at ways to deepen the debate and to promote human and
social development as the basis for attaining a more just and prosperous
society. We could again experience good government.

What we do in South Africa, Chairperson, goes beyond the norm. We are,
indeed, going so much further in involving our communities; listening to
them; meeting with them; living with them; and suffering with them. But
most of all, Chairperson, we go beyond the norm as we always look for
workable and practical solutions with them.

Unlike other governments, during the event in Pniel, we again confronted
various social issues that are of major concern to our people. Again, we
could talk about issues affecting the youth, women, poor communities and
the provision of services. Those communities give us another opportunity to
reach out to people who would, in any other circumstances, not have had
access to their directly elected representatives.

This reminds me of so many women who attended the gathering at Pniel and
told us about their struggles and battles as women and farm labourers. We
are reminded of the aged who told about the abuse and the different
problems they encounter as they grow old. We are forced to give some
thought to the disabled who told us about the restrictions they continue to
face.

The lives of our people are changing for the better because of this
government. People have faith in their government because of this
Parliament. The despondent have hope because of the Council of Provinces
but we dare not let them down or betray their trust.

As the responsible government, leaders of our people and representatives of
our communities, we have a responsibility to the people who rely on us for
guidance and leadership. We dare not let them down.

Lastly, I would just like to ask, because I was part of the delegation that
went to the Khayelitsha Health Care Centre, did we make a follow-up on the
Community Health Care Centre in Khayelitsha that we visited? Is the
building completed; are there enough staff and medicine; is the fence
fixed; and are people still illegally taking electricity and water from the
hospital? If not, then we need to do these things post-haste. This is but
one of the many things that does not need rocket science; it just needs us
to roll up our sleeves and to respond to the call that the people gave us
at Pniel. Thank you.

Mnr F ADAMS: Agb Voorsitter, Voorsitter van die NRVP, Adjunkvoorsitter van
die NRVP, agb lede, iemand het my eendag gevra: [Hon Chairperson,
Chairperson of the NCOP, Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP, hon members,
someone once asked me:]

Why do you always go to the back of beyond in taking Parliament to the
people?

I think in less than a decade of taking Parliament to the people, the
National Council of Provinces has made great strides.

Laat ek my huistaal, Afrikaans, praat. Albei van u verstaan dit tog maar.
Die NRVP het goeie vordering gemaak om hierdie program verder te vat. In
minder as ’n eeu het ons na die agtergeblewenes toe gegaan.

Die gedagte het by my opgekom dat die probleme wegkruip waar die
agtergeblewenes hulself bevind. Dis waar die armoede is. Dis waar die
armstes van die armes bly. Dis waar dié wat honger ly, bly. Baie regerings
en politieke partye konsentreer op die voorkant. Soos die ou mense gesê
het: “Bo blink en onder stink.” [Gelag.] Ek het amper iets anders gesê wat
onparlementêr is! Dankie, agb Sulliman.

Die NRVP en hierdie ANC-beheerde regering het gewys dat ons nie net na “bo
blink” gaan nie, maar ons kom af tot onder. Ons maak oop tot op die been.
Niemand by hul volle verstand het gedink dat ons ooit Pniel toe sou gaan
nie, want wanneer jy daar verby ry, sien jy oral net die mooi wingerde, die
mooi plase en die mooi landskap.

Die DA was so geskok dat die vorige burgemeester van Stellenbosch op die
openingsdag gesê het dat die LUR en die provinsiale regering nooit met
hulle praat nie. Terwyl die LUR, die provinsiale regering, die nasionale
regering en die Nasionale Raad van Provinsies daar was, het die
burgemeester nie kans gesien om daar te wees nie. Selfs die DA-raadslede
van al die munisipaliteite in daardie omgewing was die hele week nie eers
daar nie. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Maar hulle het daardie platform gebruik om politiek te kom speel. Die agb
Watson het die Vrydag daar kom politiek speel.

Met die inwerkingstelling van hierdie program was die DA die eerste mense
wat gesê het dat die ANC die program wil gebruik vir politieke gewin. Die
ANC het nog nooit op enige van daardie platforms gestaan en gesê “Stem nou
ANC; ons is hier” nie. Dit het nog nooit gebeur nie. Ons het liewers vir
die mense gevra wat hulle kwel, en wat hul probleme is.

Onder u leiding, Voorsitter, asook onder dié van die Adjunkvoorsitter van
die Raad, het u vir die mense gesê: “Hier is die parlementslede; hier is
die Ministers. Kom sê wat julle pla!” Die DA sê dit is negatief. Maar hoe
moet ons dan weet as die mense nie vir ons herinner nie?
Selfs in die Bybel sê God vir ons dat ons Hom aan Sy beloftes moet
herinner. Hy sê: “Toets My of Ek nie die vensters van die hemel vir julle
sal oopmaak ... nie.” Nou dit is wat die mense doen. Hulle het vir ons
gestem; hulle wil vir ons sê: “Hoor hier, boetas, hoor hier, anties, skrik
’n bietjie wakker, ons het dít nodig.”

Die ANC-beheerde regering het nog nooit politiek gespeel op hierdie
platforms nie. Ons was daar om na die mense  om te sien. Dis waarom ons so
bly is dat hierdie program “goes to the back of beyond” sodat ons werklik
kan sien wat daar aangaan. Ek dink baie van die DA-lede vergeet waarvandaan
hulle kom. Baie van hulle het vergeet dat ons ook uit provinsies en
townships kom waar daar hongerte is.

Iemand het eendag vir my gesê dat hy nie verstaan hoe Suid-Afrikaners werk
nie. Hy wou weet hoekom praat hulle van “extended families”. (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Let me use my home language, Afrikaans. After all, both of you understand
it. The NCOP had made great strides to advance this programme. In under a
century, we had gone to the marginalised groups.

The thought that came to my mind is that where the marginalised groups are,
that is where the problems are hidden. That is where the poverty is. That
is where the poorest of the poor live. That is where those who are starving
find themselves. Many governments and political parties concentrate on the
bright side. As the old people used to say: ”Bo blink en onder stink.”
[Laughter.] I almost said something else that is unparliamentary! Thank
you, hon Sulliman.

The NCOP and this ANC-controlled government have shown that we do not only
look at the bright side, but we get right to the bottom of it. We cut to
the chase. No one in their right mind would have thought that we would ever
go to Pniel, because when you drive through there you just see beautiful
vineyards, the beautiful farms and the beautiful landscape everywhere.

The DA was so shocked when the former mayor of Stellenbosch said on the
opening day that the MEC and the provincial government never speak to them.
When the MEC, the provincial government, the national government and the
National Council of Provinces were there, the mayor did not deem it fit to
be there. The very DA councillors from all the surrounding municipalities
were not even there for the entire week. [Interjections.]

But they have used that platform to come and play political games. The hon
Watson came there the Friday to play political games.

When this programme was implemented the DA were the first people to say
that the ANC wants to use the programme for political gain. The ANC has
never stood on any of those platforms saying “Vote ANC now; we are here.”
This has never happened. We rather asked people about their concerns, and
what their problems are.

Under your guidance, Chairperson, as well as that of the Deputy Chairperson
of the Council, you told the people: “Here are the Members of Parliament;
here are the Ministers. Come and tell them what is troubling you.” The DA
is saying that this is negative. But how are we supposed to know if people
do not remind us?

Even in the Bible God says to us that we should remind Him of His promises.
He says: “... and test Me now in this ... If I will not open for you the
windows of heaven ...” Now this is what the people are doing. They voted us
in; they want to say to us: “Listen here, boetas, listen here, aunties,
wake up; this is what we need.”

The ANC-controlled government has never played political games on these
platforms. We were there to take care of the people. That is why we are so
happy that this programme goes to the back of beyond so that we can really
see what is happening there. I think many of the DA members have forgotten
where they come from. Many of them have forgotten that we are also come
from provinces and townships where there is hunger.

Someone once said to me that he does not understand how South Africans are
functioning. He wanted to know why they speak of “extended families”.]
Why do they talk about extended families? It is because we care. We are a
government that cares and I think our Chairperson and Deputy Chairperson
are leaders who care. That is why they say let us go to the back of beyond.

Maar ek wil net nog iets sê, Voorsitter. U moet asseblief tog toelaat dat
ons weer eendag so ’n program het waar ons by die mense gaan oorbly, sodat
ons tussen die mense kan wees. Dit is so dat by baie van die programme
hulle eenkant gaan eet het. By baie van hierdie programme gaan eet hulle
eenkant, dan sê hulle hulle wil nie in so ’n lang tou gaan staan nie.
[Tussenwerpsels.]

As ek vir die agb Watson moet antwoord, in KwaZulu ...

Mnr A WATSON: [Onhoorbaar.]

Mnr F ADAMS: Voorsitter, daar erken hy dit! [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[However, I just want to mention something else, Chairperson. You should
please allow us once more to have the kind of programme where we stay over
at the people’s homes, so that we can be amongst the people. It is so that
at many of these programmes people went to one side to eat. With many of
these programmes they go to one side to eat, then they say that they don’t
want to stand in such a long queue. [Interjections.]
If I have to reply to the hon Watson, in Kwazulu ...

Mr A WATSON: [Inaudible.]

Mr F ADAMS: Chairperson, there he admits it! [Interjections.]]

Mr R J TAU: Chairperson, I just wanted to find out whether it is
parliamentary, under the circumstances that we find this country in, that
we still find a member of the DA, in the form of Miss Robinson, asking,
“What about the ‘makwerekweres?’[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Order, please! I did not hear
that, but if you said that, hon Robinson, can you please respect this House
and withdraw that name?

Ms D ROBINSON: Hon Chair, what I said was, “What about the extended
families?” We need to look after everybody. [Interjections.] Yes, that
should not be used. But if it caused offence I will withdraw it, but that
was not the intention. I simply wanted to point out that if we talk about
extended families we should look after all our brethren.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Hon member, I’m saying that if
you have said the words that were said by hon Tau, can you please withdraw
them. But if you did not say that then you are not bound to withdraw.
Ms D ROBINSON: I withdraw, but there was no intention to cause any offence,
I was pointing out the disjuncture in what is being said, but I do
apologise if that was offensive.

Mnr F ADAMS: Dis hoekom die burgemeester van Kaapstad gesê het dat hierdie
program nie in Kaapstad is nie. Nou wonder ek waar Pniel is. Waar is
Stellenbosch? Is dit dan nie deel van Kaapstad nie? Sy sê dat die program
nie in die metro is nie. Maar dit is wel ’n parlementêre program en ons
verwag, in terme van “intergovernmental relations”, dat almal daar moet
wees. Dit is nie uitsluitlik nie.

Dit kom weer terug na die punt. Dis hoekom die burgemeester en haar komitee
van die Stad Kaapstad nie die sale wil oopmaak vir hierdie uitgewekenes
nie. Dis hoekom hulle sê hulle kan dit nie in sekere gebiede, soos
Milnerton, oopmaak nie. Dan praat ons van herintegrasie. Dan praat die agb
Robinson van “extended families”. Agb Robinson, daar is van ons wat
families het wat dit nie so breed het soos ek en u nie. Ons moet na hulle
omsien – dit is ons plig.

Die Here vra vir een van sy seuns in die Bybel: “Waar is jou broer Abel?”
Hy antwoord toe: “ Ek weet nie. Is ek my broer se wagter?” Toe sê die Here
aan hom dat Hy hom aangestel het om oor sy broer wag te hou.

‘n AGB LID: Is jy ’n parlementslid of ’n dominee?

Mnr F ADAMS: Ons is albei. Met betrekking tot die wykskomitees, hoekom wil
die DA nie wykskomitees instel nie? Hoekom verkies hulle wyksforums? Want
in wyksforums kies die raadslid self wie die in wyksforum moet dien. Die
raadslid is die voorsitter van die wyksforum en hy kies wie hy in die forum
wil hê. So word baie van ons organisasies uitgesluit. Hulle word totaal en
al uitgesluit, want die raadslid kies self wie hy daar wil hê.

Die ANC is die enigste party wat tot op grondvlak gaan. Ons, as lede van
die ANC, word aanspreeklik gehou, in terme van ons kiesafdelingverslae.

Adjunkvoorsitter en Voorsitter van die NRVP, ons wil vir u baie dankie sê.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr F ADAMS: That is why the mayor of Cape Town said that this programme is
not being implemented in Cape Town. Now I wonder where Pniel is. Where is
Stellenbosch? Is it not part of Cape Town? She said that the programme is
not being implemented in the Metro. But it is indeed a parliamentary
programme, and we expect, in terms of intergovernmental relations, that
everyone should be there. It is not exclusive.

This comes back to the point. That is why the mayor and her committee in
the City of Cape Town do not want to open the halls for these refugees.
That is why they say they cannot open it in certain areas, like Milnerton.
Then we speak about reintegration. Then the hon Robinson speaks about
extended families. Hon Robinson, some of us have families who are not as
well off as you and I. And we have to take care of them - that is our duty.

In the Bible the Lord asks one of His sons: “Where is your brother Abel?”
Then he says: “I do not know. Am I my brother’s keeper?” Then the Lord
tells him that He appointed him to watch over his brother.

An HON MEMBER: Are you a Member of Parliament or a clergyman?

Mr F ADAMS: We are both. With regard to the ward committees, why does the
DA not want to establish ward committees? Why do they prefer ward forums?
The reason is that on ward forums the councillor himself chooses who should
serve on the ward forum. The councillor is the chairperson of the ward
forum and he chooses whom he wants to serve on the forum. In this way many
of our organisations are excluded. They are excluded altogether, because
the councillor himself chooses whom he wants there.

The ANC is the only party that goes down to grassroots level. We, as
members of the ANC, are held accountable, in terms of our constituency
reports.

Deputy Chairperson and Chairperson of the NCOP, we want to thank you.]
Thank you that you see it fit that we can go to the back of beyond and do
not only show everything that is hunky-dory ...

... of alles wat reg is. Nee, alles is nie reg nie. Ons het ’n klomp werk
wat gedoen moet word. Ons kan dit net saam doen as ons almal saamwerk.

Gedurende die provinsiale week was ons op plase waar ons mense in haglike
omstandighede gesien het. Mense was van hul plase afgesit om langs ashope
te gaan bly, en die ANC sê dat ons dit moet regmaak.

Wat ons hier het, in “Taking Parliament to the People”, dink ek, het geen
ander land of parlement nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[... or everything that is perfect. No, everything is not perfect. We have
a lot of work that must be done. We can only do this together if we all
collaborate.

During the provincial week we were on farms where we saw people in
appalling conditions. People have been evicted from their farms to live
next to rubbish dumps, and the ANC is saying that we should rectify this.

What we have here, with “Taking Parliament to the People”, no other country
or parliament has, I think.]
There is room for improvement, but I think from now on we can only do
better. To get to the best, we must strive for better. I thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S SETONA): Thank you, Chairperson,
distinguished special delegates from the Western Cape, the hon Premier and
Speaker of the Western Cape in absentia, fellow friends, colleagues and
comrades.  The debate on this report this afternoon is a moment of
celebration for the NCOP. As an evolving institution of our democracy, we
have cause to celebrate because this debate coincides with the coming of
age of the NCOP, as it celebrated its 10th anniversary last year.

The debate marks the last leg of the round of the NCOP “Taking Parliament
to the People” programme since its inception. It is certainly the last
debate of its kind in our third democratic Parliament as our country braces
itself for the fourth national elections next year.

It is indeed a moment of celebration, a celebration of the accumulated
experience of 14 years of our legislatures, and 11 years of the NCOP as a
critical component of our national legislature. I’m sure those who were
here before us in 1997, when the NCOP was established, probably didn’t know
where to start. They’ve been grappling with what the systems, procedures,
vision and mission of the NCOP should be.
Now we are proud to be debating this report after we have accumulated 11
years of experience as the NCOP; an experience that should make us modest
and not shy away from even criticising ourselves as a House. As the hon
Freddie Adams has said, despite all the good we have done, there is still
room for improvement. And this is the celebration that I’m talking about.

The debate of the NCOP’s “Taking Parliament to the People” programme in the
Western Cape should accordingly afford us an opportunity to reflect
critically on the fundamental question of whether this august Council, the
NCOP, deserves a special place in the consolidation of democracy for a
better life for all.

The only meaningful way to debate this particular report in a celebratory
way is to reflect critically on this fundamental question: In our last 11
years of this experience that we are talking about, have the things we have
done and the manner in which we have done them been able to make us proud
in the eyes and in the minds of our people in the rural communities and our
people in the dusty streets of South Africa? Are they able to associate
with this august Council with pride and say in the NCOP that they are
actually inspired and confident of a better future and a better life for
all?

I think that is the fundamental question that should actually occupy our
minds when we enter into this kind of debate. I am raising this question
quite clearly because the NCOP is not the National Assembly, neither is it
the stepchild of the National Assembly.

I’m raising these questions because the NCOP is not a provincial
legislature, neither a stepchild of the provincial legislatures. It is a
distinct House within our constitutional democracy, with a specific
mandate. That mandate is about ensuring that provincial interests are taken
into account in the national sphere of government. That mandate is about
ensuring that our system of multi-sphere governance - we have three spheres
of government: the national, provincial and local spheres – is in harmony.

Nowhere in our Constitution is any entity or body, not even the President
of the country, given the powers in terms of the Constitution to ensure
that there is harmony between the three spheres of government. So this
House is about ensuring that harmony and coherence, and we are doing so in
pursuance of nothing else but a better life for all our people.

I think, as we celebrate, we must ask ourselves these hard questions and we
must not only talk about the things that are easy for us. But we must also
attempt to do better, as hon Adams has said, and so we need to find answers
to some of these burning questions.

Let me stop to respond to some of the issues that have been raised in the
context of what I’ve said.
We need to report; and I say this on behalf of my colleague hon Oliphant.
Not all committees were able to go to Pniel to do the follow-up as you
instructed. Not all the committees were able to go to Free State to do a
follow-up as they were expected to do. Not all the committees were able to
go to KwaZulu-Natal or Limpopo to do the follow-up as expected. This wasn’t
because nobody else is interested in this particular programme, or because
nobody else is inspired to go back to make the follow-up with the masses of
our people in terms of this programme.

I’m quite confident that the Chairperson will agree with me that a House of
52 people, if we exclude the Chairperson and Deputy Chairperson, has been
able to do things in volume and size exceeding the things done by a House
of 400 people. And this is humanly and practically impossible!

Then what is to be done? As V I Lenin said, if we are not able to do all
that we desire, what good are our mistakes? How do we explain to our nation
that we have not been able to go to Pniel, as we had been instructed? We
have not been able to go to the Free State. I think the fault does not lie
anywhere else but with us all as a collective. Hon Tolo will agree with me.


We prioritise and when Parliament, jointly, has more than a thousand
responsibilities to undertake, we as the NCOP have to do those
responsibilities with 52 people, and we want to do it with the same vigour,
the same speed, and the same quality of excellence as our counterpart,
which has 500 people to do the same thing. That is practically impossible.

Hon members will agree that at the time that we were planning to go back
and undertake this follow-up visit, there was legislation that was coming
from the executive, which occupied all our committees. I always argue in
the committee I serve on - hon Tolo will know – that I don’t think we need
to pay attention in the same way to section 75 legislation as we are
supposed to do with section 76 legislation, as I believe that is our key
function. We are not a senate!

Maybe the problem in this country is that the history of the senate, as
established by the Constitution of 1993, has not been documented and even
we, as the class of this NCOP, haven’t even begun the process. I would like
to say thank you to the Chairperson for the project that he has launched,
because it is actually beginning to document our history, because the
manner in which we want to conduct ourselves in relation to this task
before us is to do it as a normal senate like the former Senate of South
Africa or the House of Lords in Britain or the senate of Australia.

Those, however, are separate entities. There is a particular mission that
has actually inspired the drafters of our Constitution to come up with the
notion of the NCOP. As we are debating this particular situation I am
challenging my colleagues, collectively and individually: Are we not going
to cause this august House to lose it’s relevance in the hearts and minds
of our people out there if we continue to operate and function in this
manner?

Hon Mkhaliphi and hon Watson will agree with me that a man who is farming
with five tractors will actually be more productive and produce more goods
and surpass the outputs of the man who is farming with one tractor. But
normally, in simple mathematical terms, there has been an urge on our part
- it’s a voluntary urge and nobody has imposed it on us - to do everything
without looking at our size, strength or strategic focus.

I don’t want to use big words. The former chairperson of the NCOP, hon
Naledi Pandor, used to call for what she defines as niche excellence for
the NCOP in order for it to remain relevant. Because if we go and chase
somebody in a province and do the same thing that the National Assembly
portfolio committee and the legislatures are doing, we are going to confuse
our people at the end of the day. Our people will be saying: “What does
this guy want? Those ones who are doing these things are also from
Parliament.”

Let me conclude, Has the time not come for us to reflect frankly, honestly
and critically on this question, because I think our failure to do that
will actually create more problems for the next class that will join this
Parliament. Thank you very much.

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): I shall now put the question. The
question is that the report be adopted. As the decision is dealt with in
terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether
all delegation heads are present in the Chamber. Are all the delegation
heads present? All are present.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make their declarations of vote if they so wish. Is there any province
that wants to make a declaration? There is none. We shall now proceed to
the voting on the question in alphabetical order per province. Delegation
heads must please indicate whether they vote in favour of, against or
abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?

Mr A T MANYOSI: We support.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: We support.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Gauteng?

Ms N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: Gauteng supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr D D GAMEDE: KwaZulu-Natal elethu. [KwaZulu-Natal supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Mpumalanga?

Mr B J MKHALIPHI: Mpumalanga supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West ke ya rona. [North West supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Die Wes-Kaap gee sy positiewe ondersteuning. [The Western Cape
positively supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): All nine provinces have voted in
favour. I therefore declare the report adopted in terms of section 65 of
the Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF JOINT MONITORING COMMITTEE ON IMPROVEMENT OF
  QUALITY OF LIFE AND STATUS OF WOMEN – IMPACT OF EQUALITY ACT ON LIVES OF
             WOMEN AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES – GENDER SECTOR

Ms M P THEMBA: Hon Chairperson, hon members, South Africa’s definition of
goals towards achieving equality are guided by the principles of human
right, which incorporates the acceptance of all peoples’ inalienable rights
to equality. This principle is a fundamental tenet under the Bill of Rights
of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa.

Section 9 of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa provides for
the enactment of national legislation to prevent and prohibit unfair
discrimination and to promote the achievement of equality. The Promotion of
Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act, Act 4 of 2000, which
is also known as the Equality Act, was passed to give effect to this
constitutional requirement. This Act prohibits practices that perpetuate
inequality by promoting equality in all spheres of life in South Africa.
As we marked the 10th anniversary of the passing of the Constitution in
1996, we embarked on a process to review the impact of the Equality Act on
the lives of women and people with disabilities. The main findings
emanating from the review process revealed that discrimination and inequity
remain common in South African society. Most of the contributors to the
study argue that women’s continued inequalities are attested to by the very
high levels of gender-based violence in our country. Some of them
highlighted the fact that women still constitute a major share of the
vulnerable group in our country because they make up the majority of the
poor, the homeless, the jobless and the dispossessed.

Initiatives to achieve both the prevention and elimination of unfair
discrimination and the promotion of equality have not sufficed in
eliminating the scourge of inequity from South African society. It was
further argued that this problem is particularly exacerbated in rural areas
due to a lack of resources and infrastructure. The review also highlighted
areas of major concern about persisting income inequalities between men and
women. It showed that 10 years after the demise of the apartheid regime in
1994, there is still a high concentration of women in lower-paid temporary
or casual employment or employment in the informal sector.

What is even more worrying is the fact that the mechanisms for monitoring
progress in protecting women against discrimination are not being
adequately implemented. In some instances, companies are not complying with
equity targets and the subsequent reporting requirements.

The review further found that while there is a formal commitment in South
Africa to gender equity in land reform, the implementation of land reform
programmes remains a problem. The pace of land delivery to the previously
disadvantaged South Africans is relatively low when one considers the fact
that approximately 4% of land has been delivered to black people since
1995.

The fact that many women are unable to own land and housing also emerged as
a key impediment to enhancing the quality of their lives and negatively
impacts on their economic status and on equality in general. Violence
against women and gender-based violence, that is, including rape, domestic
violence, female genital mutilation, murder, and sexual abuse are common
phenomena in South Africa; and according to many observers this is
indicative of women’s unequal status in society. A study published by the
Medical Research Council in 2004 indicated that every six hours a South
African woman is killed by her intimate partner.

The most important legislative measure aimed at combating gender-based
violence is the Domestic Violence Act, Act 116 of 1998, but the
implementation of this Act has proven to be challenging. There is a lack of
dedicated resources for combating gender-based violence and for the
protection of survivors of such violence. Furthermore, the review suggested
that problematic attitudes on the side of police officials and court
personnel present a major challenge for persons reporting gender-based
violence, as these officials often see gender-based violence not as a
criminal matter, but as a domestic issue.

All the facets of the review examined the manner in which institutional
mechanisms established to promote equality have contributed to greater
equality. What has emerged is that the establishment of gender focal
points, in line with provisions of the National Gender Policy Framework for
Women’s Empowerment and Gender Equality, continues to generate cause for
concern.

The level at which gender focal points are appointed impact negatively on
the skills these positions are able to attract and on the effectiveness of
this work at provincial and local level. While structures are in place in
many provinces and local government, the national gender machinery is not
functioning as effectively as it had been envisaged. It also became clear
that the monitoring process has been hampered by insufficient and
inappropriate information being provided by the officials.

South Africa has made significant strides in increasing the number of women
in decision-making, particularly in government and in Parliament. In terms
of ranking determined by the Inter-Parliamentary Union, South Africa ranked
13th in the world in relation to the number of women members in Parliament.
There are currently 131 women members in the National Assembly and 19 women
members in the NCOP. In addition, various forums have been established
within Parliament to deal with gender issues.

In relation to government departments, the review indicated that a number
of departments are doing relatively well in terms of their ratio of women
to men, both in positions of leadership and in departments generally.
However, the organisational profiles of most state structures and private
sector organisations are skewed in favour of men, particularly in decision-
making positions.

Sexual harassment also remains a critical issue, as does the development of
a gender-sensitive organisational ethos, culture and practice.

In the light of the insight emanating from the review process, the Joint
Monitoring Committee on the Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of
Women makes a number of recommendations, including the following: that in
light of the fact that Parliament is sometimes provided with misdirected
and meaningless information with regard to the functioning of national
gender machinery the relevant committees of Parliament must be explicit and
specific with regard to the information requested from government
departments; that the relevant committees of Parliament engage with the
departments of provincial and local government on the manner in which the
national gender machinery has been put into operation; and that the
relevant committees of Parliament avail themselves of additional
information from stakeholders in order to facilitate a comprehensive, more
accurate assessment of the national and provincial situation as it pertains
to gender. [Interjections.]

As I conclude, it is of great concern that, 12 years into democracy, South
Africa still faces a number of challenges in ensuring the prevention of
unfair discrimination and promoting equality, thereby achieving the
consolidation of democracy in our country.

There is still a need for robust engagement to ensure that we reaffirm our
commitment to ensure that the Promotion of Equality and Prevention of
Unfair Discrimination Act remains a key tool for our goal towards the
realisation of the vision of equality which should result in the
consolidation of our democracy. I therefore would like to call upon this
House to support the report and its findings, and I’d also like to call
upon on all hon members to take part in combating gender-based inequality,
violence and any other discrimination in their communities. I thank you.

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): I shall now put the question. The
question is that the report be adopted. As the decision is dealt with in
terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether
all delegation heads are present in the Chamber to cast their
provinces’votes. Are all the delegation heads present? All are present.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make their declarations of vote if they so wish. Is there any province
that wants to make a declaration? There is none. We shall now proceed to
the voting on the question in alphabetical order per province. Delegation
heads must please indicate to the Chair whether they vote in favour of,
against or abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?

Mr A T MANYOSI: We support.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: We support.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Gauteng?

Ms N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: In favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr D D GAMEDE: KwaZulu-Natal elethu. [KwaZulu-Natal supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo ondersteun. [Limpopo supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Mpumalanga?

Mr B J MKHALIPHI: Mpumalanga supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West ke ya rona. [North West supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Ons ondersteun. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): All nine provinces have voted in
favour. I therefore declare the report adopted in terms of section 65 of
the Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.
   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF JOINT MONITORING COMMITTEE ON IMPROVEMENT OF
 QUALITY OF LIFE AND STATUS OF CHILDREN, YOUTH AND DISABLED PERSONS – IMPACT
 OF EQUALITY ACT ON LIVES OF WOMEN AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES – DISABILITY
                                   SECTOR

Mr D D GAMEDE: Chairperson, the Promotion of Equality and Prevention of
Unfair Discrimination Act provides that neither the state nor any person
may unfairly discriminate against any person on the ground of disability.
It has emerged from the review process that, not withstanding the political
will to eradicate inequality, the appropriation of adequate resources for
related initiatives continues to be a significant problem.

There were also arguments indicating that the mainstreaming of disability
issues has not been successful, and that those issues affecting people with
disabilities may be dealt with more effectively if each department had a
dedicated section that deals with disability issues.

To this end, accessibility or the lack thereof for persons with
disabilities to engage fully in opportunities within society require
attention in order to ensure the participation of persons with disabilities
as set out in the social model of disability which South Africa has
committed itself to adopting within policy initiatives.

Furthermore, given South Africa’s recent ratification of the UN Convention
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, UNCRPD, it is imperative that
the recommendations arising from the review be taken seriously and
implemented. Clearly, Parliament has a decisive role to play in this
regard.

In the light of the insights emanating from the review process, the Joint
Monitoring Committee, JMC, makes a number of recommendations. Firstly, that
the committee of Parliament responsible for education issues should engage
with the Department of Education on the implementation of the policy on
inclusive education.

Secondly, when the relevant committees of Parliament engage with the
Department of Transport on the implementation of an integrated public
transport system, attention must be paid to the needs of persons with
disabilities.

Thirdly, attention must be paid to the manner in which language and the
lack of access to information remain barriers to substantive equality of
persons with disabilities.

Fourthly, the JMC on the Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of
Children, Youth and Disabled Persons must engage the Department of Housing
on producing relevant statistics, including targets and indicators, and
information relating to people with disabilities.

Fifthly, the JMC must engage the Department of Labour on issues of
promoting the employment rate of people with disabilities as the statistics
indicate that the rate of employment for them has deteriorated, that is, we
have not gone above the 2%.

The report has been tabled and it is in the ATCs. I therefore move that
this House adopt this report. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Order! I shall now put the
question in respect of the Third Order. The question is that the report be
adopted. As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are
present in the Chamber to cast their provinces’ votes. Are all delegation
heads present? Obviously they are.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make their declarations of vote if they so wish.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetic order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to the
Chair whether they vote in favour of, or against or abstain from voting.
Eastern Cape?

Mr A T Manyosi: Eastern Cape is in favour.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Free State votes in favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Gauteng?

Ms N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: In favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr D D GAMEDE: Ke ya rona. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: In favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Mpumalanga?

Mr B J MKHALIPHI: Bekunene bayavuma. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Noord-Kaap ondersteun. [Northern Cape supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Wes-Kaap ondersteun. [Western Cape supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): All nine provinces voted in
favour. I therefore declare the report adopted in terms of section 65 of
the Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 15:33
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                            FRIDAY, 13 JUNE 2008
ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills

     (1)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


          a) Criminal Procedure Amendment Bill [B 42 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
             prior notice of its introduction published in Government
             Gazette No 31115 of 2 June 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Justice and Constitutional Development of the National
             Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
             (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

     (2)    The Minister of Transport


          a) Legal Succession to the South African Transport Services
             Amendment  Bill [B 43 – 2008] (National Assembly – proposed
             sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
             introduction published in Government Gazette No 31059 of 15
             May 2008.]


            Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Transport of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
             Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
             Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

     (3)    The Minister of Health


          a) Medicines and Related Substances Amendment Bill [B 44 – 2008]
             (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of
             Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
             Government Gazette No 31114 of 2 June 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Health
             of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint
             Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint
             Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

     (4)    The Minister of Defence


          a) National Conventional Arms Control Amendment Bill [B 45 –
             2008] (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory
             summary of Bill and prior notice of its introduction published
             in Government Gazette No 31078 of 23 May 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Defence of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
             Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
             Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

     (5)    The Minister of Science and Technology


          a) Intellectual Property Rights from Publicly Financed Research
             and Development Bill [B 46 – 2008] (National Assembly –
             proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
             of its introduction published in Government Gazette No 31130
             of 13 June 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Science and Technology of the National Assembly, as well as
             referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
             classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.


     (6)    The Minister for the Public Service and Administration


          a) Public Administration Management Bill [B 47 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 76) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
             prior notice of its introduction published in Government
             Gazette No 31113 of  2 June 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Public
             Service and Administration of the National Assembly, as well
             as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
             classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.


2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)    National Conventional Arms Control Amendment Bill, 2008,
         submitted by the Minister of Defence.  Referred to the Portfolio
         Committee on Defence and the Select Committee on Security and
         Constitutional Affairs.


    (2)    Diplomatic Immunities and Privileges Bill, 2008, submitted by
         the Minister of Foreign Affairs.  Referred to the Portfolio
         Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Select Committee on Economic
         and Foreign Affairs.


                            TUESDAY, 17 JUNE 2008


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a section 75 Bill:

          a) Competition Amendment Bill [B 31 – 2008] (National Assembly –
             sec 75).


    (2)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a section 76 Bill:

          a) National Railway Safety Regulator Amendment Bill [B 32 – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 76).

2.    Introduction of Bills

     (1)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


           a) Judicial Matters Amendment Bill [B 48 – 2008] (National
              Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
              prior notice of its introduction published in Government
              Gazette No 31117 of 2 June 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Justice and Constitutional Development of the National
             Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
             (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.


     (2)    The Minister of Labour


          a) Skills Development Bill [B 49 – 2008] (National Assembly –
             proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
             of its introduction published in Government Gazette No 31103
             of 29 May 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Labour
             of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint
             Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint
             Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.


     (3)    The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
         Development
          a) Repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment of
             Certain Laws Amendment Bill [B 50 – 2008] (National Assembly –
             proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
             of its introduction published in Government Gazette No 31088
             of 23 May 2008.]
             Bill initiated by the Portfolio Committee on Justice and
             Constitutional Development of the National Assembly, and
             referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
             classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

3.    Calling of Joint Sitting of Parliament


    The Speaker of the National Assembly, Ms B Mbete, and the Chairperson
    of the National Council of Provinces, Mr M J Mahlangu, in terms of
    Joint Rule 7(2), have called a joint sitting of the Houses of
    Parliament for Thursday 19 June 2008 at 14:00 to debate the report of
    the Task Team of members of Parliament probing violence and attacks on
    foreign nationals.


    B MBETE, MP                                         M J MAHLANGU, MP
    SPEAKER OF THE                                      CHAIRPERSON OF THE
    NATIONAL ASSEMBLY                        NATIONAL COUNCIL OF
                                                         PROVINCES


National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed and transmitted
    (1)     Bills passed by National Assembly on 13 June 2008 and
         transmitted for concurrence:


         (a)     Refugees Amendment Bill [B 11B – 2008] (National Assembly
              – sec 75)


             The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Social
              Services of the National Council of Provinces.


         (b)     Agricultural Debt Management Repeal Bill [B 24 – 2008]
              (National Assembly – sec 75)


         The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Land and
         Environmental Affairs of the National Council of Provinces.

    (2)     Bill passed by National Assembly on 17 June 2007 and
         transmitted for concurrence:


         (a)     Appropriation Bill [B 3 – 2008] (National Assembly – sec
              77)


         The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Finance of
         the National Council of Provinces.

2.    Change to heading of tabling

    (1)    The headings to the „Report of the Task Team of Members of
         Parliament Probing Violence and Attacks on Foreign Nationals“ which
         appeared in the Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of 12
         June 2008 (p 1137), should also have referred to „The National
         Council of Provinces“ and to „The Chairperson“.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

CREDA INSERT REPORT - T080617E – Insert 1 – PAGES 1201-1248

