---
title: 'National Assembly - 21 October 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2008-10-21
---

                          TUESDAY, 21 OCTOBER 2008
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                     MEDIUM-TERM BUDGET POLICY STATEMENT

                       ADJUSTMENTS APPROPRIATION BILL
                               (Introduction)
                         REVENUE LAWS AMENDMENT BILL
                               (Introduction)
 GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES PENSION FUND (CONDONATION OF INTERRUPTED SERVICE) BILL
                               (Introduction)
                                FINANCE BILL
                               (Introduction)
             ESKOM SUBORDINATED LOAN SPECIAL APPROPRIATION BILL
                               (Introduction)
The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, Deputy President - may I
congratulate both of you from the podium - Ministers, Deputy Ministers,
Governor of the Reserve Bank, hon members, members of the diplomatic corps,
friends who have taken the time to join us today, whether you are at home
or at work, in tabling the Budget in February this year, I took a very
strange initiative, and that was to do the first part of the Budget Speech
in a weather station to try and communicate the sense of big storms and
climate change ahead. We came here and actually shared a weather report
with members of this House, which indicated that there were storm clouds on
the horizon.

Indeed, for several years in this House, we noted the growing imbalances
between the major trading partners of the global economy. We spoke about
the scale of the adjustments required and the risk to the international
community of associated financial disruptions. These imbalances have
accumulated over more than a decade and are embedded in the global trade
patterns, inequalities between and within nations, imprudent lending to
households and the intricate mechanisms through which credit risks have
been packaged and resold. The dimensions of these flows are staggering. The
United States consumes some US$700 billion more than it produces every
year. Now, pause for a moment and consider that in rands. It is R7 trillion
that they consume more than they produce. This is financed mainly through
surpluses in Japan, China and the oil-producing states.

Banks have become increasingly inventive in channelling foreign savings to
American consumers and firms. For example, the market for credit default
swaps, through which bad debt has been passed on to pension funds and other
investors, grew from US$100 billion in the year 2000 to US$64 trillion last
year. This is just one of the inventive and, as it turns out, exceedingly
destructive and toxic financial innovations of the last decade, causing the
implosion that the world now lives through.

Indeed, a structural correction was needed. But the ferocity of the
financial crisis could not have been anticipated. Global stock exchanges
have lost just over US$5 trillion in value over the past month. The oil
price is down from its peak in May of US$145 a barrel to just US$70. I’ve
made the point before, but it wasn’t much more than 10 years ago that oil
traded at just US$10 a barrel. Earlier this year, people were talking of a
US$200 a barrel reality. Recently, it was at US$145 and now it is US$70 a
barrel. So, South Africans will applaud this and say, well, the petrol
price will come down. But we are also a producer of all manner of other
commodities. The platinum price has fallen from a high of US$2 254 to
US$903 an ounce. I think we have also seen the prices of coal, copper and
steel falling sharply. Manganese and aluminium stockpiles are mounting in
ports and warehouses and, all across the world, industrial order books are
shrinking. Several major banks and financial institutions have collapsed or
have required direct support from their governments. The scale of fiscal
interventions under way is historically unprecedented. But it is
nonetheless expected that factories will close in industrial economies,
unemployment will indeed rise and food stamp queues will lengthen.

We do not yet know how the crisis will be concluded or what its impact will
be on output and employment, trade relations or the world’s financial
system. What is clear is that the storm has arrived. This storm is fiercer
than anyone could have imagined, and its course from here cannot be
predicted with any certainty.

But, we saw the signs early, and we took appropriate action. We can say to
our people, “Liduduma lidlule!” [Things come and go]. [Applause.] We can
say to our people that our finances are in order, our banks are sound, our
investment plans are in place, our course is firmly directed at our long-
term growth and, of course, the development challenges. Whatever it takes,
we will ride out this storm together on the strength of a vision and a plan
of action that we can proudly share as South Africans.

We can say these things because this government, since 1994, took tough
decisions early. Beginning with the balance articulated between meeting
basic needs and promoting investment and growth in the Reconstruction and
Development Programme, RDP, reprioritising spending and reducing the budget
deficit in the 1990s – regardless of the nicknames that people give to this
process – the adoption of an explicit target for inflation, our gradual
approach to the relaxation of exchange controls, our strengthening of bank
regulation and the steady accumulation of foreign reserves during the last
five years, we kept our focus on the reforms required for long-term growth
and development. We adopted a macroeconomic framework and a fiscal stance
capable of withstanding tough times and protecting our economy and our
people during times of global economic turbulence. Essentially, we started
this process understanding that business cycles in the economy tend to
create boom and bust. But this boom and bust creates enormous hardship in
the lives of people. So, part of our responsibility in macroeconomic
management must be to try and even this out so that we can minimise the
impact thereof on the lives of people.

I am very aware that our policy decisions have sometimes been
controversial. But if our economic policies were designed for their
populist appeal, and if we tried to finance everything for everybody at
once, then short-term gains would have quickly given way to long-term
misery. Our policies are aimed, instead, at sustainable progress for
workers in our factories and on our farms, support for families through
steadily rising social services and income transfers, businesses that can
invest in the confidence of a sound fiscal and financial environment and
public services that will continue to serve our children and our children’s
children.

Yet, there is no avoiding the coming storm. Global economic growth will be
slow for several years, export earnings will, of course, be negatively
affected, and it will be more difficult to finance all of our investment
needs. Economic growth in the seven richest countries – the so-called G7 -
which account for roughly half of the world’s economic output, is forecast
to be zero or negative next year. Growth in the global economy is forecast
to fall from over 5% in 2007 to 3,9% this year and perhaps less than 3%
next year. But to get to this 3%, if you’ve deducted the output from half
of the world’s output, then of course the growth has to be lifted by
developing countries. Africa’s growth is forecast to be 6% next year. But
the key engines that drive the global economy now - China and India - will
also see their growth slow down as exports to their trading partners
decline.

Following four years of economic expansion of 5% a year, the revised GDP
growth estimate for South Africa for this year, 2008, is 3,7% - somewhat
below the forecast of 4% that we tabled in February. Next year, we expect
to grow by 3%, accelerating moderately in 2010 and beyond as the global
economy begins to recover. Continuing investment in infrastructure
contributes to the momentum of growth in South Africa. This is also
reflected in our ongoing current account deficit on the balance of
payments. This means that we need to continue to attract financial inflows
from the rest of the world while improving our domestic savings performance
as well.

There is this big number that we are talking about. The deficit on our
current account is expected to be something in the order of R165 billion
this year. This means that each week, we must try and attract R3,5 billion
to cover this shortfall between what we are investing and what we have as
savings. Navigating our way in this changed economic environment will of
course be tougher. But we will continue to expand and improve public
services and invest in the infrastructure required for future growth.

There is an aspect of South Africa’s interconnectedness with the global
crisis that I need to emphasise. We will be negatively affected by the
slowdown and the uncertainty ahead, but we have also benefited from the
strong growth and high commodity prices of the recent past. Reflected in
our favourable terms of trade in recent years and identified as a cyclical
revenue component that should be saved and not spent – this was the debate
at the time of the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement last year – this
gain accounts for the moderate budget surplus we were able to report last
year. We recognised that the world has enjoyed a long period of unbalanced
growth and that it could not persist indefinitely. That the imbalances
lasted so long was made possible by excesses in the financial sector, bad
loans dressed up as tradable securities, inadequate regulation and the
presumption that bankers, because they earn such huge salaries and bonuses,
must obviously understand what they are doing.

Such blind faith in unfettered markets is clearly misguided, and has got
the world into the difficulties we now see.
Our approach has been different. We have recognised that there is creative
strength in markets and they do assist in mobilising resources, encouraging
innovation and creating jobs. But, markets left without adequate
supervision or regulation sometimes fail spectacularly.

The legal and regulatory framework within which markets operate is
important, and governments have substantial responsibilities to intervene
in support of economic and social stability, and also to ensure that the
benefits of growth are both inclusive and broad-based.

This financial crisis invites all of us to revisit the critical questions
of the relationship between market processes and their regulation, the
balance between public service delivery and private sector development, and
the appropriate arrangements for safeguarding the integrity of our
financial institutions.

Countries that put the interests of their people first, above dogmas and
ideologies, have been able to grow and prosper in the face of adversity
over several decades. Macroeconomic policy is, after all, about ensuring
that we sustain our growth rates as the international business cycle rises
and falls by managing the cost of capital and how much we save and invest.

When we chose to budget for a surplus, it was not because of any particular
ideological position. It was the right thing to do under the economic
circumstances. And in time to come, and as the Medium-Term Budget Policy
Statement we announce today reflects, as we revert to a deficit along with
several other countries in similar circumstances, it will not be because we
have adopted a new economic creed but it will again be because it is the
right thing for changed economic circumstances.

It is very important that we try and see this rationally. These are merely
measures to cushion that rise and fall across the business cycle. Our
fiscal stance is a considered one, putting the long-term interests of our
people first, Batho Pele.

Our low level of debt, especially foreign debt, and our prudent approach to
fiscal policy, provide us with the space to adjust our policies to cushion
our economy against the worst effects of the global crisis.

Let me comment briefly on the oversight of our financial institutions in
the present circumstances, and the special role that trust and integrity
play in securing effective credit markets and financial peace of mind.
The financial stability assessment was conducted by the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank during April and May this year. And it
concluded that the financial system in South Africa is fundamentally sound,
and noted that our financial sector regulatory framework is sophisticated,
modern and effective.

Every day, sometimes more than once a day, I receive a call from a
gentleman, Mr Errol Kruger, who is the registrar of banks. He gives me an
update on developments in our banking system. Mr Kruger, in turn, is in
regular communication with the chief executives of all our banks. A
constant flow of data and consultations keeps both the regulators and risk
management teams of our credit institutions informed and alive to market
developments.

I am also in very regular contact, almost daily, with the Governor of the
Reserve Bank, Mr Tito Mboweni. I know he is in the audience somewhere. He
is hiding. There must be photographers around here. This is because I think
we have to discuss developments in the international environment and the
wider financial sector. It is nice to talk to the governor but I think it
is also something that the Constitution requires of us. If we want to
manage the macroeconomy, then it is required of us to talk about these
issues very regularly.

Then there is the Financial Services Board, which constantly has to review
our insurance and pension fund industry, tracking the status of assets
under management and reviewing fund governance, to ensure that the pension
funds of workers are protected and prudently managed.

The task of the Financial Services Board is a bit more difficult because
there are 14 000 registered pension funds in South Africa and they have to
look after all of these funds. Banks are relatively easy. There are six
large banks and some smaller banks but in the pension funds it requires a
lot more oversight and supervision because it is a lot more difficult.

Now, these procedures and measures may seem technical and at times overly
bureaucratic. But we proceed from the premise that this Parliament has
entrusted us with the responsibility for licensing and oversight of our
financial institutions. Licences to do business in the financial sector are
granted on the understanding that the highest standards of financial
responsibility and integrity will be maintained, and must be maintained.

If people don’t like the rules and the supervision, then they have to hand
back their licences. It is a very important principle because we have to
serve between the depositors in these institutions and the shareholders and
that licence, we believe, is a very important tool in this regard.

One of the present features of this crisis internationally is that banks
have lost trust in each other, and so interbank lending has collapsed.
Deterioration in public confidence has also resulted in runs on some banks.
In countries such as Hungary and Iceland, high levels of reliance on
foreign capital has left the domestic banking system unprotected from these
confidence failures.

In contrast, Madam Speaker, the balance sheets of our banks here in South
Africa remain sound. They rely on rand-based capital and South African
deposits, and the local interbank market remains fully functional and
competitively priced. The World Competitiveness Report ranked the soundness
of South Africa’s banks 15th in the world, above countries such as the
United States and Switzerland. [Applause.]

Hon members, I give these assurances, not to suggest that nothing can go
wrong, nor indeed to pretend that our banking sector is somehow unconnected
from international financial flows, but to indicate that your government is
vigilant. And our vigilance rests on a clear appreciation of the
trusteeship obligations of our financial institutions for the deposits of
our citizens, the savings of our workers, the pensions of our senior
citizens and the security of our children’s future.

Allow me to add, Madam Speaker, that the strength of the capital structure
of our financial sector is a necessary condition for its effective
contribution to the broader social and developmental obligations recognised
in our Financial Sector Charter. It is surely now clear that capital
adequacy cannot be compromised in the interests of promoting unsound
lending practices or for the pursuit of unrealistic equity participation in
our banks.

Madam Speaker, since 2000 the measure of price trends that we have used for
inflation targeting purposes has been the consumer price index minus
mortgage costs, CPIX. The target excluded mortgage repayments from the
inflation measure because of the direct impact of monetary policy on these
household expenses.

However, interest on loans is not an adequate measure of the cost of
housing, and so in line with international best practice, Statistics SA
will shortly replace this component of the consumer price index with what
is called "owners’ equivalent rent", alongside with several other changes
to the Consumer Price Index basket.

The inflation measure for policy purposes will therefore revert to the full
Consumer Price Index for major urban areas. The target band for inflation
remains 3% to 6% and we expect that CPI will fall into the target band in
the third quarter of 2009.

During 2008, the world experienced an almost unprecedented increase in the
prices of food and fuel. The world’s poor bore the brunt of these price
increases with many countries experiencing social strife as a result of
higher food prices. Partly as a result of higher food and fuel prices,
inflation in South Africa increased during 2008, reaching 13,6% in August.

Oil prices are now falling and food prices have moderated. Taking into
account the slowdown in consumer spending and the clear resolve of the
monetary authorities, we expect consumer price inflation to fall during the
remaining months of 2008 into next year. The government has taken several
steps to mitigate the impact of higher food prices, and income support for
the poor remains one of the fastest growing categories of our public
expenditure.

The circumstances behind rising prices over the past year were exceptional
and largely external, and the Monetary Policy Committee has taken
appropriate steps to ensure that inflation will subside over the period
ahead. Moderation of inflation must remain a central policy objective,
particularly as we seek to expand investment and job creation under
conditions of heightened business uncertainty.

Since 1994, this government has affirmed that budgets are not about markets
or bonds or statistics. Budgets are about people, their lives and their
wellbeing. We have the tools and the resources to protect our economy and
our people from the worst effects of this crisis. It is a testimony to the
strength of our economy and our policies that we can take these measures.

Over the past six years, our economy has enjoyed rapid growth, rising
employment, rising household incomes, a major expansion in public services
and significant income and asset transfers to the poorest South Africans.

Achieving our objective of reducing poverty and inequality, broadening
opportunities and building a prosperous country remains our guiding light.
In the period of slower growth ahead, our efforts need to focus on building
stronger institutions and improving the quality of our investment in social
and economic infrastructure and public services.

Amongst the economic challenges ahead, we need to lift our rate of national
savings, we need to construct a more export-oriented economy and we need to
create a more labour-intensive growth trajectory. We must ask ourselves
repeatedly where South Africa will be when the storm has passed - as the
Minister in the Presidency asked me the other day, where will South Africa
be when the cycle turns? Will our economy be more diversified, more
competitive and more inclusive? Without addressing these challenges, we are
not likely to meet the legitimate expectations of our people for a better
life for all.

While we have made progress in several areas of policy and service delivery
over the past 14 years, there remain aspects of microeconomic policy where
more clearly has to be done. These include trade and industrial policy,
labour market policy, enhancing competition in our economy, improving our
skills base and increasing the effectiveness of the state - areas where we
have just not seen sufficient dynamism in the implementation of policy.

Stronger co-operation between government and the private sector and raising
our level of investment in economic infrastructure are also imperative.

We live in a dynamic, rapidly changing world and the major changes that we
are witnessing, the rise of India, China and Brazil as major industrial
powers, is likely to be delayed only temporarily by the financial crisis.
These countries are increasing output and incomes rapidly in contributing
to a more balanced world and to substantial reductions in global poverty.

Several countries in Africa are also now expanding strongly and creating
greater opportunities for the citizens. And so our own social and economic
development is not a project undertaken in isolation and on terms we can
dictate for ourselves. We do not have the option of rolling down the
shutters through high tariff barriers or adoption of the policy of
detachment. Progress in accelerating trade and industrial reforms focused
on productivity and competitiveness is therefore critical.

A recent report on the South African economy by the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development, OECD, points out that although an
impressive improvement in growth and productivity has been achieved in
South Africa in recent years, many middle-income countries are advancing
rapidly and South Africa still trails behind the most dynamic emerging
economies. The OECD report puts the focus firmly on creating employment as
the key medium-term priority. This is a challenge that needs intense
scrutiny, perhaps under the auspices of Nedlac, so that we can give greater
detail and substance to what more labour-intensive growth would mean in our
circumstances.

Hon members, the Budget framework we are tabling today, which draws on the
work of the Ministers’ Committee on the Budget, shows that we have the
ability to adapt to changing circumstances, to continue to forge ahead with
our developmental mandate within a sustainable budget framework. Over the
three year medium-term expenditure period, and that’s the period that we
foresee to 31 March 2012, R171 billion is added to the spending plans
tabled in February, taking total proposed spending including the social
security fund over the next three years to R2,4 trillion. The Budget
framework also draws on the extensive contributions of members of the
Ministers’Committee on the Budget.

The additional allocations include adjustments amounting to       R59
billion over the next three years for higher salaries and other costs
associated with the rise in inflation. Over R60 billion is allocated to new
programmes or expanded spending on key priorities. As indicated in
February, an amount of R10 billion this year and the further R50 billion
over the period ahead will be provided to Eskom to support its capital
spending programme.

As a consequence of strong economic growth in the recent past, our revenue
performance has exceeded expectations, providing additional revenue for
capital investment, spending on public services to provide tax relief and
to reduce our debt. Changes that we made to our tax system, including the
introduction of capital gains tax, closing numerous loopholes, lowering tax
rates and improving administration, have provided us with a fairer, more
equitable and buoyant tax system. In particular, the share of corporate tax
has increased significantly, due both to these reforms and to stronger
economic growth.

For the period ahead, as our economy slows, revenue growth is also
anticipated to slow. In particular the share of corporate tax is increasing
significantly, due both to these reforms and to stronger economic growth.
Revenue from corporate taxes and value added tax is likely to come under
pressure. This is a natural consequence of the business cycle, and our
adoption of a cyclically adjusted Budget balance makes provision for such
cyclical effects.

The net effect of higher spending and lower revenue growth is that the
Budget balance, including social security funds, shifts into a moderate
deficit of 1,6% of GDP next year. It is the early decisions we took on
fiscal management that allow us to adapt in the face of these more
difficult circumstances to protect public spending, to support investments
and to contribute towards higher growth in the future without eroding the
sustainability of our Budget framework.

The central purpose of the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement is to advise
Parliament of the main spending priorities for the following year’s Budget.
The Medium-Term Expenditure Framework contributes to a better informed
public debate on public service delivery and informs the more detailed
allocations to national and provincial departments and municipal budgets
that will be tabled next year.

As I said earlier, the Budget framework also draws on the extensive
contributions of members of the Minister’s Committee on the Budget. I want
to highlight the most pressing priorities that Cabinet has approved for the
period ahead: Firstly, improving education and skills development to
broaden opportunities for our people and to raise our level of
productivity. Secondly, improving provision of health care, with particular
emphasis on reducing infant, child and maternal mortality and broadening
the prevention and treatment programmes tackling Tuberculosis, HIV and
Aids. Thirdly, investing in the criminal justice sector to reduce levels of
crime and to enhance citizens’ safety. Key priorities here are to further
expand police numbers and to invest in investigative capacity, forensic
laboratories and enhance information technology network infrastructure.
Fourthly, expanding investment in the built environment to improve public
transport and meet universal access targets on water, sanitation,
electricity and housing. Fifthly, decreasing rural poverty by taking steps
to raise rural incomes and improve livelihoods by extending access to land
and support for emerging farmers.

In addition to these key priorities, the framework makes good on the pledge
we made in February to increase spending on energy efficiency, reducing
electricity demand, supporting renewable energy sources and providing
complementary funding for coal generation projects. After taking into
account the need for timely adjustment of municipal and other electricity
tariffs, the levy on electricity generation from nonrenewable sources we
announced in February will be deferred to next July, and we will broaden
its base to include other large industrial sources of greenhouse gas
emissions.

It is recognised that the electricity outages in South Africa that we
experienced in the first quarter of this year signal capacity constraints
in several areas of infrastructure, including roads, rail, ports and most
importantly in skills. These capacity constraints have also slowed economic
activity and will restrict growth in the near term. To break these
constraints we must obviously invest more.

Financing this investment in the period ahead will be challenging.
Government will support our state-owned enterprises through providing
selective guarantees on their borrowing and through increases in the
capacity of our development finance institutions to contribute to funding
major infrastructure projects. At the same time, it is essential to price
utility services appropriately so that we can encourage more efficient use
of these inputs and to generate the resources to fund greater expansion in
capacity. We must also create a more amenable environment for the private
sector to invest in economic and social infrastructure.

In tabling the 2008 Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement, which I now want
to do, Deputy President - you see I am doing this, I haven’t forgotten to
do it - I invite this House and all South Africans to engage vigorously
with the policy priorities this government has set itself, with the
respective roles of the public and private sectors in accelerating economic
growth and employment creation and with the challenge of financing
development in an uncertain and rapidly changing global environment.

As you will have heard from the Table, I also table five separate Bills for
further consideration in this House today. The first is the Finance Bill
that regularises expenditure previously deemed unauthorised. These
authorisations are made on the basis of recommendations of the Standing
Committee on Public Accounts, and approved by this House.

The second is the Bill that gives effect to a resolution of this House in
response to a petition, on special grounds, for a deviation from the normal
rules of the Government Employees Pension Fund.

The third is the Eskom Subordinated Loan Special Appropriation Bill, which
requests Parliament to approve a subordinated loan of R60 billion to Eskom.

The fourth and fifth are the Revenue Laws Amendment Bill and the Revenue
Laws Second Amendment Bill, which give effect to the revenue proposals
announced in the Budget in February. I need to advise that it is not light
reading.

And lastly, I have to table the Adjustments Appropriation Bill for 2008-09.
Let me just touch on this last-mentioned Bill, the Adjustments
Appropriation Bill, for a moment or two. As in the past, hon members, there
are various categories of adjustments, including the R2,4 billion in
unspent monies appropriated last year, 2007-08, which have been approved
for rollover to the current year, for clearly identified purposes. I would
like to draw the attention of this House to several additional allocations
included in the Adjustments Appropriation Bill, as provided for in section
30(2) of the Public Finance Management Act. These include R2 billion to
deal with a series of natural disasters and outbreaks of animal disease.
They are floods, droughts, fires, classic swine fever and all of those
kinds of things, R2 billion for that. There is a sum of R2,5 billion for
the Road Accident Fund, R344 million for the School Nutrition Programme and
an additional R390 million for the National Student Financial Aid Scheme.

A sum of R1,4 billion is allocated to cover the cost overruns on 2010 Fifa
World Cup stadium projects and R600 million for last mile Internet
connectivity between the stadiums and the national backbone network.

A sum of R107 million goes to the Kha Ri Gude Mass Literacy Programme,
which has exceeded expectations in its first full year of operation. I
count 20% of members who are awake at this point, Madam Speaker.

There is a total of R5 billion for higher salaries, not for
parliamentarians ... [Laughter.] ... due to high inflation, and R2,2
billion for other inflation-related adjustments to cover the high costs of
fuel, textbooks, medicines, medical equipment and inflation-related
adjustments to social grants.

For the benefit of certain members, R2,5 billion is recommended in the
Adjustments Appropriation Bill as a once-off allocation for the Political
Office Bearers Pension Fund on the basis of the recommendations made by the
Commission on the Remuneration of Public Office Bearers, chaired by the
distinguished Judge Dikgang Moseneke. [Applause.]
The adjustments budget also makes provision for R300 million to assist in
meeting Zimbabwe’s short-term food requirements, subject to acceptance of
an appropriate role for international food relief agencies by a recognised
multiparty government.

Including spending on social security funds, total spending in 2008-09 of
R650 billion is proposed, R19 billion higher than the budgeted amount.
Taking into account a R1,2 billion upward adjustment to revenue this year,
a small Budget surplus of 0,1%, if you include the social security funds,
is anticipated.

This year, government has taken several steps to mitigate the impact of
higher food prices. Several of these programmes will continue over the
medium term, and increased agricultural support should enhance our efforts
to ensure food security for all.

Amongst the short-term interventions introduced, government is raising the
value of the old age grant, child support grant, disability grant and care
dependency grant by R20 with effect from October. [Applause.] That’s a
smaller applause than the pension’s one, I observe ... [Laughter.] This is
so that grant beneficiaries don’t have to wait until April to see the
buying power of their grants protected.

Extra resources have also gone to the school feeding programmes and for
agricultural starter packs. In total, adjustments to deal with the short
and longer-term implications of higher food prices amount to R11 billion
over the next three years.

Alongside the Adjustments Appropriation Bill, we table the Adjusted
Estimates of National Expenditure, which provide a breakdown of all
adjustments for each national department.

Returning to the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework for the next three
years, provinces will receive an additional allocation of R51,3 billion. In
addition to accommodating higher inflation, key provincial priorities
supported include: Expanding the no-fee schools to cover 60% of learners;
increasing the school nutrition programme from R1,9 billion in this year to
R4,6 billion in three years’ time; also increasing the number of teachers
in poor schools and increasing spending on school infrastructure, including
the necessary infrastructure for an increased intake in Grade R.

Additional resources for the health sector provide for the introduction of
three new child vaccines to reduce deaths from pneumonia and diarrhoea; new
proposed salary scales for doctors, dentists, pharmacists and related
professionals; expanding TB track and trace teams and increased take-up of
antiretroviral treatment programmes. The provincial priorities also include
expanding resources investment in agriculture with a view to expanding
extension services and providing better support for small-scale farmers, as
well as increasing investment in housing, roads and other economic
infrastructure. [Applause.]

Additional resources to the municipal sphere cover the higher costs of
providing free basic services and over R4,3 billion more as a municipal
infrastructure grant to accelerate the provision of basic services.

Next year, government will roll out the second phase of the Expanded Public
Works Programme. Drawing on the successes and lessons of this programme
over the past five years, R4 billion is added to this programme to
incentivise the creation of longer-term, more stable employment in
provinces, municipalities and nongovernmental organisations. [Applause.]

It is anticipated that this programme will be phased in to grow the number
of full-time equivalent jobs from about 145 000 at present to over 300 000
a year.

In conclusion, this Budget framework gives effect to our commitment to put
people first, to use the space that we have created to protect and expand
those programmes that make a difference to the lives of the poorest in the
short term, while also investing in the programmes that broaden
opportunities and ensure higher economic growth in the longer term.

Our country faces a difficult period ahead. There is no telling how deep
the global financial crisis will be, nor how severe and enduring its impact
will be on incomes and economic activity.

We are obliged to table fiscal plans and spending proposals in a context of
considerable economic uncertainty. Our economic and budgetary framework,
constructed year by year since 1994, is built on solid policy foundations
and provides fiscal space within which to respond to both global
circumstances and domestic challenges.

Over the next three years, we will continue to step up investments in
infrastructure that will drive long-term growth, and we will continue to
expand and improve the quality of public services. And more importantly, we
will continue to take the necessary steps to protect the poor and the most
vulnerable.

We take these steps because we know that the storm will pass. “Liduduma
lidlule!” [Things come and go.] We do this because we always put people
first. [Applause.]

Permit me an opportunity to recognise the contributors to the Medium-Term
Budget Policy Statement. Firstly, the colleagues who serve on the
Ministers’ Committee on the Budget. There are a number of members who are
now to this task. We’ve had to thrust this task onto them. They arrived in
office on one day, completely overwhelmed by the responsibilities of their
own portfolio.

They were called into the Treasury the next day and had this responsibility
thrust onto them. I think that we must say a very big thank you.
[Applause.] And assure them that the hard work still lies ahead because
over the next few weeks, once Parliament has approved this, we will have to
sit down, take this global amount and allocate it to departments, and we
will then have to deal with the complaints and gripes of colleagues who
always say, “We don’t have enough”.

But that’s the task that the Ministers’ Committee on the Budget will
undertake over the next few weeks. It would be entirely remiss of me not to
mention the former members of the Ministers’ Committee on the Budget, who
were involved until a month ago.  And I would like to single out the former
Deputy Minister, Jabu Moleketi.

Secondly, their Excellencies President Motlanthe and Deputy President
Mbete, were also faced with this situation where they had this load dumped
on them. We met with them, sat them down and just continued talking and
hoped that they were listening - and obviously they were.

It’s also appropriate that I express my sincerest appreciation to former
President Mbeki and former Deputy President Mlambo-Ngcuka, who supported us
through the difficult period to evolve the Budget process and bring it onto
an even keel.

South Africa is privileged to have the quality of public servants we have.
I want to single out those in the departments with whom I work most closely
and those who are most closely involved in the process of compilation of
the Budget – the National Treasury, the South African Revenue Service and
Statistics SA, but also, as we reflected on today, those involved at the
Reserve Bank, especially in the bank supervision department and at the
Financial Services Board, who allow us to sleep a bit more easily. Thanks
for the dedication, the leadership and the quality of advice you offer.

I always tend to forget to mention the staff in the Ministry, a team of
wonderfully supportive, chirpy, competent and, may I say, tolerant
individuals. [Laughter.] And finally, to all of you, both here and
elsewhere, for your patience in listening to me this afternoon. Thank you
very much. [Applause.]

Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement referred to the Joint Budget Committee
and the Portfolio Committee on Finance for consideration in accordance with
their respective mandates.

Bills referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance for consideration and
report.

                         COMPETITION AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Consideration of Bill)

Mr B A D MARTINS: Madam Speaker, hon members, the Portfolio Committee on
Trade and Industry considered the Competition Amendment Bill, 2008, and the
amendments proposed by the National Council of Provinces on 7 October 2008.


The amendments relate, firstly, to the complex monopoly provision. The Bill
was amended to include the definition of conscious parallel conduct in
order to provide certainty to business on its meaning. Secondly, it relates
to the personal liability of directors and officers of firms. The Bill was
amended to remove the subclause that seeks to hold directors and/or
officers of firms criminally liable for negligence, even though they may
not have actual knowledge of their firms’ involvement in cartel activities.
This is intended to ensure fairness and avoid any potential constitutional
challenges.

Another change in subsection (12)(5) of the Bill was the removal of the
phrase which seeks to shift the burden of onus of proof from the state.
Under number three, technical challenges, other changes are not substantive
as they relate to numbering, proper reference, and replacement of certain
words for consistency. I recommend the Bill to the House.

There was no debate.

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move that the
Bill, as amended, be passed.

The SPEAKER: The motion is that the Bill, as amended, be passed. Are there
any objections?

Motion agreed to.

Bill, as amended, accordingly passed.

The SPEAKER: Hon members, there are just too many meetings in the House
this afternoon. We should have asked the Minister of Finance to omit some
paragraphs because, after touching on that, we also lost some order in the
House.

    APPOINTMENT OF DEPUTY PRESIDENT, MS B MBETE, AS LEADER OF GOVERNMENT
                                  BUSINESS

                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I wish to announce that the President has
informed me that he has appointed the Deputy President, Ms B Mbete, as
Leader of Government Business in the National Assembly in terms of section
91(4) of the Constitution with effect from 6 October 2008. [Applause.]
Congratulations, Madam.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION


The SPEAKER: Is daar enige lid wat kennis wil gee van ’n voorstel? [Is
there any member who wishes to give notice of a motion?]

Mr G R MORGAN: Madam Speaker, I hereby move on behalf of the Democratic
Alliance:

   That the House –


     1) notes that the securing of South Africa’s energy security is vital
        for sustainable development and poverty alleviation;


     2) further notes that decarbonising the economy is an imperative if we
        are to mitigate climate change; and

     3) debates the possible makeup of South Africa’s future energy supply,
        with particular reference to both renewable and nuclear energy and
        their associated costs and benefits.
Thank you.

The SPEAKER: Is daar enige voorstelle sonder kennisgewing? [Are there any
motions without notice?]

              INTERNATIONAL DAY FOR THE ERADICATION OF POVERTY

                             (Draft Resolution)

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House –


      1) notes that 17 October was International Day for the Eradication of
         Poverty;


      2) further notes that poverty affects millions of people in the world
         today, the majority of whom are women;

      3) recalls that one of the UN Development Goals states, among others,
         that poverty and hunger will remain wherever poor health and lack
         of education deprive people of productive employment;

      4) believes that the establishment of an open, rules-based trading and
         financial system, debt relief, as well as more aid to countries
         that are committed to eradicating poverty could make a meaningful
         contribution to reducing poverty in the developing world in
         particular; and

      5) commits itself to prioritise efforts aimed at the eradication of
         poverty.

Agreed to.

                               WORLD FOOD DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without
notice:


   That the House –

   1) notes that Thursday, 16 October, was World Food Day;


      2) further notes that this day is an occasion to highlight the plight
         of more than a billion undernourished people in the world, most of
         whom live in rural areas where their main source of income derives
         from the agricultural sector;
      3) recognises that the theme for this year is: World Food Security:
         The Challenge of Climate Change and Bioenergy;


      4) recalls that global warming, the biofuel boom and unemployment
         threaten to push numbers of the hungry even higher in the decades
         to come; and

      5) urges all governments and the United Nations to intensify efforts
         aimed at helping the poor to engage in agricultural and other food
         production programmes.

Agreed to.

   CONGRATULATIONS TO SOUTH AFRICAN YOUTH TEAM ON ACCOMPLISHMENTS AT 2008
                          COMMONWEALTH YOUTH GAMES

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –

      1) notes that our South African team won 30 medals at the 2008
         Commonwealth Youth Games in Pune, India;


      2) further notes that the South African team won seven gold, 14 silver
         and nine bronze medals and finished fourth on the overall medals
         table;

      3) recognises that this result demonstrates the large number of
         exciting young talents we have in the country across a range of
         sports who serve as an inspiration for all young athletes dreaming
         of a career in the international arena;

      4) acknowledges that these young people’s talents need to be nurtured
         and honed so that the next generation of South African sportsmen
         and women who will be able to compete at the highest levels is
         produced; and

      5) congratulates the team on their outstanding performance and wishes
         all our young South African sportsmen and women well in their
         future sports careers.

Agreed to.

    EXTENSION OF DEADLINE FOR REPORT ON LEGISLATION ON THE NATIONAL YOUTH
                             DEVELOPMENT AGENCY

                             (Draft Resolution)

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move:
  That the House, notwithstanding the resolution adopted by the House on 23
  September 2008 which, inter alia determined that the Ad Hoc Committee on
  Legislation on the National Youth Development Agency had to report by 20
  October 2008, extends the deadline for reporting by the Committee to 20
  November 2008.

Agreed to.

                          SUSPENSION OF RULE 253(1)

                             (Draft Resolution)

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move:

   That Rule 253(1), which provides inter alia that the debate on the Second
   Reading of a Bill may not commence before at least three working days
   have elapsed since the committee’s report was tabled, be suspended for
   the purposes of conducting the Second Reading on 22 October 2008 on the
   Criminal Procedure Amendment Bill [B 42B – 2008] (National Assembly – sec
   75) and the Judicial Matters Amendment Bill [B 48B – 2008] (National
   Assembly – sec 75).

Agreed to.

                     INTERNATIONAL DAY FOR OLDER PERSONS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs S V KALYAN: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –

      1) notes that Wednesday, 1 October, was International Day for Older
         Persons;


      2) further notes that the theme for this year was the ``Rights of
         Older Persons’’ which was chosen to commemorate the 60th
         anniversary of the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human
         Rights;

      3) acknowledges that the recognition of the rights of older persons
         should not be confined to one day but should be recognised every
         day so that the dignity of older persons is respected at all times;

      4) recognises that the rights of many older persons are marginalised
         and ignored on a daily basis in many countries, including ours, and
         that this violation includes incidences of neglect, abuse and
         violence against older persons;

      5) further recognises that in South Africa, due to a number of
         socioeconomic factors, including HIV/Aids, many older persons have
         not only had to care for their children but have also taken over
         the responsibility of caring for their orphaned grandchildren;

      6) further acknowledges and respects the authority, wisdom and divers’
         skills older persons possess that can be utilised to benefit our
         society in many ways; and

      7) calls on all South Africans to recognise that older persons should
         enjoy a life of fulfilment, health and security and should not be
         socially, culturally, economically or politically discriminated
         against in any aspect of their lives and that all forms of neglect,
         abuse and violence against older persons must be eliminated.

Agreed to.

    ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO MEDIATION COMMITTEE ON MANDATING PROCEDURES OF
                               PROVINCES BILL

                             (Draft Resolution)

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move the
motion as it appears on the Order Paper:

   That the House -
     1) notes that the National Council of Provinces rejected the Mandating
        Procedures of Provinces Bill [B 8D – 2007] (National Council of
        Provinces – sec 76(2)) on 23 September 2008; and


     2) elects the following members, as nominated by their respective
        parties, as the Assembly representatives to the Mediation Committee
        on the Mandating Procedures of Provinces Bill [B 8D – 2007]
        (National Council of Provinces – sec 76(2)): Carrim, Y I (ANC);
        Johnson, C B (ANC); Joubert, L K (DA); Landers, L T (ANC);
        Magwanishe, G B (ANC); Mahlawe, N M (ANC); Ngaleka, E (ANC);
        Seaton, S A (IFP); Sibanyoni, J B (ANC).

Agreed to.

   EXTENSION OF REPORTING BY AD HOC COMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE LEGISLATION

                             (Draft Resolution)

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move the
motion as it stands on the Order Paper:

   That the House -

     1) notes that the Ad Hoc Committee on Intelligence Legislation had
        been given until 9 October 2008 to report on its mandate, but has
        yet to table its report;


     2) notwithstanding Rule 214(6)(c), condones the continued existence of
        and the work conducted by the committee after its term had expired;
        and


     3) further extends the date by which the committee must report on the
        legislation before it to 21 November 2008.

Agreed to.

                     SOME PARTIES’ OPPOSITION TO THE ANC

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms T V TOBIAS (ANC): Madam Speaker, emboldened by the activities of a few
individuals who have come to see themselves as bigger than the organisation
that made them, today most right-wing opposition parties in our country,
your Das, UDMs and the conventions of this country’s sore losers, young and
old - those still struggling to see the light of day - appear to speak in
one voice in their opposition to the ANC. [Interjections.]

The ANC is a movement with a rich political tradition and an unparalleled
legacy. We have a vision, a plan and best policies to ensure the creation
of a better life for all. Our commitment and adherence to the goals of the
Freedom Charter and the Constitution are unshakeable. Our democratic
dispensation, among others, guarantees the right to freedom of speech and
association.

The ANC respects the democratic right of individuals to express their views
on any issue and, if they so desire, to form political parties to advance
their goals. Throughout our history we have fought for these rights, and
now that they are secured we shall defend them resolutely. The ANC will not
be deterred for one moment from our strategic objective to fight poverty,
create employment and improve access to quality education. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

                     NATIONAL CONVENTION IN BLOEMFONTEIN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Die LEIER VAN DIE OPPOSISIE (DA): Voorsitter, op 2 November vind daar in
Bloemfontein ‘n nasionale konvensie plaas. Politieke gebeure op
Bloemfontein het telkemale in die verlede hulle merk op die geskiedenis
gemaak: Die stigting van die ANC, die stigting van die Nasionale Party en
die stigting van die Progressiewe Party.

Die persone wat hierdie konvensie lei, was tot onlangs baie gesiene lede
van die ANC en dit is duidelik dat hulle diep gekrenk is deur
verwikkellinge in die regerende party; soveel so dat hulle bereid is om uit
die knus kussings van die regering op te staan en in die koue daar buite ’n
nuwe heenkome te gaan soek.

Dit kan ’n baie positiewe wending vir demokrasie wees, mits dit die belang
van die bevolking in sy geheel nastreef en ’n oop, geleentheidsgedrewe
gemeenskap vir almal tot gevolg het. Dit sal nie deug as dit slegs ‘n
alliansie van verontregtes is nie, soos dit die geval was met die
herskikking van lojaliteite wat in die ANC plaasgevind het en dit nou
moeilik maak om die regerende party met ’n morele visie te vereenselwig.

Die DA praat al lankal in hierdie Huis van die nodigheid vir so ’n
politieke herskikking, maar dit moet plaasvind met ’n onbetwisbare
verbintenis tot die Grondwet en sy individuele waarborge en ’n
langtermynvisie vir sosiale kohesie en welvaart vir almal in die land,
ongeag hulle politieke verbintenisse. Die DA sal hierdie nuwe verwikkelinge
met belangstelling dophou. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans member’s
statement follows.)

[The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (DA): Chairperson, on 2 November a national
convention will be held in Bloemfontein. Political events in Bloemfontein
have time and again made their mark on history in the past: The founding of
the ANC, the founding of the National Party and the founding of the
Progressive Party.

The people leading this convention were, until recently, highly esteemed
members of the ANC and it is clear that they are deeply hurt by
developments in the ruling party; so much so that they are prepared to
leave the cosy cushions of government and seek a new livelihood in the cold
out there.

This could be a very positive turn for democracy, provided it is in the
interests of the population as a whole and leads to an open, opportunity-
driven community for all. It will not work, however, if it is merely an
alliance of the aggrieved, as was the case with the rearrangement of
loyalties that took place in the ANC and has subsequently made it difficult
to associate the ruling party with a moral vision.

For a long time the DA has advocated the necessity of such a political
rearrangement in this House, but this should happen with an undisputed
commitment to the Constitution and its individual guarantees and a long-
term vision for social cohesion and prosperity for everyone in the country,
regardless of their political affiliation. The DA will be following these
new developments with keen interest. [Applause.]]

                ROAD ACCIDENT FUND’S DELAYS IN HANDLING CASES
                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr E J LUCAS (IFP): Chairperson, the Mission of the Road Accident Fund, the
RAF, states that the fund exists to administer the system of compensation,
as defined in the RAF Act, in a manner that is timeous, cost-effective and
appropriately delivers on its mandate.

Sibisi Hlatswayo was involved in a terrible accident in December, 1995,
which resulted in his arm being amputated. He was only 11 years old at the
time. More than 12 years after the unfortunate incident that forever
changed his life, he is still waiting for compensation from the RAF,
despite pursuing the matter with an attorney and submitting the required
documents, including three medical reports to prove his condition.

The fact that the RAF has delayed in handling the case is unacceptable, and
is certainly not in line with their mission and objectives. I am sure that
this is not an isolated incident and that they have many other complaints
against the RAF.

Instead of treating accident victims with respect and dignity, as stated in
their core values, their actions of inefficiency in dealing with cases just
add to the misery of victims. The way in which the RAF operates and deals
with cases must be reviewed. Accident victims are to be treated with
respect and dignity and officials must be held accountable for their role
in the delays. We cannot allow cases to drag on for years, with little or
no progress being made, while the victims continue to suffer.

                         ANC ECONOMIC SUMMIT OF THE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms J L FUBBS (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC and its alliance partners recently
held a two-day alliance economic summit to concretise and consolidate the
economic policy perspectives. This ANC economic summit occurred during a
time of global financial turbulence, and was underpinned by our commitment
to halve the unemployment rate and to overcome poverty.

Many South Africans have a common vision to create a nonracial, nonsexist,
democratic and prosperous country. At the centre of these developmental
priorities is the creation of decent work for all and the re-emphasis on
the industrial and trade policy that includes a shared accelerated economic
growth and a radical transformation of the justice system to ensure that
democracy remains vibrant. The ANC economic policy recognises that a
continuing element of democratic transformation is the systematic programme
to overcome historical injustice. [Time expired.]

                  INFLAMMATORY STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS OF ANC

                            (Member’s Statement)

Rev K R J MESHOE (ACDP): Chairperson, the ACDP is very concerned about the
continuing inflammatory statements and insults that are directed at people
who have a different opinion about politics and the future of this country.
We must appeal to the majority party to instruct their members to refrain
from using derogatory terms to insult those they dislike, for whatever
reason. Calling people “donkeys” and “dogs” is totally unacceptable and it
is not helpful in a country that is supposed to be a success story that has
proven that national reconciliation is possible, even in a country with a
cruel and oppressive history such as ours.

The ACDP does not want to see a violent reaction resulting from the
unabating attacks on the integrity and person of some members of the
public, particularly those who are unhappy with what’s happening in the
ruling party. To sustain our young democracy, there needs to be respect
amongst leaders and followers, even when they disagree and differ on
issues.

The ACDP warns against stoking instability and violence, which will come
with a high price. If political violence does break out over the next few
months, then the privilege of hosting the 2010 Fifa World Cup will be lost,
which would be a great loss, not only for our country, but for the entire
African continent. In spite of the many assurances that have been given by
the president of Fifa, the Soccer World Cup will be hosted by a country
that is seen to be peaceful and stable economically and politically.

The ACDP therefore calls on politicians to help promote healing,
reconciliation, respect and tolerance and not war talk, insults and
instability. If divorce has to take place within the ANC, let it be
peaceful and not violent. [Time expired.]

                          DISSOLUTION OF SCORPIONS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr P J GROENEWALD (VF Plus): Agb Voorsitter, die aanvaarding van die
wysigingswetsontwerpe op die SA Polisiediens en die Nasionale
Vervolgingsgesag deur die Portefeuljekomitees oor Justisie en Staatkundige
Ontwikkeling, en oor Veiligheid en Sekuriteit gee beslag aan die politieke
besluit van die ANC by Polokwane om die Skerpioene te ontbind.

Hierdie besluit is ’n miskenning van die kundigheid en suksesse van
toegewyde ondersoekers en aanklaers in die stryd teen misdaad, en spesifiek
in die stryd teen georganiseerde misdaad. Daar kon nie eens waarborge aan
lede van die Skerpioene gegee word vir die voortsetting van hulle dienste
by die te stigte Direktoraat vir die Ondersoek van Prioriteitsmisdaad nie.

Hoogs gekwalifiseerde en kundige lede van die Skerpioene is nou onseker oor
hulle toekoms. Lede kan kies of hulle lid wil word van die polisie of enige
ander staatsdepartement. Die gekoördineerde kollektiewe kundige optrede van
die Skerpioene word hierdeur effektief vernietig.

Baie van hierdie lede is in aanvraag in die private sektor en sal nou
verlore raak vir misdaadbekamping. Die uittog van kundiges gaan ook
bestaande ondersoeke benadeel en selfs laat skipbreuk ly. Die Jackie Selebi-
saak is ’n sprekende voorbeeld hiervan. Die aanvaarding van die
wysigingswetsontwerpe is ’n oorwinning vir misdadigers. Die publiek van
Suid-Afrika is die verloorders en die misdadigers is die wenners.
(Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD (FF Plus): Hon Chairperson, the acceptance of the
amending Bills on the SA Police Service and the National Prosecuting
Authority by the Portfolio Committees on Justice and Constitutional
Development, and on Safety and Security settled the matter that was
informed by the political decision that was taken by the ANC at Polokwane
to disband the Scorpions.

This decision shows disregard for the expertise and successes of dedicated
investigators and prosecutors in the fight against crime, and specifically
in the fight against organised crime. Assurances could not even be given to
members of the Scorpions for the continuation of their services at the
Directorate for Priority Crime Investigation that will be established.

Highly qualified and capable members of the Scorpions are now uncertain
about their future. Members can decide whether they want to become members
of the police or any other government department. The co-ordinated
collective skilful action of the Scorpions is hereby effectively destroyed.

Many of these members are in demand in the private sector and will now be
lost to the fight against crime. The exodus of experts will also harm
existing investigations and even contribute to their failure. The Jackie
Selebi case is a striking example of this. The acceptance of the amending
Bills is a victory for criminals. The South African public are the losers
and the criminals are the winners.]

                  INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT COUNCIL MEETING

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms D M RAMODIBE (ANC): Chairperson, over the weekend the International
Investment Council met at Mossel Bay. The meeting encouraged South Africans
to communicate vigorously its economic achievements to the global investor
community, especially its economic potential and attractiveness as an
investment destination. The International Investment Council expressed its
continued confidence in our country. It noted that South Africa’s
regulatory environment and policy choices have, to a large extent, shielded
the economy from the turmoil that has swept across financial markets around
the world.

Before 1994, economic growth had ground to a halt. Since then, our economy
has grown on average by 2,8% per year. It has become more competitive with
increasing volume, diversity and destinations of exports and it has created
more and more jobs.

The ANC recognises that poverty is still a reality for millions as many do
not have appropriate skills, while others cannot access credit to start or
improve their small and medium-sized businesses. The ANC remains committed
to the eradication of poverty and to economic development, comprehensive
social security, land reform and improved household and community assets.
Thank you. [Time expired.]

                      TAKING STOCK OF SERVICE DELIVERY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr P H K DITSHETELO (UCDP): Chairperson, I think it is high time we took
stock of service delivery. For instance, parts of Lehurutshe have been
without water for months.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Is your microphone not working?

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: It is working.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Could you please raise your voice a
bit?

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: I think it is high time we took stock of service
delivery. For instance, parts of Lehurutshe have been without water for
months. All relevant institutions have been approached for help and
assistance, without success. This has led to utter frustration and
impatience, which resulted in upheavals such as roadblocks accompanied by
the burning of tyres and the damaging of vehicles. Officials from concerned
municipalities intervened to no avail, causing paralysis between officials
and the community. This state of affairs is barbaric and cannot be
tolerated in a democratic South Africa.

Still on the same subject, a stone’s throw away from Lehurutshe in
Mafikeng, the capital of North West, the community is supplied with
unhygienical, stinking and unpalatably dirty water, which cannot even be
drunk by animals. To confirm this state of affairs an announcement is made
through the local radio station to the effect that this water must not be
used for consumption without boiling it first. What kind of service
delivery is this?
Tlogelang go gora lefetlho. [Stop procrastinating.] [Time expired.]

               NUMBER OF NONWHITE PLAYERS IN CURRIE CUP FINAL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S SIMMONS (NA): Chairperson, I wish to ask the hon Komphela and Frolick
to count the number of nonwhite players on Saturday during the Currie Cup
Final. All these players will not only play to win the Currie Cup, but also
to become Springboks. The overwhelming number of players, if not all
nonwhite rugby players, want to become Springboks, rendering the hon
Komphela and Frolick’s comments ill-founded. I have on a previous occasion
asked these two hon members to resign. Today I again call on the ANC to get
these hon members to resign. Surely the ANC must have members who are
interested in protecting and promoting solidarity among all communities.
The hon Komphela and Frolick are countering this opportunity for unity
among rugby communities. These two hon members are exactly what we don’t
need in our country.

The ACTING CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, on a point of
order: Mr Simmons persistently uses the term “nonwhite” in his statement. I
think that we’ve outgrown that language as a nation. Could he please
withdraw and reformulate it?

Mr S SIMMONS: Chairperson, that is the term that these hon two members
normally use, white and nonwhite. These two hon members are exactly what we
don’t need in our country.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon member, because that was a
point of order contesting that statement, I’m not saying it’s
unparliamentary, I’m simply saying that we will rule on it once we’ve dealt
with this, but you can continue.

Mr S SIMMONS: These two hon members are exactly what we don’t need in our
country for the sake of solidarity, reconciliation and nation-building.
Thank you.

                DA MEMBERS ATTACKED BY ALLEGED ANC SUPPORTERS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M WATERS (DA): Chairperson, yesterday, two Democratic Alliance
activists, namely, Collen Mdluli and Thokazani Nhleko, were attacked by a
gang of men known to be ANC members and supporters in the Mogobo informal
settlement in Ekurhuleni. They were hurt with axes and hit with shovels
outside Mdhluli’s home. Their attackers burned the shack to the ground,
leaving Mdluli, his wife and children homeless.

This violent attack is a brutal reminder of the ruling party’s intolerance
of opposition and is one of the many acts of intimidation recently
perpetrated against DA activists working in ANC strongholds around the
country. These attacks indicate that the ANC feels threatened by the DA’s
growing presence in areas traditionally supportive of the ruling party.

As the ANC comes under increasing electoral pressure, such violent
intimidation - if left unchecked - will escalate. We need to take urgent
steps now before next year’s election, when political competition will
intensify.

The DA leader, Helen Zille, has therefore called the President in order to
request an urgent meeting with him and the Minister of Safety and Security
to discuss the recent increasing political violence and intimidation. The
DA will also propose that a multi-party task team be established to make
recommendations, with inputs from the South African Police Service and the
Independent Electoral Commission, to prevent political violence and
intimidation inside and outside the election periods.

The DA will not stand by while our activists are threatened and attacked.
If the government and the ANC believe in democracy and the principle of
freedom of association, they won’t either. It is time for the few voices of
conscience that remain in the ANC to speak out against the culture of
violence that now permeates the ruling party from top to bottom. I thank
you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

                    DEMOCRATIC ALLIANCE ELECTION CAMPAIGN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr P J GERBER (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC has noted a plan by the
Democratic Alliance to court the electorate for their votes by inviting
people to submit applications in the false hope that they will become the
party’s public representatives after the 2009 elections. The DA have placed
advertisements in various newspapers in which members of the public are
invited to submit applications to become Members of Parliament or
provincial legislatures.

This can exploit the country’s unemployment situation. The advert is
deceptive. Firstly, the chance that the so-called successful applicant who
only becomes a party candidate a couple of months before the elections can
be referred for the position as a Member of Parliament ahead of a long-
standing party member is remote, if not nonexistent.

Secondly, given the party’s representation in the national and provincial
legislatures and its failure in elections to improve its representation, it
is inconsiderable that successful applicants will even make it to the first
draft of the party elections list. This is both an act of desperation and
unethical conduct. That the party could not find within its present pool of
membership the best possible and dynamic public representatives who can at
least read or write is a serious indictment on its credibility. The ANC
cautions people against this job adverts scam. I thank you.

                         COLLAPSE OF OFFICE BUILDING

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr H J BEKKER (IFP): Hon Chairperson, the IFP notes with great sadness the
devastating effects as a result of the collapse of the Roodepoort office
building under construction. We hereby express our condolences to the
families of the three men who died, as well as our wishes for the speedy
recovery of those who were left injured.

South African employers are not only obliged to guarantee the safety of
working environments, but are expected to observe all workers’ rights and
freedoms entrenched in our Constitution. The Department of Labour must
ensure that there is a speedy investigation so that the construction bosses
are brought to book, if there is indeed a prima facie case of negligence.

We further believe that such negligence leading to the death and injury of
innocent workers should serve as a wake-up call for many employers who take
worker rights for granted. The scene of this horrendous accident is
relatively close to my residence and I had an opportunity to notice the
devastation. I also would like to thank the hon Minister Mdladlana for
visiting the accident scene and personally expressing his condolences to
the victims and deep concern about the sad and unnecessary occurrence.
Thank you.

                          DEATH OF MS ESTHER BARSEL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr T M MASUTHA (ANC): Chairperson, on 6 October 2008, our country lost one
of its servants for social justice, peace and democracy, Comrade Esther
Barsel, with whom I happened to share a branch, which is the Wynberg
branch, in the Northeast of Johannesburg.

Comrade Barsel was a stalwart of the ANC and SACP who was unwavering in her
commitment and dedication to the struggle for a democratic and just South
Africa. She was a member of the SACP since the 1940s and was a tireless
political activist who remained engaged in struggle until the end of her
life.

The ANC salutes Comrade Esther Barsel and will forever treasure the
contributions she made in the struggle for liberation, the building and the
deepening of our democracy. We extend our condolences to her family,
friends, comrades and the SACP. I thank you. [Applause.]

                        NONPAYMENT OF APPROVED CLAIMS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms A M DREYER (DA): Chairperson, the main aim of the Compensation Fund is
to provide compensation to injured or disabled workers or to their
dependants in the case of death. The fund has an annual income of R4
billion and reserves of R18 billion in its bank account. It is indeed flush
with money.

However, the fund is not paying out approved claims. Doctors, chemists,
physiotherapists and other medical service providers often wait for years
to receive payments for their services, but worse, people have died because
of complications arising out of delayed medical treatment. The reason for
this shameful state of affairs is administrative bungling, poor management,
poor information technology systems and no political will.

Further, the fund does not comply with the Public Finance Management Act or
the Compensation for Occupational Injuries and Diseases Act. Further
misbehaviours include materially incorrect assessments, and a lack of
appropriate record-keeping and filing systems. This has compelled the
Auditor–General to once again give the fund a disclaimer of opinion.

In the past, when confronted with problems of the Compensation Fund, the
Minister for Labour has asked for details of actual cases. I shall now, in
the absence of the Minister of Labour, hand over to one of his colleagues
in the Cabinet account details to the value of R76 million, some of them
dating back to 1993, of 69 887 approved but unpaid claims. [Applause.]

                  MEETING ON TRANSFORMATION IN SOUTH AFRICA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr B M SOLO (ANC): Chairperson, on 9 and 10 October 2008, stakeholders in
sport gathered in Durban to review the progress made in transforming sport
in the country since the unity process of the 1990s.[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Order! Hon member, what are you
doing? [Laughter.] Hon member, seeing that the Minister who needs to
receive your documents is not here, try to do it outside the Chamber as the
Minister is not here at the moment.

Ms S P RWEXANA: Chairperson, on a point of order, is it parliamentary for a
member to sit in the seat of the Deputy President when she is absent?
[Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Continue, hon member.
Mr B M SOLO: Thank you, Chairperson. The administrators from federations,
politicians, sport activists, sport scientists and coaches deliberated for
two days on matters affecting sport in our country. The gathering was
significant in that it succeeded in bringing together stakeholders for the
first time in 10 years, to map out a common vision and action plan for
sport.

The indaba discussed a range of important matters and adopted key
resolutions on the following issues: The reconstruction of the SA Sports
Confederation and Olympic Committee, Sascoc, with amendments to its
constitution to make it more representative of the sportspeople in our
country; a new approach to school sport, whereby teachers become the key
drivers of the programme; enforcement of the King Protea as the only emblem
for national teams; endorsement of scientific approaches to prepare
athletes for international participation, including the Olympic games; and
promoting the participation of women in sport.

The ANC supports the resolution taken at the indaba as a big step forward
towards nation-building, fostering social cohesion and the forging of a
national identity built on the foundation of human dignity, equality and
excellence. I thank you.

                          UNPARLIAMENTARY LANGUAGE

                                  (Ruling)
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Before I go to Ministerial
responses that conclude Members’ Statements, I need to rule that the
description of a group of Springbok players by the hon Simmons as
“nonwhite” is not unparliamentary. Are there any Ministerial responses?
[Applause.]

                      TAKING STOCK OF SERVICE DELIVERY

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, in a
democratic South Africa with a responsive government and a clear policy of
service delivery and redress, it is unfortunate to have people taking to
the streets in demand of service delivery, indicating that they have
exhausted all platforms when in actual fact they have not. It is also
opportunistic for a public representative to believe that all avenues have
been exhausted before he actually takes a step to meet one of the readily
available Ministers.

On the issue reported about at Lehurutshe, I undertake, as I would have
undertaken had the member approached our offices, to investigate that issue
together with the Minister of Water Affairs. We will be able to engage with
the member concerned about this issue. Thank you very much.

                          DISSOLUTION OF SCORPIONS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER FOR SAFETY AND SECURITY: The relocation of the Directorate for
Special Operations into the South African Police Service will strengthen
our resolve to fight against the scourge of crime. A new unit will deal
with priority crime in a fair, impartial and apolitical manner. The so-
called exodus of DSO personnel to the private sector is a scarecrow,
hon member, which is just being used, or perhaps the member knows what we
do not know. But what we do know is that, as part our obligation which
we’ll have to meet in the Constitution of South Africa, this is one step
towards the creation of a single police system in the country. I thank you,
Chairperson.

                DA MEMBERS ATTACKED BY ALLEGED ANC SUPPORTERS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: The hon
Waters has made allegations about certain ANC members that have committed
violence against some of their members. If that is so, of course, we
absolutely condemn from the ANC’s side any such actions by an ANC member.
However, we would also expect that, as a citizen of South Africa, if crimes
are being committed you would go and report them immediately to the police.
So we do hope that they have been reported. If they have been reported, we
would appreciate it if we could see the case number. If they have not been
reported, then clearly this could be a publicity stunt. So please...
[Interjections.] You know, Ms Kohler-Barnard, you are only more foolish
than you are arrogant. You take stupidity to higher levels.

Now, Mr Waters, as I was saying, as far as the ANC is concerned, if there
are ANC members that have committed crimes, please give us the number and
we will follow it up. We will make sure that the law takes its course.
[Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon Minister, with due respect, I
should have recognised the Minister of Home Affairs earlier but I couldn’t
see her hand.

                          VICTORIOUS FUTURE FOR ANC
                          DEATH OF MS ESTHER BARSEL

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson, if I am going to comment on two
statements, are you going to give more time? How much time do you give me?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): So far, we have three responses
from three Ministers. You are the fourth one. We still have two more left.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson, I think it is quite early to
celebrate the demise of the ANC. I do want to say that the ANC will weather
the storm. It will because it is the oldest liberation movement on the
African continent. It has a wealth of experience and cadres who are capable
of resolving their internal problems. It belongs to the people of South
Africa, and I think it would be odd for the ANC, as it is undergoing
transformation from a liberation movement to a political party, not to have
the kind of challenges that it has. It has challenges now, and I believe
that this is a temporary inconvenience. It is the ANC of Dube, of Luthuli,
of Tambo and of Mandela, and yes, it has challenges but this ANC will rise.
It is early for you to celebrate. [Applause.]

The ANC will emerge victorious – it will emerge victorious. I also believe
that, yes, you do see something being formed but you still don’t know what
it is.

My second comment relates to Esther Barsel, a comrade who must be honoured;
a white lady who stood for the truth in South Africa, long before it was
fashionable to talk about the needs of the majority of the oppressed South
Africans. [Interjections.] Just hold on, please, because we are paying our
respects to a decent human being who talked about democracy before it was
fashionable to do so; who spoke on behalf of the majority of oppressed
South Africans when it was still dangerous and risky to do so; who spoke on
behalf of the people on the ground before we could teach some of you what
it meant to talk on behalf of people on the ground.

Right now, it is fashionable to do that, but we are talking here about a
person who risked detention, death, losing her family, her children and her
all on behalf of South African people, the majority who were disadvantaged,
who are black people, and this is whom we are talking about. May her soul
rest in peace! [Applause.] [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: On a point of order: Mr Chairman, I am just having a problem
with the sentiments expressed by the hon Minister. What statement was she
talking about? I don’t understand what she was talking about. Why was she
raising that under the reply to statements? In other words, which statement
was she referring to?

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson, there was a statement on the
death of Esther Barsel and I am paying tribute on behalf of the government
to Esther Barsel, the stalwart of the African National Congress and the
South African Communist Party.

Mr T M MASUTHA: Chairperson, I made the statement!

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): The hon Minister was responding to
the statement by hon Masutha.

                     NATIONAL CONVENTION IN BLOEMFONTEIN

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, may I just comment on the
statement made by the leader from the DA, hon Botha. Generally, I had
expected from the first time I entered here today that there would be such
a statement, specifically from the DA. I think I was not surprised when she
said so.

It is quite obvious that some of my former comrades who have decided to
take the Mutambara option, have pleased hon Botha, and I think they should
listen to that very carefully. They have that right to move and go wherever
they want to go. The right to free association within our Constitution is
entrenched, and this issue basically is an issue that the ANC is looking
into and I think the comrades should be allowed to move in whatever way
they want to without any hindrances. It is a pity that the Reverend has
gone. I just want to tell him, there would be no hindrances - but we will
talk to them. It is not something to be pleased about. Of course, the DA
must be very pleased, but we are not. Thank you.

The House adjourned at 15:43.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS
                          MONDAY, 29 SEPTEMBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

Membership of the Assembly

 1. Resignation of Members


        1) Mrs A T Didiza resigned as Member of the National Assembly with
           effect from 26 September 2008.

        2) Mr A Erwin resigned as Member of the National Assembly with
           effect from 26 September 2008.

        3) Ms G J Fraser-Moleketi resigned as Member of the National
           Assembly with effect from 25 September 2008.

        4) Ms M E George resigned as Member of the National Assembly with
           effect from 23 September 2008.

        5) Mr R Kasrils resigned as Member of the National Assembly with
           effect from 25 September 2008.

        6) Mr M G P Lekota resigned as Member of the National Assembly with
           effect from 25 September 2008.

        7) Ms P G Mlambo-Ngcuka resigned as Member of the National Assembly
           with effect from 25 September 2008.

        8) Mr P J Moleketi resigned as Member of the National Assembly with
           effect from 25 September 2008.

        9) Mr F S Mufamadi resigned as Member of the National Assembly with
           effect from 25 September 2008.

       10) Dr E G Pahad resigned as Member of the National Assembly with
           effect from 25 September 2008.

       11) Mr A G H Pahad resigned as Member of the National Assembly with
           effect from 24 September 2008.

2.    Swearing-in of Members

      (a)   The vacancy which occurred in the National Assembly owing to the
           passing on of Mr P J Gomomo on 22 January 2008, has been filled
           with effect from 23 September 2008 by the nomination of Mr P S
           Sizani.

      (b)   The vacancy which occurred in the National Assembly owing to the
           resignation of Mr P J Moleketi with effect from 25 September
           2008, has been filled with effect from 25 September 2008 by the
           nomination of Mr S Shiceka.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for the Public Service and Administration

       a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 9 – Department of Public
          Service and Administration for 2007-2008, including the Report of
          the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
          Information of Vote 9 for 2007-2008 [RP 218-2008].


          Please Note: The following 2 items replaces item 1(a) and (b)
          under Tablings of the Announcements, Tablings and Committee
          Reports of 25 September 2008, as published on page 1784.


       b) Report and Financial Statements of the State Information
          Technology Agency (Proprietary) Limited (SITA) for 2007-2008,
          including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
          Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 236-
          2008].

       c) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 11 – South African
          Management Development Institute (SAMDI) for 2007-2008, including
          the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
          Performance Information of Vote 12 for 2007-2008.

2.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy

       a) Report and Financial Statements of the Central Energy Fund Group
          of Companies (CEF) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
          Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial
          Statements and Performance Information of the Central Energy Fund
          Group of Companies for 2007-2008 [RP 155-2008].


       b) Annual Review of the Central Energy Fund CEF (Pty) Ltd for 2007-
          2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
          Statements and Performance Information of the Central Energy Fund
          CEF (Pty) Ltd for 2007-2008.

       c) Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Geoscience
          (CGE) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General
          on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
          2008 [RP 106-2008].

3.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

       a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 24 – Department of
          Agriculture for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
          General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of
          Vote 24 for 2007-2008 [RP 248-2008].


       b) Report and Financial Statements of the Agricultural Research
          Council (ARC) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
          General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
          for 2007-2008 [RP 227-2008].

                         TUESDAY, 30 SEPTEMBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson
1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) Special Pensions Amendment Bill [B 29B – 2008] – Act No 13 of 2008
         (assented to and signed by President on 17 September 2008).


      2) Agricultural Debt Management Repeal Bill [B 24 – 2008] – Act No 15
         of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 17 September 2008).

      3) Human Sciences Research Council Bill [B 16D – 2007] – Act No 17 of
         2008 (assented to and signed by President on 23 September 2008).


      4) Financial Services Laws General Amendment Bill [B 21B – 2008] – Act
         No 22 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 23 September
         2008).
      5) Housing Development Agency Bill [B 1F – 2008] – Act No 23 of 2008
         (assented to and signed by President on 23 September 2008).

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Message from National Council of Provinces to National Assembly in
     respect of Bills passed by Council and returned to Assembly


    Please note: The following item amends item 2(c) under the entry
    “Announcements – The Speaker”, published on page 1784 of the
    Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of 25 September 2008:


     (1)    Bills, subject to proposed amendments, passed by National
         Council of Provinces on 25 September 2008 and returned for
         consideration of Council’s proposed amendments:


          a) Intellectual Property Rights from Publicly Financed Research
             and Development Bill [B 46B – 2008] (National Assembly – sec
             75) (for proposed amendments, see Announcements, Tablings and
             Committee Reports, 4 September 2008, p 1668).


             The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on
             Science and Technology of the National Assembly for a report on
             the amendments proposed by the Council.

TABLINGS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The President of the Republic

      a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 1 – The Presidency for
         2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 1 for
         2007-2008.
2.    The Minister of Defence

    (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Castle of Good Hope for
         2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP
         165-2008].

3.    The Minister of Finance

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 8 – National Treasury
         for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements of Vote 8 for 2006-2007 [RP 123-2008].


      b) Annual Financial Statements of the Project Development Facility
         (PDF) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
         the Financial Statements Ltd for 2007-2008 [RP 123-2008].


      c) Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Intelligence
         Centre for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
         2008 [RP 167-2008].


      d) Report and Financial Statements of the Public Investment
         Corporation Limited for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008 [RP 223-
         2008].


      e) Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the Ombud for
         Financial Services Providers for 2007-2008, including the Report of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
         Information for 2007-2008.


      f) Report and Financial Statements of the Land and Agricultural
         Development Bank of South Africa (Land Bank) for 2007-2008,
         including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2007-2008 [RP 159-2008].


      g) Address of the Governor of the South African Reserve Bank – 18
         September 2008.

4.    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 5 – Department of
         Provincial and Local Government for 2007-2008, including the Report
         of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
         Information of Vote 5 for 2007-2008 [RP 255-2008].


     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Municipal Demarcation
         Board for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
         the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008
         [RP 191-2008].

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for the
         Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and
         Linguistic Communities (CRL) for 2007-2008, including the Report of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
         Information for 2007-2008 [RP 237-2008].


5.    The Minister of Transport

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 33 – Department of
         Transport for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of
         Vote 33 for 2007-2008 [RP 252-2008].


     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Civil
         Aviation Authority (SACAA) for 2007-2008, including the Report of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
         Information for 2007-2008 [RP 150-2008].


     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the Urban Transport Fund
         (UTF) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
         the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008
         [RP 216-2008].

6.    The Minister for Public Enterprises

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Denel (Proprietary) Limited
         for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
         the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.


7.    The Minister of Public Works

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 6 – Department of Public
         Works for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
         the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 6 for
         2007-2008 [RP 249-2008].


      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the Council for the Built
         Environment (CBE) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
         Information for 2007-2008.


      (c)   Report and Financial Statements of the Construction Industry
         Development Board (CIDB) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
         Information for 2007-2008.


8.    The Minister of Health

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 16 – Department of
         Health for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 16
         for 2007-2008 [RP 129-2008].

9.    The Minister of Housing

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the National Housing Finance
         Corporation Ltd (NHFC) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.


10.   The Minister of Safety and Security

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 21 – Independent
         Complaints Directorate (ICD) for 2007-2008, including the Report of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
         Information of Vote 21 for 2007-2008 [RP 259-2008].
11.   The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of National Prosecuting
         Authority for 2007-2008, including the Reports of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
         2007-2008 and on the Financial Statements and Performance
         Information of the Criminal Assets Recovery Account for 2007-2008
         [RP 225-2008].


12.   The Minister of Science and Technology

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the Africa Institute of South
         Africa for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
         2008 [RP 215-2007].


      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the National Advisory Council
         on Innovation for 2007-2008.


      (c)   Report and Financial Statements of the National Research
         Foundation (NRF) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.


      (d)   Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Scientific
         and Industrial Research (CSIR) for 2007-2008, including the Report
         of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
         information for 2007-2008 [RP 147-2008].

      (e)   Report and Financial Statements of the Human Sciences Research
         Council (HSRC) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
         2007-2008 [RP 112-2008].

      (f)   Report and Financial Statements of the Tshumisano Trust for 2007-
         2008, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for 2007-2008.

      (g)   Report and Financial Statements of Academy of Science of South
         Africa for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.

13.   The Minister of Home Affairs

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 4 – Department of Home
         Affairs for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 4
         for 2007-2008 [RP 258-2008].


      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the Film and Publication
         Board for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
         the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008
         [RP 176-2008].

14.   The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 34 – Department of Water
         Affairs and Forestry for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
         Information of Vote 34 for 2007-2008 [RP 246-2008].


      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the Water Research Commission
         for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP
         180-2008].


15.   The Minister in The Presidency

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the Media Development and
         Diversity Agency (MDDA) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
         Information for 2007-2007.


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

 1. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry on the
    South African National Water Resources Infrastructure Agency Bill [B36
    – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 11 September 2008.

        The Bill was referred to the Committee on 10 June 2008.  In the
        course of inquiring into the subject of the Bill, the Committee, on
        25 June 2008, took a decision to request the Minister to withdraw
        the Bill due to the following:

          • Lack of consultation on the Bill with the National Economic
            Development and Labour Council (NEDLAC) by the Department of
            Water Affairs and Forestry before it was introduced to
            Parliament.

        The Committee considers the Bill to be an instrument containing
        significant changes to social and economic policy. The Memorandum
        on the Objects of the Bill states that NEDLAC was consulted before
        the Bill was introduced to Parliament. The Committee is not however
        satisfied that section 5 of the National Economic Development and
        Labour Council Act, 1994 (Act No. 35 of 1994), relating to
        consultation with NEDLAC, has been complied with. The Committee,
        therefore recommends that the Bill be rejected due to non-
        compliance with Section 5 of the NEDLAC Act.


        Report to be considered.

 2. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Communications on the appointment
    of members to the Board of the Media Development and Diversity Agency,
    dated 30 September 2008:

        The Portfolio Committee on Communications, having considered the
        matter of the appointment of members to the Board of the Media
        Development and Diversity Agency, referred to it in terms of
        section 4(1) of the Media Development and Diversity Agency Act, (No
        14 of 2002), reports as follows:


        The Committee invited the public, by means of advertisements in the
        print media, to nominate persons for consideration and
        recommendation for appointment to the Board.


        The following candidates were interviewed in an open meeting in
        Parliament on 30 September 2008, namely:


        Dr T Bosch, Dr A Haupt, Mr MK Jara, Ms SC Kananda, Mr S Molefe,
        Prof S Mmusi, Ms P Ntombela-Nzimande, Ms K Skinner and Mr N
        Woudberg.


        The Committee recommends that the House, in accordance with section
        4(1)(b) of the Act, make a recommendation to the President that the
        following persons be appointed as Board members:


        Dr T Bosch and Ms P Ntombela-Nzimande.


        Report to be considered.

                           FRIDAY, 3 OCTOBER 2008

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Sport and Recreation

      a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 18 – Department of Sport
         and Recreation South Africa for 2007-2008, including the Report of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
         Information of Vote 18 for 2007-2008 [RP 250-2008].
2.    The Minister of Science and Technology

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the South African Council for
         Natural Scientific Professions for 2007-2008, including the Report
         of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-
         2008.

      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
         Energy Research Institute (Pty) Ltd for 2007-2008, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
         Performance Information for 2007-2008.

3.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

      (a)   General Notice No 1052 published in Government Gazette No 31367
         dated 27 August 2008: Nominations for appointment of suitable
         persons to serve as members of the Board of South African National
         Parks, in terms of the National Environmental Management: Protected
         Areas Act, 2003 (Act No 57 of 2003)

      (b)   Government Notice No 916 published in Government Gazette No
         31360 dated 29 August 2008: Threatened or Protected Species: Second
         Amendments Regulation – 2008, in terms of the National
         Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of
         2004).

      (c)   Government Notice No 917 published in Government Gazette No
         31360 dated 29 August 2008: Threatened or Protected Species: Second
         Amendments Regulation – 2008, in terms of the National
         Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of
         2004).

      (d)   Government Notice No 949 published in Government Gazette No
         31380 dated 5 September 2008: Declaration of intention to propose
         extensions from, and a buffer zone for the fossil hominid sites of
         Sterkfontein, Swartkrans, Kromdraai and the environs (Cradle of
         Humankind), in terms of the National Environmental Management:
         Protected Areas Act, 2003 (Act No 57 of 2003) and the World
         Heritage Convention Act, 1999 (Act No 49 of 1999).


      (e)   General Notice No 1138 published in Government Gazette No 31415
         dated 15 September 2008: Second Edition Environmental
         Implementation and Management Plan (EIMP).

4.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the National Nuclear
         Regulator (NNR) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
         2007-2008 [RP 36-2008].

         Please Note: The above entry is amending item 4(b) under Tablings
         of the Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of 25
         September 2008, as published on page 1785.

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

     a) Letter from the Minister of Transport, dated 29 September 2008, to
        the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section 65(2)(a)
        of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999),
        explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual Reports of South
        African Maritime Safety Authority (SAMSA), the Cross-Border Road
        Transport Agency (C-BRTA) and the Ports Regulator of South Africa
        for 2007-2008.


        Dear Madam Speaker


        I write to inform Parliament that in terms of section 65(1)(a) of
        the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), as
        amended (PFMA), I am unfortunately not able to table the Annual
        Reports and audited Financial Statements for the year ended 31
        March 2008 of the South African Maritime Safety Authority (SAMSA),
        the Cross-Border Road Transport Agency (C-BRTA) and the Ports
        Regulator of South Africa before the deadline of 30 September
        2008.10.03


        Section 65(2)(a) of the PFMA stipulates that if an Executive
        Authority fails to table, in accordance with subsection 65(1)(a),
        the Annual Report and Financial Statements of the Department or
        Public Entity, and the Audit Report on those Statements, in
        Parliament within six months after the end of the financial year to
        which those Statements relate, i.e. 30-09-2008, the Executive
        Authority must table a written explanation in Parliament setting
        out the reasons why such an Annual Report was not tabled.


        The purpose of this communication is therefore to furnish
        Parliament with the following reasons for the late tabling of the
        Annual Reports in respect of the Public Entities listed below:-
        South African Maritime Safety Authority (SAMSA)
        SAMSA’s Financial Statements were submitted timeously on 31 May
        2008 to the Auditor-General. However, these Financial Statements
        were materially misstated. As a result, the Financial Statements
        had to be rectified and SAMSA had to resubmit the amended Financial
        Statements to the Auditor-General for audit. It is anticipated that
        the audit of the amended Financial Statements will begin in early
        October 2008 and should be finalised by the end of October 2008.
        Shortly thereafter the 2007/08 Annual Report should be finalised
        and available for tabling in Parliament.


        Cross-Border Road Transport Agency (C-BRTA)
        The C-BRTA’s final Financial Statements were originally approved
        and submitted to the Auditor-General on 31 May 2008. However, these
        Financial Statements were materially misstated and as a result the
        Financial Statements had to be rectified and the C-BRTA had to
        resubmit the amended Financial Statements to the Auditor-General
        for audit. It is anticipated that the audit of the amended
        Financial Statements will begin in mid-November 2008. Shortly
        thereafter the 2007/08 Annual Report should be finalised and
        available for tabling in Parliament


        Ports Regulator of South Africa
        The Ports Regulator of South Africa is a new Public Entity and the
        2007/08 Financial Statements is presently being finalised and will
        be submitted by the Accounting Authority to the Auditor-General for
        auditing during mid-October 2008. Thereafter it is anticipated that
        the audit finalisation processes and Audit Report by the Office of
        the Auditor-General should be completed within a short space of
        time. The Ports Regulator’s 2007/08 Annual Report will be finalised
        subsequently and available for tabling in Parliament.
        Arrangements will, however, be made for the above-mentioned Public
        Entities’ Annual Reports to be tabled in Parliament as soon as it
        becomes available.


        I trust that this will be in order.


        Kind regards




        signed
        MR J T RADEBE, MP
        MINISTER OF TRANSPORT


     b) Letter from the Minister of Science and Technology, dated 1 October
        2008, to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section
        65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of
        1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual Report of
        the South African Council for Natural Scientific Professions for
        2007-2008.


        LATE TABLING OF SOUTH AFRICAN COUNCIL FOR NATURAL SCIENTIFIC
        PROFESSIONS




        Dear Madam Speaker


        I acknowledge that the Department of Science and Technology failed
        to comply with section 65(1) of the Public Finance Management Act,
        1999 (Act No 1 of 1999) which stipulates that the Executive
        Authority must table annual reports within one month after
        receiving them from public entities.


        The South African Council for Natural Scientific Professions
        (SACNASP) Annual Report could not be tabled on time due to the
        unavailability of key personnel in the Department to check the
        accuracy and validity of the information in the annual reports
        before submitting them for tabling.


        In support of the information above, it should be noted that
        SACNASP is not a listed public entity. Hence it does not receive
        any funding from government. However, the SACNASP Act requires it
        to table its Annual Report to Parliament. It is for that reason
        that officials found it difficult to assess its performance as it
        does not have business plan.


        I confirm I will be able to table the Annual Report before the 3rd
        of October 2008.


        Yours sincerely




        MOSIBUDI MANGENA
        MINISTER


     c) Letter from the Minister of Science and Technology, dated 1 October
        2008, to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section
        65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of
        1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual Report of
        the South African Council for Natural Scientific Professions and
        South African National Energy Research Institute for 2007-2008.


        LATE TABLING OF SOUTH AFRICAN COUNCIL FOR NATURAL SCIENTIFIC
        PROFESSIONS AND SOTUH AFRICAN NATIONAL ENERGY RESEARCH INSTITUTE


        Dear Madam Speaker


        I acknowledge that the Department of Science and Technology failed
        to comply with section 65(1) of the Public Finance Management Act,
        1999 (Act No 1 of 1999) which stipulates that the Executive
        Authority must table annual reports within one month after
        receiving them from public entities.


        The South African Council National Energy Research Institute
        (SANERI) annual report could not be tabled on time due to the
        unavailability of key personnel in the Department to check the
        accuracy and validity of the information in the annual report
        before submitting it for tabling.


        In support of the information above, it should be noted that SANERI
        annual report could not be tabled on time due to unavailability of
        key personnel in the Department to check the accuracy and validity
        of the information in the annual report before submitting it for
        tabling.


        In support of the information above, it should be noted that SANERI
        is a joint responsibility of the Department of Science and
        Technology and Minerals and Energy.


        I confirm that I will be able to table the Annual Report before the
        3rd of October 2008.


        Yours sincerely




        MOSIBUDI MANGENA
        MINISTER


                           FRIDAY, 10 OCTOBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Classification of Bill by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a section 75 Bill:

          a) Civil Aviation Bill [B 73 – 2008] (National Assembly – sec
             75).

National Assembly

The Speaker

1. Membership of Committees

     1) Ad Hoc Committee on the Filling of the Vacancy on the South African
        Human Rights Commission

        (a)      The following members have been nominated for appointment
           to the Ad Hoc Committee on the Filling of the Vacancy on the
           South African Human Rights Commission

           ANC


           Johnson, Adv C
           Burgess, Mr CV
           Ngaleka, Ms E
           Sibanyoni, Mr JB
           Mothusiemang, Ms M
           Mahlawe, Ms NM
           Dithebe, Mr S
           Masutha, Adv TM


           DA
           Smuts, Ms D
           Joubert, Adv L


           IFP


           Seaton, Ms S


           NADECO
           Woods, Dr G


           UPSA


           Simmons, Mr S

        (b)      Adv C Johnson has been elected as Chairperson of the Ad
           Hoc Committee on the Filling of the Vacancy on the South African
           Human Rights Commission with effect from 7 October 2008

TABLINGS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1. The Minister of Finance

   Municipal Budgets for the 2008 Medium-Term Revenue and Expenditure
   Framework (MTREF).
2. The Minister of Agriculture and Land Affairs

   The Report and Financial Statements of Onderstepoort Biological Products
   Limited for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Independent Auditors
   on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

CREDA INSERT REPORT - T081010e-insert1 – PAGES 1814-1819

                           MONDAY, 13 OCTOBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bill
     (1)    The Portfolio Committee on Finance


          a) Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Bill [B 75
             – 2008] (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Draft Bill and
             memorandum setting out its objects published in Government
             Gazette No 31238 of 10 July 2008.]


             Bill initiated by the Portfolio Committee on Finance of the
             National Assembly, and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
             (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

                          TUESDAY, 14 OCTOBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

    (1)    Prohibition or Restriction of Certain Conventional Weapons Bill
        [B 7D – 2007] – Act No 18 of 2008 (assented to and signed by
        President on 9 October 2008).

     2) Local Government Laws Amendment Bill [B 28D – 2007 (Reprint)] – Act
        No 19 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 9 October
        2008).

National Assembly


The Speaker


     1. Membership of Committees


    (1)    Ad Hoc Committee to consider legislation on the National Youth
           Development Agency

            (a)   The following members have been nominated for appointment
               to the Ad Hoc Committee to consider legislation on the
               National Youth Development Agency

              ANC
              Combrink, Mr J
              Kholwane, Mr E
              Johnson, Mr L
              Mkongi, Mr B
              Mokoto, Ms P
              Newhoudt-Druchen, Ms W
              Tobias, Ms T
              Wang, Mr C
              DA
              Swathe, Mr M
              Van der Walt, Mrs D


              IFP
              Lebenya, Ms SP


              ID
              Greyling, Mr L


              UDM
              Madikiza, Mr G

           (b)   Mr L Johnson has been elected as Chairperson of the Ad Hoc
              Committee to consider legislation on the National Youth
              Development Agency with effect from 14 October 2008.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance
      (a)   Government Notice No R.954 published in Government Gazette No
          31397, dated 3 September 2008: Draft regulations for the
          adjustment of prescribed fees in terms of section 36, read with
          section 40C, of the Pension Funds Act, 1956 (Act No 24 of 1956).

          Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance for consideration.

2.    The Minister of Communications

       a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Broadcasting
          Corporation Limited (SABC) for 2007-2008, including the Report of
          the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-
          2008.

3.    The Minister of Labour

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the Media, Advertising,
          Publishing, Printing and Packaging Sector Education and Training
          Authority (MAPPP-Seta) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
          Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
          Information for 2007-2008 [RP 81-2008].

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

      (a)   A letter from the Minister of Finance, dated 6 October 2008,
          containing a report to the National Assembly on the use of
          R1,3 billion from the National Revenue Fund to defray claims
          expenditure by the Road Accident Fund, authorised and tabled in
          terms of section 16 of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999
          (Act No 1 of 1999).

          Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance for consideration
          and to the Portfolio Committee on Transport.

                         WEDNESDAY, 16 OCTOBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    A copy of the report containing the adjusted recommendations of the
    Independent Commission for the Remuneration of Public Office-Bearers in
    respect of salaries, allowances and benefits of public office-bearers
    for the fiscal year commencing 1 April 2008 was submitted to Parliament
    on 14 October 2008 in accordance with section 8(5) of the Remuneration
    of Public Office-Bearers Act, 1997 (No 92 of 1997).

                           FRIDAY, 17 OCTOBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and Council of Provinces

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

      1) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour for consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-
         General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
         and Performance Information for 2007-08 are referred to the
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for
             Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) for 2007-08,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 55-
             2008].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Compensation Fund for
             2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-08
             [RP 64-2008].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Unemployment Insurance
             Fund (UIF) for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 [RP 201-2008].


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the National Economic
             Development and Labour Council (Nedlac) for 2007-08, including
             the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
             Statements for 2007-08.

      2) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour for consideration and report and to the Portfolio Committee
         on Minerals and Energy. The Reports of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements and Performance Information are referred to
         the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:
          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Chemical Industries
             Education and Training Authority (Chieta) for 2007-08,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 69-
             2008].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Energy Sector Education
             and Training Authority (Eseta) for 2007-08, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 73-2008].

      3) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour for consideration and report and to the Portfolio Committee
         on Provincial and Local Government. The Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information is
         referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Local Government Sector
             Education and Training Authority for 2007-08, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 80-2008].

      4) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour for consideration and report and to the Portfolio Committee
         on Health and Portfolio Committee on Social Development. The Report
         of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
         Information is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Health and Welfare
             Sector Education and Training Authority for 2007-08, including
             the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
             and Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 77-2008].

      5) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour for consideration and report and to the Portfolio Committee
         on Education. The Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements and Performance Information is referred to the Committee
         on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Education Training and
             Development Practices Sector Education and Training Authority
             for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
             08 [RP 72-2008].

      6) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour for consideration and report and to the Portfolio Committee
         on Environmental Affairs and Tourism and Portfolio Committee Sport
         and Recreation. The Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements and Performance Information is referred to the Committee
         on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Tourism, Hospitality
             and Sport Education and Training Authority (Theta) for 2007-
             08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-08
             [RP 128-2008].

      7) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour for consideration and report and to the Portfolio Committee
         on Science and Technology. The Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements and Performance Information is referred to the
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Information Systems,
             Electronics and Telecommunications Technologies Sector
             Education and Training Authority (ISETT-Seta) for 2007-08,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 78-
             2008].

      8) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Enterprises for consideration and report. The Reports of the
         Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial
         Statements and Performance Information for 2007-08 are referred to
         the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 30 – Department of
             Public Enterprises for 2007-08, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information of Vote 30 for 2007-08 [RP 156-2008].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Forestry
             Company Limited (Safcol) for 2007-08, including the Report of
             the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-
             08.


          c) Report and Financial Statements of South African Airways
             (Proprietary) Limited (SAA) for 2007-08, including the Report
             of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for
             2007-08.


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the Broadband Infraco (Pty)
             Limited for 2007-08, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-08.

      9) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Communications for consideration and report and to the Portfolio
         Committee on Trade and Industry, Portfolio Committee on Arts and
         Culture and Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and
         Tourism. The Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements and Performance Information is referred to the Committee
         on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the International Marketing
             Council of South Africa (IMC) for 2007-08, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 144-2007].

     10) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Communications for consideration and report. The Reports of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
         Information are referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Sentech Limited for 2007-
             08, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2007-08.


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Post
             Office Limited for 2007-08, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-08.


     11) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Environmental Affairs and Tourism for consideration and report. The
         Reports of the Auditor-General and of the Independent Auditors on
         the Financial Statements and Performance Information are referred
         to the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 26 – Department of
             Environmental Affairs and Tourism for 2007-08, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information of Vote 26 for 2007-08 [RP 53-2008].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of South African Tourism for
             2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-08.


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Weather
             Service (SAWS) for 2007-08, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 [RP 197-2008].


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
             Biodiversity Institute (SANBI) for 2007-08, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2007-08.


          e) Report and Financial Statements of the Marine Living Resources
             Fund for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General
             on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
             2007-08 [RP 190-2008].


          f) Report and Financial Statements of the National Environmental
             Advisory Forum (NEAF) for 2007-08 [RP 101-2008].


          g) Report and Financial Statements of the Air Traffic and
             Navigation Services Company Limited (ATNS) for 2007-08,
             including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2007-08.

     12) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
         report. The Reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements and Performance Information are referred to the
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the Public
             Protector for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 [RP 211-2008].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of Parliament of the South
             African Human Rights Commission for 2007-08, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 89-2008].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Legal Aid Board for
             2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-08
             [RP 97-2008].

     13) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Correctional Services for consideration:

          a) Report of the Public Protector on an Investigation into the
             Causes of Delays in the Administration of Criminal Appeals
             Lodged by Prisoners [Report No 10 of 2008-09].

     14) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Correctional Services for consideration and report. The Report of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
         Information is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 19 – Department of
             Correctional Services for 2007-08, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information of Vote 19 for 2007-08 [RP 217-2007].

     15) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Provincial and Local Government for consideration:
          a) Report of the Public Protector on an Investigation into an
             Allegation of the Misappropriation of Public Funds by the
             Kungwini Local Municipality in the Gauteng Province [Report No
             12 of 2008-09].

     16) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Home
         Affairs for consideration:

       a) Annual Performance Plan (Revised) of the Department of Home
          Affairs for 2007-08.

     17) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Home
         Affairs for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information is
         referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Electoral Commission
             for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
             08.

     18) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Education for consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information are
         referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 14 -  Department of
             Education for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 [RP 220-2008].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the National Student
             Financial Aid Scheme for 2007-08, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08.


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Council on Higher
             Education for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08.

     19) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Education for consideration and report and to the Portfolio
         Committee on Labour. The Reports of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements and Performance Information are referred to
         the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Qualifications Authority for 2007-08, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 149-2008].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Education Labour
             Relations Council for 2007-08, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 and the Report of the Auditor-General
             on the Transformation Fund of the Education Labour Relations
             Council for 2007-08 [RP 136-2008].

     20) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Arts and Culture for consideration and report. The Reports of the
         Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial
         Statements and Performance Information are referred to the
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African State
             Theatre for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 [RP 224-2008].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Msunduzi/Voortrekker
             and Ncome Museums for 2007-08, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 [PR 160-2008].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the National English
             Literary Museum for 2007-08, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08.


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the Market Theatre
             Foundation for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 [RP 102-2008].


          e) Report and Financial Statements of the National Museum –
             Bloemfontein for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08.


          f) Report and Financial Statements of Iziko Museums of Cape Town
             for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
             08 [RP 185-2008].


          g) Report and Financial Statements of the War Museum of the Boer
             Republics for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2007-08.


          h) Report and Financial Statements of the National Film and Video
             Foundation (NFVF) for 2007-08, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 [RP 176-2008].


          i) Report and Financial Statements of Artscape for 2007-08,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 189-
             2008].


          j) Report and Financial Statements of The Freedom Park Trust for
             2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-08.


          k) Report and Financial Statements of the William Humphreys Art
             Gallery for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08.


          l) Report and Financial Statements of Business and Arts South
             Africa (Basa) for 2007-08, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-08
             [RP 166-2008].

          m) Report and Financial Statements of the Natal Museum for 2007-
             08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements for 2007-08 [RP 158-2008].


          n) Report and Financial Statements of the Pan South African
             Language Board (PanSalb) for 2007-08, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 137-2008].


          o) Report and Financial Statements of the National Heritage
             Council for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 [RP 203-2008].


          p) Report and Financial Statements of The Playhouse Company for
             2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-08.

          q) Report and Financial Statements of the Nelson Mandela National
             Museum for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 [RP 202-2008].


          r) Report and Financial Statements of the Afrikaans Language
             Museum and Language Monument for 2007-08, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 161-2008].


          s) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Heritage
             Resources Agency (SAHRA) for 2007-08, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 192-2008].


          t) Report and Financial Statements of the Northern Flagship
             Institution for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 [RP 164-2008].

          u) Report and Financial Statements of the Windybrow Centre for
             the Arts for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08.


          v) Report and Financial Statements of the National Library of
             South Africa for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 [RP 222-2008].


          w) Report and Financial Statements of the Luthuli Museum for 2007-
             08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-08
             [RP 181-2008].

     21) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Arts and Culture for consideration and report and to the Joint
         Monitoring Committee on Children, Youth and the Disabled. The
         Reports of the Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements and Performance Information are referred to
         the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Blind SA for 2007-08,
             including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2007-08.


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Library
             for the Blind for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08.

     22) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Service and Administration for consideration:

          a) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the Fifth
             Consolidated Public Service Monitoring and Evaluation System
             Report: Research Cycle 2007-08 – July 2008 [RP 134-2008].


          b) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the
             Evaluation of the Consistency of Sanctions Imposed for
             Misconduct in the Public Service – April 2008 [RP 135-2008].

     23) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Service and Administration for consideration and to the
         Joint Monitoring Committee on Children, Youth and the Disabled:

          a) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on an Assessment
             of Disability Equity in the Public Service – January 2008 [RP
             50-2008].


     24) The following paper is referred to the Joint Monitoring Committee
         on Children, Youth and the Disabled for consideration and report:

       a) African Youth Charter, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
          Constitution, 1996.

     25) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance for consideration and report. The Reports of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements are referred to
         the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Annual Financial Statements of the Corporation for Public
             Deposits for 2007-08, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-08.


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Accounting Standards
             Board for 2007-08, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 [RP 109-2008].

     26) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance:

          a) Government Notice No 871 published in Government Gazette No
             31336, dated 15 August 2008: Appointment of board members of
             the Co-operative Banks Development Agency in terms of section
             58 of the Co-operative Banks Act, 2007 (Act No 40 of 2007).


          b) Government Notice No 887 published in Government Gazette No
             31342, dated 22 August 2008: Designation of institution of
             which the activities do not fall within the meaning of “the
             business of a bank” (“Financial Service Co-operative”) in
             terms of the Banks Act, 1990 (Act No 94 of 1990).

          c) Government Notice No 880 published in Government Gazette No
             31342, dated 22 August 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
             1/1/1360) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
             91 of 1964).


          d) Government Notice No 881 published in Government Gazette No
             31342, dated 22 August 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No
             2/305) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
             of 1964).


          e) Government Notice No 882 published in Government Gazette No
             31342, dated 22 August 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
             3/634), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
             91 of 1964).


          f) Government Notice No 883 published in Government Gazette No
             31342, dated 22 August 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
             3/635), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
             91 of 1964).

          g) Government Notice No 884 published in Government Gazette No
             31342, dated 22 August 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No
             4/314), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
             91 of 1964).


          h) Government Notice No 885 published in Government Gazette No
             31342, dated 22 August 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
             1/1/1359), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act
             No 91 of 1964).


          i) Government Notice No 886 published in Government Gazette No
             31342, dated 22 August 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
             3/633), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
             91 of 1964).


          j) Government Notice No 895 published in Government Gazette No
             31342, dated 22 August 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
             1/1/1361), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act
             No 91 of 1964).

     27) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance for consideration and to the Portfolio Committee on
         Provincial and Local Government:

          a) Government Notice No 878 published in Government Gazette No
             31346, dated 22 August 2008: Municipal Asset Transfer
             Regulations made in terms of section 168 of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).

     28) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry for consideration and report. The Reports of the
         Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial
         Statements and Performance Information are referred to the
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Competition Tribunal
             for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
             08 [RP 183-2008].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the National Consumer
             Tribunal for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 [RP 217-2008].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Export Credit Insurance
             Corporation of South Africa Limited for 2007-08, including the
             Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
             for 2007-08.


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
             Accreditation System (Sanas) for 2007-08, including the Report
             of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for
             2007-08 [RP 199-2008].

          e) Report and Financial Statements of the National Credit
             Regulator (NCR) for 2007-08, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 [RP 140-2008].


          f) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Bureau of
             Standards for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 [RP 208-2008].


          g) Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Microfinance Apex Fund for 2007-08, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 111-2008].


          h) Report and Financial Statements of the Companies and
             Intellectual Property Registration Office for 2007-08,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 187-
             2008].


          i) Report and Financial Statements of the National Metrology
             Institute of South Africa for 2007-08, including the Report of
             the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 221-2008].


          j) Report and Financial Statements of the National Gambling Board
             for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
             08 [RP 125-2008].


          k) Report and Financial Statements of the Industrial Development
             Corporation of South Africa Limited (IDC) for 2007-08,
             including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2007-08.

          l) Report and Financial Statements of Khula Enterprise Finance
             Limited for 2007-08, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-08 [RP 210-
             2008].


          m) Report and Financial Statements of the Competition Commission
             for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
             08 [RP 107-2008].


          n) Report and Financial Statements of the National Lotteries
             Board for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General
             on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
             2007-08.


          o) Report and Financial Statements of the Support Programme for
             Industrial Innovation (SPII) for 2007-08, including the
             Reports of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
             Statements for 2007-08.


          p) Report and Financial Statements of the International Trade
             Administration Commission of South Africa for 2007-08,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 207-
             2008].


          q) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Quality
             Institute for 2007-08, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-08.

     29) The following paper is referred to the Committee on the Auditor-
         General for consideration and report. The Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information is
         referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the Auditor-
             General for 2007-08, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 [RP 235-2008].

     30) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Health for consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information are
         referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Medical
             Schemes for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 [RP 96-2008].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the National Health
             Laboratory Service (NHLS) for 2007-08, including the Report of
             the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-
             08.


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Medical
             Research Council (MRC) for 2007-08, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2007-08
             [RP 173-2008].

     31) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Social Development for consideration and report. The Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
         Information is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Social
             Security Agency for 2007-08, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 [RP 108-2008].

     32) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Service and Administration and the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance for consideration:

          a) Report of the Public Protector on a Systematic Investigation
             into the Deficiencies with the Processing of Pension Benefits
             Payable to Former Government Employees and Their Dependants
             [Report No 11 of 2008-09].

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

      (a)   Proclamation No 818 published in Government Gazette No 31292
          dated 1 August 2008: Commencement dates in terms of the Co-
          operatives Banks Act, 2007 (Act No 40 of 2007).

      (b)   Government Notice No 929 published in Government Gazette No
          31381 dated 29 August 2008: Appointment and re-appointment of
          chairpersons of the Tax Board for the hearing of income tax
          appeals, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).

      (c)   Government Notice No 930 published in Government Gazette No
          31381 dated 29 August 2008: Determination of interest rate for
          purpose of paragraph (a) of the definition of “official rate”, in
          terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).

      (d)   Government Notice No 931 published in Government Gazette No
          31381 dated 29 August 2008: Determination of a date upon which
          section 22(1)(b) of the Taxation Laws Second Amendment Act,  2008
          (Act No 4 of 2008).
      (e)   Government Notice No 929 published in Government Gazette No
          31381 dated 29 August 2008: Determination of amounts for purposes
          of the Military Pensions Act, 1976 (Act No 84 of 1976).

2.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

       a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Arts Council of
          South Africa for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
          General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
          for 2007-2008 [RP 188-2008].

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker


      (a)   Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on Strategic
          Issues Emanating from the Evaluation of Heads of Departments –
          June 2008 [RP 133-2008].

      (b)   Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on The Turn-over
          Rate of Heads of department and its Implications for the Public
          Service – June 2008 [RP 146-2008].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Education on  it’s  oversight  visit
   to the Vaal University of Technology on the 18-19 may 2008:

1.1   Background:

The Portfolio Committee on Education mandated a multi-party delegation  that
conducted an oversight visit to the Vaal University of Technology on the  19
May 2008. During the visit, the Committee interacted with top management  of
the university, unions and the various student organisations.
The procedure in which the meetings were conducted  was  that,  the  various
stakeholders were given an opportunity to express their  opinions,  and  the
delegation would  comment  and  raise  question  that  needed  clarity.  The
programme of the visit  was  drafted  in  a  manner  that  accommodated  the
different stakeholders an opportunity  to  express  their  opinions  on  the
situation that prevailed at the University then.

The programme of the visit was drafted as follows:
    ▪ Meeting with top  management;  (Presentation  by  the  Vice-Chancellor
      Prof I Moutlana)
    ▪ Meeting with the two unions, (National  Education  and  Health  Allied
      Workers Union (Nehawu) & National Union of Tertiary Educators of South
      Africa (Nutesa)
    ▪ Meeting with the various Student Leadership of the University
    ▪ Feedback to management

1.2   Delegation:

The delegation was led by the Chairperson of the Committee, Prof S  Mayatula
(ANC), accompanied by Mr B  Mthembu (ANC), Mr R Ntuli (ANC),  Mr R  van  den
Heever (ANC), Mr G Boinamo (DA), Ms C  Dudley  (ACDP),  and  Mr  I  Mfundisi
(UCDP). The members of the support staff were Mr Anele Kabingesi  (Committee
Secretary), Mr Andile Mphunga  (Committee  Researcher),  Mrs  Nocawe  Mxinwa
(Party Researcher), Mr Vuyisile  Mfuniselwa  (Committee  Assistant)  and  Ms
Khanyisa Ndyondya (Parliamentary Media).

VUT Members:

Prof I  Moutlana:  Vice-Chancellor,  Prof  G  Zide:  Deputy  Vice-Chancellor
Institutional Support, Prof A Louw: Deputy Vice-Chancellor Academic, Prof  P
Naidoo: Deputy Vice-Chancellor Resource & Planning, Mr K  Kasankola:  Senior
Director Human Resources, Mr F Tsieane:  Executive Director  Finance,  Mr  T
Mokoena: Registrar Academic Support

1.3   Terms of Reference/ Purpose of the meeting:

The purpose of  the  oversight  visit  was  to  interact  with  the  various
stakeholders of the university including top  management  on  the  following
issues: NSFAS  bursary,  student  drop-out,  transformation  plan  and,  the
situation that prevailed at the university then.  The  Committee  also  felt
very strong to be briefed on the resolutions of the violence  that  hit  the
university at the beginning of the year.

1.4   Findings:

The delegation of the Portfolio Committee on Education, having conducted  an
oversight visit  to  the  Vaal  University  of  Technology,  discovered  the
following key issues:

    ▪ There was consensus that VUT is  emerging  from  a  culture  that  was
      characterised  by  policy   void,   unyielding   power   of   students
      (particularly the Student Representative Council), ad hoc  appointment
      of staff and low productivity.
    ▪ The University did not have a  transformation  plan.  The  process  of
      crafting a transformation plan was in progress as there was  currently
      a process of stakeholder engagement to develop the terms of  reference
      for the facilitator.
    ▪ The succession plan of VUT had  not  been  implemented  in  the  past,
      leading to low staff retention. High staff turnover was also caused by
      the competition between industry and institutions of higher  learning,
      largely related to competitive salaries.
    ▪ Various student leadership formations did  not  trust  the  management
      and had a fear of being  victimised  due  to  their  participation  in
      student leadership activities.
    ▪ The provision of transport  to  students  attending  lecturers  was  a
      cause for concern to students.
    ▪  Students  complained  about  the  lack   of   transparency   in   the
      utilisation of the university’s funds
    ▪ Legitimacy of the Council was highly questionable by both  the  Unions
      and student leadership organizations.
    ▪ There was an  allegation  from  both  students  and  unions  that  the
      closure of the Klerksdorp Campus was not properly communicated to  the
      university population.

2.    Meeting at the VUT Chambers:

Prof Irene Moutlana welcomed the delegation  of  the  PC  on  Education  and
other special guest to the meeting. She acknowledged that, the visit of  the
PC on Education was highly appreciated by management and other  stakeholders
of the institution.  She handed over to the Chairperson and  leader  of  the
delegation Prof. S. Mayatula to introduce  the  delegation  and,  brief  the
meeting about the purpose of the visit.
Prof. S. Mayatula, the Chairperson and leader of the delegation  of  the  PC
on Education briefly introduced the delegation  together  with  the  support
staff.  The Chairperson briefly outlined the mandate  of  the  committee  as
conducting oversight from Grade R to the highest  institutions  of  learning
and, responsibility of considering all legislation that  affects  education.
He mentioned that, as part of its oversight function, the  committee  visits
institutions of higher learning to  obtain  a  broader  perspective  of  the
situation of the institution from its  various  stakeholders.  He  indicated
that,  the  committee  was  not  visiting  the  institution  to   make   any
judgements. However,  the  purpose  of  the  visit  was  to  be  briefed  by
management and relevant stakeholders about  key  issues  that  affected  the
institution and, given the institution’s policies, what  has  been  done  to
address those critical issues.

2.1   Presentation by Prof I Moutlana: Vice-Chancellor

Prof. Irene Moutlana, the Vice-Chancellor VUT, welcomed the  opportunity  to
present to the delegation of the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Education.   She
appreciated the Committee’s willingness to help the  VUT.  Her  presentation
focused on matters that took place in 2007 and the progress made in 2008.

The VC indicated that, in 2006 the former VC Mr  A  Mokadi’s  services  were
terminated due to allegations of mismanagement of the institution. In  2007,
Prof. I. Moutlana was appointed as the new Vice-Chancellor of  VUT.  On  her
arrival, the institution was much disorganized. There were  no  policies  in
the institution. The SRC was occupying 16 offices of  the  institution.  The
SRC members were receiving prestige awards and free meals.   The  open  door
policy was abused. There were many  ad  hoc  appointments  and  many  people
holding acting positions. The students had significant power and  overlooked
senior management for their interest. Restructuring of staff  was  happening
willy-nilly, without any order.  The  image  of  the  institution  had  been
shattered by poor academic results and low throughput.  The  partnership  of
the institution and its donors was affected negatively.  It  was  discovered
that, one student had been doing a Diplomas for over 10 years and some  more
than 6 years. External sources were thinking that, the  institution  was  to
be degraded from a university of technology to a college.

In 2008, the institution approached the Department of  Education  to  assist
it with the Institutional Operational Plan (IOP). Through this IOP a  number
of focus areas were identified. The institution submitted  a  remedial  plan
to   the   Higher   Education   Qualifications    Committee    (HEQC)    for
recommendations. A meeting with the Minister of Education was  organized  to
improve teaching outputs and issues around student accommodation.  The  risk
assessment and 2nd phase of Disaster Recovery plan had been  completed.  The
institution established  a  whistle  blowing  facility  that  was  aimed  at
reducing misconduct of  both  students  and  staff  members.  After  a  long
process of consultation with the DoE  and  the  institution’s  stakeholders,
the Klerksdorp Campus was finally phased out.  The  institution  managed  to
accommodate students from  the  Klersdorp  Campus  to  continue  with  their
studies effectively. A resolution  was  implemented  that  resulted  in  the
creation of thirty new  lecturing  posts  and  six  others  in  key  support
positions to boost the institutions productivity.

Current challenges:

    ▪ Some members of the unions are  closely  aligned  to  outside  persons
      determined to undermine the success of VUT under a new leadership
    ▪ Lack of good communication between students and management
    ▪ Poor academic results in human and management sciences
    ▪ Decreased enrolment rate due to funding caps
    ▪ Poor transport service for students
    ▪  Resistance  from  the  student  leadership  in  complying  with   new
      policies of the institution
    ▪ Unions complaining about the poor dispensation of support staff
    ▪ Students not  satisfied  with  the  function  and  legitimacy  of  the
      Council
    ▪ Logo of the institution too old
    ▪ Filling of the vacant posts

Achievements:

    ▪ Four SRC Members suspended from SRC in May for alleged fraud
    ▪ Whistle blowing facility very effective
    ▪ Development of a five-year marketing plan to attract donors
    ▪ Eradication of bad  practises  that  existed  in  students  and  staff
      members
    ▪ Unqualified audit report
    ▪ Improved graduate pass rate
    ▪ Good management of the NSFAS bursary
    ▪ Positive accreditation  received  from  South  African  Qualifications
      Authority (SAQA)
    ▪ Good working relationship with DoE

2.4   Concluding remarks:

In concluding the presentation, Prof I  Moutlana  indicated  that  with  the
appointment  of  the  new  Deputy  Vice-Chancellor,  the   institution   has
developed a five-year marketing plan and, employed experts in  marketing  in
order to attract more donors to the institution.  Management  was  proposing
to change the logo of the institution because it was  too  old  and  not  in
line with the mandate of the institution. The events that took place at  the
beginning of the year erupted as a result that  student  demanded  extension
on the registration period. However, after that incident  the  situation  of
the institution had been calm  and  academic  activities  were  normal.  The
institution  would  like  the  committee  to  assist  it  by  ensuring  that
additional resources are provided from government to bring  the  institution
on the same infrastructure and capacity  levels  as  that  of  other  higher
education institutions.

3.    Meeting with the Unions:

Prof S Mayatula welcomed the Unions to the meeting. He mentioned  that,  the
committee was in the institution as part  of  its  oversight  function  over
institutions of  higher  learning.  He  indicated  that  the  committee  had
invited the Unions in order for  them  to  express  their  opinions  on  the
situation of the institution and, later give feedback to  management.  After
this visit, the committee would compile a report with  recommendations  and,
that report  will  be  presented  to  National  Assembly.  The  Minister  of
Education would then implement the resolution taken from the report.

National Union of Tertiary Educators of South Africa (NUTESA)
Mr Martin Joubert, the Chairperson  of  Nutesa  led  the  presentation.  His
presentation highlighted the following key issues:

    ▪ The university is loosing  valuable  staff  to  industries  which  are
      offering higher salaries.
    ▪ Nutesa is  concerned  with  the  succession  plan  of  the  university
      because it favours outside people versus the internal ones.
    ▪ The Nutesa represents academic staff’s interests

NEHAWU:

Mr Stone Liphoko, the Chairperson of Nehawu,  welcomed  the  opportunity  to
present the input of Nehawu. His presentation highlighted the following  key
issues:

    ▪ Majority  employees  of  the  institution  are  employed  on  contract
      basis, and this threatens their job security.
    ▪ There was no transparency in  the  utilisation  of  the  institution’s
      finances.
    ▪ There was no policy in place for promotion of support  staff,  and  as
      a result support staff employees remained in same position for several
      years.
    ▪ Applied Science’s and Engineering department was  dominated  by  white
      academic staff and, the  institution  should  consider  employment  of
      black lecturers in that department to reflect the  demography  of  the
      province.
    ▪ There  was  racism  in  the  dispensation  of  academic  staff.  White
      lecturers received more salaries than black lecturers that are at  the
      same level.
    ▪ Alleged unfair dismissal of the former Vice-Chancellor.
    ▪ Institutional Forum (IF) should be given an opportunity  to  influence
      appointment of senior managers.

3.1   Questions and comments raised by Members:

It emerged that, there was racism in  the  dispensation  of  lecturers.  The
committee wanted to know, whether remuneration of  lecturers  was  based  on
race.

A point was raised earlier concerning the  union’s  dissatisfaction  in  the
dismissal of the former Vice-Chancellor.  The  delegation  wanted  to  know,
whether this case was not being handled by the labour court.
The committee was very concerned with the role played by both Unions in  the
institution. The committee was shocked to notice that Nehawu  was  presented
by  majority  black  representatives  while  Nutesa   was   entirely   white
representatives. The committee wanted to know whether there was  integration
of race within the Unions.

It  emerged  that  the  unions  were  dissatisfied  with  the  departure  of
qualified lecturers to industries. The committee informed the  Unions  that,
this  was  a  national  problem  that  affected   other   higher   education
institutions. The committee further elaborated that,  lecturers  were  being
attracted by good remuneration / package that is offered by industries.

It emerged from Nehawu that, workers rights  especially  the  support  staff
were not recognized. A question was asked  whether  the  unions  did  inform
management concerning this issue.

3.2   Responses from the Unions:

The Unions play a very important role in representing labour rights  in  the
institution. Nehawu represents the majority of support  staff  while  Nutesa
represents the academic staff. There is integration of race in  both  Unions
because, they consist of both races.

The institution does not have a  policy  in  place  that  looked  after  the
interest of workers. The support staff were not valued by management of  the
institution since promotion was only given to  academic  staff.  The  budget
allocated to pay salaries to the support staff should be  increased  because
currently the dispensation of support staff is unacceptable.

The unions were not properly consulted in regard to  the  dismissal  of  the
former Vice-Chancellor. The only information they  received  was  that,  the
former VC was charged with criminal offences and the  case  was  before  the
labour court.

4.    Meeting with Student Leadership:

Prof S Mayatula welcomed the students to the meeting. He briefly  introduced
the mandate of the committee as passing all legislation affecting  education
and oversight responsibility over institutions of higher learning  and  even
schools. He further indicated that the Committee invited student  leadership
to express its opinion on the critical issues that affects the  institution.
He indicated that management was to be informed  of  the  issues  raised  by
students.

a)    Presentation by the Young Communist League (YCL):

Mr T Mbengeni, the Secretary  of  the  YCL  highlighted  the  following  key
issues:

    ▪ The YCL declares a motion  of  no  confidence  in  management  of  the
      institution
    ▪ Poor service delivery in the residential areas and cafeteria.
    ▪  The  closure  of  Klerksdorp   Campus   was   done   without   proper
      consultation.
    ▪ Poor transport service affects the mobility of students.
    ▪ Lack of transparency in the utilisation of the institution’s funds.
    ▪ Victimization of student leadership should stop immediately.
    ▪ Departure  of  lectures  is  affecting  the  academic  performance  of
      students

b)    Presentation by the South African Students Congress (SASCO):
Mr Sedimo Thabani, the Secretary of  SASCO  highlighted  the  following  key
issues:

    ▪ The output of the institution is poor.
    ▪ Utilisation of the international levy is not clear.
    ▪ There is a problem with the quality of the institution’s lecturers.
    ▪ Students should be subsidized to buy bus tickets.
    ▪ Returning of  funds  to  NSFAS  while  there  are  students  that  are
      struggling should stop.
    ▪  Security  guards  of  the  Campus  should  stop  threatening  student
      leaders.

c)    Presentation by Black Management Forum - Student Chapter:

Mr. Tsepo Marumule highlighted the following issues:

    ▪ Lack of transformation.
    ▪ Suppression of student leadership.
    ▪  Problem  with  the  Council  of  the  institution,   especially   the
      Chairperson.

d)    Presentation by the Student’s Representative Council (SRC):

Mr Donald Manganye, the President  of  SRC  highlighted  the  following  key
issues:

    ▪ The University Council is not looking after students interests.
    ▪ Legitimacy of the University Council is highly questionable.
    ▪ No intervention from the Department of Education to  observe  problems
      in the institution.
    ▪ The institution does not have a system to check academic fraud.
    ▪ The SRC demands that, the institution  should  be  an  environment  in
      which excellence is achieved.

Mr. David Tsotetsi, Member of the SRC:

    ▪ Students were not  happy  with  the  appointment  of  both  the  Vice-
      Chancellor and the Deputy Vice-Chancellor.
    ▪ Though one  of  the  DVC  is  being  investigated,  he  has  not  been
      suspended.
    ▪ The victimisation of students is rife.


e)    Presentation by the Student Christian Organization (SCO):

Mr Progress Sandlane, the Secretary of SCO  highlighted  the  following  key
issues:
    ▪ The NSFAS office in Sebokeng Campus cannot  accommodate  all  students
      but funds are returned.
    ▪ The students have a problem of having to  pay  for  transport  to  the
      main campus.
    ▪ Student’s leadership is not given freedom to express  its  opinion  to
      the Council.
    ▪ There is misuse of power by senior management of  the  institution  to
      oppress student’s leadership.
    ▪  A  member  of  the   institution’s   senior   management   is   under
      investigation for fraud.

4.1   Questions and comments raised by Members:

It was observed that, the students were questioning the legitimacy and  role
played by the Council in the institution. The committee wanted more  clarity
on this issue.
Members asked, whether there was evidence regarding allegations towards  the
institution with allegation of fraud.

It was evident that, students were very afraid to raise  their  opinions  to
management because of the fear of being  punished.  A  question  was  asked,
whether management was victimizing students leaders.

It  emerged  from  all  student  leaders  that,  the  manner  in  which  the
institution  was  utilising  its  finances  was  highly  questionable.   The
committee wanted more clarity on this issue.

4.2   Responses:

The SRC offices were indeed 16 and the SRC representatives liaised with  the
Council in requesting these offices and the Council  approved  the  request.
The money that is paid to SRC leader goes to their fees and, it is  not  for
personal gain or interest.

International students paid a levy of R1800 per  annum  and,  there  was  no
transparency to what was being done with that money. The conditions  in  the
residential areas and cafeteria are not good. However, institution  receives
funds from the Department of Education and, there is no transparency in  the
utilisation of the institution’s finances.

The management of the institution was victimizing the  political  structures
of the institution. Political leaders were threatened for  expressing  their
views to management and, some of them were being told that, they will  never
finish their Degree’s or Diplomas.

The strike that took place at the beginning  of  the  year  occurred  for  a
valid reason. Students were striking to be registered as some of  them  were
in a waiting list  for  a  very  long  time.  There  was  no  intention  for
requesting bashes as claimed by the Vice-Chancellor.

The selection procedure of members of the Council  was  not  constitutional.
The Council had a very close working relationship  with  the  Department  of
Education which is questionable. The Council was not looking after  students
interests as their voices are not being recognized by it.

The memorandum that was written to the  Minister  of  Education  by  student
leadership of the institution never got a response. The department  did  not
respond to the request of the students in appealing against the  closure  of
the Klerksdorp Campus. Students were never consulted about  the  closure  of
this Campus and, they feel that, they are being excluded in  the  activities
of the institution.
Students demanded that, there should be  honesty  and  transparency  in  the
utilisation of the institutional funds.

5.    Feedback to management:

The committee, having conducted meetings with both the  unions  and  student
leadership reported the following observations to management:

    ▪ It emerged from all bodies  of  student  leadership  that,  management
      had a very close working relationship  that  was  highly  questionable
      with the Department of Education.


    ▪ It was observe that, both the unions and student leadership  were  not
      properly consulted with the  closing  of  the  Klerksdorp  Campus.  In
      addition to that, the committee discovered that,  management  was  not
      attentive to opinions from student leadership.


    ▪  Members  questioned  management  on  its  negative  attitude  towards
      student leadership. It further elaborated that, student  leaders  were
      very afraid of management. The  committee  emphasized  that,  if  this
      statement was indeed valid, then management was  very  unfair  towards
      students.


    ▪ It emerged from both unions that high staff  turn-over  was  affecting
      the productivity of the institution. The  committee  wanted  to  know,
      whether the institution had mechanisms in place to address that issue.

    ▪ The unions outlined that, the Institutional Forum (IF) was  not  given
      a say in the appointment of academic staff. In addition to  that,  the
      Unions complained  that,  there  was  no  policy  that  supported  non
      academic’s interests.

    ▪  It  emerged  that  racism  in  some  of  the  department’s   of   the
      institution  existed.  The  unions  indicated  that,  some   faculties
      especially the Science and Engineering  consisted  of  entirely  white
      lecturers. In addition, racism in the dispensations of  lecturers  was
      also highlighted.

    ▪ Based on the memorandum dated 14 April on from Prof.  G.N.  Zide,  the
      DVC,  Institutional  Support,   entitled,   “Discussion   Document   –
      Transformation and Change Management” the Committee observed that  the
      institution was still at the planning stage for transformation.

5.1   Responses:
Students of this institution had a free access to the office of  the  former
Vice-Chancellor. Since the arrival of  the  new  Vice-Chancellor,  that  was
completely stopped and students  had  to  follow  a  proper  procedure  when
requesting for  a  meeting  with  management.  Management  did  not  exclude
student leadership in its meetings. However, the problem with  the  students
was that, they demanded meetings  whenever  they  wanted  without  following
procedures.

The appointment of Council members was legitimate  and  constitutional.  The
statues were followed  properly  in  the  appointment  of  the  all  Council
members. The students were complaining because most of the times they  would
not be present in the sub-council meetings.

Students were never victimized by management of this  institution.  However,
the problem with the students was that, they did  not  follow  the  statutes
and constitutionality with regards to their presentation to the  sub-council
meetings where major decisions are made.

The funeral levy was established to  support  the  family  of  the  deceased
student with funds at the time of  despair.  However,  the  students  wished
that, the money of the funeral policy that remains at the  end  of  be  used
for something else.

The institution was aware of the transport problem experienced  by  students
and, a transport committee was established to address this  issue.  However,
some students did not bother to buy a bus  ticket  and,  this  had  negative
impact on the service provider.

6.    Conclusion:

Prof S Mayatula expressed his gratitude to the management  of  the  VUT  for
the meeting. He indicated that, the meetings with  various  stakeholders  of
the  institution  gave  the  committee  an  in-depth  understanding  of  the
situation of the institution. He mentioned that, the committee was going  to
make recommendations and, present those recommendations  to  Parliament  for
the executive to implement.

7.    Recommendations:

The committee recommends that  the  University  give  consideration  to  the
following:

    ▪ The management of the VUT needs to restore,  inculcate  and  reinforce
      a sound culture of leadership to rebuild the image of the institution.
    ▪ The  university  needs  to  intensify  the  process  of  developing  a
      transformation plan, in line with the relevant legislation  on  higher
      education.
    ▪ The retention fund should be utilised effectively to prevent the
      exodus of skilled staff. The University should learn from best
      practice approaches implemented by other institutions of higher
      learning.
    ▪ Management needs to develop mechanisms to encourage open
      communication and cordial relationship with student leaders.
    ▪  The  study  that  is  said  to  be  investigating  the  provision  of
      transport for students across campuses  needs  to  be  prioritised  to
      allow for an efficient and cost-effective provision of  transport  fro
      students.
    ▪ The institution should prioritise academic  productivity  as  its  key
      function to attract prospective students to the institution.


   Report to be considered
                           MONDAY, 20 OCTOBER 2008

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

      (a)   Draft amendment regulations made in terms of Public Funding of
          Represented Political Parties Act, 1997 (Act No. 103 of 1997), and
          submitted to Parliament in terms of section 10 of the Act.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and  Constitutional
      Development on the National Prosecuting Authority Amendment Bill  [B23
      – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 20 October 2008:

      The Portfolio Committee on  Justice  and  Constitutional  Development,
      having considered the National Prosecuting  Authority  Amendment  Bill
      [B23 –  2008]  (National  Assembly  –  sec  75)  referred  to  it  and
      classified by the Joint  Tagging  Mechanism  as  a  section  75  Bill,
      reports the Bill with amendments [B23A – 2008].


      The Committee further reports as follows:


      Introduction

      1.1   The National Prosecuting  Authority  (NPA)  Amendment  Bill  was
           referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice &  Constitutional
           Development, which was required to  confer  with  the  Portfolio
           Committee on  Safety  &  Security.   The  South  African  Police
           Service  Amendment  Bill  [B30  –  2008]  was  referred  to  the
           Portfolio Committee on Safety & Security, which was required  to
           confer with the Portfolio Committee on Justice &  Constitutional
           Development.   As  the  two  Bills  are  interrelated,  the  two
           Committees worked together on both Bills.

      1.2   To make fuller sense of this report, it should be read with  the
           report on the South African Police Service Amendment Bill [B30 –
           2008].




      2.    Public Participation

      2.1   Although the South African Police Service (SAPS) Amendment  Bill
           and the NPA Amendment Bill are section 75 Bills,  the  Committee
           decided that, in view of the importance of and  public  interest
           in the Bills, we should organise extensive public hearings,  not
           just in the National Assembly, but the provinces as well, in co-
           operation with the  NCOP  Security  and  Constitutional  Affairs
           Select Committee. The hearings were not just on the  Bills,  but
           on the proposed new integrated criminal justice system (CJS)  as
           well.

      2.2   However, very few people commented on the proposed new CJS.  The
           Committee proposes to undertake further public hearings  on  the
           new CJS and report back to the public on progress regarding what
           has come to be known as the “Scorpions Bills”before the  end  of
           the year.




      3.    Visit to the DSO and SAPS

      3.1   The Committee also visited the Directorate of Special Operations
           (DSO) and the SAPS organised crime-fighting units to  report  on
           progress on the Bills, hear their views, and encourage  them  to
           co-operate in implementing the Bills and  ensure  that  the  new
           organised crime fighting unit to  be  located  within  the  SAPS
           works effectively. The Committee appreciates the concerns of the
           DSO staff about moving into the new unit.  The  Committee  feels
           that the DSO staff should not prejudge the new unit but give  it
           a chance to develop. We suggested to the staff who do  not  wish
           to move to consider going into the unit for a year or so  before
           making a final decision.




      4.    Processing the Bill

        1. The Parliamentary Research Unit and  Committee  Content  Advisor
           presented a comprehensive report on  every  submission  received
           and the Committees went through the report fully.


      4.2   The Committee drew in two representatives each of NPA and  SAPS,
           and two technical advisors from civil society  organisations  to
           assist  in  the  processing  of  the  Bills.  We   express   our
           appreciation for their participation.

        3. As the NPA Amendment Bill emanates from, and is  closely  linked
           to, the provisions of the South African  Police  Services  Bill,
           the Committee identified the broad principles or characteristics
           of an effective crime-fighting unit which would impact  on  both
           Bills.  The principles and the 5 different models are set out in
           an earlier report and are also summarised in the report  on  the
           South African Police Services Amendment Bill.

      5.    Investigating Directorates

      5.1    The  Bill  provides  for  the  deletion  of  section  7   which
           established an Investigating Directorate, known as the  DSO.   A
           decision was taken to delete all provisions relating to the  DSO
           and to effect all consequential amendments.

      5.2   The newly substituted section 7 simply reverts to  the  previous
           position, i.e. as it was prior to the establishment of the  DSO.
           The section  provides  that  the  President  may  establish  two
           Investigating  Directorates  in  the  office  of  the   National
           Director, by way of proclamation.

      5.3   The Committee is of the view that the Department  of  Justice  &
           Constitutional Development should seriously investigate  whether
           there  is  any  need  to  allow  for  these  two   Investigating
           Directorates, and the  Department  should  report  back  to  the
           Portfolio Committee  on  Justice  &  Constitutional  Development
           within 6 months  from  the  commencement  of  the  new  term  of
           Parliament in 2009.




      6.    Transitional Provisions

      6.1   The transitional provisions provide that as from the fixed  date
           Special Investigators are transferred to  the  SAPS  and  become
           members of the SAPS.  Other administrative and support personnel
           of the DSO may be  transferred  to  the  SAPS,  as  agreed  upon
           between the National Directorate and the National Commissioner.

      6.2   Employees may  only  be  transferred  to  the  SAPS  with  their
           consent.  Those who do not want to be transferred may be offered
           a transfer to a reasonable alternative post or position  in  any
           government department, in the NPA (but in a post other than that
           of special investigator), or be offered a severance package.

      6.3   Those employees who are transferred to SAPS will remain entitled
           to all rights and benefits and continuity of their employment.

      6.4   Pending investigations must be transferred to and  continued  by
           the new unit, in accordance with a mechanism determined  by  the
           Minister of Justice & Constitutional Development and Minister of
           Safety & Security.

      6.5   The Committee will ensure that it exercises effective  oversight
           over the  implementation  of  the  transitional  provisions  and
           monitors the progress made in this regard.




      Report to be considered.




CREDA INSERT REPORT - T081020e-insert2 – PAGES 1926-1936

                          TUESDAY, 21 OCTOBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bill submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (a)    Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill, 2008, submitted by the
         Minister of Finance. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and the Select Committee on Finance.


2.    Introduction of Bills


      1) The Minister of Finance


          a) Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 76 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 77)


          b) Eskom Subordinated Loan Special Appropriation Bill [B 77 –
             2008] (National Assembly – proposed sec 77)


          c) Finance Bill [B 78 – 2008] (National Assembly – proposed sec
             77)


          d) Government Employees Pension Fund (Condonation of Interrupted
             Service) Bill [B 79 – 2008] (National Assembly – proposed sec
             77)

          e) Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 80 – 2008] (National Assembly –
             proposed sec 77)

          f) Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 81 – 2008] (National
             Assembly –  proposed sec 75)  [Explanatory summary of Bill and
             prior notice of its introduction published in Government
             Gazette No 31511 of
            13 October 2008.]


              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
              Finance of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
              Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
              Joint Rule 160.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the
              classification of the Bills may be submitted to the Joint
              Tagging Mechanism (JTM) within three parliamentary working
              days.


3.    Bill passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly on 21 October 2008:


          a) Competition Amendment Bill [B 31D – 2008] (National Assembly –
             sec 75).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

     a) Medium Term Budget Policy Statement 2008 [RP 267-2008].


        Referred to the Joint Budget Committee and the Portfolio Committee
        on Finance for consideration and report, in accordance with their
        respective mandates.


     b) Adjustments Appropriation Bill, 2008 [B76-2008].


        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance for consideration
        and report.


     c) Eskom Subordinated Loan Special Appropriation Bill, 2008 (2008/09-
        2010/11 Financial Years) [B77-2008].


     d) Finance Bill, 2008 [B78-2008].


     e) Government Employees Pension Fund (Condonation of Interrupted
        Service) Bill, 2008 [B79-2008].


     f) Revenue Laws Amendment Bill, 2008 [B80-2008].


     g) Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill, 2008 [B81-2008].


     h) Adjusted Estimates of National Expenditure 2008 [RP 266-2008],
        which includes:

              1. Memorandum on Vote No 1 - "The Presidency", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2008-2009;
              2. Memorandum on Vote No 2 - "Parliament", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2008-2009;


              3. Memorandum on Vote No 3 - "Foreign Affairs", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2008-2009;


              4. Memorandum on Vote No 4 - "Home Affairs", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2008-2009;


              5. Memorandum on Vote No 5 - "Public Works", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2008-2009;


              6. Memorandum on Vote No 6 - " Government Communications and
                 Information System", Adjustments Estimates, 2008-2009;


              7. Memorandum on Vote No 7 - "National Treasury", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2008-2009;


              8. Memorandum on Vote No 8 - "Public Service and
                 Administration", Adjustments Estimates, 2008-2009;


              9. Memorandum on Vote No 9 - "Public Service Commission",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2008-2009;


             10. Memorandum on Vote No 10 - "Public Administration
                 Leadership and Management Academy", Adjustments Estimates,
                 2008-2009;
             11. Memorandum on Vote No 11 - "Statistics South Africa",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2008-2009;


             12. Memorandum on Vote No 12 - "Arts and Culture", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2008-2009;


             13. Memorandum on Vote No 13 - "Education", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2008-2009;


             14. Memorandum on Vote No 14 - "Health", Adjustments Estimates,
                 2008-2009;


             15. Memorandum on Vote No 15 - "Labour", Adjustments Estimates,
                 2008-2009;


             16. Memorandum on Vote No 16 - "Social Development",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2008-2009;


             17. Memorandum on Vote No 17 - "Sport and Recreation South
                 Africa", Adjustments Estimates, 2008-2009;


             18. Memorandum on Vote No 18 - " Correctional Services",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2008-2009;


             19. Memorandum on Vote No 19 - "Defence", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2008-2009;


             20. Memorandum on Vote No 20 - " Independent Complaints
                 Directorate", Adjustments Estimates, 2008-2009;


             21. Memorandum on Vote No 21 - " Justice and Constitutional
                 Development", Adjustments Estimates, 2008-2009;


             22. Memorandum on Vote No 22 - "Safety and Security”,
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2008-2009;


             23. Memorandum on Vote No 23 - "Agriculture", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2008-2009;


             24. Memorandum on Vote No 24 - "Communications", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2008-2009;


             25. Memorandum on Vote No 25 - " Environmental Affairs and
                 Tourism", Adjustments Estimates, 2008-2009;


             26. Memorandum on Vote No 26 - "Housing", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2008-2009;


             27. Memorandum on Vote No 27 - "Land Affairs", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2008-2009;


             28. Memorandum on Vote No 28 - "Minerals and Energy",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2008-2009;
             29. Memorandum on Vote No 29 - "Provincial and Local
                 Government", Adjustments Estimates, 2008-2009;


             30. Memorandum on Vote No 30 - "Public Enterprises",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2008-2009;
             31. Memorandum on Vote No 31 - "Science and Technology",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2008-2009;


             32. Memorandum on Vote No 32 - "Trade and Industry",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2008-2009;


             33. Memorandum on Vote No 33 - "Transport", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2008-2009;


             34. Memorandum on Vote No 34 - "Water Affairs and Forestry",
                 Adjustments Estimates, 2008-2009;

          Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance for consideration
          and report.

       i) Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services Board on
          the Registrar of Collective Investment Schemes for the year ended
          31 December 2007 [RP 145-2008].
       j) Government Notice No R.952 published in Government Gazette No
          31395 dated 5 September 2008: Amendment of the Regulations made
          under section 72 of the Long-Term Insurance Act, 1998 (Act No 52
          of 1998).

       k) Proclamation No 37 published in Government Gazette No 31410 dated
          5 September 2008: Coming into operation of sections 12(1) and
          33(1) in terms of the Revenue Laws Second Amendment Act, 2006 (Act
          No 21 of 2006): Coming into operation of section 11(1) of the
          Taxation Laws Second Amendment Act, 2007 (Act No 9 of 2007).

       l) Government Notice No 1000 published in Government Gazette No 31417
          dated 19 September 2008: Listing and delisting of public entities
          for Schedule 3 Part A, in terms of sections 47 and 48 of the
          Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).

       m) Government Notice No 1002 published in Government Gazette No 31417
          dated 19 September 2008: Listing and delisting of public entities
          for Schedule 3 Part D, in terms of sections 47 and 48 of the
          Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).

       n) Government Notice No 1003 published in Government Gazette No 31417
          dated 19 September 2008: Listing and delisting of public entities:
          Amend Schedule 3 Part A, in terms of sections 47 and 48 of the
          Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

      Legal Aid Guide for 2008: 11th Edition in terms of section 3A of the
          Legal Aid Amendment Act, 1996 (Act No 20 of 1996).

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

      a) Letter dated 4 March 2008 from the Office of the Auditor-General
         to provide reasons for the delay in completing the audit of the
         financial statements of the Kannaland Municipality, tabled in
         terms of section 126(4) of the Local Government: Municipal Finance
         Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


        Referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration and
        to the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government.


      b) Letter from the Minister of Finance, dated 2 October 2008, to the
         Speaker of the National Assembly explaining the delay in the
         tabling of the Annual Financial Statements of the Reconstruction
         and Development Programme (RDP) fund for 2007-2008.

        ANNUAL FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF THE RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
        PROGRAMME ((RDP)


        I wish to inform you that the Annual Financial Statements (AFS) of
        the Reconstruction and Development Programme (RDP) fund for the
        financial year ending 31 March 2008 will be tabled with the 2007/08
        financial year Consolidated Financial Statements on 31 October
        2008.


        Since its inception, the RDP Fund has always tabled its AFS at the
        end of September each year. It has, however, always been qualified
        as follows: - “In terms of section 5 of the RDP Act, money
        transferred from the RDP Fund and not spent by the end of each
        financial year, in the absence of any provision to the contrary in
        a technical assistance agreement, is required to be paid into the
        RDP Fund. As the Fund had not implemented sufficient systems for
        the follow-up of such monies, I was unable to determine the
        completeness of the unspent money refunded to the RDP Fund”
        Please note that this is a technical qualification since the
        information needed to address this matter is only available once
        all the departments’ audits have been concluded by the Auditor-
        General (AG). In order to obviate this, the audit of the RDP fund
        has had to lag behind that of the departments to allow for the
        conclusion of the audits. This invariably results in the necessity
        of tabling the RDP fund at the end of October, during the same
        period in which the consolidated information is tabled.


        I trust that you will find this to be in order.


        Kind regards




        signed
        TREVOR A MANUEL, MP
        MINISTER OF FINANCE
     c) Letter from the Minister of Social Development, dated 3 October
        2008, to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section
        65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of
        1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual Report of
        the Central Drug Authority for 2006-2007.


        TABLING OF THE CENTRAL DRUG AUTHORITY 2006/07 ANNUAL REPORT IN
        PARLIAMENT


        In terms of section 2(11) (a) (b) of the Prevention and Treatment
        of Drug Dependency Amendment Act (Act 20 of 1992) and Section, 65
        (1)(a) of the PFMA, I am required to table the Central Drug
        Authority Annual Report in the National Assembly. Subsection (2)(a)
        further requires me to table a written explanation to Parliament on
        the circumstances that prevented me from tabling such a report
        within six months from the end of the financial year.


        In this regard I would like to report that the Department of Social
        Development was unable to table the said report, in June 2007, due
        to the following reasons:


        1. There was a delay in the finalization of the 2006/07 CDA Annual
            Report due to late receipt of reports from various departments.
            As a result, this report was only approved by the CDA Executive
            in September 2007 and adopted by its General Meeting in
            November 2007.
         1. The delay was exacerbated by two service providers who were
            appointed on the basis of cost effectiveness, including the
            Government Printers, who failed to complete the task. The
            printing was finally assigned to Shick Designs who were only
            able to complete the printing in the middle of August 2008.


        In view of the fact that the CDA is reliant on various
        stakeholders, such as government departments, provincial substance
        abuse forums, etc, to submit reports that must be collated into the
        annual report by the CDA, the Prevention and Treatment for
        Substance Abuse Bill, proposes that the CDA Annual Report be tabled
        in September each year. This will be more realistic time to ensure
        compliance by the CDA.


        The Department and the CDA would like to appeal to the Speaker to
        accept the CDA Annual Report for 2006/07 for tabling, please.


        Kind regards


        signed
        DR Z S T SKWEYIYA, MP
        MINISTER

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

CREDA INSERT REPORTS - T081021e-insert1 – PAGES 1948-1957.


