---
title: 'National Assembly - 20 May 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2008-05-20
---

TUESDAY, 20 MAY 2008
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

                                 NEW MEMBERS

                               (Announcement)

The Speaker announced that the vacancies which occurred in the National
Assembly owing to the passing away of Ms Z N Nawa and the resignation from
the National Assembly of Prof A K Asmal, had been filled with effect from 6
May 2008 by the nomination of Mr K P Motlanthe and Ms N C Mfeketho,
respectively.

                         SOLEMN AFFIRMATION AND OATH

Mr K P Motlanthe and Ms N C Mfeketho, accompanied by Mrs L Maloney and Mr S
K Louw, made and subscribed the solemn affirmation and oath, respectively,
and took their seats.
         ACKNOWLEDGEMENT AND WELCOMING OF DEPUTY SPEAKER OF ETHIOPIA

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I would like to take this opportunity to
acknowledge the presence in the gallery of the Deputy Speaker of the House
of Peoples’ Representatives of Ethiopia, Ms Shitaye Minale, and her
delegation. [Applause.] Welcome.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Mr E W TRENT: Madam Speaker, on the next sitting day of the House, I shall
move:

  That the House –

   (1)      debates the failure of government departments to take action
        against officials guilty of financial misconduct; and


   (2)      considers possible actionable steps that can be taken against
        offending departments in the future.

[Applause.]

    OSCAR PISTORIUS CONGRATULATED ON WINNING APPEAL TO COMPETE IN BEIJING
                                  OLYMPICS

                             (Draft Resolution)
The CHIEF WHIP OF MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

  That the House –


     1) notes that on Friday, 16 May 2008, double amputee sprinter Oscar
        Pistorius won his appeal to compete in the Beijing Olympics that
        will take place from 8 to 24 August this year;


     2) further notes that the Court of Arbitration for Sport ruled that the
        21 year old South African is eligible to race against able-bodied
        athletes;


     3) believes that the ruling of the Court is a step forward for sport
        for people living with disability, not only in South Africa but
        globally and that it takes disabled sport closer to the world of
        able-bodied sport, a world that has been closed off to people living
        with disability; and


     4) congratulates Oscar Pistorius on winning the right to compete with
        able-bodied athletes in the Beijing Olympics.

[Applause.]

Agreed to.

   CONGRATULATIONS TO PRIMARY SCHOOL IN BONTEHEUWEL ON BECOMING drug-free

Mr M J ELLIS (DA): Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

  That the House –


  (1) notes that the Rosewood Primary in Bonteheuwel, classified as one of
        the province’s 109 high-risk schools, is no longer an attractive
        target for vandals or gangs and is also drug-free;


  (2) further notes that this school has been turned into a hub of the
        community where church services are held each evening;


  (3) recognises the vital roles principal Roderick Williams has played in
        making the school secure, despite no funds being available to make
        large security changes;


  (4) acknowledges the difference that dedicated and passionate principals
        can make by involving educators and the surrounding communities at
        schools experiencing challenges; and


  (5) therefore congratulates principal Williams, the educators and learners
        at the Rosewood Primary School and the surrounding community on
        making the primary school a safe place of learning

Thank you. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Are there any objections?

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, this is not an
objection against the content, but I think it was conveyed to the DA that
whilst we associate ourselves with the sentiments expressed in that motion,
we would regard it as more appropriate as a member’s statement. I’m
informed that that was conveyed to the DA.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, it certainly was not conveyed either to the
Chief Whip of the DA or to me as the Deputy Chief Whip. I will check up on
that.

The SPEAKER: Please do. I think you must sort it out. I don’t think this is
a major issue that need occupy us for long.

Mr M J ELLIS: Thank you.

                     VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND CHILDREN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N P KHUNOU (ANC): Madam Speaker, on 5 May 2008, René Burger, a 20-year-
old medical student, was abducted at Tygerberg Hospital campus and later
raped by her kidnappers. For some time it was speculated that the victim
was the sister of one of our much-celebrated rugby heroes. Indeed, it was
so.

However, René Burger would not allow speculation to assume a life of its
own. To this end, she bravely and audaciously broke the silence about her
ordeal. It turned out that she too had become one of the latest targets of
sexual violence.

Instead of licking her wounds and withdrawing into a cocoon of victimhood,
she defied the wish and will of her tormentors. She identified herself
positively and bore the indomitable spirit of a South African who will not
be cowed into submission by any act of violence by criminals, nor be
intimidated by those who think their deeds of darkness rule the world. Your
words of courage and bravery soothed all the wounded hearts of those who
are on the receiving end of sexual violence. You said that you stop being a
victim when you choose not to allow something like this to destroy your
dignity and self-worth, your trust in others, hope for the future and
commitment to the country you love.

You spoke out against those who have perpetrated gender violence against
women and girl-children in the whole country. We urge government to do all
it can to drastically reduce the incidents of contact crime by providing
proper resources and training to the police.

We also call on all communities to assist the police in bringing to book
all those who are guilty of these crimes so that we can truly launch our
nation on a path towards the creation of the national democratic society we
yearn for, that is based on respect for human life ... [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

                        ATTACKS ON FOREIGN NATIONALS

                            (Member’s Statement)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, the DA is deeply concerned
about the vast humanitarian crisis that is developing across Gauteng as a
result of violent attacks on foreign nationals. Thus far 22 people have
been killed while hundreds more have been injured and thousands displaced.
We extend our deepest sympathies to those who are affected by this tragedy.
In order to prevent the situation from deteriorating any further, it is
clear that the time has come to pursue a targeted intervention comprising
strategies both to contain the violence itself and to relieve the suffering
of those who are displaced by the attacks.
The current ad hoc approach to deal with displaced foreign nationals in
Gauteng is clearly not working. Hundreds of people are gathering at police
stations or other public facilities that are simply not equipped to cope
with even their most basic needs. What is therefore required is the
establishment of refugee camps in the worst affected areas so that people
can be given access to food, shelter and medical care where required. This
would also enable aid agencies to render assistance to migrants in a
relatively safe and regulated environment, and help us to cope with the
strain placed on our already stretched resources.

The Minister of Home Affairs also needs to fully acknowledge both the
causes and the extent of the crisis. Government’s attempts to formulate an
adequate response and workable solutions to this stalemate hinge upon a
full acknowledgement by the Minister that this is indeed an emergency
rather than the workings of a so-called third force or a ragtag of
unspecified criminal elements. I thank you. [Applause.]

                        ATTACKS ON FOREIGN NATIONALS

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr V B NDLOVU (IFP): Madam Speaker, following the high-level discussions
between the ANC and the IFP in Gauteng yesterday, both parties agreed that
the xenophobic violence that is currently sweeping through the province is
probably driven by criminal elements and not just xenophobia. We want to
make it clear that the leadership of both parties at the meeting called on
our supporters to desist from engaging in any acts of violence.

We have warned our members that should they be found to be involved in any
violation of human rights or any perpetration of xenophobia or violence
against foreigners, the IFP will take stringent disciplinary steps against
them. We also call for the full might of the law to take its course without
fear or favour. At the meeting we also urged the leadership of both
parties, down to the lowest branch, to address their supporters as a matter
of urgency so that we can use both parties to play a leading role in
stopping these senseless killings and violence.

Furthermore, the IFP would like to urge the NGOs and local government to
assist those who have been affected by the violence by providing
humanitarian assistance to the displaced. We call on the SAPS, from its top
leadership down to the level of constable, to do everything in its power to
protect the lives of these innocent victims. We also urge the police to use
intelligence to get to the root cause of the problem. We must stop the
violence, and the perpetrators must be brought to book as soon as possible.
I thank you. [Applause.]

                       ZILLE’S ATTACK ON JUDGE ERASMUS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr R P Z VAN DEN HEEVER (ANC): Madam Speaker, the barrage of personal
attacks by Mrs Helen Zille on the integrity of Judge Nathan Erasmus is not
only unworthy of a mayor and leader of the DA, but constitutes a direct
assault on the integrity of the judiciary and strengthens the suspicion
that the Mayor and the DA leader may indeed have something to hide.

The Erasmus Commission was established to inquire into allegations that
procurement regulations may have been transgressed. This is based on a
transcript which indicates that the Speaker of the City of Cape Town may
have condoned illegal surveillance and intelligence activities, and
possible contact by the Mayor and the DA leader herself with the alleged
operatives of George Fivaz and Associates. Such operations may have been
used in the George Municipality as well as internally in the DA.

We therefore call on the DA and the City Mayor Helen Zille to let the
Erasmus Commission continue its work unhindered and to present proof of
their innocence to the Commission, if indeed they have nothing to hide.

Mayor Helen Zille seems to confuse her roles as Mayor of Cape Town and as
the leader of the DA. She should desist from her unsavoury attacks on Judge
Nathan Erasmus and rather use the Erasmus Commission as a platform to
establish the truth. I thank you. [Applause.]

                    PREMATURE BIRTHS CAUSED BY DRUG ABUSE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs C DUDLEY (ACDP): Madam Speaker, the ACDP calls on the Minister of
Health to urgently initiate relevant research into tik and its effect on
mothers and their babies.

A neonatalist at Tygerberg Hospital, Johan Smit, has said staff at the
neonatal unit have seen a year-on-year rise for the past six years in
premature births which could be related to the increased number of pregnant
women using tik.

Babies exposed to tik have a higher risk of brain haemorrhage and,
depending on the severity, it will impact on the long-term development of
the child. A 2006 study at Tygerberg Hospital showed that out of 100
pregnant mothers surveyed, 10 admitted to using tik. Smith said tik also
affects the development of a baby’s gut and doctors had difficulty feeding
premature babies via tubes to the stomach. Babies of tik-addicted mothers
tend to be smaller and lighter than similar premature babies.

Lucy Linley, head of the neonatal unit at the Mowbray Maternity Hospital,
has referred to a massive problem of denial among pregnant women admitted
to the hospital who displayed clear signs of abusing tik. Linley said there
had been no decent study into the effects of tik abuse on newborn babies,
although there was a general consensus on its harmful impact.

The ACDP believes that the Medical Research Council is best equipped to
conduct the necessary research into tik and its effect on both mother and
child. According to Linley, there has been no decent study into these
effects on newborn babies.

Bronwyn Myers, a senior MRC researcher, has also acknowledged the definite
increase in the number of young pregnant women using tik, and has said
there was also a strong correlation between drug abuse on the Cape Flats
and increased risky sexual behaviour. People are less likely to use
condoms, more likely to have multiple sex partners and less likely to
negotiate condom usage with their partners. Greg Gonsalves of the Aids and
Rights Alliance for Southern Africa said tik, like most recreational drugs,
increased risky behaviour amongst users, exacerbating HIV infection rates.
Thank you. [Applause.]

                            ATTACKS ON FOREIGNERS

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr I E JENNER (ID): Madam Speaker, yesterday morning South Africans awoke
to a very gruesome and ugly picture on the front pages of our newspapers,
of a man being burnt to death.

We must ask ourselves how it is that we have reduced our people to a level
where they can set another human being on fire. The current wave of
xenophobic attacks must make us take stock of the type of society that we
are building for our children.

We need to ask ourselves some very serious questions about why some of us
are not able to recognise the worth of another human being. What has
happened to our society and the humanity that inspired our struggle against
apartheid? We agree with the view expressed by the SA Human Rights
Commission that the attacks are partly as a result of competition for
scarce resources including houses, jobs and services.

The grinding poverty and accompanying frustration of our people has
contributed to elements amongst us behaving in a most despicable manner.
There are now thousands of people without food, clothing, blankets or
shelter. Many of them are children, and they urgently need our help and
support. Most of these children and women are now camping out at several
police stations in Gauteng.

The ID calls on government, as a matter of urgency, to provide emergency
humanitarian relief to all those women and children affected by this
crisis. I thank you.

                    DECLINE IN UNEMPLOYMENT IN MPUMALANGA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A J NYAMBI (ANC): Madam Speaker, last week the province of Mpumalanga
held a two-day labour market summit in Graskop. The summit was aimed at
finding better ways of creating employment in the province. It was attended
by representatives from the provincial government, organised labour,
business and civil society. The summit noted that over the past four years
unemployment in Mpumalanga has declined by 5,1%. The summit further noted
that the economy in the province has been growing by over 4% over the past
three years.

The provincial government has set aside 70% of its provincial budget of R13
billion for developing human capital this year through the provision of
education and health services. The ANC-led government will continue to
engage all stakeholders in efforts aimed at eradicating poverty and
creating sustainable employment in our country. We urge other provinces to
emulate this shining example set by Mpumalanga. Thank you. [Applause.]

                      XENOPHOBIC ATTACKS ON FOREIGNERS
                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr B E PULE (UCDP): Madam Speaker, the leader of the UCDP, Kgosi L M
Manyope, declared that he has no problem with a motswana man marrying a
woman of any ethnic group, anywhere in the world. This statement is
indicative of the fact that there is absolutely no room for xenophobia in
the UCDP.

The UCDP therefore condemns the xenophobic behaviour displayed by our
fellow South Africans. Whatever reasons are advanced by these people will
be unacceptable to the UCDP as long as their actions are ungodly. We in the
UCDP believe that people are made in the image of God and they must be
treated humanely irrespective of their place of origin. The UCDP subscribes
to the philosophy our leader always espouses, I quote:

“Rata motho, tlotla motho, direla motho, rerisa motho, itshokele motho”.
[Love mankind, respect mankind, serve mankind, engage mankind and be
patient with mankind.]

We in the UCDP would therefore like to call upon all people of goodwill to
pray for the serenity of mind of those who commit such atrocities, so that
calm may prevail in our country. The UCDP calls upon law-abiding citizens
to help the police to bring calm to the affected areas. We further call
upon all political leaders in Zimbabwe to solve their problems amicably.
Thank you.

    ROLL-OUT OF PREVENTION OF MOTHER-TO-CHILD TRANSMISSION AND ARV ACCESS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S V KALYAN (DA): Madam Speaker, the National Strategic Plan of the
Department of Health cites the use of ARVs in HIV treatment as official
government policy. The department has approved a national Prevention of
Mother to Child Transmission roll-out and the Polokwane conference adopted
a resolution stating that access to ARVs must be expanded. Yet, despite all
these affirmations, the National Minister of Health and the KwaZulu-Natal
MEC for Health hosted a workshop in Durban recently that condemned ARVs.
The meeting was addressed by Dr Khanyile, who disputes the fact that HIV
causes Aids, and Mr Gwala, who promotes an expensive concoction called
“Ubhejane”, which he claims is a cure for Aids.

Information handed out at the workshop was authored by vitamin quack Dr
Raad, who claims that all ARVs are toxic. By flirting with Aids dissidents
and sharing public platforms with them, these Ministers are behaving
irresponsibly in the following manner. Firstly, they are in conflict with
their own government policies and secondly, they are sending out confusing
messages, which state that the ARV drugs that the government uses in its
programmes are poisonous and dangerous. It is rather ironic that tomorrow
the Minister of Health will be hosting a candlelight memorial in Parliament
and yet ...
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon member! Your time has expired.

Ms S V KALYAN: ... she persists in sending out bizarre messages.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, your time has expired!

Ms S V KALYAN: The DA calls on President Mbeki to relieve these two
Ministers of their duties with immediate effect, as they do not have the
interests of the health of the nation at heart.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I want to appeal to the Chief Whips of all parties to
assist us. When the time has expired, the time has expired.

                  PROVISION OF BETTER HEALTH CARE SERVICES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs M A A NJOBE (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC-led government has
made significant progress in the delivery of health care. However, the high
level of poverty afflicting some of our communities continues to expose
them to a variety of social and infectious illnesses as characterised by
the growing burden of diseases related to tuberculosis, HIV and Aids.

One hundred and seventy-eight new nurses from the North West government
nursing colleges will be doing community service this year. The nurses will
be deployed to various health facilities in the province. The North West
government has recognised that in order to attain scarce skills in the
government health sector, systems need to be developed and incentives have
to be created to ensure the best possible working conditions.

The provision of health care services to all people remains at the core of
the efforts to realise the goals of a better life for all. I thank you.
[Applause.]

  CONDOLENCES TO THOSE AFFECTED BY EARTHQUAKE IN PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Prof E S CHANG (IFP): Deputy Speaker, we in the IFP would like to convey
our most heartfelt condolences to all the individuals and families from the
People’s Republic of China who have lost loved ones or are being affected
by the earthquake in Wenchuan County in the Sichuan province of China.

It has been estimated that the earthquake which rocked China on 12 May 2008
has claimed in excess of 30 000 lives and has left more than 220 000 people
hurt, while many more are still buried in the ruins.

These figures, however, fail to review the sad human side of this terrible
disaster. I was visiting China at the time of this tragedy and heard many
heart-wrenching stories of families torn apart, parents left childless and
children orphaned by this earthquake.

There are also stories of extreme bravery and true love where parents
sacrificed their own lives in order to protect their children and ensure
their survival.

The State Council of China has announced a three-day national mourning
period from 19 to 21 May 2008 as a nationwide display of respect for the
dead. Condolence books are also open in all Chinese embassies. I urge all
South African organisations and individuals to do whatever they can to
assist the affected people and also to remember the deceased and their
loved ones in their prayers and thoughts. I thank you.

      CONDEMNATION OF XENOPHOBIC ATTACKS IN THE EKURHULENI MUNICIPALITY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D K MALULEKE (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC strongly condemns the
barbaric and violent acts of xenophobia that have engulfed a number of
townships in the Ekurhuleni Municipality and other parts of Johannesburg
and Soweto in recent days, together with the possibility of copycat re-
enactments in other areas. It is indeed deplorable that certain elements in
our society can demean themselves by stooping to such gutter levels in
human history.
We are aware of the challenges facing our communities, but also believe
that those challenges cannot be used as an excuse or factors precipitating
such inhumane glorification of hatred against our very own brothers and
sisters who provided us with sanctuary during our dark days in the past.

We therefore urge the law enforcement agencies to use appropriate measures
to stamp out the source of this scourge besieging our communities and
ensure that the culprits are brought to book. We also commend the Gauteng
provincial government for appointing a provincial task team that will help
to unravel the causes of these violent acts and hope that its
recommendations will ensure proper normalisation of the affected
communities. I thank you.

                  DEATH OF STUDENT AT UNIVERSITY OF LIMPOPO

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M M SWATHE (DA): The DA condemns the death of Nkosinathi Mhlongo, a
student at the University of Limpopo, who was thrown out of a moving
vehicle and left to die by Sasco students for refusing to sing one of their
protest songs on their return from a student protest at the Union
Buildings.

The chairperson of Sasco at the University of Limpopo Turfloop campus,
Tibane Serumula, and other two members of Sasco were involved in this
brutal act. This is not an incident in isolation. Sasco structures are a
source of instability at institutions of higher learning in the country.
Their activities are influenced by a deep-rooted intolerance for political
plurality. Opposition student organisations are constantly intimidated and
abused on the basis of their political affiliation. Sasco’s behaviour
violates the constitutionally enshrined right to freedom of association yet
it still continues to enjoy ties with the ANC, which often turns a blind
eye to despicable acts of this kind.

I call upon the Minister of Education to establish an investigation to
probe the level of political violence amongst student organizations in the
university. The death of one student is one too many, and the Department of
Education must intervene to avoid more deaths. Thank you. [Applause.]

                    EKUNGWINI MUNICIPALITY ENERGY CRISIS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr J B SIBANYONI (ANC): Ngithokoze Sekela likaSomlomo. [Thank you, Deputy
Speaker.]

In its effort to confront the current electricity challenges and load-
shedding, the Kungwini PCO in Bronkhorspruit has held a meeting with all
stakeholders in the area. These included the Metsweding and Kungwini
Municipalities, Eskom, the Department of Minerals and Energy and the
Electricity Distribution Industry Holdings, the EDI.

The meeting agreed on the following: the establishment of a joint task team
between municipalities and Eskom; the establishment of a forum between
municipalities to deal with a national energy emergency plan; Eskom to
provide claim forms for customers who suffered direct damages; load-
shedding schedules to be communicated to all customers; and radio
interviews to be held to provide information for customers.

The ANC notes the work done by the PCO in seeking solutions to these
challenges and reiterates the call for all South Africans, government
departments and communities to work together for the realisation of the
national energy emergency plan. Ngiyathokoza. [Thank you.]

                    PROGRAMME TO ASSIST INDIGENT PERSONS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G S GABANAKGOSI (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, South Africans who are
living below the breadline and struggling to make a life for their families
are to benefit from a new government initiative. An amount of R124 million
has been allocated to the South African Security Agency, Sassa, and to the
provincial departments for social development. This will form part of the
social relief of distress programme.

The programme allows for the temporary provision of assistance to persons
in such a dire material need that they cannot meet their families’ most
basic needs. Civil society organisations and faith-based organisations are
urged to assist the government in raising the awareness about this form of
assistance.

The ANC-led government has expanded access to welfare grants, free
compulsory education, free health care, free basic services and assists
provinces through the housing and land reform programmes. The goals of the
development social welfare programme are the attainment of basic social
welfare rights for all South Africans irrespective of race, colour,
religion, gender and physical disability. I thank you. [Applause.]

    ROLL-OUT OF PREVENTION OF MOTHER-TO-CHILD TRANSMISSION AND ARV ACCESS
                  DEATH OF STUDENT AT UNIVERSITY OF LIMPOPO
                     VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND CHILDREN

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Deputy Speaker, I would like to thank the hon
members for the wide range of statements that have been made. My colleagues
will speak on other aspects of the statements. With respect to the DA’s
reference to a workshop attended by the Minister of Health, I just want to
say that I attend workshops with all kinds of peculiar people. It doesn’t
mean that if I am in that workshop I agree with all the people who are
present there.

As far as I am aware, government’s policy on the response to HIV and Aids
has not been changed in any manner following that workshop. The policy of
government stands as it is. Just as the hon member may mix with peculiar
people, some of us might also mix with them! [Applause.]

On the statement referring to Sasco, I am not aware that Sasco as an
organisation has been found guilty in any particular matter. I am aware
that some students who are implicated in the event the DA member has
referred to, have indeed been arrested and charged. I do not know what
organisations they belong to, neither do I think that we can view the
entire Sasco organisation as being guilty of the particular incident and
death, which is most regrettable, that the hon member referred to.

I have previously called on all students in our universities to respect the
rights of all students to join any organisation and to desist from acts of
violence and other destructive practices on our campuses. I certainly don’t
think that through the activities of one or two members of an organisation,
the entire Sasco organisation can be judged as guilty. I would say that
that cannot be the manner in which we should deal with this.

Finally, I think all of us should express our deeply felt support for the
young Ms Burger, who indicated in the public domain that she had been a
victim of sexual assault in our country. I think we should join with the
many women who have welcomed the gesture she has made so bravely by
indicating what happened to her. We call on South Africans to redouble
their efforts to fight against sexual harassment and the violent
victimisation of children and women in our society. I thank you.
[Applause.]

                      XENOPHOBIC ATTACKS ON FOREIGNERS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Deputy Speaker, I
would also like to use this occasion to call upon all of us here, to pass
on our condolences to the families of those who have lost loved ones. I am
also here to report that the Justice, Crime Prevention and Security
cluster, JCPS, is seized with the matter, that at a practical level the
necessary security forces have been deployed and that a number of
individuals suspected of being perpetrators have been arrested.

I would like to use the occasion to call on all of us, members of this
House and society at large, to confront this challenge head-on and that we
do our best to strengthen social cohesion in all the necessary forums that
we occupy; and that we continuously design and find strategies to
strengthen human solidarity. I am confident that this is one challenge that
all of us together can manage.

We work within the context of our Constitution. We should use the occasion
to advocate the values enshrined in our Constitution. I am certain that if
we do all these things and engage at all levels in our society on what is
right and what is in our Constitution, and take a firm stand against those
who break the law, we should manage the challenge. I thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: There are two more slots available for Ministers.

  CONDOLENCES TO THOSE AFFECTED BY EARTHQUAKE IN PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Deputy Speaker, thank you for your indulgence. I
thought we should have shared in the expressions of condolences that were
articulated by the IFP with respect to the earthquake in the People’s
Republic of China. Government has issued a statement in this regard, and we
join the hon member of the IFP in expressing our sympathy and condolences
to those families that have lost loved ones and to the people of the
People’s Republic of China who suffered this calamity. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: That concludes Minister’s Responses. Did you want to take the
slot, Minister Skweyiya? I didn’t see any hand. I just saw you looking sad,
perhaps asking yourself why I am doing this to you. [Laughter.]

             SOCIAL RELIEF FOR VICTIMS OF XENOPHOBIA IN GAUTENG

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Yes, Madam Speaker, I thought so, and I
would! [Laughter.] I want to agree with the hon comrade over there on the
issue of the social relief of distress, generally to the poorest of the
poor in the country and all those who are finding it difficult to survive,
specially during these times of high food prices and all the other issues.

We also want to join the rest of the House in trying to work together
towards the resolution basically of the problems that are being faced – the
violence in Gauteng. We have been in contact with the Gauteng government to
try and ensure that relief is brought to almost everybody who has been a
victim of xenophobia that is presently happening there.

We are working very closely with the MEC, in order to ensure that we can be
able, at least, to ensure that all children are safe and that those who
have nothing to eat are served with the right supplies of food; but more
importantly, we should work very closely with the nongovernmental
organisations and the faith-based organisations to relieve the hardships of
the victims of violence during this phase in our country, especially in
Gauteng.

We should, however, try to make an appeal from here that it should not only
be left to Gauteng, but that all the provinces should take the necessary
steps to make sure that it does not take place anywhere in this country. I
thank you. [Applause.]

      EXPENDITURE FOR THE SECOND QUARTER OF THE 2007-08 FINANCIAL YEAR

             (Consideration of Report of Joint Budget Committee)

Ms J L FUBBS: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members of the House, colleagues
and comrades, the joint budget committee is not simply any committee; it is
a committee that is intended to be an instrument of oversight on delivery
of prioritised services.

The Estimates of National Expenditure of 2007 state that the medium-term
budgeting is more than just numbers – and here I am dealing with the
committee report. It is about policy prioritisation, planning and reaching
agreement on spending plans that support government’s objectives. The Joint
Budget Committee hereby presents its in-year oversight report on assessing
the executive authorities’ and accounting officers’ actions of implementing
the allocated budgets to meet the government’s objectives for the second
financial period of 2007-08, from 1 July to 30 September 2007. It is that
very phrase ``in-year oversight” that the committee finds challenging. It
becomes a blunt instrument if the reporting is delayed.

In-year oversight is conducted through the interrogation of national
expenditure as published by National Treasury.

Madam Deputy Speaker, all members have the ATC before them. It is not my
job, my position or delegated duty to read this word-for-word but it is
rather to highlight the main points.

Given that we are pursuing sustainable measures in a developmental state,
the Budget assumes a critical role in this delivery. What we have done as
the JBC was to cluster the report, as members will see. And in the
highlighting of this, I think there were references to ``overexpenditure
and underexpenditure’’.

What we need to ask ourselves, and the question facing this House of
Parliament, is not whether it is overexpenditure or underexpenditure, but
rather why has overexpenditure been incurred; why? It may be for very valid
reasons. Why has underexpenditure been incurred? Unfortunately, JBC has to
say that much of the underexpenditure is due to one of the following three
things. The first one is poor planning. Planning is a word that is not in
the dictionary of many members of the executive, and it is something that
will have to be learnt. [Interjections.]

The second point that we are looking at is not simply poor planning, but
rather allocative efficiency. It is pointless talking in fairy tale terms
on my left here. I think we ought to be constructive in our comments,
especially as Members of Parliament. The second point that the JBC was
deeply concerned about, as I say, is allocative efficiency, and indeed
having done that job, is there effective performance and monitoring of that
implementation?

So as we move through on the financial and administrative services cluster
on Page 2 and the social services cluster, you will see the comment of the
JBC. This is referring to the social services cluster. [Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: [Inaudible.]

Ms J L FUBBS: In fact, quite frankly, you need to see a doctor.
Despite the improvement in expenditure, however, the committee’s ultimate
focus is on whether spending has achieved its intended impact and outcome
or not. This is an area which for many is the last port of call in the
poverty situation they may be facing.

With respect to the justice and protection services cluster here, the
question remains whether the resources allocated to this cluster,
specifically to the Department of Safety and Security, have indeed achieved
the identified and stated outcomes and whether or not they have
satisfactorily reduced the levels of crime.

Although there is increased spending and additional personnel and capacity,
the public still finds it extremely difficult to access the police services
at critical times - not at times when, like me, you just want to get an
affidavit; no, we don’t really need them then.

If you look at the quarter-to-quarter total spending of the departments
grouped under the economic services and infrastructure development cluster,
you will see when you study the tables that they reflect inconsistency in
expenditure.

The other area is with respect to the Department of Public Enterprises;
although in many ways one wishes to move over that a little, as much time
at this podium has been dedicated and devoted to Public Enterprises itself.
A review of spending according to the economic classification of
expenditure is in three categories: current payments, transfers, subsidies
and capital expenditure.

Madam Deputy Speaker, I now move to capital expenditure, capex. The reason
for this is that, as we know, if we are going to develop sustainable
measures in a developmental state, then we can and should be using our
capex to underpin this policy priority. The capex is comprised of five main
categories, which we can read there in that respect, and that recalls an
underspending during the first half of the financial year.

Now, why does the JBC say that this is a serious problem? It is because
when it comes to capital expenditure, it takes a longer time to roll out.
Therefore the planning should have been there five or three years in
advance and the expenditure itself should begin with immediate effect in
the first term. [Interjections.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Tell the Minister!

Ms J L FUBBS: I suggest you read this: the day you win an election, I’ll
lose my hair. [Laughter.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: I thought you had lost it already.

Ms J L FUBBS: I certainly haven’t.

Before we lose the end of this, Madam Deputy Speaker, I would like to look
at the committee’s recommendations specifically and I want to point out to
all members of this House, and that includes the executive and the
legislature ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, we are struggling to follow what
the hon member is saying.

Ms J L FUBBS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I can tell you, in my experience it has
never ever been a policy of the members on my left of this podium to learn
anything from experience.

Many national departments have not implemented previous parliamentary
resolutions as recommended by the JBC, and that is not only a challenge for
the executive; it is a challenge for every member in this House who sits in
a portfolio committee. What are you doing? Nothing! Consequently, the same
general weaknesses prevail in expenditure and financial management across
government. In this regard, therefore, the committee reissues - and I want
to emphasise “reissues” - its recommendations.

Departments must ensure that they spend their budgets in line with national
priorities. Stop the silo approach! National departments should report to
Parliament on spending, including transfers to provinces and public
entities in meeting these national priorities.

Departments should accelerate the establishment of sound administrative and
financial systems to create an environment for effective and efficient
financial management. The development of realistic key performance
indicators should be included in this exercise. To effectively reduce the
high vacancy rates, affected departments should establish specific
timeframes and inform Parliament on a quarterly basis of their progress in
the filling of funded vacant posts. I thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker.
[Applause.]

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

The House adjourned at 14:59.


