---
title: 'National Assembly - 25 September 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2008-09-25
---

                         THURSDAY, 25 SEPTEMBER 2008
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

Members assembled in the Chamber of the National Assembly at 11:06.

Chief Justice P N Langa took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

            ELECTION OF PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA

                               (Announcement)

The Chief Justice announced that the meeting had been convened for the
purpose of electing the President of the Republic of South Africa.

                                    RULES

                               (Announcement)
The Chief Justice announced that the Rules as contemplated in item 9 of
Part A of Schedule 3 of the Constitution had been made available to
members.


      APPOINTMENT OF RETURNING OFFICER AND ASSISTANT RETURNING OFFICERS


                               (Announcement)

The Chief Justice announced the appointment of Mr Z A Dingani, as Returning
Officer, and, as Assistant Returning Officers, Mr M K Mansura, Mr M Xaso,
Dr N Ismail, Ms M C Griebenow, Mr T D Molukanele, Ms C S Abell, Mr C V
Mahlangu, Mr V Ngaleka, Mr M E Philander, Mr E Hendricks and Mr J M
Manyange.

   NOMINATIONS OF CANDIDATES FOR ELECTION AS PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF
                                SOUTH AFRICA

The CHIEF JUSTICE: The meeting will now proceed to the election of the
President of the Republic of South Africa. Before I call for nominations, I
have to remind members that in terms of the Constitution each nomination
must be submitted on the prescribed form and be duly seconded.

Furthermore, I have to draw the attention of members especially to item 4
of Part A of Schedule 3 to the Constitution, in terms of which there may be
no debate.
There will now be an opportunity for the nomination of candidates for
election as President of the Republic of South Africa.

Prof B TUROK: Chief Justice, it gives me great pleasure to nominate the hon
Kgalema Petrus Motlanthe to be the President of the Republic of South
Africa. Thank you. [Applause.]

The CHIEF JUSTICE: The hon Mr Motlanthe has been nominated. Is the
nomination seconded?

Mrs B M NTULI: Chief Justice, it is a great honour to second the nomination
by the hon Prof Ben Turok of the hon Kgalema Petrus Motlanthe as the
President of the Republic of South Africa. I thank you. [Applause.]

The CHIEF JUSTICE: Thank you. Please submit the nomination form to the
Returning Officer. [Applause.]

The RETURNING OFFICER: Chief Justice, I have satisfied myself that the
nomination is in order.

The CHIEF JUSTICE: Thank you. Are there any further nominations?

HON MEMBERS: No! [Laughter.]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Chief Justice, it is my privilege on this
wonderful occasion to nominate the hon Wetshotsile Joseph Seremane as
candidate for the position as President of the Republic of South Africa.
Thank you. [Applause.]

The CHIEF JUSTICE: Well, let’s proceed. The hon Mr Seremane has been
nominated. Is the nomination seconded?

HON MEMBERS: No!

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Mr Chief Justice, it gives me great
pleasure to second the nomination of the hon Seremane for the position of
President of the Republic of South Africa. [Applause.]

The CHIEF JUSTICE: Thank you. Please submit the nomination form to the
Returning Officer. [Applause.]

The RETURNING OFFICER: Chief Justice, I have satisfied myself that the
nomination is in order.

The CHIEF JUSTICE: Are there any further nominations?

HON MEMBERS: No! [Laughter.]

The CHIEF JUSTICE: Right. We proceed.
The following candidates have been properly nominated: the hon Mr Motlanthe
and the hon Mr Seremane. Since more than one candidate has been nominated,
a secret ballot will take place in terms of item 6 of Part A of Schedule 3
to the Constitution.

I now suspend proceedings to allow the Returning Officer to prepare ballot
papers. We shall resume proceedings when the bells are rung. It is
estimated that the printing of ballot papers will take approximately 30
minutes.

Business suspended at 11:15 and resumed at 12:06.

The CHIEF JUSTICE: The Assistant Returning Officers will now show that the
ballot boxes are empty and then seal them. [Interjections.] Right, let’s
proceed. They are empty and sealed.

The procedure is as follows: Members will be called in alphabetical order
according to their surnames. When their names are called, members must
collect a ballot paper from the voting table. After collecting a ballot
paper, each member must proceed to one of the ballot booths and make a
clear cross against the name of the candidate he or she desires to vote for
in the space provided on the ballot paper for the recording of a vote.

After making the mark on the ballot paper and whilst still in the booth, a
member must fold his or her ballot paper in such a manner that the official
mark thereon is visible to an Assistant Returning Officer - this is
important, and I will repeat it. After making the mark on the ballot paper
and whilst still in the booth, a member must fold his or her ballot paper
in such a manner that the official mark thereon is visible to an Assistant
Returning Officer.

After the Assistant Returning Officer has noted the mark on the ballot
paper, members should deposit it in the ballot box and resume their seats.

              VOTING FOR ELECTION OF PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC

The House proceeded to a secret ballot for the election of the President.

The CHIEF JUSTICE: Are there any members who have not voted and who wish to
vote? [Interjections.] Because this is the time to do so. If not, the
Assistant Returning Officers will close and seal the ballot boxes.

The vote counting is going to begin. For that purpose, I will suspend the
proceedings to enable the Returning Officers to count the votes in my
presence and report the results to me. It will be appropriate for members
to take their lunch break now until 14:00. The bells will be rung for five
minutes before the resumption of proceedings.
Business suspended at 13:02 and resumed at 14:03.

                    ELECTION OF PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC

                               (Announcement)

The Chief Justice took the Chair and announced the results  of  the  ballot,
as follows:

   Mr K P Motlanthe: 269
   Mr W J Seremane: 50

Mr  K  P  Motlanthe,  accordingly,  elected  President  of   the   Republic.
[Interjections.]

The hon Chief Justice declared the hon Kgalema Petrus Motlanthe duly
elected President of the Republic of South Africa, in accordance with item
6 of Schedule 3(a) of the Constitution.
The Chief Justice congratulated Mr K P Motlanthe on his election as
President.

The Speaker thanked the hon Chief Justice for conducting the proceedings.

Parties and the President-Elect were afforded the opportunity to address
the House.
Mr B A D MARTINS: Madam Speaker, Your Excellency President Kgalema
Motlanthe, Your Excellency Comrade Thabo Mbeki, esteemed Chief Justice Pius
Langa, distinguished leaders of the ANC-led alliance: Comrade Jacob Zuma,
Dr Blade Nzimande and Zwelinzima Vavi, members of the diplomatic corps,
distinguished guests, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, subsections 83(b)
and (c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa enjoins the
President, as the head of state and head of the national executive, to
uphold, defend and respect the Constitution as the supreme law of the
Republic and to promote the unity of the nation and that which will advance
the Republic.

The President of the ANC, Comrade Jacob Zuma, the national executive
committee of the ANC and the leadership of the alliance are confident that
Comrade Kgalema will be equal to the task that he has been entrusted to
perform on behalf of all South Africans. He will thus ensure that there is
continuity in government up to and beyond the 2009 elections.

Comrade Kgalema was born on 19 July 1949, in Alexandra Township in
Johannesburg to a working-class family. Comrade Kgalema has an impeccable
record of selfishness ... [Laughter.] ... selflessness and sacrifice.
[Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members!

Mr B A D MARTINS: Let me correct myself: Comrade Kgalema showed an
impeccable record of selflessness and sacrifice during the struggle to free
South Africa. He was recruited into Umkhonto weSizwe in the early 1970s
whilst working for the Johannesburg City Council. He and the late Comrade
Stan Nkosi formed part of a unit that had the responsibility of recruiting
ANC members for military training.

On 14 April 1976, they were arrested and detained for 11 months at the
notorious John Vorster Square police station in Johannesburg. In 1977 they
were tried under the Anti-Terrorism Act, found guilty and sentenced to 10
years imprisonment on Robben Island.

Comrade Kgalema served his term on Robben Island in an exemplary manner,
with fortitude, dignity, integrity and courage in the face of adversity.

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Madam Speaker, on a point of order, I just want to
express my objection to the fact that the President is being referred to as
Comrade Kgalema, because that is not in our culture, really. Privately,
yes, it’s acceptable, but I think that most of our problems emanate from
ignoring some of these customs. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: I think we will note the objection. However, we actually did
refer to the previous President as Comrade Thabo. [Applause.] Some people
referred to him as Comrade Thabo and others didn’t. This should be
understood in the way people relate to one another.

Mr B A D MARTINS: Madam Speaker, I will respect the advice of Prince
Mangosuthu Buthelezi as an elder, and refer to the President as Comrade
President Kgalema Motlanthe. [Laughter.]

Upon his release in 1987, he was given the responsibility of working in the
trade union movement in order to assist in the process of strengthening it.
Comrade President Kgalema worked for the National Union of Mineworkers and
in 1992 he was elected as its general secretary.

During his tenure, he was instrumental in negotiating and concluding an
agreement for mineworkers which helped to avert massive retrenchments at a
time when the gold price was low and when marginal mines were closing down.

When the ANC was unbanned in 1990, he was given the responsibility of
leading the re-establishment of the ANC as a legal organisation in the PWV
region. He was subsequently elected its first chairperson.

When South Africa was engulfed in violence in the early 1990s, he travelled
around the country, on numerous occasions with the ANC stalwart, Comrade
Walter Sisulu, to visit areas that bore the brunt of violence.

In 1997 and 2002, he was elected unopposed as the secretary-general of the
ANC. Amongst other things, his responsibilities included fostering party-to-
party relations in Africa, Latin America and Europe.

In December 2007 he was elected ANC deputy president at the ANC’s 52nd
national conference in Polokwane. In July 2008 Comrade Thabo Mbeki
appointed him as Minister in the Presidency of the Republic of South
Africa.

Madam Speaker, the ANC commends Comrade President Kgalema Motlanthe to you
and the nation with the full confidence that he will serve with honour and
humility to promote the unity of the nation as the Constitution calls upon
him to do. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr W J SEREMANE: Madam Speaker, Your Excellency, Chief Justice Langa,
colleagues and fellow citizens, on behalf of the DA I would like to
congratulate the hon Mr Motlanthe on his election as President of the
Republic of South Africa and wish him well for the months ahead. Allow me
also to be the first to say: Your Excellency, the President of the Republic
of South Africa, nkgonne [my brother]. [Applause.]

Election to such high office brings with it great and profound
responsibility, the most important of which is the need to rise above party-
political interests and to put the needs and aspirations of the people of
South Africa first.

The country is crying out for resolute and strong leadership to reduce the
level of anxiety currently felt by a great many of our people, who have
been deeply unsettled by the governing party’s internal power struggles,
now playing themselves out on a national and international stage.

The newly-elected President must, therefore, act with speed to calm both
domestic and international fears about interruptions in policy continuity,
service delivery and the possible vacuum in leadership.

At a time of extraordinary global financial turbulence, South Africa does
not have the luxury of being too insular at present, and we must be mindful
that any misstep in this area will be severely punished by international
and domestic investors, to the great detriment of all South Africans
irrespective of political persuasion.

With this in mind, it is essential that the President appoints the few
Ministers who performed very well under the previous administration, such
as my brother the Minister of Finance, to his new cabinet without delay.
There are urgent challenges facing South Africa which have to be dealt
with. The new administration must therefore do away with a focus on
internal power struggles and rather turn its attention to the issues that
matter most to ordinary South Africans. These include rampant crime and
lawlessness; widespread and devastating poverty; chronic levels of
unemployment; the continuing negative effects of HIV/Aids; the gradual
erosion of our general infrastructure; and poor or nonexistent service
delivery.

Dealing with these problems need to become the nation’s number one
priority, not the politics of revenge and hatred which we have witnessed
within the ANC’s ranks over the past week.

For our part, we in the DA are confident that we possess both the vision
and the solutions necessary to overcome the many challenges facing our
country today, and it is this compelling alternative which we know will
find increasing favour with the electorate in next year’s elections.

Hon Motlanthe, Mr President, you will shortly swear an oath of allegiance
to the Constitution. I trust that you will make this oath with due
sincerity, and in so doing ensure that you rise above the petty internal
squabbles and political interests within your party, which have held this
country to ransom for far too long.

Last but not least, we trust that you will tirelessly strive to allow
sanity, decency and decorum to prevail in this august House, the Parliament
of South Africa. I thank you, colleagues and all citizens of this country.
[Applause.]

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Madam Speaker, His Excellency the President, the hon
Chief Justice of the Republic of South Africa, hon Ministers and hon
members, today the shining torch of leadership of the Republic is passing
to the new President - has already passed. The party I lead, the IFP,
congratulates His Excellency Mr Kgalema Motlanthe on becoming the President-
Elect of the Republic of South Africa. We wish him well and may the light
of God Almighty shine upon him as he shortly takes a solemn oath to serve
the Republic.

Only a foolish optimist can deny the dark realities of the hour. Yet I for
one believe this is a moment which will pass; the nation is strong.
Confidence, at home and abroad, in the integrity and independence of our
institutions has languished, for such confidence thrives upon truth,
obligation and protection. This is the great work of restoration that our
new President must now turn to and do so swiftly.

I have no doubt that our President-Elect, Mr Motlanthe, is more than equal
to this task, possessing as he does integrity, an instinctive sense of the
common good and of a fair society and an abiding respect for the
institutions of the Republic.
I would like to applaud him for not being afraid to stand up to some of the
rabble-rousers in the ANC and encourage him to continue to do so. This is
something that really gives me hope for our country. [Applause.]

Today we also honour the many achievements of the former President, His
Excellency Thabo Mbeki, and we trust that they will endure and in the
fullness of time flourish. We wish him and his wife, Mrs Zanele Mbeki, all
the happiness in the world as they leave office and hope that they will
continue to contribute to the progress of the country, the wider region,
and global affairs as they have done for so many decades.

Our President-Elect has been shown a remarkable example of leadership by
both his immediate predecessor and President Nelson Mandela before him. The
President-Elect has already demonstrated a cool and unclouded judgment in
standing up, as I said, to some of the rabble-rousers within the ranks of
the ruling party. I think he will be able to draw on this in the coming
months.

We in these opposition benches simply ask our President to trust in the
future of democracy and the common sense of the South African people. The
Republic is looking for leadership and direction. May God protect our
President, the Republic and each one of us.

Ha e lale, makwala re none. [Let peace reign.]
Mr G T MADIKIZA: Madam Speaker, hon President, Chief Justice Langa and hon
members, at the outset we would like to wish the newly elected President
well. Allow me to join my colleagues in congratulating you on your
ascendancy to the High Office, sir. The manner in which we have arrived at
this point today leaves much to be desired. It is a political crisis in the
ruling party that has led to the country’s Head of State being removed.

To claim that there is no crisis is ridiculous. There is a huge crisis in
this country and the ruling party’s inability to manage its internal
conflict is affecting us all. So bitter has the fight become that service
delivery and stability is forgotten in favour of purges and witch-hunts.
This whole saga has led to the embarrassment of the country. Indeed, there
are people within the ruling party who have never stood in an election, but
they have publicly promised that they will have the Head of State removed.

The endless insults flung at the President have also damaged his office.
This is the short-sightedness of these unelected and irresponsible people;
they break something down that they will inherit later.

To the new President we say that he will be watched closely to see if he is
focusing on service delivery as it is expected of him. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Ms P DE LILLE: Madam Speaker, on behalf of the ID, I would like to
congratulate Comrade Kgalema Motlanthe on his election as President of the
Republic of South Africa. President Motlanthe, we in the ID ...
[Interjections.]

April, bly stil! [April, keep quiet!] [Laughter.]

President Motlanthe, we in the ID hope that you will now put the lives of
ordinary South Africans ahead of party-political agendas and focus on
leading our nation. During times such as these, when there is political and
economic upheaval, we urgently need leadership that will give all South
Africans hope that the enormous challenges we face, such as corruption,
crime, poverty, unemployment and HIV/Aids will be addressed.

Mr President, we also have faith that you will respect the request by the
hon Judge Nicholson in the Pietermaritzburg High Court and appoint a
judicial commission of inquiry into the arms deal. [Interjections.] The ID
wrote a letter to former President Mbeki to request that he set up a
commission of inquiry. The decade-long denial by the ANC that there was
wide-scale corruption in the arms deal has now made former President Thabo
Mbeki its highest-profile casualty. It is my hope that you will give this
matter your urgent attention.

South Africa needs a leader who is serious about accountability and
transparency and has the courage to deliver on the vision of the struggle
that we would all be equal before the law.

Mr President, it is our hope that in the coming days you will make
appointments to the Cabinet on the basis of what is in the country’s best
interests. South Africa needs leadership that can lead by example and usher
in a new era in which we can truly build upon the values, principles and
ideals of the struggle. I thank you. [Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Madam Speaker, hon President, the ACDP wishes to
congratulate hon Kgalema Motlanthe on his election as President of the
Republic of South Africa. He will be faced with severe challenges following
the shocking events of the past few days. This leadership crisis is due to
the internal squabbles within the ANC and has caused anxiety amongst
citizens, damage to our financial markets and a mass exodus of experienced
Ministers.

Our nation is crying out for strong and responsible leadership following
the turmoil of the past days. It is up to the hon President-Elect, ntate
Motlanthe, as President of all South Africans, to now unify the squabbling
factions within his party and our nation. It is critical now to put the
interests of the nation before the narrow interests of the ruling party.

We are pleased that there are experienced Cabinet Ministers who are
available to ensure that there is a smooth transition to the new
administration. The critical issues of crime, HIV/Aids, poor service
delivery, poverty and unemployment must remain a high priority for the new
Cabinet. It does, however, present hon Motlanthe with the opportunity of
appointing new Ministers in Cabinet positions in which there have been a
lack of delivery.

We are pleased that the Minister of Finance, Trevor Manuel, has indicated
that he will serve in the new administration, and we call on hon Motlanthe
to confirm that existing fiscal and monetary economic policies will not
change. This, we believe, will stabilise our financial markets. We hope it
will not take too long for confidence in our markets to return following
the unsettling events of the past few days.

In conclusion, the ACDP wishes the hon Motlanthe well. Our advice to him is
to earnestly seek the help and wisdom of God to be able to lead our nation
during this period of political uncertainty in the run-up to the 2009
elections. Our citizens need political as well as economic stability. As
responsible parliamentarians we will hold him and his Cabinet accountable
for their actions, and in this regard we trust that the recent robust
parliamentary oversight exercise by the ruling party over the executive
will continue.

A pula e go nele, Presidente Motlanthe. [All the best, President
Motlanthe.]

Dr P W A MULDER: Madam Speaker, on behalf of the FF Plus I wish to
congratulate Mr Motlanthe on his election as President of the Republic of
South Africa. South Africa is one of the most beautiful countries in the
world, with incredible potential. We all love this country.

South Africa, however, is also one of the most difficult countries in the
world to govern. President Motlanthe can ask his predecessors about this.
The FF Plus wishes him wisdom in these difficult times. All that is
necessary for evil to triumph is for good men to do nothing, as Edmund
Burke said. That is true for all of us as leaders in South Africa.
Experience is important, but in the end all that we really need from
leaders in South Africa is common sense. I must be honest with you; over
the past year I’ve been worried that common sense is no longer so common in
South Africa. [Laughter.]

I, like Mr Seremane, we both come from the same place, Randfontein. The FF
Plus abstained from casting a vote today in this election, not because we
are angry with Mr Seremane, but we thought it opportunistic of the DA to
nominate Mr Seremane ... [Applause.] [Interjections.] ... as President of
this country while from the ranks of the DA, during the recent election of
a new leader for the DA, Mr Seremane could only obtain 6% of the DA’s vote.
[Applause.] [Interjections.]

As for Mr Zuma, I want to tell him a story. [Laughter.] Two Afrikaners in
the olden days were on their way with a wagon and eight oxen. That evening
they unharnessed the oxen and went to sleep in the bushes next to the road.
At midnight they heard lions roaring around the camp. Quickly and anxiously
they harnessed the oxen and dashed off. When the sun rose that morning they
saw that in their haste they had harnessed seven oxen and one of the lions.
[Laughter.] The two looked at each other and said, “It was easy to hastily
harness the lion in the dark, but how do we now unharness it?” [Laughter.]

Now sir, the ANC has harnessed Mr Motlanthe as a lion today during the dark
and current crisis, and we really wish him well in this position. Does the
ANC, however, also know how to unharness a lion, should it be necessary?
[Laughter.]

It seems that we will not have the opportunity again today to thank Mr
Mbeki. The FF Plus often disagreed with Mr Mbeki, but in our opinion he
served his country to the best of his ability and he was always a dignified
President. We wish him a peaceful retirement. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M V NGEMA: Madam Speaker, the President, His Excellency the Chief
Justice, Mzizi, Umsholozi, Nadeco is one of the youngest parties in this
House and in the country. It had to take us, as a young party, to stand up
to the rebellious youth from the ANC Youth League and the SA Communist
Party, called Young Communists, in defence of the man they were attacking.
We thought we were just defending an elderly person from naughty youngsters
- we did not know that we were defending our future Head of State.

We wish to express our anger at the manner in which the ANC dealt with the
problems that brought us here today. Merely a week after Polokwane, Nadeco
issued a statement saying the ANC should look firmly and squarely at the
problems within their ranks and see if they had the capacity to deal with
them. If they felt that they found themselves coming short, we’d advise
them to call for an early election. It is history today that my friends,
the youth of the ANC and the SACP ended up making the same call, which was
also echoed by the DA and the ID, seven months after we made the call.

We advise the ANC to deal with the matters of this country with courage in
the same idiom that Nkosi Albert Luthuli, the former president of the ANC
warned his members and said, “Let your courage rise with danger”. In this
the ANC has failed. We are hopeful that the State President in his
leadership is going to correct this, not only for the ANC ... [Time
expired.]

The SPEAKER: Hon member, I would like to unharness you from the podium of
the House! [Laughter.]

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Speaker, hon President Motlanthe, Chief Justice Langa.
I, on behalf of the United Christian Democratic Party, feel honoured to be
here to congratulate Mr Kgalema Motlanthe on his ascension to the highest
office of our country. We come from a background that says many are called,
but few are chosen. This son of Africa is one of those rare flowers who
nearly wasted his sweetness in the desert air of segregation.

The UCDP has enjoyed friendship with him and his office while he was the
secretary-general of his party, the ANC. As a humble and down-to-earth man
he was never too elevated to listen whenever we spoke to him about the
issues that affected our party. We hope he will continue to listen and
digest. I hope the new President will preside over the affairs of the state
without fear, favour or prejudice and that he will not hesitate to
“kgalema” [reprimand], as his name indicates, should there be any need
whatsoever.

While we are aware that the President will soon vacate the office of
President, we wish him the best of luck and we wish that the entire nation
will stand behind him and commit itself to hard work and discipline. The
UCDP wishes the President-Elect the best of luck. In the words of John 19:5
we say ...

A motho! Bonang motho! [Look! Here is the man!]

We believe in this living God, the Almighty. If you ask for wisdom, He will
guide you in all the problems that lie ahead.

Re tla bo re le teng. Re teng, re ikaelela go dira le wena. A pula e go
nele. [We will avail ourselves to support you. We are readily available and
we are looking forward to working with you. Be blessed.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Madam Speaker, His Excellency the President, the hon Chief
Justice, the leader of the MF, Mr A Rajbansi, who is present in the gallery
today, has requested that I convey the good wishes of the MF on your
appointment, hon Kgalema Motlanthe, to the highest office as the State
President.

Hon President, you carry a heavy responsibility, as all South African eyes
are locked in eager anticipation on your fluent advance of the country’s
affairs. We are comforted by the majority party’s assurance that there is
stability in this important and critical period in South African history.
Hon President, we have observed you in your public performances as a senior
officer of the ANC. Your conduct excels in integrity, dignity and
credibility as a promising leader to our people.

I agree: What game is the DA playing? The hon members on my left had no
confidence in the hon Seremane to lead the DA and today they say that he is
fit to hold the highest office in the country. [Laughter.] [Interjections.]
The DA has a false hope. The hon leader of the MF asked me to convey a
message to the DA that in 2006 we gave you a thrashing, and in 2009 we will
give you a thrashing at the poles in KwaZulu-Natal. [Applause.]

At this pivotal stage of politics in our country, one thing needs to remain
constant and that is the principle values and purport of our national
Constitution of 1996 that clearly upholds great respect for the rule of
law, the independence of three spheres of government and effective
governance, accountability, transparency and a commitment to the people of
South Africa.

It is our united duty to serve the people and it is our united commitment
to bring recovery and prosperity to the long-suffering masses of South
Africa.

Hon President, we consider your appointment as most worthy and extend our
warmest congratulations to you. We hereby assure you of the MF’s fullest co-
operation and support. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr N T GODI: Madam Speaker, comrades and hon members, I wish, on behalf of
the APC to extend our congratulations to you, Comrade President. We are
painfully aware that you are being elected at a difficult time for the
nation. We, however, hope and wish that you will be able, with the support
of the whole House, to pull the pieces together for the sake of our young
democracy, our children and our continent.

The deep schisms in the liberation movement cannot be disguised, but it is
our conviction as the APC that we need to handle the situation carefully,
beyond narrow partisan interests. The APC adds its voice in calling for
calm. We need to take our responsibilities to the nation seriously. This is
no time for grandstanding. We need to send a positive message of hope to
our people and the world.

Any mishandling of the situation has the potential to have disastrous
consequences, as was shown by the reaction of the markets to the
resignation of Ministers earlier this week. Comrade President, we are in
the silly season of elections and all sorts of things will be said. We hope
that you will steady the ship till the elections. We also hope that your
administration will strengthen consultation and interaction with all
stakeholders in a manner that seeks to develop and consolidate a shared
national vision. The truth is that the ruling party does not have a
monopoly on the truth or on talent. There are countless progressive and
patriotic South Africans who can and must make a positive contribution to
the building of our country.

The APC believes in a government of all our talented citizens. You are now
the President of all of us. Lead with firmness, fairness and consistency.
Once again, congratulations. The struggle continues. [Applause.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Speaker, hon Chief Justice Langa, the PAC
congratulates the hon Mr Kgalema Motlanthe as the President of our country.
He is a pleasant person. He seems endowed with a lot of wisdom. The PAC
wishes him success in his new position.

As our President, one of his duties is to unite, not only his own ruling
party, but this nation. A united nation can develop faster economically and
advance faster technologically and thus bring about the eradication of
poverty.

It would be hypocritical on my part not to state that this would have been
a happier moment if it didn’t happen under the cloud that necessitated this
election. The PAC does not believe that it was correct to remove President
Thabo Mbeki on the basis of utterances that were made by a judge in a court
where he was not an accused. An inference, whether made in court or not,
cannot be a substitute for evidence. The matter of the Presidency could
have been resolved in a more dignified manner than to sacrifice the good
image of the country and frighten investors. The PAC upholds the
independence of the judiciary, the rule of law and the principle of natural
justice that no one is guilty until convicted in an impartial tribunal.
Lastly, hon President, the PAC has campaigned for the release of our former
Apla members and others who have been languishing in the prisons of this
country. We hope that the departure of President Mbeki will not compromise
their release. These are political prisoners. They fought against
apartheid, which the UN declared a crime against humanity, through the
International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of
Apartheid.

It is the PAC’s hope that this is the last time that a sitting president
leaves in the manner in which President Mbeki has left. The Presidency of
this country is an important national institution. It must be handled with
care. It must be handled with the dignity and respect it deserves. Ruri,
ruri, ruri. [Really, really, really.] [Applause.]

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, hon Comrade President
Motlanthe and hon members.

Vho-Motlanthe, kha vha ntendele ndi lidze mufhululu wa u vha tanganedza sa
Muphuresidennde wa shango lashu la Afurika Tshipembe. [U dzhenelela.] Rine
vha Azapo ri vha tamela mashudu kha hetshi tshudulo tshihulwane fhano kha
shango lashu. (Translation of Tshivenda paragraph follows.)

[Mr Motlanthe, allow me to ululate as a gesture of welcoming you as
President of our country. [Interjections.] We, as Azapo, wish you luck in
this prominent position in our country.]

As an organisation, we are willing and ready to make our contributions to
the development of our country and its people. Be assured, hon President,
that we have watched carefully the developments in our country as they
happened and we are convinced that these developments will need your
careful attention and our collective attention.

Ri vha fhululedza ro takala vho dzhena kha tshidulo hetshi. Ri a vha
tanganedza nahone ri dovha ra ri kha vha fare vho khwatha vha tsireledze
shango lashu uri li songo balangana. Nnda! Aluta continua! [U vhanda
zwanda.] (Translation of Tshivenda paragraph follows.)

[We congratulate you with joy now that you have ascended to this position.
We welcome you and we also want to say to you, hold on tight and protect
our country from chaos. Greetings. Aluta continua! [Applause.]]

Mr S SIMMONS: Madam Speaker, hon President, hon Chief Justice Langa and
colleagues, on behalf of the NA, I first wish to congratulate the House for
making a sensible choice under the circumstances in electing the hon
Motlanthe as the President of the Republic. Our sincere congratulations go
to the hon President Motlanthe.

The hon Motlanthe is widely regarded as reasonable, level-headed and
meticulous in what he does. It is precisely because of these qualities that
we as a nation place our hopes on him, for at least the next few months, to
ensure stability.

The current turmoil in the ANC is without doubt the result, not only of
conflicting personalities, but also conflicting ideas of policy directions.
The core policy concern, I believe, is the method of dealing with the
fundamental principle of transformation. For instance, the hon President in
his capacity as Deputy President of the ANC, not so long ago, while
addressing members from the Afrikaans community alluded to the willingness
to re-examine aspects of certain transformation policies. Shortly
thereafter the President of the ANC, Mr Jacob Zuma, suggested that nothing
of the sort will happen - two directly opposing views.

I therefore call on the hon President to give consideration to a summit on
the model, role and place of transformation policies, specifically the
Employment Equity Act. This, I believe, is necessary to ensure certainty
and also labour and economic stability. I trust that the hon President will
ensure political stability, resume all constitutional mandates and ensure
that they are performed without incident. Hon President-Elect, may God
bless you with wisdom. Thank you.

The PRESIDENT-ELECT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker of the National
Assembly, Madam Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly, our esteemed Chief
Justice P N Langa, hon leaders of our political parties, hon Members of
Parliament, Ministers and Deputy Ministers, Mr Jacob Gedleyihlekisa Zuma,
the former Deputy President of the Republic and current president of the
ANC, Ahmed Kathrada, Isitwalandwe, heads of our security services,
distinguished Premiers present, heads of state, organs supporting our
constitutional democracy, directors-general and other leaders of the Public
Service, your excellencies, Ambassadors and High Commissioners,
distinguished guests, friends, and comrades, the people of South Africa, I
hereby accept election as the President-Elect of the Republic of South
Africa. [Applause.]

I am deeply humbled and honoured by the faith and confidence that the
members of this Assembly have in me. I undertake this responsibility fully
cognisant of the duties and responsibilities that are attached to this high
office, and the expectations that the people of this nation rightly have of
the Head of State. I thank you. Ro livhuwa. [Thank you.] Baie dankie.
[Thank you.] [Applause.]

                          HOURS OF SITTING OF HOUSE

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I have been informed that the proceedings of the
swearing in of the President at Tuynhuys will be televised on the screens
in this Chamber. Members may, therefore, view those proceedings inside the
Chamber.

The National Assembly will resume sitting at 17:00 for further business,
including a statement by the President. So, hon members, we adjourn the
sitting in order to allow a few people to go to Tuynhuys, after which we
will reconvene so that the President can then address the House after
having been sworn in.

Business suspended at 14:56 and resumed at 17:02.

                                 NEW MEMBERS

                               (Announcement)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, I have to announce that Mr P S Sizani has
been nominated with effect from 23 September 2008 to fill the vacancy
caused by the passing away of Mr P J Gomomo. Mr S Shicheka has been
nominated with effect from 25 September 2008 to fill the vacancy caused by
the resignation of Mr P J Moleketi. Mr Sizani and Mr Shicheka have made and
subscribed the oath and affirmation in the Speaker’s office. [Applause.]

          REQUEST BY PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC TO MAKE A STATEMENT
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have to announce that I have agreed to the request  by
the President to make a statement to the House.

         STATEMENT BY PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC IN TERMS OF RULE 106

                                 (Statement)

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Deputy Speaker, esteemed Chief
Justice, Madam Speaker, hon leaders of our political parties, Members of
Parliament, Ministers and Deputy Ministers, Mr Jacob Zuma, former Deputy
President of the Republic and President of the ANC, Mr Ahmed Kathrada,
Isithwala ndwe Leaparankwe, Chairperson of the National House of
Traditional Leaders and hon traditional leaders, heads of organs supporting
our constitutional democracy, Directors-General and leaders of the Public
Service, Your Excellencies, Ambassadors and High Commissioners,
distinguished guests, friends, comrades and people of South Africa, today I
make a solemn pledge that I will do all to live up to these expectations
and to undertake this task to the best of my ability.

I wish to record my sincere thanks and appreciation to the outgoing
President, Mr Thabo Mbeki, in whose Cabinet I’ve had the honour to serve
these last few months. I know that I speak on behalf of all the people of
South Africa when I say that we have been privileged to have him as our
President these last nine years. There is no value that we can place on the
service he has rendered to our country, nor any tribute that can adequately
capture his contribution to building this nation. For all he has done for
South Africa, for our continent and for the advancement of the global
community, we remain forever indebted.

I wish also to express my gratitude to my Cabinet colleagues, most of whom
were appointed in 2004 in my presence while I was secretary-general of the
ANC and whom I have been with as part of a team in government. I am
grateful to the ANC for the tasks and responsibilities it has given me over
several decades which have provided me with the political and analytical
grounding that is so essential for effective public service.

The ANC is a movement with a rich political tradition. While conditions
have changed and tactics have had to be adapted, the policy orientation of
the ANC has remained consistent over 50 years. The vision espoused in the
Freedom Charter remains at the core of the work of this movement, reflected
in the mandate of this government. Even when faced with difficulty and
confronted by unanticipated challenges, the ANC has remained unwavering in
its commitment to advance the interests of all the people of South Africa.
This has been reflected in the policies of three successive ANC
governments, as it will continue to be reflected in the final months of the
country’s third democratic national government.

In 2004 the people of this country gave a clear and unequivocal mandate to
this government to forge a people’s contract to create work and fight
poverty. It placed on this government the responsibility to use all means
at its disposal to ensure that by 2014 we would be able to reduce poverty
and unemployment by half.

When its term ends next year, this government will be able to report to the
people that indeed it has done what it was mandated to do. It will be able
to report on an economy that has sustained a pace of growth unprecedented
in recent South African history, that has created jobs at an accelerated
pace and that has enabled government to dedicate greater resources to
meeting the basic needs of our people.

It will be able to report on significant progress in pushing back the
frontiers of poverty. This government will be able to report on tangible
advances in the provision of housing, electricity, water, sanitation and
other basic services to the millions of our people; and it will be able to
report on major improvements in the access poor South Africans have to
health care, education and social security.

South Africans across the length and breadth of the country will attest to
these and many other achievements, but they know too that much work still
lies ahead. They know the challenges our country faces and the hardships
that many of our people continue to endure. To them and to the world at
large we say that we shall not falter in leading the national effort to
build a society in which all South Africans, regardless of their
background, race or gender, have equal access to an expanding array of
opportunities. To them and to the world at large we say that this
government will continue, as it has done under the leadership of President
Thabo Mbeki, to dedicate every day that it remains in office towards the
achievement of this goal. The resolve of this government will not slacken,
the pace of implementation will only quicken and the fulfilment of its
mandate will only ever draw closer.

We are able to make such pronouncements with neither hesitation nor doubt,
precisely because the policies we are charged to implement are the policies
of the ANC. These policies, which government will continue to implement
unchanged, are the product of an extensive consultation and decision-making
process. These policies are the property of a collective, they do not
belong to any one individual and it is not for any one individual to change
them. [Applause.] The policies of this government are clear; they are based
on the 2004 manifesto of the ANC, enhanced by the decisions of both the
ANC’s policy conference as well as its 52nd national conference held in
Polokwane in December 2007.

Mine is not the desire to deviate from what works. It is not for me to
reinvent policy, nor do I intend to reshape either Cabinet or the Public
Service. We will not allow the work of government to be interrupted; we
will not allow the stability of our democratic order to be compromised and
we will not allow the confidence that our people have in the ability of the
state to respond to their needs to be undermined.

At this moment in our history, as we stand poised to make still further
advances towards the achievement of a better life, it is as important as
ever that we stand united as a nation. It is as important as ever that we
retain our faith in the resilience of our constitutional order and the
vibrancy of our democracy.

Though we may at times experience difficulty, though we may suffer moments
of doubt and uncertainty, we have both the will and the means to rise above
the challenges of the present and to forge ahead with our historic mission
to liberate all our people from discrimination, oppression and want. We,
therefore, stand here to send out a message that government remains on
course to deliver on its commitments to the poor, who rely on us daily for
the fulfilment of their basic needs and for the provision of important
services like health, education and social security.

We remain on course to halve unemployment and poverty by 2014. We remain
determined to stamp out crime, violence and abuse, whomever it affects and
wherever it manifests itself. We remain committed to building safer
communities and protecting the vulnerable in our society from abuse. In
doing so, we need all our people to work with and within the criminal
justice system so that, together, we stamp out crime.

We are here to assure all those on our continent and in the world that we
will continue to meet our international obligations; we will continue to
play a positive role within international institutions and forums; we will
continue to provide whatever assistance we can in the pursuit of peace,
security, democracy and development in Africa; we remain on course to host
the best Fifa World Cup ever in 2010 - an African World Cup; we fully
expect to meet every commitment our nation has made to the football world.

In a turbulent global economy we will remain true to the policies that have
kept South Africa steady and that have ensured sustained growth; we will
intensify the all-round effort to accelerate the rate of growth and job
creation and ensure that the benefits of growth are equally shared by all
our people.

In the spirit of building a united, democratic, nonracial, nonsexist and
prosperous South Africa, I look forward to a constructive relationship with
all parties within this assembly, even as we begin preparations for next
year’s elections. I hope to benefit from the critical eye that a vibrant
and alert opposition brings to politics. [Applause.] We will continue the
regular engagements between government and the various working groups
representing vital sectors within our society. These, together with
initiatives like the nationwide Izimbizo Programme, provide a crucial
opportunity for enhancing popular engagement with the highest levels of
government.

In the interest of establishing immediate stability and certainty, I
thought it important not to delay in filling whatever vacancies may have
occurred in government and confirming the Cabinet. I therefore intend
appointing the following to the Cabinet of the Republic:

For the position of Deputy President, Mrs Baleka Mbete; the Minister of
Foreign Affairs, Dr Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma; the Minister of Defence, Mr
Charles Nqakula; the Minister of Finance, Mr Trevor Manuel; the Minister
for Provincial and Local Government, Mr S Shiceka; the Minister of
Transport, Mr J T Radebe; the Minister of Social Development, Dr Z S T
Skweyiya; the Minister for Public Enterprises, Ms Brigitte Mabandla; the
Minister of Communications, Dr I F Matsepe-Casaburri; the Minister for the
Public Service and Administration, Mr Richard Baloyi; the Minister of
Labour, Mr Membathisi Mdladlana; the Minister of Public Works, Mr Geoff
Doidge; the Minister for Intelligence, Dr Siyabonga Cwele; the Minister of
Health, Ms B A Hogan; the Minister in The Presidency, Dr M E Tshabalala-
Msimang; the Minister of Correctional Services, Mr Ngconde Balfour; the
Minister of Housing, Dr Lindiwe Sisulu; the Minister of Safety and
Security, Mr E N Mthethwa; the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
Development, Mr M E Surty; the Minister of Education, Ms Naledi Pandor; the
Minister of Arts and Culture, Dr Pallo Jordan; the Minister of Sport and
Recreation, Rev M A Stofile; the Minister of Environmental Affairs and
Tourism, Mr Marthinus van Schalkwyk; and the Minister of Trade and
Industry, Mr M B Mpahlwa.

As you know, the Minister in the Department of Science and Technology used
to be Mr Mangena, who comes from Azapo. We have initiated discussions with
his organisation and Azapo has indicated to us that they will report back
to us by tomorrow. We should then be able to confirm Mr Mangena as the
Minister of Science and Technology.

The other Ministers are: the Minister of Minerals and Energy, Ms B P
Sonjica; the Minister of Home Affairs, Ms Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula; the
Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry, Ms Lindiwe Hendricks; the Minister
of Agriculture and Land Affairs, Ms Lulu Xingwana.
The following have been appointed as Deputy Ministers: The Deputy Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Mr Aziz Pahad; the Deputy Minister of Science and
Technology, Mr Derek Hanekom; the Deputy Minister of Safety and Security,
Ms Susan Shabangu; the Deputy Minister of Agriculture and Land Affairs, Adv
D C du Toit; the Deputy Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism, Ms
Rejoice Mabudafhasi; the Deputy Minister of Health, Dr Molefi Sefularo; the
Deputy Minister of Arts and Culture, Ms N G W Botha; the Deputy Minister of
Provincial and Local Government, Ms N E Hangana; the Deputy Minister of
Social Development, Dr J Swanson-Jacobs; the Deputy Minister of Justice and
Constitutional Development, Adv J H de Lange; the Deputy Minister of
Defence, Mr Fezile Bhengu; the Deputy Minister of Home Affairs, Malusi
Gigaba; the Deputy Minister of Communications, Mr R Padayachie; the Deputy
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ms Sue van der Merwe.

With regard to the Deputy Minister of Public Works, we have initiated
discussions with Dr Kganyago’s organisation and they have also indicated
that they will be able to report back to us by tomorrow so that we can
confirm his appointment as Deputy Minister of Public Works.

The rest of the Deputy Ministers are: Sport and Recreation, Mr C J G
Oosthuizen; the Deputy Minister of Trade and Industry, Dr R H Davies; the
Deputy Minister of Trade and Industry, Ms Elizabeth Thabethe; and the
Deputy Minister of Correctional Services, Ms L Jacobus.

We live in challenging times. We see before us many mountains that are yet
to be climbed and numerous rivers that still need to be crossed. Yet for
all the challenges that lie ahead, the incontrovertible truth is that never
before has South Africa been closer than it is today towards the
achievement of a better life for all its people. We therefore have a shared
responsibility to build on these results and to strive together, sparing
neither courage nor strength towards the achievement of a better life and a
better South Africa, and a better Africa and a better world. I thank you.
[Applause.]
                           RESIGNATION OF SPEAKER

                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Madam Deputy Speaker, the President of the Republic of South
Africa, the hon Chief Justice, members of the executive, hon members of the
National Assembly, guests and members of the public, ladies and gentlemen,
it is an honour and privilege for me to be offered an opportunity to make
these few remarks.

Now that the President has expressed his wish that I occupy the post of
Deputy President, I rise to officially vacate the post of the Speaker of
the National Assembly.

I wish to thank members of this august body for their unwavering support
for me and for the Office of the Speaker over the many years that I have
been serving as both the Deputy Speaker and later the Speaker of the
National Assembly. I sincerely thank you for allowing me to preside and
lead the House during this time.

When I reflect on all my experiences in this Assembly I become convinced
that it would have been impossible to fully discharge my responsibilities
without your steadfast support.

I must take this opportunity to also express my feeling of humility at the
confidence that the ANC has extended to me at this time. This show of
confidence gives me strength as I look forward to serving the people of
South Africa in a new role. I commit myself to serving the Republic of
South Africa to the best of my ability. In my new position I will continue
to keep in touch with the NA, a body that I regard as my second home, as I
remain a member of the NA notwithstanding my new role. Thank you.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: There will now be an opportunity for parties to respond
to the Speaker’s statement.

Order, hon members! We will now give an opportunity to those parties who
have a message in response to the statement of the Speaker.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, it is an unexpected
opportunity, but I will take it with gratitude because I am very thrilled
at the appointment of a Speaker that I know as Deputy President of the
country. I got to know her as a colleague and as a friend. I believe that
she is a woman who commits herself to a job completely and wholeheartedly.

I also think that she is probably in a better position now as Deputy
President than as a Speaker because I think her political heart has always
been too strong for the position of a Speaker. And we have often thought
that she should have refrained from the support she may have given
politically in the way that she did.

However, I have absolute faith that she will commit herself to this job
with the greatest grace and ability. From all of us, we wish her luck in
the service of the country. [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY (ACDP): Deputy Speaker, the ACDP would like to wish the now
Deputy President every success in this new venture and new mandate she has.
We would like to thank her for all that she has done for the NA in the time
she has been Speaker and Deputy Speaker. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of order: May I ask
whether the speaker’s list that we have here is to allow for reaction to
the Deputy President or to the new President? There is a speaker’s list.
What is it for?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a speakers list which I also received, but I
have been advised that I should allow parties to respond if they needed to.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Do you mean to respond to Ms Mbete, the Deputy
President?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: In that case, then, the IFP will speak. [Laughter.]
Ms S C VOS (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, I have the honour, on behalf of the
IFP, to congratulate the hon Mbete on her appointment as Deputy President.
We would clearly like to thank her for her years of hard work and
dedication on our behalf as members of Parliament and also on behalf of the
country. We would like to thank her for all she has done in this
Parliament, not only on this continent, but also internationally. We
sincerely congratulate her, and we offer her our support in her new role as
Deputy President. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms P DE LILLE (ID): Madam Speaker - if I may call you that for the last
time - on behalf of the ID, I want to congratulate you. As I sat here and
looked at you, I thought back to the days when we sat at the World Trade
Centre, negotiating a new constitution for our country. Who would have
dreamt that today you would be the Deputy President of this country? I want
to wish you well.

But I also want to say, Madam Deputy Speaker, that we are a bit tired. Can
I nominate you as the Speaker so that we can go home? [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: We shall ignore that last part.

Ms M M MDLALOSE (NADECO): Madam Deputy Speaker, Nadeco wishes to
congratulate the Speaker, now Deputy President, on her new role. We wish
her success in her new role. We also wish to congratulate her on the
exemplary way in which she led this Parliament and on her role as a nation-
builder and a leader. We thank her, and we wish her all of the best. Thank
you.

Ms S RAJBALLY (MF): Madam Deputy Speaker, firstly, I take the honour on
behalf of our leader, Mr A Rajbansi, to thank hon Madam Speaker, Baleka
Mbete, for her impeccable chairing of the House’s affairs. We are certain
that her skills will be an astounding contribution to the position of
Deputy President for the pending term of Parliament. We have great faith in
her as the Deputy President, and we wish her well. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE (AZAPO): Deputy Speaker, on behalf of Azapo, we want to
congratulate you because it shows that we are sticking to the advancement
of women even in this new administration. It is a very pleasing matter to
Azapo that we stick to the advancement of women to the highest office as we
go along with our democracy.

Having seen and worked with the Speaker for a couple of years now, we are
convinced that she will discharge her responsibilities at the highest
office in the same manner as she did while we were working together here in
Parliament. We wish her well and we hope that we will still be able to
interact as she will remain part and parcel of this institution. Thank you.


Mr P H K DITSHETELO (UCDP): Deputy Speaker, on behalf of the UCDP, I would
like to congratulate Ms Baleka Mbethe on her nomination as the Deputy
President. She has been a very cool and calculated Speaker of this House
and we have no doubt that she will do well as the Deputy President. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Nkul N T GODI (APC): Xandla xa Presidente, hi vito ra APC ha tlangela eka
ku hlawuriwa ka n’wina ku va Museketeri wa Murhangeri. Ha mi khensisa. Hi
mi navelela minkateko na ku humelela. Ndza tshemba leswaku leswi a mi
tirhisa xiswona tanihi Xipikara xa Huvo leyi, hileswi mi nga ta tirhisa
xiswona tanihi Xandla xa Presidente ya tiko. Hi mi navelela minkateko. Hi
ri Homu! Homu! [Va ba mavoko.] (Translation of Xitsonga paragraph follows.)

[Mr N T GODI (APC): Deputy President, in the name of the APC we celebrate
your election as the Deputy President. As we express our congratulations to
you, we would also like to wish you good luck and success. I believe that
the manner in which you served as the Speaker of this Assembly will
translate into how you will serve as the Deputy President of the country.
We would once more like to wish you good luck and echo our ululations to
you. [Applause.]]

Dr C P MULDER (FF PLUS): Madam Deputy Speaker, before I address the new
Deputy President, I would like to thank the hon President for making the
announcement with regard to the executive in this House this afternoon. I
think that is in recognition of the importance of the NA as the legislative
arm of government. Thank you for that. [Applause.]

I would like to address myself to the new Deputy President, but I do so
with mixed feelings. I am happy on her behalf for this wonderful
opportunity she is being given to become the Deputy President and we all
know that she will do a wonderful job, the same way as she did when she was
our Speaker.

I am also a bit sad on behalf of the legislative arm of government because
we are losing one of our finest to the executive. I hope that the Deputy
President will remember us and look after us as well. [Applause.]

Dr S E M PHEKO (PAC): Madam Deputy Speaker, I think that today, since the
Speaker has become the Deputy President, I can be given those few minutes
that she had not been giving me while she was the Speaker. [Laughter.]

We would like to sincerely congratulate the Deputy President. I always get
very emotional when I see our women rise to high positions because I
believe that the 21st century is the women’s century, and besides that,
they are the majority anyway. [Applause.]

As men, we have always pretended and played the role of the majority, but
we are actually a minority. I believe that women should take up the
challenge and lead the continent.

I don’t want to digress into a lot of things that I could digress into, but
I cannot but reflect on Nehanda, Manthatise and Nzinga. It is generally not
known that it was Nzinga who brought about the abolition of slavery, long
before 1834 when the British pretended that they were abolishing slavery.
You know who took up the arms in Zimbabwe; it was Nehanda.

In the past our women played a very important role, and I believe that they
are yet to play an even better role, so I would like to congratulate you,
Madam Deputy President.

I also remember those days when we travelled with you to Italy and Belarus
in Russia. At that time you were received as a head of state - I don’t know
how you manoeuvred that!

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of Order: Hon member, you see the danger in
giving you more time!

Dr S E M PHEKO: Izwe lethu! Izwe lethu! Izwe lethu! [Our land! Our land!
Our land!]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon members, for those kind words.
The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, Mr
President, on behalf of the ANC and of the House, congratulations to Madam
Speaker for the last time. We wish her strength for the path ahead.

We wish to thank you for the role that you have played in the formative
years of this very important institution of our democracy and for the
leadership that you have displayed in steering this institution through
both difficult and good times. The role that you’ve played in the
transformation of this institution, from how we found it in 1994 to the
people’s Parliament that it has become, is commendable.

We wish to pledge our support to you in the new role that our organisation
has entrusted you with. We hope that in the spirit of co-operative
governance, the relationship between the legislature and the executive will
be further consolidated and strengthened.

Baie dankie, voorspoed, alles van die beste! [Thank you very much; good
luck and everything of the best!]

                  ELECTION OF SPEAKER OF NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                               (Announcement)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, owing to the resignation of the Speaker of
the National Assembly, with immediate effect, there is now a vacancy in the
Office of the Speaker. I now request the Chief Justice to take the Chair to
preside over the election of the Speaker. [Applause.]

The CHIEF JUSTICE: There will now be an opportunity for the nomination of
candidates for election as Speaker of the National Assembly.

Mrs R A NDZANGA: Justice Langa, I have the honour to nominate hon Gwendolyn
Lindiwe Mahlangu-Nkabinde as a candidate for the Speaker of the National
Assembly. [Applause.]

The CHIEF JUSTICE: Is the nomination seconded?

Dr M SEFULARO: Chief Justice, I, Molefi Sefularo, rise to second the
nomination of Ms Gwendolyn Lindiwe Mahlangu-Nkabinde. Thank you.
[Applause.]

The CHIEF JUSTICE: Please submit the nomination form to the Returning
Officer.

The RETURNING OFFICER: Mr Chief Justice, I have satisfied myself that the
nomination is in order.

The CHIEF JUSTICE: Are there any further nominations?

Mrs S V KALYAN: Chief Justice, it is an honour and a privilege to nominate
the hon Celia–Sandra Botha for the position of Speaker of the National
Assembly. [Applause.]

The CHIEF JUSTICE: The hon Ms Botha has been nominated. Is the nomination
seconded?

Mr S J MASANGO: Chief Justice, I stand to second the nomination of hon
Celia-Sandra Botha as the Speaker of the National Assembly. [Applause.]

The CHIEF JUSTICE: Please submit the nomination form to the Returning
Officer.

The RETURNING OFFICER: Chief Justice, I have satisfied myself that the
nomination is in order.

The CHIEF JUSTICE: Are there any further nominations? If not, we will
proceed. The following candidates have been properly nominated: the hon Ms
Gwendolyn Mahlangu-Nkabinde, the hon Ms Celia-Sandra Botha.

Since more than one candidate has been nominated, a secret ballot will take
place in terms of Item 6 of Part A of Schedule 3 to the Constitution. I now
suspend proceedings to allow the returning officer to prepare ballot
papers. We shall resume proceedings when the bells are rung. It is
estimated that the printing and preparation of ballot papers will take
approximately 10 minutes.

Business suspended at 17:50 and resumed at 18:08.

                  ELECTION BY SECRET BALLOT OF NEW SPEAKER

The CHIEF JUSTICE: We shall now proceed with voting. Assistant Returning
Officers will, as before, now show that the ballot boxes are empty and seal
them.

I will now go through the procedure. It is the same as before. Members will
be called in alphabetical order according to their surnames. When their
names are called members must collect a ballot paper from the voting table.
After collecting a ballot paper, each member must proceed to one of the
ballot booths and make a clear cross against the name of the candidate for
whom he or she decides to vote, in the space provided on the ballot paper
for recording of a vote.

After making the mark on the ballot paper and while still in the booth, a
member must fold his or her ballot paper in such a manner that the official
mark thereon is visible to an Assistant Returning Officer. After the
Assistant Returning Officer has noted the mark on the ballot paper, members
should deposit it in the ballot box and resume their seats. The Returning
Officer will now call upon members to vote.

The CHIEF JUSTICE: Are there any members who have not voted and wish to do
so now? It seems not. The Assistant Returning Officers will close and seal
the ballot boxes. Thank you, that has been done. I now suspend proceedings
to enable the Returning Officer to count the votes, in my presence, and
report the results to me. The bells will be rung for five minutes before
resumption of proceedings, which I estimate to be in about 20 minutes.

Business suspended at 18:55 and resumed at 19:16.

            ANNOUNCEMENT OF ELECTION RESULTS BY THE CHIEF JUSTICE

The Chief Justice took the Chair and announced the results of the ballot,
as follows:

   Mrs C-S Botha: 45
   Ms G L Mahlangu-Nkabinde: 260

The CHIEF JUSTICE: In terms of item 6 of Part A of Schedule 3 to the
Constitution, I accordingly declare Ms G L Mahlangu-Nkabinde the Speaker of
the National Assembly.

Ms G L Mahlangu-Nkabinde accordingly elected Speaker of the National
Assembly in terms of item 6 of Part A of Schedule 3 to the Constitution.

The CHIEF JUSTICE: I now call upon the Serjeant-at-Arms to conduct the
Speaker to the Chair.

The Serjeant-at-Arms conducted the Speaker to the Chair.

           STATEMENT BY NEWLY ELECTED SPEAKER OF NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

The SPEAKER: Chief Justice Langa, honoured guests, esteemed colleagues, I’m
greatly honoured and deeply humbled by the confidence shown in me by the
House today. This institution is the ultimate custodian of the democracy
for which we fought for so hard, and for which so many brave South Africans
suffered and died.

For me, personally, it is an enormous honour to have been tasked as Speaker
of the NA. As my colleagues on both sides of the House will know, I am
passionate about this institution and the work it does. I’m also deeply
attached to the community which we have established here. Although we have
differences between parties across the House, those differences are
ideological. We remain, beyond those differences, one community committed
to the shared ideal of building a better future for all South Africans.
[Applause.]

I shall endeavour to do my work to the best of my ability to facilitate the
efficient and effective functioning of the House in order to achieve those
ideals which we are here to serve. In order to achieve that, I will need
not only the co-operation of my colleagues, but also of that enormously
valuable resource, the parliamentary staff.

I wish to express, in particular, my appreciation to the former Speaker,
Mrs Baleka Mbete, under whom I served as Deputy Speaker, and from whom I
learnt so very much. I wish her well in the great new challenge that lies
before her.

I wish to acknowledge the commitment and hard work of the House Chairs, the
Whippery and the staff in the Speaker’s Office. I look forward to continue
working with that team. Above all, I thank God Almighty. [Applause.] I
thank God Almighty for the protection and guidance over the years; but,
above all, I thank Him for allowing me to do His work. I thank you.
[Applause.]

The House will proceed to the election of the Deputy Speaker, in terms of
the procedure set out in Part A of Schedule 3 to the Constitution, and in
accordance with the rules of the Chief Justice. There will now be an
opportunity for nomination of candidates for election as Deputy Speaker of
the National Assembly.

                         ELECTION OF DEPUTY SPEAKER
Ms M A A NJOBE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, I have the honour to nominate the
hon Nozizwe Charlotte Madlala-Routledge as Deputy Speaker for the National
Assembly of the Parliament of the Republic of South Africa. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mrs T L P NWAMITWA-SHILUBANA: Hon Speaker, his Excellency the Chief
Justice, I stand here to second the nomination of Nozizwe Charlotte Madlala-
Routledge as Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly of the Parliament of
the Republic of South Africa. I thank you. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Thank you. Please submit the nomination form to the Returning
Officer.

The RETURNING OFFICER: Madam Speaker, I have satisfied myself that the
nomination is in order.

The SPEAKER: Thank you. Are there any further nominations?

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, I want to inform the House that the DA has the
huge privilege and pleasure in announcing that we will not be nominating
anybody for the position of Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker, we also do not have a candidate.
[Applause.] [Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: Order! There are no further nominations. Only one candidate
has been nominated, namely, the hon Madlala-Routledge. [Applause.]

The nomination is in order. Accordingly, in terms of item 5 of Part A of
Schedule 3 to the Constitution, I declare the hon Madlala-Routledge duly
elected Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly of the Republic of South
Africa. [Applause.]

On behalf of all present here, I congratulate you on your election as
Deputy Speaker. You now have the opportunity to address the House.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Madam Speaker, hon members, it’s been a wonderful day.
When I woke up this morning, there was a rainbow covering the mountain. I
felt blessed because I live in this wonderful country, South Africa. I feel
that as a country and a very young democracy, we have set for ourselves a
course and a path that will remain, not only for the generations to come
but for the continent as a whole.

I humbly thank all of you, hon members, for electing me. I pledge to work
with the Speaker to serve you, because I believe that when we elect
leaders, we elect them to serve us. I will not give you a long speech
because I think I am overwhelmed.

I want to thank the ANC. [Applause]. I want to thank the leadership of the
ANC and our people in the streets, who have great expectations of this
House and of us.

Today we have listened as the President of the Republic addressed us and we
felt a sense of hope, a sense of optimism and for me that rainbow I saw
this morning is a promise of a bright future for our country, as we build
our democracy. Thank you, members. [Applause.]

The House adjourned at 19:31.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent


    (1)    Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 25 September
    2008:


          a) South African National Space Agency Bill [B 20B – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).


          b) Legal Succession to the South African Transport Services
             Amendment Bill [B 43B – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75).

          c) National Energy Bill [B 52D – 2008] (National Assembly – sec
             75).
          d) Diplomatic Immunities and Privileges Amendment Bill [B 55B –
             2008] (National Assembly – sec 75).

2.    Bill referred to Mediation Committee

    (1)     Bill, amended by National Assembly and rejected by National
        Council of Provinces on 23 September 2008, referred to Mediation
        Committee in terms of Joint Rule 186(2)(b):


         (a)      Mandating Procedures of Provinces Bill [B 8D – 2007]
             (National Council of Provinces – sec 76(2)).

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Message from National Council of Provinces to National Assembly in
     respect of Bills passed by Council and returned to Assembly


    (1)    Bill amended by National Council of Provinces and returned for
         concurrence on 25 September 2008:


         (a)      National Environmental Management: Integrated Coastal
             Management Bill [B 40D – 2007] (National Assembly – sec
             76(1))).


             The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on
             Environmental Affairs and Tourism of the National Assembly.

     (2)    Bills, subject to proposed amendments, passed by National
         Council of Provinces on 25 September 2008 and returned for
         consideration of Council’s proposed amendments:


          a) Child Justice Bill [B 49B – 2002] (National Assembly – sec 75)
             (for proposed amendments, see Announcements, Tablings and
             Committee Reports, 17 September 2008, p 1696).


             The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on
             Justice and Constitutional Development of the National Assembly
             for a report on the amendments proposed by the Council.


          b) Competition Amendment Bill [B 31B – 2008] (National Assembly –
             sec 75) (for proposed amendments, see Announcements, Tablings
             and Committee Reports, 1 September 2008, p 1657).


             The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Trade
             and Industry of the National Assembly for a report on the
             amendments proposed by the Council.


          c) Intellectual Property Rights from Publicly Financed Research
             and Development Bill [B 46B – 2008] (National Assembly – sec
             75) (for proposed amendments, see Announcements, Tablings and
             Committee Reports, 4 September 2008, p 1668).


             The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Arts
             and Culture of the National Assembly for a report on the
             amendments proposed by the Council.


          d) Skills Development Amendment Bill [B 49B – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 75) (for proposed amendments, see Announcements,
             Tablings and Committee Reports, 27 August 2008, p 1648).


             The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Labour
             of the National Assembly for a report on the amendments
             proposed by the Council.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for the Public Service and Administration

       a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 27 – Department of Housing
          for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
          Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 27 for
          2007-2008 [RP 127-2008].


       b) Report and Financial Statements of the Social Housing Foundation
          for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
          the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.

2.    The Minister of Housing
       a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 27 – Department of
          Housing for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
          General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
          of Vote 27 for 2007-2008 [RP 127-2008].


       b) Report and Financial Statements of the Social Housing Foundation
          for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Independent Auditors
          on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.

       c) Report and Financial Statements of the Rural Housing Loan Fund
          for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Independent Auditors
          on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.


      (d)   Report and Financial Statements of the National Urban
          Reconstruction and Housing Agency (NURCHA) for 2007-2008,
          including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
          Statements for 2007-2008.


3.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

       a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 23 – Department of Justice
          and Constitutional Development for 2007-2008, including the Report
          of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
          Information of Vote 23 for 2007-2008 [RP 232-2008].


4.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy

       a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Nuclear
          Energy Corporation Limited (NECSA) for 2007-2008, including the
          Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
          Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 163-2008].


       b) Report and Financial Statements of the National Nuclear Regulator
          (NNR) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General
          on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2006-
          2007 [RP 36-2008].

       c) Report and Financial Statements of the Mine Health and Safety
          Council for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General
          on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
          2008 [RP 46-2008].

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

      (a)   A request has been received from the Minister for Justice and
         Constitutional Development for the filling of a vacancy of full-
         time commissioner in the South African Human Rights Commission in
         terms of section 193(5) of the Constitution.

         Referred to the Ad Hoc Committee on Filling of Vacancy in Human
         Rights Commission for consideration and report.


