---
title: 'National Assembly - 12 February 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2008-02-12
---

                          TUESDAY, 12 FEBRUARY 2008
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 12:00.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                        APPOINTMENT OF NEW CHIEF WHIP

                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members! I wish to take this opportunity to
formally announce that Mr E N Mthethwa has been appointed Chief Whip of the
Majority Party with effect from 24 January 2008. [Applause.]

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Mr L W GREYLING: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice of the following
motion:
  That the House, noting President Mbeki’s response to a question
  from Ms P de Lille concerning party funding –

     1) establishes an ad hoc committee to consider and report on the nature
        of party funding in South Africa; and

     2) recommends measures for the regulation of such   funding, if deemed
        necessary.

                              HOURS OF SITTING

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, I move without notice:

  That, notwithstanding the hours of sitting of the House as provided for
  in Rule 23(2), the House, today, Tuesday, 12 February 2008, sits at 12:00
  in order to pay tribute to the late hon P J Gomomo.

I thank you.

The SPEAKER: I’m quite sure there are no objections; that’s why we are all
here.
Agreed to.
     REVIVAL OF ITEMS THAT LAPSED AT THE END OF THE 2007 ANNUAL SESSION

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move the draft
resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper as follows:

  That the following items, which were on the Order Paper and which lapsed
  at the end of the 2007 annual session, be revived for consideration by
  the National Assembly:


     1) Second Reading debate – National Environment Laws Amendment Bill
        [B35 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 76) – (Minister of
        Environmental Affairs and Tourism).


     2) Consideration of Report of Ad Hoc Committee on the Review of Chapter
        9 and Associated Institutions (Announcements, Tablings and Committee
        Reports, 21 August 2007, p 1590).

Agreed to.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                          (The late Mr P J Gomomo)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move the draft
resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:

    That the House –


      1) notes with profound sadness that on Tuesday, 22 January 2008, the
         hon Phumzile John Gomomo passed away;


      2) recognises that the hon Gomomo was a great South African and
         working-class leader who devoted his life to the service of the
         people and the country and that the mighty workers’ movement we
         see today would never have been built without the commitment and
         hard work of people like him;


      3) recalls that in the 1980s, together with other comrades in the
         motor industry, he led a R2 an hour living wage campaign that saw
         the total shutdown of a Uitenhage plant and also linked with the
         works councils at VW Germany which contact resulted in the
         development of contacts with the German trade union IG Metall;


      4) further recalls that throughout his life, the hon John Gomomo was
         an internationalist and had represented Numsa on major committees
         at the International Metalworkers Federation and in 1989 he was
         elected as Cosatu’s second Deputy President and as President in
         1991 and that he led the workers of South Africa through difficult
         times and was involved in the drawing up of the RDP, the new
         Constitution and also spearheaded the 1995 campaign for new labour
         laws;


      5) further recalls that together with other comrades, the hon Gomomo
         worked to build the civic movements which played a key role in the
         fight to end apartheid – notably the powerful Uitenhage Black
         Civic Organisation - and that many of the comrades he fought with
         were assassinated by the security police while others were
         detained and tortured;


      6) believes that the hon John Gomomo discharged his responsibilities
         with dedication, discipline, diligence and humility and that his
         life epitomises heroism and commitment to the cause of freedom and
         social justice; and


      7) conveys its condolences to the Gomomo family, the African National
         Congress, the South African Communist Party and the Congress of
         South African Trade Unions.


I thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Speaker, hon colleagues, our late
comrade, Phumzile John Gomomo, was born on a farm near Adelaide in 1946 at
a place called Didima. His parents were farm labourers and, as such, young
Phumzile was destined to become either a farm labourer himself or to join
other young people, as was the tradition in those days, to line up for
recruitment to be a mineworker.

The farm school went up to Standard 2. Legislation made sure that children
born and brought up on the farms were invariably destined to be labourers
themselves, or to be mineworkers, to make sure that cheap labour was
readily available on the mines. Opportunities for social and economic
development were few for farm children and, in fact, as low as the ceiling
of a Bantu education classroom.

To escape this spiral of providing cheap labour, the young Phumzile was
soon to migrate with his family to Uitenhage. There he got what was a
relatively better type of education. He was also exposed to a bigger world
and a different experience – an experience of a hard life and survival
skills. It was in Uitenhage that his political life actually developed.

Phumzile worked at a Volkswagen car manufacturing plant at the time when
the trade union movement was reawakening in South Africa. The events in
Durban in 1973 gave birth to a number of trade unions, such as Macwusa,
Naawu and Saawu in the Eastern Cape. Phumzile became a shop steward of
Naawu, which is now Numsa, and rose to the ranks of local and national
leadership of that trade union. Together with other leaders of the then
Fosatu, leaders such as our Minister, Alec Erwin, Comrade Sisa Njikelana,
MP, the late Comrade Thozamile Gqwetha and many others, Phumzile became
pivotal in the negotiations that led to the birth of the current Cosatu in
1985. He became, as the Chief Whip said, the second President of Cosatu,
after Comrade Elijah Barayi.

As an activist of the 1970s and the 1980s, Comrade Gomomo had to wrestle
with a barrage of contending ideologies. He had to contend with the Black
Consciousness Movement, he had to contend with the Unity Movement and he
had to contend with our own ideology of the ANC and its allies. He
developed his own political understanding and understood the correctness of
aligning himself with the ANC and the SACP. This guided his position on the
role of trade unions and the link between that role and the broader
struggle for national liberation.

As part of the leadership of the UDF under the regional leadership of
comrades such as hon Henry Fazi, an MP now, the late Comrade Edgar Ngoyyi,
the late Matthew Goniwe and young comrades, scholars at the time, such as
Lulu Johnson, Comrade Gomomo played a pivotal role in mobilising,
organising and leading our people to deliver the final blows to apartheid.
The consumer boycotts of 1985 after the Langa massacre are a case in point.

It was only rational that this outstanding leader of our people became a
member of this august House. He represented our people with humility and
dignity but with unyielding resolve to attain total freedom for our country
and its people.

He leaves behind a South Africa which is remarkably different from the one
he grew up in. Our government has made huge strides in passing legislation
that restores our people’s dignity, laws that protect our people’s rights
and make sure there are better opportunities and services even for farm
labourers and mineworkers. But he knew that was not all we had been
striving for. Not all our objectives for the South Africa of our dreams
have been attained.

Phumzile was a total person. He was a father, a husband, a relative, a
sangoma and a grandfather, but, above all, he was a revolutionary. We will
miss his company and contribution.

AmaNzotho namaMpondo mawalale ngenxeba. Akuhlanga Lungehliyo. [May the
Nzothos and Pondos take comfort in God’s love. What has happened was God’s
will.]

Mnr K J MINNIE: Speaker, agb lede, op 20 Junie 2007 het John Gomomo die
laaste keer in hierdie Huis opgetree. Dit was tydens die debat oor die
Staatsdienswysigingswet. Gister, op 11 Februarie 2008, het die President
hierdie wet onderteken, en vandag, op 12 Februarie 2008, is dit gepubliseer
in die Aankondigings, Tertafelleggings en Komiteeverslae van hierdie
Parlement. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr K J MINNIE: Speaker, hon members, the last time John Gomomo appeared in
this House was on 20 June 2007. It was during the debate on the Public
Service Amendment Act. Yesterday, 11 February 2008, the President signed
the Act and today, 12 February 2008, it was published in the Announcements,
Tablings and Committee Reports of this Parliament.]

Speaker, Mr John Gomomo was a pioneer and a great leader of the South
African workers who devoted his entire life to improving the working
conditions for workers in his union, movement and the country in general.
John Gomomo was, in the 70s, the chairperson of the Volkswagen liaison
committee. This was a time when the workers’ movement faced enormous
obstacles as the law banned the formation of trade unions across race. He
became the president of the National Automobile and Allied Workers Union.

To demonstrate his selfless life, John Gomomo was an astute negotiator,
which saw him elected as the first chairperson of the Eastern Cape region
of the Federation of South African Trade Unions, Fosatu, in 1979, a union
that was formed through the merger of some unions. After this, John Gomomo
participated in four-year-long unity talks that led to the creation of the
Congress of South African Trade Unions in December 1985. In 1989, he was
elected second Deputy President of Cosatu and ultimately became President
of Cosatu in 1991.

I have known John Gomomo as the chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on
the Public Service and Administration on which I served with him for the
past four years. On a personal level, Mr Gomomo was a warm person to talk
with. He was always humble and respectful. Although one could, at times,
see the strain his body was taking due to his illness, he always
demonstrated that life should go on.

On a working and political level, as we are in different political parties
in Parliament, John would always demonstrate an accommodating outlook with
the belief that people are, by nature, not homogenous in their thinking and
beliefs. He did not take things personally. We could disagree but we could
still laugh and talk. Perhaps his inherent skills as a politician, a
devoted unionist and negotiator helped him to be real and humane. This is
what one will miss due to the departure of John Gomomo.

We should take a leaf out of the book of gentle giants like John Gomomo. We
should not fail to think about our people more than ourselves when we deal
with national work such as legislation, policy and other social issues. We
as the DA say: Fare you well, John Gomomo. We will miss you, maNzotho. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Dr U ROOPNARAIN: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, I stand before you ...

The SPEAKER: I have since become the Speaker! [Interjections.]

Dr U ROOPNARAIN: Sorry! Madam Speaker, hon members, I stand before you
today on behalf of my party, the IFP, to pay tribute to this great human
being. I believe that, in history, each individual is able to make a unique
contribution. Some contributions stand out as monuments and others as a
legacy. The life and contributions of the late John Gomomo will be both.

I met John Gomomo in 2001 when I joined the portfolio committee. I was new
to the committee yet immediately I felt part of the team. I think every
member who was part of the Public Service portfolio committee, across
partisan lines, can attest to this. John Gomomo dedicated his life to the
workers’ movement. He helped to create a better life for people and indeed
his departure from our midst will be a very difficult void to fill.

In paying tribute to this phenomenal human being, I would describe John in
the following way: He was a man among men – never judgmental and very
composed. John exuded the very essence compassion, duty, courage, and
political integrity. He was a voice for the thousands of voiceless and
powerless workers, a standard-bearer and a fearless champion for the rights
of the oppressed. He worked tirelessly to create a more humane working
environment.

He pioneered the establishment of a number of civic organisations such as
the Uitenhage Black Civic Organisation. At the height of social unrest, he
led a number of mass campaigns. In 1991, he was elected as Cosatu’s
president and spearheaded a number of campaigns including the introduction
of the Labour Relations Act and the Employment Equity Act.

John fully embraced the principles of the ANC and the strategic moment that
political liberation brought. He immersed himself in being a
parliamentarian but had the issues of employment and the Public Service at
heart. He fought to improve the material conditions of workers and public
servants, hence he became a colossal symbol of justice and fairness. This
sense of fairness and impartiality also seeped into the portfolio
committee. Many hon members will attest to this. John always looked in the
direction of the opposition and solicited our opinions and thoughts. He
knew what the people were saying and he knew what serving the people meant.

Let me share something with you about John: John was an eclectic thinker.
He spent many years on a spiritual journey and often embraced other faiths.
Yes, he was a sangoma, but John also wore sacred Hindu beads around his
wrist. He burnt incense sticks at his home and, more amazingly, he quoted
Hindu scriptures and mantras in Sanskrit. He did this with such eloquence.
I stood in awe and admired this individual. It was amazing.

Another incident also comes to mind. John suffered from diabetes. Despite
this, he gave in at times to the sugar cravings. I remember accompanying
him to the anti-corruption forum last year. During the coffee break, he was
seated in front of a plate of pastries and other sugary goods and began
eating them. I walked towards his table all wide-eyed and looked at him in
dismay. Instead he smiled at me, winked and said he was checking the
freshness of the baked goods. He did this for two days!

Although we feel the sadness, John would want us to continue protecting the
rights and interests of people, especially the workers. I am grateful that
I had the chance of interacting with him. I am also grateful to have served
under his leadership. So, today I am filled with both grief and pride –
grief that his presence is no more, but pride for his epic contribution.

Though he may not be physically with us, we can hear his voice and his
words that, in their profound simplicity, will continue to ring
irrespective of which parties we belong to or where we reside or what
language or religion we follow. We are reminded of his words. He often used
these words when he ended portfolio committee meetings: “We are the last
country on the continent to attain liberation. We need to be a beacon of
light to the rest of Africa.” This should be our resolve.

To the members of his family: We know you feel this pain even more deeply.
We cannot grasp the depth of your grief. May you be comforted. To the ANC,
his colleagues and his comrades: You have lost a giant. May God, the Prince
of Peace, comfort you in this time. Farewell, John. May your soul rest in
peace. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Madam Speaker, hon members, the UDM joins the previous
speakers in extending heartfelt condolences to the Gomomo family and
friends and, not least, to his political party, the ANC, and Cosatu. It is
with a deep sense of sorrow that we extend these condolences for a man of
hon Mr Gomomo’s stature at this moment in time.

Some of us may not have known hon Gomomo on a personal level but one cannot
help feeling like one knew him personally because of his contributions,
ranging from workers’ rights to the basic principles of democracy and human
rights which he stood for and embodied in himself for the best part of his
life.

May his family find solace in the fact that their loss is not theirs only
but also that of the nation at large. We salute the role that he played and
bid a sad farewell to another great son of the Eastern Cape. Aluhlanga
lungehlanga, maNzotho kunye namaMpondo. [What has happened was God’s will,
the Nzothos and the Mpondos.] May his soul rest in peace. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Madam Speaker, on behalf of the ID, I extend my condolences
to John’s family - our late comrade - the ANC and all his friends.

I remember John was there as a trade unionist when we had to react to the
Frame Group strikes in Durban in the 70s; when we had to interact on the
Wiehahn Commission recommendations; and also when we had unity talks. He
played a major role in trying to bring unity amongst workers.

I recall one day when we were travelling back from an International
Confederation of Trade Unions conference in Paris and we had bought a book
that was banned in South Africa. We had to take turns on the plane to read
the book because we were not allowed to bring it in the next day. When we
arrived, the customs officials called us and I asked: “John, where is the
book?” He said: “Comrade, I am taking it with me.” That is the kind of
bravery that we have experienced through working with him as a worker.

We have certainly lost a great son. To his family and to the ANC: I know it
is going to be difficult to find somebody to fill his great shoes. But he
certainly left a mark that we can all remember. May his soul rest in peace.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Deputy Speaker, Ministers, colleagues, the ACDP joins
this House in conveying our sincere condolences to family and friends of
hon John Gomomo. It is our sincere hope that they have an assurance and
confidence that he is going to be with his Maker and pray that they will
experience the peace of Jesus Christ at this time.

Hon John Gomomo is recognised for his contribution to the liberation of
South Africa and the postapartheid reconstruction process. It is, however,
of course, his loved ones, his family, friends and colleagues, who knew him
best.

John’s wife was in fact one of the first people I met and had the pleasure
of spending time with in 1999 when I came to Parliament to be sworn in - a
wonderful woman whose trust is in the Lord Jesus Christ and who was
committed to praying for her husband. We ask God to strengthen you and your
family during this time. May God bless you and may his peace, which
transcends all understanding, guard your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr B E PULE: Deputy Speaker, allow me, on behalf of the UCDP, also to pay
tribute to the late hon Phumzile Gomomo. I did not know the late hon Gomomo
in his prime of life but I had the privilege of knowing him as a Member of
Parliament and also as a resident of Acacia Park.

During my interaction with him, our minds took excursions, generally, into
life’s vicissitudes. I observed that he was a man with a sense of mission;
he was also a man with a sense of destiny; and above all, I observed that
he was a very humble no-nonsense man. Of course, it is this humility that
is always an index of a man’s ethical integrity; hence, in him, I observed
a man of integrity.

May the soul of this worthy son of Africa rest in peace! May his departure
leave a legacy of dispossession of self and all that self includes. May his
family, friends and relatives, his party, the ANC, and all its alliance
partners and all South Africans accept the UCDP’s condolence. God’s will
has been done.

Lalang ka ntho madi a tshologe. [Legofi.] [Hang in there. [Applause.]]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Deputy Speaker, we regretfully return to the podium to
pay our respects to the deceased hon Phumzile John Gomomo. It saddens me
that we have lost such a wonderful spirit that has served our people well.
We extend our condolence to the beloved family and friends of Gomomo, and
pray that God may give them the strength to overcome his loss. Gomomo has
been one of those souls that has left each of us marked with good memories
of his friendship.

I had the pleasure to encounter and engage with Gomomo in his trade union
work and he was a great personality. He had a strong drive for life and a
great passion for people. We further extend our heartfelt condolences to
the ANC that has lost an impeccable comrade. Our condolences are further
extended to the Portfolio Committee on the Public Service and
Administration. We are sure that his leadership skills will be sorely
missed.

Cosatu has lost a great leader and comrade that we hope will serve as an
example to the one who shall fill his shoes. We pray that Gomomo’s
commitment and enthusiasm to serve the people will be enshrined in the
business of the House, the ANC and Cosatu. We pray that our brother Gomomo
will be welcomed into the gardens of Heaven and be met by so many of our
great martyrs. I pray that he will tell them that we are all well and
working hard to transform South Africa into the nation that they also
dreamt of.

Brother Gomomo, as you lay down to rest, may you have the peace that you
have served us well. Loving memories of you will rest in the hearts of all
that have gained from encountering such a wonderful soul as you. May God
bless you. Rest in peace. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Deputy Speaker, in December last year, I was shocked to
learn about the hospitalisation of Comrade John Gomomo around his area of
residence. It was only on 22 January 2008 when the sad news of his passing
away was broken and I was shattered. I’ve known Comrade Gomomo since my
early years as a high school student in the late '70s. He was an
inspiration to me and many other students of my time, especially the
scholars of the liberation struggle. He was always in the thick of things
and led from the front. In matters of the workers’ struggle, he stood very
tall.

In 2004, I was fortunate to serve in this Parliament as a colleague of this
honourable son of the soil, although in different portfolio committees. I
recall a day we met near Poorthuis. I had a brief chat with Comrade Gomomo.
He said to me: You are a clean-shaven comrade, just keep it that way. I
thanked him and immediately remembered that he was referring to our heydays
of the struggle when most of the activists were bearded and sported rough
hair.

Comrade Gomomo will be missed by us, his family, friends, comrades and the
alliance partners. On behalf of the APC, I wish to extend our deepest
condolences and sympathy to Gomomo’s family and those who are close to him.
We will always remember Comrade Gomomo because an injury to one is an
injury to all.

Long live the spirit of Comrade John Gomomo, long live! [Applause.]
HON MEMBERS: Long live!

Dr S E M PHEKO: Deputy Speaker, the hon Phumzile John Gomomo was indeed a
great trade unionist. I appreciated him very much. He was tolerant. He
admitted it when he supported issues that were in conflict with the
interests of the workers. For instance, there was a time when I
consistently asked him how he justified his appeal to Cosatu to vote for a
political party that pursued the policy of privatisation which reduced
jobs. There was also a high rate of retrenchment of teachers at the time.
He admitted that this was a paradox. He took my inquiry in the right
democratic spirit.

The PAC is saddened by his premature death but appreciates that he did so
much for the trade union movement in our country in a short space of time.
He, indeed, lived his life qualitatively.

We express and extend our deep condolences to his family. Many trade union
leaders are people who are often moved by the poverty and exploitation of
workers; the hon P J Gomomo was one of them. His life and role evoke
memories of giant trade union leaders such as Clement Kadalie - one of the
first dynamic trade union leaders in this country.

Death remains a mystery but Job - that African who lived in the ancient
geographic area of the Kushites, many years ago – asked: “Is there life
after death?” He answered: “For I know that my redeemer liveth ... and
though after my skin worms may destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I
see God.” May it be so with the hon P J Gomomo. [Applause.]

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Madam Deputy Speaker, allow me to join the ANC, the
SACP, Cosatu and members of this House in expressing our condolences, as
Azapo, to the family and friends of Comrade Gomomo. It is indeed in our
tradition and befitting, as people who come from the liberation movement,
to celebrate the life and work of such an important comrade. As Azapo, we
remember him as a trade unionist who inspired and stood by the workers as a
leader in the trade union movement.

We also wish to acknowledge the enormous contribution that Comrade Gomomo
made in the liberation struggle as a man who rose from an ordinary worker
to become a leader of one of the most important workers’ federations in
Africa and in the world. To us, his departure creates a gap that would be
difficult to fill. However, his work and name will live forever. His
passing away came as a shock to many who worked with him. He will indeed be
missed. May his soul rest in peace! I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms M M MDLALOSE: Madam Speaker ...

... singu-Nadeco nezakhamuzi zaseNingizimu Afrika sifisa ukukhalela iqembu
elibusayo kanye nezwe lonke ngeqhawe, ... [... as the National Democratic
Congregation, Nadeco, and as citizens of South Africa we wish to extend our
condolences to the ruling party and the country as a whole for the hero
...]

... son of the soil.

Siyabonga ngempilo yakhe futhi siyadumisa ngokuphila kwakhe
okugcwalisekile. Simfisela ukuphumula okuhle. Sifisa ukududuza umndeni
nabahlobo bakhe. [We are grateful for his life and we celebrate the life he
lived to the end. May his soul rest in peace. We would like to convey our
words of comfort to his family and friends.]

May his soul rest in peace!

Ngiyabonga. [Thank you.] [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Deputy Speaker, hon Ministers and members, the FD wishes to
extend a sincere message of condolence to the family, friends and loved
ones of Mr John Gomomo. He was a stalwart of the workers’ movement, a
comrade to his peers, a leader of the workers and a visionary of a society
free of exploitation and discrimination.

I had the privilege to meet Mr Gomomo at Parliament – a humble man of
integrity and a fighter to the end in defending the rights of workers. Mr
Gomomo knew how to lead and his talents placed him in the leadership of
various workers’ organisations including the National Union of Metal
Workers of SA and later Cosatu, which he helped bring into existence. He
was actively involved in helping to shape our new Constitution and had
always been committed to defending the rights of the poor.

He was a trade unionist at heart and his politics were motivated by these
interests. Even as a Member of Parliament, he would continue to argue in
favour of economic policies that benefited the workers, the unemployed and
the poor.

The FD acknowledges the role of Mr Gomomo in shaping our society into one
that is free and friendlier for all to live in. We extend our sincerest
condolences to the family, friends and loved ones of the late John Gomomo,
as well as to the ANC, which has lost an outstanding leader. He will be
sorely missed. May his soul rest in peace! I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S SIMMONS: Madam Deputy Speaker, the contribution of any individual in
the fight for democracy can never be ignored, more so in the case of
someone of the magnitude of the late Mr Gomomo, as noted.

The late Mr Gomomo is a shining example of taking the fight for freedom and
democracy from the bottom to the top - from soldier and shopsteward to
Member of Parliament. The NA salutes the hon Mr Gomomo for his unselfish
contribution to his people and conveys its condolences to his family,
friends and the ANC. May his soul rest in peace! I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr T R MOFOKENG: Madam Speaker, hon members, Ministers, Deputy President, I
think it is a privilege for me just to talk about the man I knew. When I
was told to talk about him a few minutes ago, I was in a Scopa meeting and
I thought it is never too late for a man to comment, since I knew what I
was going to talk about - I knew the person.

I knew Gomomo since the early ’70s – some of you will be surprised. In the
mid seventies, around ’77 and ’78, we met with Gomomo when we formed a
consultative committee with comrades like Alec and others. We came down to
Cape Town to form a federation. That federation was called the Federation
of South African Trade Unions, Fosatu, and was officially formed late in
1979.

We thought that was not enough because we were worried about the mines
which were not organised then. We found that we were not capable of
organising the mines and thought that we should give that task to the
Council of Unions of South Africa, Cusa, which was then the National
Council of Trade Unions, Nactu, and then thought of Comrade Cyril to lead
it. We then decided to bring the federations together and form a real
federation, not leaving Cusa aside. We were with Gomomo. By that time - I
must not be afraid to say this - I think I was still a leader to him
because I was serving at five national levels. We then, together with
Gomomo, formed Cosatu in 1985.

I remember when we were at Kings Park stadium in KwaZulu-Natal in 1985 – I
think there was a state of emergency thereafter – when Comrade Gomomo and
some of us called for the throwing away of reference books, etc. We did
that, threw them away in that stadium and said that we were not going to
carry those things anymore and that we wanted IDs. By that time, the then
State President, P W Botha, was late. He could not believe what had
happened and had to follow us. After three to six months he agreed and
said: “yes, let us get rid of these passbooks and IDs.” We had already
called for that with Gomomo, the real leader by then.

I went to Uitenhage and buried his wife, who was in a wheelchair, and I was
surprised. I was always with Gomomo but I was unaware that his family had
problems. Comrades, I remember during those times that he used to say to
me: “Ron, there is a problem here. There is no more peace.” The funny part
of this is that when there was peace, Comrade Gomomo would lead that peace.
There would come a time when there was a conflict of rights and conflict of
workers’ interests and Gomomo would realise that things were at the lowest
ebb and there might be war. Gomomo would not lead that war but he would
command it.
Mr P W Botha called for a state of emergency and Comrade Gomomo came to me
in the mid-80s and again said: “Ron, there is a state of emergency now. Let
us show this man that we can do something.” He said: “I am no longer
commanding a war but, under this emergency, I am dictating.” He dictated.
That was Gomomo.

This towering leader of the people of South Africa - a dedicated worker,
servant, revolutionary, fearless fighter, campaigner and activist of
people’s power - has passed away. Yes, indeed, he has passed on. But today
we are not commemorating, we are celebrating his revolutionary life.

Comrade Gomomo was indeed a fearless servant of the working class and the
oppressed people of South Africa. He offered himself selflessly to the
struggle against colonialism and apartheid and against capital
superexploitation. He put his own life at risk to ensure that colonialism
and apartheid were no more, and that South Africa dawned into a nonracial,
nonsexist, democratic and prosperous country, free of colonialism of a
special type and of all forms of oppression.

In his task he feared nothing - not even death could deter his vision of
justice and freedom for the oppressed masses. As the poet said:

   Oh death, thy fear I fear. But I fear thee not. I wait not for thy
   appointment day, for in it you instill thy fright, and trouble the minds
   and thoughts of those who fall to thy illusion.

Indeed, the revolutionary vision of a democratic and nonracial South Africa
inspired Comrade Gomomo to be beyond the fear of death, for he consciously
decided to dedicate his entire life to the revolutionary cause. His own
life was at risk many times but he soldiered on to provide fearless and
conscious leadership to the South African working class to take on colonial
and racial capitalism.

Comrade Gomomo served the people of South Africa with distinction. He
travelled to many parts of the world, mobilising international solidarity
against the tyranny of the former white regime. This he did with a great
sense of responsibility and courage, without seeking any glory but for the
people of South Africa and the trade union movement. He was an embodiment
of the best traditions of the congress movement - a worker, a negotiator,
an activist and a leader of the ANC, the SACP and the civic movement.

Comrade Gomomo displayed a high level of revolutionary discipline,
expressed by a commitment and availability to carry out tasks of the
organisation at all times. He served the people of South Africa in many
capacities across a number of areas including in this House. He led Cosatu
and the working class with excellence; he resembled the kind of individual
South Africa requires in its fight for social cohesion and ongoing social
transformation.

His work will always guide us. His commitment to the struggle confirms that
he was prepared to die for his beliefs, for he was indeed beyond fear in
his cause - as a poet has said referring to death:


   Admonish thy angel not to come,
   For I shall acquaint myself
   On how to die daily.
   Like travellers of the far country,
   I too shall someday know the route
   From this world to the one beyond,
   To transit at will over and again,
   Losing all fear that may lie.

Indeed, Comrade Gomomo was a fearless fighter and a revolutionary ready and
willing to die for his people and his country.

I see the faces of some of the comrades who were in the struggle with
Gomomo. I can see Don, the former president of the Chemical Workers
Industrial Union. I can see the former deputy president ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, your time has expired.
Mr T R MOFOKENG: Thank you very much. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: The condolences of the House will be conveyed to the
Gomomo family and relevant structures.

Debate concluded.

Motion agreed to, members standing.

Business suspended at 12:52 and resumed at 14:01.

              DEBATE ON PRESIDENT’S STATE OF THE NATION ADDRESS

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I have received a copy of the President’s
address, delivered at the Joint Sitting on 8 February 2008. The speech has
been printed in the minutes of the Joint Sitting.

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Madam Speaker, Comrade President, hon Members of
Parliament, fellow South Africans, ladies and gentlemen, the achievement of
democracy in 1994 marked the birth of our country as an African nation on
the southern tip of the continent.
It provided us with the opportunity to set up a government based on the
will of the people and on people-centred and people-driven principles.

It provided us with an opportunity to strengthen the ANC as a leader and a
commander in the implementation of a practical programme of social change
and a movement rooted among the people. Hence the slogan: ANC lives! ANC
leads! It is precisely for that reason that the President, during the State
of the Nation Address, declared war on poverty: ”... a national war room
for a war against poverty”, to be precise.

Masibambane ngezandla singamasebe karhulumente silwe nendlala, silamlele
abantu ekuthwaxweni linxele likaKetsekile. Sonke masibambelele ekhubeni,
siqinise imisipha neentsinga, singathandabuzi.

UMongameli uhlabe ikhwelo lokuba kungabikho siseko sikarhulumente
sibulaleka sodwa. ISebe loPhuhliso lwezeNtlalo, elooRhulumente baMaphondo
nabaseKhaya, elezoRhwebo noShishino, elezoLimo neMicimbi yoMhlaba,
eleMisebenzi yoLuntu nelezeMpilo, la masebe kufuneka abambane abe yinkwa
nenkwa, kuliwe nendlala.

Masahlukane nesiqhelo, naxa ndisazi ukuba isiqhelo siyayoyisa ingqondo. Ude
agwebe ngelikaJoji uMongameli athi, “Business unusual”.

Kunyembelekile! Umbutho wesizwe i-ANC ufuna sibe ngamafela-ndawonye anjongo
ikukubumbana alwe indlala. Ewe, silenzile igalelo, kodwa kuninzi
ekusafuneka sikwenzile. Ewe, uninzi lwabantu lunawo amanzi okusela, kodwa
kusekho abangenawo. Baninzi abanombane, kodwa bakho nabangenawo; baninzi
abazuza indodla nenkamnkam, kodwa bakho nabangacholi naphantsi. Ngokumisela
amaphulo ophuhliso lwamakhosikazi, awomlisela nomthinjana, awomgqeku
nomqikela, awabantu abahlala emaphandleni, awabantu abakhubazekileyo
nabalimeleyo, awabantu abahlaselwa zizifo naweengwevu neengwevukazi zethu,
silwa indlala.

Ngokumisela iinkqubo zophuhliso lwezakhono noqeqesho, silwa nendlala;
ngokuthoba iminyaka ukuze amadoda aminyaka ingama-60 azuze indodla, silwa
nendlala. Nam ndisalelwe yiminyakana nje embalwa, Mongameli, ndifike
kwiminyaka engama-60, ndibe kweli qumrhu lokulwa nendlala. [Kwahlekwa.]
Ngokumisela amaphulo okudala imisebenzi, silwa nendlala. Njengoko
abacinezelwa bengazange bavume ukuthoba kwimpatho-gadalala yabamhlophe,
abavumi nangoku ukuthoba ngenxa yendlala.

Abantu bahluthwa imihlaba yabo ngolunya; yiyo loo nto bakhwazayo
nanamhlanje besithi: “Umhlaba! Ubutyebi belizwe busezandleni zegcuntswana.”
Yiyo loo nto abantu bekhwaza besithi: Mayibuye! Uninzi alukabi nazindlu.
Yiyo loo nto abantu bekhwaza besithi: Amandla! (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[Let us join hands, as government departments, to fight poverty and
intervene on behalf of the people who have been ravaged by poverty. We
should all work tirelessly and earnestly together.
The President has made a call that no government structure should struggle
on its own. The Department of Social  Development, Provincial and Local
Government, Trade and Industry, Agriculture and Land Affairs, Public Works
and Health must work together to alleviate poverty.

Let us dissociate ourselves from the habit, even though I know that old
habits die hard. The President even sums this up, in English, as “Business
unusual”.

Things are bad! The people’s organisation, the ANC, wants us to form an
alliance with the aim of working together to alleviate poverty. Yes, we
have made our contribution but there is a lot that we still have to do.
Yes, the majority of the people have access to drinking water but others
don’t. There are many people who have access to electricity but there are
those without; there are many people who get social grants and old age
pensions but there are those who do not get them at all. We are fighting
poverty by establishing projects for the development of women, the youth
and children in general, people who live in the rural areas, disabled
people and those who have severe injuries due to accidents, people who are
ravaged by diseases and our elderly.

By establishing skills development and training programmes, we are fighting
poverty; by reducing the pension entry age for men to 60, we are fighting
poverty. I am also left with just a few years, President, before I reach
the age of 60 and can be part of the group to fight poverty. [Laughter.] By
establishing employment programmes, we are fighting poverty. Just as the
oppressed did not succumb to the oppressive white government, even now,
they do not want to succumb to poverty.

People had their lands maliciously expropriated. It is for that reason that
today they call out loudly: “Land! The country’s wealth is in the hands of
the few.” It is for that reason people call out loudly: “Mayibuye!”[Come
back, Africa!] A lot of them do not have houses. It is for that reason that
they loudly call:”Amandla! [Power to the people!]]

Comrade President, I agree with you that we must prepare our people for war
against poverty. Yes, Comrade President, our people have political freedom.
However, political freedom without economic control is hollow. It is for
this reason that I agree with you that we should mobilise our people for
this stage and phase of our struggle. Aluta continua!

Our theme from the 8 January Statement is “Mass mobilisation to build a
caring society”. It has been the ANC that cared and it is still the ANC
that cares. It is the ANC, together with our labour movement, that can
mobilise domestic and farm workers under the banner of a strong and
vigilant trade union.

It is the ANC together with our labour movement that can sustain a
programme of action aimed at protecting vulnerable workers. “All who work
shall be free to form trade unions, to elect their officers and to make
wage agreements with their employers”, says the Freedom Charter. And it
continues thus, Mr President: “... that our country will never be
prosperous or free until all our people live in brotherhood, enjoying equal
rights and opportunities.”

Sir Francis Bacon, however, advised us many years ago that “knowledge is
power”. Therefore, it would be of no use to create jobs and develop skills
when our people remain ignorant of the jobs being created when they are
created, what skills they require and so forth. Therefore, as highlighted
by the President in his speech, the need to enhance employment-search
mechanisms that should not be costly for job seekers is very important.
Government is stepping up the efforts to expedite that process.

It is the ANC that is committed to human rights and the rights of all
workers irrespective of gender, race, creed or religion. The ANC, hon
members, has no “buts”, “ifs”, “howevers”, “whenevers ” or “wherevers” when
it comes to the rights of workers and the constitutional rights of South
Africans in general.

Only the ANC government can win this war. Only the ANC can end rural
poverty. Only the ANC can bring dignity to people with disabilities.
[Applause.] Only the ANC can ensure that we have youths who are of quality
standard to enter the labour market. Only the ANC can provide universal
access to basic services such as water and electricity. [Interjections.]
Only the ANC can provide support to the elderly and indigent people. Only
the ANC is the home of the truly dispossessed and of all South Africans.
Our strength flows from our roots among the people. Only the ANC government
can and will win this war against poverty.

Comrade President, I am absolutely sure that, in this House, including
those members who are howling on my left, the ANC is the only organisation
and the only party that is proud of its past and the only one that is
confident of the future. [Interjections.]

I cannot say the same about the DA because they were once the Progressive
Federal Party – at some stage the DP – and now I don’t know who they are in
alliance with. I cannot even say the same about my friend in the UDM
because he knows he cannot be proud of their history. He certainly is not
sure of his future either.
I can name the parties one by one but it is only the ANC that is proud of
its past and confident about the future.

Mandigqibezele ngelithi, kumakholwane am ahleli kweli cala:
[Let me conclude by saying to my colleagues sitting on this side:]

The more you shout, the more I get excited because I am a preacher. I think
you are saying: “Hallelujah! Amen!” to what I am saying. [Interjections.]
That is why I am enjoying myself. Shout more so that I can speak more.
Thank you. [Applause.]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Agb Speaker, agb President en agb lede –
moenie bekommerd wees nie; die grootste deel van my toespraak is in Engels.
[Hon Speaker, hon President and hon members – do not be worried; the bulk
of my speech is in English.]

The President has told us that South Africa is on course. He has told us
that he has 24 Apex Priorities to accelerate renewal and to improve the
efficient running of the country. He has told us that it is “Business
Unusual” with his government because we need urgent and determined action
if we are to rise above a host of grave infrastructural problems and
constitutional threats.

I am here to tell the President that, with all respect, most South Africans
do not believe him any more. [Interjections.] Under President Mbeki, the
state has been misused for the ANC’s benefit and to ensure its hold on
power. The separation of powers has consequently been undermined. The
language and the mindset of race exclusivity have returned to bedevil South
Africa and to undermine the effective functioning of the state at every
level. The sudden dimming of the lights across South Africa is merely the
most potent and obvious metaphor for the crisis government has visited on
the people.

The result of business as usual, under President Mbeki’s government, is
that we now need to engage in Business unusual. Yet, by refusing to
acknowledge how few of the programmes and the strategies of previous years
have been fulfilled and by assuring us all that we are on course, while
refusing to hold his Ministers accountable for manifest failures, the
President, again, came to us with nothing more than business as usual.

There is a deep desire amongst South Africans to be rid of all the
pervasive evidence of corruption, crime and collapsing infrastructure which
invades our daily world. Ordinary South Africans want to have discipline in
schools, functioning hospitals, safe streets for kids to play in, old
people treated with dignity and police that can be trusted.

Mr President, my party and our leader have offered solutions and assistance
and have engaged with your government at every turn in order to achieve
these things for South Africa. We are now convinced that the only way to
achieve this is to have a new person at the helm and a new government at
the helm ... [Interjections.] [Applause.] ... a government and such a
person to be chosen by the people of South Africa and not by a faction of
the ruling party. [Interjections.]

We are in crisis in South Africa today. The crisis we face is undoubtedly
constitutional in nature and concerns the conflation of party and state.
The separation of powers, which is fundamental to any democracy – the
separation between party and state, and between the legislative, executive
and judicial arms of the state – has been systematically eroded.

Onder die Mbeki-regering was daar ongeoorloofde inmenging in beide die
vervolgingsgesag en die regbank. Dit het ons vertroue dat die fundamentele
grondwetlike skeiding eerbiedig sou word, laat krummel. [There has been
unwarranted interference in both the prosecuting authority and the
judiciary under the Mbeki government. This has shattered our confidence
that the fundamental, constitutional separation of powers will be
respected.]

We fear, Mr President, that your oblique reference to the future
functioning and location of the Directorate of Special Operations was meant
to muddy rather than clarify this all-important issue. For if you really
intended taking the South African public into your confidence, you would
have had to admit that the decision to scrap the Scorpions had already been
made for the government by the ANC.

The concern of the people of South Africa is both real and justified: Who
is going to lead the fight against corruption, especially considering that
the ANC’s chief decision-making body, the NEC, is made up so substantially
of individuals who are either suspected of, or have already been convicted
of, crimes – most of which relate to fraud?

In November 2006 the President asked representatives of the SA Council of
Churches to trust him that the evidence at his disposal did not warrant
action against National Police Commissioner Jackie Selebi. It is difficult
to know why we should trust the President on this issue, given today’s
revelations contained in an affidavit signed by the Acting Director of
Prosecutions, which seems to prove that the President has misled the nation
on this issue.

Mr President, the undeniable impression to be gained from the whole sorry
saga is that you acted improperly to protect one of your key political
allies and, in so doing, undermined the key constitutional principle of
separation of powers as well as misled the people of South Africa about the
real reason for Advocate Pikoli’s suspension.

In the light of these developments and for the sake of your own
credibility, we urge you to disband the Ginwala commission and reinstate
Advocate Pikoli with immediate effect. [Applause.]

We know that the ANC is not averse to using clandestine tactics to ensure
that party coffers are kept full. It is a sad reflection on the President’s
legacy that on the same day he delivered what may well be his last state of
the nation address, we read newspaper reports on a lucrative and illicit
deal that will allegedly benefit the ANC: the R38 billion in Eskom
contracts through the party’s funding front company, Chancellor House,
established while the President was party leader.

As everybody knows, this is not an isolated event. The so-called Oilgate
saga is yet another example of how institutions of the state have been
abused by the ANC for party purposes. Furthermore, the President has also
repeatedly and determinedly blocked answers to questions South Africans
have raised with regard to arguably the biggest corruption scandal of
postapartheid South Africa – the arms deal.

Last Friday President Mbeki took the occasion of his mother’s presence to
urge us all to tell the country the truth. The ANC, which likes to claim it
is the party of the poor, has built up R1,6 billion in assets under your
Presidency. We now ask you, Mr President, to tell us the truth: Give us
your assurance that not a single cent of the R1,6 billion was received from
the prime contractors of the arms deal or from the proceeds of the oil-for-
food scandal in Iraq.

Given that we have to ask these questions, our concern is no longer merely
whether the ANC has the capacity to defend the democratic rights and
Constitution which it so bravely helped to bring about but rather whether
it actually has the moral impulse left to do so.
Ons mense word daagliks deur moord, verkragting en gewapende roof in die
gesig gestaar, terwyl die regering die volle omvang van hierdie krisis
ontken.

In 2006 het President Mbeki verwys na die internasionale besigheidsverslag
van Grant Thornton toe hy trots daarop aanspraak gemaak het dat Suid-Afrika
tot “Die Jare van Hoop” toegetree het. In ’n latere uitgawe van dieselfde
verslag is misdaad as die grootste probleem wat besigheid in die gesig
staar, geïdentifiseer. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Our people encounter murder, rape and armed robbery, every day while the
government denies the magnitude of this crisis.

In 2006, President Mbeki was referring to the Grant Thornton International
Business Report when he proudly claimed that South Africa has entered the
“The Age of Hope”. In a later edition of that same report, crime was
identified as the biggest problem faced by the business sector.]

The economic reality of South Africa is this: Unless we improve our
competitiveness in an increasingly demanding global environment, our
economy will not grow at a sufficiently buoyant rate to create jobs and
ensure proper social security to those most in need.

Mr President, in defiance of the claims you have made since your address on
Friday, I must point out that the policies of the ANC, with respect to the
economy, are actually failing in implementation. The occupational skills
development regime, which you have put in place, and the microeconomic
policies that the government is struggling to implement are simply too
interventionist, too bureaucratic, too resource- and capacity-intensive,
and too inefficient to deliver the goods in time.

Your 24 Apex Priorities contain nothing new; they seem little more than an
empty PR exercise that Asgisa, Jipsa and the Expanded Public Works
Programme have become. The intentions are impressive and admirable but, in
practice, as with so many other much-publicised initiatives of this
government, the required outcomes have simply not been achieved.

Many debates in this House have correctly centred on poverty and the fate
of the poor. The challenges for all in this House are to ensure that any
future leader brings this voice of the marginalised into the mainstream
debate, that the poor become the key beneficiaries of any policy changes
and that they do not become the proxy battleground and war room for power
squabbles within the ANC.

We need to ensure that we create a fiscally sound social security system
and not a hot air balloon with promises that evaporate when global or local
economic conditions shift, and that we continue to explore areas in which
we can strike a sound balance in a partnership between government and
business.

The 2008 version of the International Business Report is certain to mark us
down severely for the collapse of infrastructure in South Africa. I have in
hand a reply from Public Enterprises Minister Alec Erwin, dated 19 June
2006, to one of the numerous questions sent to him by the DA concerning the
security of our electricity supply. In it, he assures us that Eskom’s
demand problems are being “appropriately managed” and that he is “confident
of a reliable electricity supply in the future”. [Interjections.]

Neither Minister Erwin nor the former or current Ministers of Minerals and
Energy, Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka and Buyelwa Sonjica, have uttered a reliable
word to the people of South Africa in the decade that the government has
been in the know about this impending disaster. We have been fobbed off
with bland assurances and half truths until the very moment when the lights
were going out all over South Africa.

Why are these Ministers allowed to remain in office? The truth is that they
stay in their places because under this government, that is business as
usual. [Interjections.] [Applause.] But for the rest of the country, as a
result, it has not been business as usual. It was only when our all-
important mining industry was brought to a standstill for the first time in
a century that a flurry of fumbled admissions and half-baked apologies
issued from these Ministers and the Presidency.

Because of this lack of accountability, the people are being denied the
services they are entitled to. These are the real Apex Priorities which the
people of South Africa are frustrated and anxious about. They resent the
collapse of our public schooling system, the violence in our schools and
the five years of unabated decline in matric pass rates.

They are appalled by the continuously deteriorating state of our public
health care system, following numerous highly publicised instances of
infant deaths, maltreatment of patients, delays in the introduction of dual
therapy for Aids patients and the fact that 500 000 HIV-positive South
Africans have yet to even start receiving antiretrovirals.

They are angered by the endless delays and underspending that hold up the
government’s housing efforts and that have put the plan to eradicate
informal housing by 2014 in serious jeopardy. They are disturbed by the
sluggishness, inefficiency and incapacity of our criminal justice system
and they are increasingly worried about the quality of our water supply and
the aging infrastructure to supply it.

Die resep wat misluk het, kan nie die resep wees wat die mislukking moet
regruk nie, en ’n inherente deel van daardie resep is die mense wat daardie
mislukking veroorsaak het.

Kom ek vertel vir u wat ek in die Vrystaat oor onderwys teëgekom het.
Eunice skool het nou vir 10 jaar ’n 100% slaagsyfer. Die skoolhoof sê
daaroor die volgende:


   Ek kry dit reg met professionele onderwysers wat toegewyd is aan hulle
   werk en wat toerekeningsvatbaar is.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The recipe which failed cannot be the recipe that has to be used to
rectify the failures, and an inherent part of that recipe is the people who
caused the failures.

Let me share with you what I have discovered about education in the Free
State. Eunice School has had a 100% pass rate over the past 10 years. The
principal has the following to say about that:

   I am able to succeed in this with professional teachers who are dedicated
   to their task and who are accountable.]

Mr President, accountability is not an optional extra. It is an imperative
of good governance and a constitutional requirement which you cannot simply
dispense with because you want to protect your loyal cadres.

Skewed loyalties have also informed the way in which the government
conducts the foreign affairs of this country. Our country has rightly been
accused of shielding a number of unjust regimes, which has lost us our
status in the world as a prime defender of human rights.

Concerning our own continent, it is indefensible that the President has
remained silent on the critical situation in Kenya and that he has publicly
endorsed the elections, once again, scheduled for the end of March in
Zimbabwe.

This determined refusal to face the undeniable has robbed South Africa of
its hard-won status gained in the 1990s as a moral beacon on the global
stage.

Finally, the reracialisation and racialisation of debate and practice in
South Africa have been particular obstacles to building the moral fibre of
this country and a key feature of the Mbeki presidency. It has retarded
state capacity to deliver where the need is greatest and it has provided
little comfort or resort where racial fault lines do emerge, such as was
demonstrated by the recent tragic incident at Skierlik in the North West.

Mr President, South Africa is filled with people of goodwill and integrity
who want this great country to succeed. They are neither on the unrealistic
left of the political spectrum nor on the reactionary right. They are to be
found in the political centre: Proponents of equality, freedom, choice,
decency and hard work. They are neither populist nor elitist. They are
committed to nonracism and nonsexism. They are not divided according to
race but united by shared values.

They do not ask much more than to be given an opportunity to prove
themselves, quality education to prepare themselves for the challenges of a
modern economy and to live in a safe and clean environment in which their
children will prosper.

South Africans are more than capable of grasping the opportunities of a new
era with their ingenuity, creativity, humanity and fascinating diversity.
We have a record of producing miracles in this country and we can do it
again.

Means-tested basic income assistance for the poor, floor-crossing, HIV and
Aids, Zimbabwe, the abuse of human rights everywhere and the desire for
moral direction, these are all issues on which there is a congruence of
views in South African politics which has yet to be explored and which can
and must flow together to the political centre.

It is not too late, and we have overcome hurdles far larger and more
destructive than those we are facing at present. But we do need to start
with a clean slate. Therefore, I now table this written notice of motion to
ask:

  That this House resolves to dissolve so that a fresh election can be
  called and the people of South Africa can be given the opportunity to
  choose.

[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Prof A K ASMAL: Madam Speaker, Mr President, Deputy President, hon members,
maqabane [comrades], in quoting the opening lines of Charles Dickens’ A
Tale of Two Cities, the President tried to show that, in real life, it is
not a matter of a choice of extremes: wisdom - foolishness, light –
darkness, but a possible reflection of a deep sense, possibly, of unease
about where the country will be tomorrow.

But there are those, like the writer of an extraordinary letter to the
Weekend Argus on 9 February, who from the deepest well of his hatred, could
write: “The world should stop caring about what happens on this continent
and allow it to self-destruct.”

Africa, it seems to him, including South Africa, is a terminally ill
patient. In other words, we are facing what the Germans would call
“Götterdämmerung” – the twilight of the gods – with decay, death and
destruction confronting us. [Interjections.]

Of course, the hon Leader of the Opposition, who is a very gentle, pleasant
woman, wants to sound like Helen Zille and she can’t manage to sound like
Helen Zille. [Interjections.] She has only the content of tone of the hon
Tony Leon but not the capacity to move them. [Interjections.]

You see, you can have all your clean slates. We have now moved to a
technological age. The DA is still in the “clean slate” one.
[Interjections.] You can have all your clean slates. The point is the
confidence of the people of South Africa in the ANC has been reflected
again and again. [Applause.] Again, and again and again: The votes went up
from 1994, to 1999, to 2004. Again, and again and again! [Interjections.]

Well, you see, like some political commentators ... [Interjections.] You
know, I think there is a kind of baying here. I’m not allowed to say “the
baying of donkeys”; that’s unparliamentary. [Laughter.] I’m not allowed to
say that, so I withdraw that. [Interjections.]

It’s a baying. [Interjections.] Well, you see, she and some political
commentators need to be reminded that the past is a foreign country; they
do things differently there. Our country in recent decades is certainly
proof of the accuracy of the first part of the opening line of L P
Hartley’s novel - you might even read novels on nostalgia - The Go-Between;
whatever about the second part.

That this country has changed out of all recognition is a truism of daily
discourse. [Interjections.] Whether it has changed – you see it says we
lead in darkness – for the better is a question whose answer usually
depends on personal circumstances, preferences, beliefs and, particularly,
your status before 1994.

It is a constant of human nature that the past is seen through a nostalgic
haze. The Leader of the Opposition says, “For the first time in history,
the mines stopped.” Do you know what happened on the mines where the lives
of thousands of people stopped through the migrant labour system?
[Interjections.] Do you know what happened to their lives when millions and
millions of them were put in all-male compounds on concrete beds? Do you
know what happened to family life when thousands were killed? Do you know
about the infant mortality rates until 1994? [Interjections.] And you have
the nerve to tell me, to tell us, the bloody lights went out the other day.
[Interjections.]

For them, the past ... [Interjections.] It’s lovely, this idea of being
barracked by these people is one of the most stimulating things to me ...
[Interjections.] … although not in the way they think I should be
stimulated. As long as there is a sunnier place for them, a frequently
content, caring place partly thanks to the broad brush strokes of the
history they want to write again and again.

Overall, though, for the vast majority of our people, there is no need to
remind us, as you need constantly to be reminded, of the past that we have
left behind. For the small minority of the permanently disaffected –
disgruntled, I should say - hoping to take office this side of the House,
we need to remind ourselves that South Africa is a much nicer place than
the “other country” used to be.

A better place is not to be defined simply by the obvious signs of physical
change, Mr President. It is not enough to say, as my brother from the
Labour department said: “How many millions of the 16 million have water now
which they did not have before?” It is not enough. It is not enough to say:
“How many homes have been built and how many hospitals and schools have
been built?”

We must talk about the quality of the life there. It is not enough to say
... You know, they are obsessed with potholes, by the way! [Laughter.] But,
you know, there were no potholes in the townships when I came in 1990; we
built the roads in the townships. So, I’m much more obsessed about our
school kids being able to go to school without fording rivers.
[Interjections.] You see, the material change is not enough. The most
highly developed social security system anywhere in the Third World is what
South Africa has today. It is not enough. [Applause.]

It is not enough to say that in my lifetime I could not go to university
because my family couldn’t afford to send me; now we are sending 90 000 a
year to university, through a financial aid scheme. [Applause.] It is not
enough to say that the school system is not working. I went to school where
not a single teacher was qualified - from primary to secondary school.
[Interjections.] You can’t say that, because you have to go round the
schools to see the extraordinary developments that are taking place. That
is wrong.

Go to the schools and you’ll see how things have changed. As the
Constitution says, in the preamble: Let’s draw on the capacity of all our
people - and we are doing that now. We are beginning to do that.
[Applause.] I will not give way to you.

So, you see only an accountant without a consciousness counts all the time.
[Laughter.] What we’ve been at now - and I’m sorry the hon Leader of the
Opposition forgets this - is much more than delivery. Have the lives of our
people changed?

And so, there are some people who will look back on the past with
nostalgia, contrasting the works, really, of a black-dominated government
and the uncaring anonymity of present-day urban life, with electricity cuts
and fortress-like homes. So, the past is a country in which we do not
actually have to live anymore, just visit in our imaginations and, usually,
in a rather fictitious fashion.

The most important development making South Africa a better place to live
in and, possibly, even to love, is the Constitution – a guaranteed contract
between South Africans as to how to organise our public and our private
lives. Very few people have had the chance, as people in this House have
had, of being able to craft that Constitution. It’s a result of an
unprecedented national conversation amongst South Africans and we hope we
can revive that consultation a little later. That partnership, together
with the Bill of Rights, is the bedrock of our freedom.

It is therefore appropriate that I should refer to the anxiety identified
by the President about people who, “are worried about whether we have the
capacity to defend the democratic rights and the democratic Constitution
which were born of enormous sacrifices”.

Do we have the capacity? The answer must be a resounding “yes” from this
side of all sides. [Interjections.] The Chief Whip – and he’s a tough
bloke, this Chief Whip; the new Chief Whip now - of the ANC in the National
Assembly last week reported to our caucus that the recent ANC lekgotla
reconfirmed our commitment to building a caring society through, among
other things, the strengthening of the people’s institutions of governance
and the protection of their integrity.

Now, this comes from the most senior representative of the party in this
House. For this to be, Parliament will have to play a bigger role. There is
no doubt about that. The myth that, for example, the executive totally
dominates Parliament is not borne out by the facts. Trevor Manuel, the
Minister of Finance, again and again and again, has said: Parliament must
assert itself through the committees to hold Ministers and departments
responsible; again and again and again. So, it’s a frailty of this House,
rather than the executive, that there is that now. [Interjections.]

That’s not good enough. Parliament will have to say that the constitutional
settlement of 1996 has to be strengthened. There are many ways of doing
this.

An HON MEMBER: What about accountability?

Prof A K ASMAL: I will come to this. [Laughter.] It is Parliament that will
take the final decision concerning the suspension of the National Director
of Public Prosecutions. It is Parliament that has to ensure that the
prosecution of the National Commissioner of Police, and the investigation
and prosecution of high-status people in respect of very serious crimes,
are conducted by elite and highly professional law-enforcement agents.

So, therefore, I want to look at the governance aspect of the National
Assembly’s supervisory functions. Central to the effective functioning of
our democracy and as part of the separation of powers which in fact drives
all of us, is a truly independent judiciary. Our national conference has
rightly made the case for the change, transformation, restructuring and
training of a united judiciary. But, as in all aspects dealing with
constitutionally protected persons or entities such as the press, changes
will have to be consistent with the Constitution and in consultation with
those affected, especially the judiciary.

There’s a limit to social engineering when we look at institutions that
need strong protection. The case for consultation is not an add-on to the
work of the executive of Parliament. It is constitutionally enjoined. I see
no other Constitution that has the provisions of section 59(1) that says
“The National Assembly must facilitate public involvement in the
legislative and other processes of the Assembly and its committees.”

But recently, on at least two occasions, Parliament has been found wanting
by the Constitutional Court on this score. Consultation, comrades, involves
a degree of openness to countervailing opinions. With regard to the issues
arising out of Khutsong and Matatiele - not ignoring the politically
motivated and organised violence in Khutsong which we must all deplore - if
we had been more assertive in the National Assembly and listened to the
grievances of these people, however misplaced they were, the position would
have been different.

If Parliament is to be the effective guardian of the Constitution, it must
be more assertive in the scrutiny of legislation. Policy, as we know, is
the prerogative of the executive under section 85. We mustn’t forget that.
Policy is the prerogative of the executive in terms of which it is charged
to develop and implement national policy.

But when Parliament has legislation before it, the constitutional
implications must be spelt out because every piece of legislation has some
constitutional implications, whether we like it or not. I recall that this
was not adequately done in the so-called anti-terrorism legislation, so
that the relevant portfolio committee had to virtually recast the Bill to
make it consistent with the Constitution.

Also, may I say, for the sake of public understanding and the edification
of Parliament, departments must give up this current gobbledegook style of
writing memoranda. Gobbledegook reminds me of a turkey, Mr President -
really, a gobbly lawyer. It is how a turkey sounds, if you look at the
legislation. We must go back to the plain English approach of our much-
praised Constitution.

It’s also very important that we must all be committed to the Constitution
in our personal lives. I don’t know who Mr George Boinamo is. He’s
described as a DA spokesman on education. He must have been asleep when he
swore that he would obey, respect and uphold the Constitution and all other
laws. I say this because the anonymous and honourable, no doubt, Mr
Boinamo, in opposing the idea of a national pledge proposed by the
President to be recited by schoolchildren, made some illiterate political
remarks and then added: “I reject the idea of reciting and swearing an oath
to the Constitution because not everybody supports all the laws of the
Constitution.” Whatever “all the laws of the Constitution” means!
[Interjections.]

I very much hope that Mr Boinamo has recourse to the lost cause of those
who say they were misquoted. Otherwise, the leader of his party will have
to draw attention, first of all, to not taking his oath seriously and
secondly, being in contempt of the Constitution which, I mean seriously, no
member of this House should be. [Interjections.]

Finally, the argument of the mortar and beam doesn’t work, hon Leon. I’m
not speaking from my side or for anybody else; I’m speaking as a member of
this House. Remember that.
So, I want to look at, finally, what makes a South African. How is it
possible that the mid-term review published by the executive recently says
that 90% of South Africans are proud to be South Africans? That’s a very
extraordinary thing. [Applause.] You won’t get a similar proportion
anywhere in the world. And why do they say that? This was two years ago.
Because regarding the issue of national identity which I would love to
speak about here, we don’t do the Milner national identity. I would have
liked very much to have spoken about that identity but I will end.

I will end on this basis, that the Speaker asked us to look at chapter 9
bodies, which are enormously important. I hope these chapter 9 bodies will
not be forgotten because a unanimous report has come out. There is a huge
agenda there because some of the bodies are not functioning and others are
not functioning very well. And the President referred to that in his speech
at the ANC conference.

So there remains a huge agenda for change, but as part of the development
of our country to deal with removing fear about the future, combating
poverty, alienation and discrimination, and fostering an agreed sense of
national identity. So we must claim tomorrow as another country and dream
and agitate. Remember, we can only do so with that extraordinary movement
that is called the ANC.

Remember Ben Okri’s injunction:
  They are only the exhausted who think
  That they have arrived
  At that final destination
  The end of the road
  With all their dreams achieved
  And no new dreams to hold.

We dream. We dreamt in the hell holes of apartheid, we dreamt on Robben
Island, we dreamt in the torture chambers, we dreamt in the loneliness of
exile. We shall continue dreaming and consummate our dreams. Thank you very
much. [Applause.]

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Madam Speaker, Your Excellency the President, Your
Excellency the Deputy President, hon Ministers and hon members, our
Republic is in jeopardy and it will not be saved unless we return to the
original ways and integrity of our liberation movement. I am no stranger to
ANC ethos and pathos. The political soul of our struggle is known to me,
for in my lifetime, I have had the privilege to be part of them more than
many members of this House.

Dr Pixley Seme was my uncle, with whom I often stayed and for whom I ran
errands. I knew Rev John Langalibalele Dube, the first ANC president. I
knew Dr Alfred B Xuma, who once hosted me in his home in Toby Street in
Sophiatown. His wife, Mrs Madie Hall Xuma, used to call at my home at
Kwaphindangene when she was organising the YWCA in KwaZulu-Natal.

Inkosi Albert Luthuli was one of my mentors until his tragic death. I was
in communication with Mr Nelson Mandela throughout his incarceration. I
worked with Mr Oliver Tambo until the crucial meeting in London in 1979.
Rev Canon James Calata, one of the stalwarts of the struggle, came all the
way from Cradock to visit me in my home at Kwaphindangene.

Professor Z K Matthews, who came up with the idea of the Freedom Charter,
was my professor. I cannot mention the long list of other leaders of our
liberation struggle with whom I interacted but I cannot omit Mr Robert
Mangaliso Sobukwe, who was my chairperson of the Fort Hare branch of the
ANC Youth League. [Interjections.] All these were men of integrity.

More than many, our President knows the closeness of my working
relationship with Mr Tambo, as he was his right-hand man, notwithstanding
all the chuckles and derision that I hear from the government benches. At
one time the President was sent by the movement to talk to me, together
with Albert Dlomo, at Heathrow Airport when I was returning from Germany
with the late Rev Enos Sikhakhane.

Since the meeting between the ANC and Inkatha’s delegations in 1979,
integrity grew thinner, with great damage to the ANC’s soul. Constantly,
undertakings were no longer fulfilled. After that meeting, Mr Tambo, then
president of the ANC, undertook to get in touch with me but this did not
happen. Instead, the sluice gates were opened and I was attacked and
vilified.

Madiba wrote to me just before he was released in 1989, stating that he
would meet with me as soon as he was released, for the two of us to deal
with the violence between our members in the ’80s and ’90s. He was
prevented by UDF and ANC leaders who, he said, almost “throttled” him. When
almost a year later we eventually met with Madiba in Durban on 29 January
1991, our President, His Excellency Thabo Mbeki, was one of the scribes.

One of our agreements was that both Mr Mandela and I should tour,
addressing joint ANC and Inkatha rallies throughout the country. Mr Mandela
agreed to do this with me, beginning at Taylor’s Halt in Pietermaritzburg
but Mr Harry Gwala, the ANC leader in the province of Natal, took a busload
of ANC leaders who read the riot act to Madiba, who was told not to go with
me to Taylor’s Halt.

On 19 April 1994, Madiba, Mr De Klerk – the then President – and I signed a
solemn agreement that the institution of the monarchy and other
constitutional issues would be dealt with through international mediation
as soon as possible after the election of 27 April 1994. This agreement was
dishonoured.

After I was appointed by President Mandela as his Minister of Home Affairs,
an invitation was sent to me and to President Mandela, in his capacity as
the ANC president, from the people of Thokoza. Both ANC and IFP members ...
[Interjections.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: There is
continuous noise and interjections while Mr Buthelezi is speaking. I ask
you for order, please. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Yes, hon member. You will note that the continuous sounds did
not start only with the hon Buthelezi speaking. [Interjections.] Not that
they are welcome; however, they did not start with the hon Buthelezi.
Please proceed, hon member.

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: They wanted us to unveil a monument which was erected
as a memorial to members of both parties who died in that low-intensity
civil war. This never happened.

In October 1999, our President, in his capacity as ANC president, and I did
unveil the Thokoza Memorial. After doing so, we addressed a joint rally of
ANC and Inkatha members. It was decided then that we had to address other
similar joint rallies throughout the country. Again, it never happened.
A few years ago, I wrote congratulatory letters to the current president of
the ANC, in his capacity as the Deputy President, and to the secretary-
general, now the ANC deputy president, raising issues which I felt had to
be addressed jointly by us as people of integrity and in the interests of
the country. I did not even receive acknowledgement of the receipt of my
letters.

A discussion took place at the Sheraton Hotel in Pretoria about five years
ago between His Excellency the President and myself. I was accompanied by
the secretary-general of the IFP, Rev Musa Zondi, and Rev Celani Mthethwa.
I think the President was accompanied by his secretary-general, Mr Kgalema
Motlanthe, and Mr Smuts Ngonyama. It was agreed that the memorandum
outlining fundamental issues for our political system in the country was to
be discussed further by 15-a-side of ANC and IFP. It never happened.

I could spend several hours listing broken promises and lost opportunities,
not for me, and not for my party, but for our country.

We were born in, and lived through, the season of hope at a time when many
of us hoped against hope. Our liberation fulfilled those hopes beyond the
hopes of many, ushering in a unique season of opportunities. We have had
the opportunity of building the strongest democracy on our continent and
forging a genuinely modern and yet uniquely African state.

After the season of hope and the season of opportunities, we are now
entering what may become a dark season of regret – regret as big as the
opportunities presented to us which we forwent.

Seizing opportunities requires operating for the greater good above short-
term sectorial interests. Huge opportunities have been missed, possibly
forever, because the pursuit of personal good, personal enrichment and
personal advancement has overshadowed a genuine long-term strategy for the
common good.

In his address, His Excellency the President was careful to avoid many raw
political nerves which I am sure are going to be harped on mercilessly
during this debate. I have never shied away from controversy and I am
mindful of how in ancient Athens, which was the cradle of democracy and
civilization, it was in fact a crime for any man to shy away from
controversy; for debate was encouraged and even forced in respect of
everything, especially controversy.

I too welcome controversy but we must ensure that the tone of our debate
rises to the gravity of the moment and is inspired not by petty politics
but by integrity. We must shift away from politics, reminding ourselves
that at times of instability, as the present one is, only the country
matters, only the issues matter, and only the people matter.

We all know our national challenges, for they have been restated time and
again in this Parliament by our President, both this year and in preceding
ones. What is required is the necessary leadership to maximise the capacity
of our state to successfully conquer them.

The President has admitted that the challenges have not changed but have
become greater and possibly beyond our capacity to master them within the
present paradigm. For this reason, the President sought to shift the
paradigm with a number of initiatives which he packaged under the catchy
phrase of “Business Unusual”.

Most of what the President suggested shows a commitment to doing more of
the same, at perhaps a greater pace, with a little more money, more
committees, more intergovernmental structures and a little outside help.

It is with regret that I fear that this might not be enough. The challenges
of unemployment, growing poverty, widespread corruption, rampant
criminality, uncontrolled HIV and Aids and TB, and escalating government
inefficiency and corruption have grown larger and more intense year after
year.

In addition, a new challenge has been allowed to grow unattended, in spite
of my endless warnings in this House and elsewhere, which is the growing
disintegration of the state as a politically independent, effective and
efficient machine, capable of delivering the policies of the day.

I urge this House to focus on the importance of institutions that anyone
can respect in spite of how one feels about their incumbents.  As I pointed
out in last year's debate, grave damage has been done to the Presidency as
an institution and the events of the past three months have inflicted on it
blows from which it may never recover.

We cannot proceed in dealing with any political issue until and unless we
re-establish credibility and respect for the Presidency and other
institutions, which has more to do with the attitude of its detractors than
with its incumbents.

I am reminded here of the American actor John Wayne, who was no authority
on constitutionalism, but when commenting on John Kennedy having won over
his favourite Richard Nixon, he famously said, “I didn't vote for him but
he is my president and I hope he is going to do a damn good job at it.”
This is what we must hope for South Africa. The issue is not who leads us
but where we are being led to and how we are being led - we do not wish to
be led by the nose deeper and deeper into the season of regrets.
It does not matter who leads us if we cannot steer our course away from the
path to slow self-destruction. The easy way out is to discuss leadership
issues and plunge into politics rather than rising to the hard task of
dealing with the real issues and living up to one's own political
responsibility. There is no point in discussing any change unless there is
a serene and objective debate of what went right and what went wrong.

The President reminded us of the course on which we originally embarked 14
years ago and he assured us that we remain on that course. We committed
ourselves to that course which remains the blueprint for a new South
Africa. But we must accept that the machinery required to move us down that
path has failed us because it moved away from the service of the greater
good and a long-term vision to serve a small circle of a few rich and
powerful people.

Inkosi Albert Luthuli would be the first to disown a government in which
premiers help themselves before helping the people, government officials
steal and policies are developed not with the people in mind but in
consideration of those who can enrich themselves through their
implementation. I can just imagine how harshly Inkosi Albert Luthuli would
speak to us if he stood in my stead in this place at this time. He would
curse those who allowed the fruits of our liberation to rot on the tree as
a short summer of opportunity gives way to an early and harsh winter of
regret.

We must regain our political soul in a way which is uncompromising and
unselfish. The judiciary must be competent and independent, not 99% but
100%, or otherwise it will be 1% corrupt and lazy. The Public Service must
be 100% loyal and corruption-free, and not 99%, for otherwise it will be
made up 1% of crooks and thieves. The police must be 100% capacitated and
beyond political manipulation, and not 99%, for otherwise it will be 1%
hopeless and crooked. Political representatives – us - must be 100%
committed to public service and the greater good of our Republic, and not
99%, because that 1% of their own personal greed and self-promotion is
treason. In the service of our people 99% loyalty is 1% treason.

We do not need a new shift into “Business Unusual” mode. We must review
what we have done until now and accept that if our business of government
had been conducted as it was meant to, it would have succeeded. Many people
have been on “Business Unusual” until now as they slept, went to cocktail
parties, travelled the world, became richer and made a few of their friends
prosperous while the majority of South Africans became poorer and poorer by
the day; crime grew rampant in all our communities, especially the poorer
ones; our industrial basis shrank, reducing our country's future role in
the world; our infrastructure became obsolete; the massive domestic and
international effort made to counter the HIV and Aids pandemic failed; our
institutions of government slowly crumbled under political interference and
lack of integrity, competence and professionalism of the politically
deployed incumbents; provinces were emasculated and turned into puppets;
the institutions of traditional leadership were obliterated; the promised
measures to give flexibility to the labour market never came about –
Asifuni iGear [we do not want Gear]; and lights slowly began going out,
foreshadowing a similar imminent breakdown of the rest of our country's
infrastructural backbone.

Everyone will need to live with his or her regrets. For 18 years, since we
began forging our new South African Republic, I have tried my utmost to
focus our collective attention on the importance of properly functioning
institutions of government, ranging from provinces to traditional
leadership. And I called our attention to the need to liberalise market
forces. Instead, our “unusual business”, made usual, moved on the basis of
a schizophrenic dichotomy between what was being said and what was being
done.

Independent institutions were established and then immediately staffed with
politically deployed party functionaries reporting to a centralised centre
of power, operating in an environment in which a genuine culture of
independence could not flourish. Provinces were established but they have
now been so emasculated of their powers, autonomy and ingenuity that in
their present form they have become a liability rather than an asset to our
democracy.

So much has been centralised that the core of our government is bound to
soon collapse under its own weight. Yet the President has suggested even
greater centralisation in the package of measures he announced, which
includes supervising committees and co-ordinating organs of state, which
should have been responsible for performing the required function in the
first place but could not do so because their autonomy and initiative were
impaired.

Similarly, while paying lip service to the cause of liberalisation of
market forces for the past 15 years, in truth, doing business in South
Africa has become far more difficult; cartels and monopolies have grown and
prospered; politics and political deal-making control our economy; the
infectious and corrupting influence of the state and its corrupt tender
practices has infected vast segments of our economy; exchange controls have
not been lifted and our country has become much more economically
inefficient than it was when liberation took place.

The many promises to provide a significant role for the institution of
traditional leadership were betrayed with dramatic consequences which have
not yet fully come to pass. I shall just mention one example of a dramatic
split between policies and reality and of a government at war with itself.

In September 2002, the KwaZulu-Natal House of Traditional Leaders set up an
HIV and Aids task force which, to everyone's assessment, was the ideal
mechanism to deliver HIV and Aids programmes in rural areas. The hon
Minister of Health, Dr M E Tshabalala-Msimang, accompanied by the
provincial Minister, hon Dr Zweli Mkhize, met with the KwaZulu-Natal House
of Traditional Leaders and praised this task force.

Your Excellency our President, on 7 February 2008, just a day before the
President spoke, the hon Minister of Health presented to all the houses of
traditional leaders here in Cape Town the HIV and Aids National Strategic
Plan 2007-2011 which no one can find fault with. This strategy calls for
the contribution of traditional leaders in the fight against HIV and Aids.
In her invitation Minister Tshabalala-Msimang tabled the need, and I quote:
“To strengthen the capacity of traditional leaders to design and implement
HIV and Aids policies and programmes.”

On that occasion, I reminded the hon Minister how the task team that we set
up in 2002 did not take off because the KwaZulu-Natal provincial government
refused to provide any resources, in spite of the House of Traditional
Leaders being listed as an entity in terms of the Public Finance Management
Act as capable of receiving and spending public funds, a law passed by this
House. Our colleague, Inkosi Patekile Holomisa - Ah! Dilizintaba - informed
me after I’d spoken that he and Inkosi Matanzima - they had spoken before
me - had pointed out the same lack of resources and capacity.

The President was made aware of a broad range of issues affecting
traditional leadership, including the capacitation of the house, and
requested hon Minister Mufamadi to visit the Premier of KwaZulu-Natal,
together with Inkosi Mzimela, to deal with the matter. This never happened.

Responding to the MP Mr Smith’s accusation in this House, during the Vote
for his department, he said, and I quote: “The government is being totally
dishonest in dealing with traditional leadership.” Hon Minister Mufamadi
stated, ipsissima verba [the very words], that “what is happening in
KwaZulu-Natal is a matter of grave concern to us”.

The Chairperson of the National House of Traditional Leaders, Inkosi
Mzimela and I, have been in discussions which led to the agreement that we
are going to intervene and exorcise this ghost from the body politic of our
country. There was a peal of laughter. He then personally assured me, as we
walked up the steps after the session, that he would go to KwaZulu-Natal,
as originally instructed by the President, to deal with the issue of
capacitation of traditional leaders. None of this has happened.

In his address, the President spoke to the whole nation and said, as never
before, that we should address common challenges with every strain of every
sinew, as a collective. I don’t think there is a worse challenge than HIV
and Aids. Traditional leaders should be part of the envisaged HIV/Aids war
room. We want to be in that room too, Mr President. What else can we do,
being mere spectators and not role-players, in spite of anyone sane
recognising that without them, life-saving HIV and Aids programmes cannot
succeed in rural areas?

What progress can be made when an hon Minister of state, like hon Minister
Mufamadi, has the temerity to say one thing in Parliament and do the
opposite - conducting himself as if he abhors telling the truth even when
in Parliament? It is no surprise that plans are being considered to repeal
provincial powers even though the matter has not been discussed in this
House beforehand. This conduct exemplifies the lack of integrity which is
so far removed from the ANC culture of its founding fathers, but which has
regretfully become usual.

The President has given us as a good framework in many respects. I
challenge any one of you who can provide a better framework than that which
was presented by the President, but I would like to say, with Robert Burns:


   The best-laid schemes o’ Mice an’ Men
   Gang aft agley ...

Our usual way of doing business for the past 15 years has been unusual.
Indeed, it has not been what it was supposed to be. If we accept this, we
can move forward and do what is right in the first place. I have not said
anything today which is substantially different from what I have said in
the past 13 years on these occasions, for the challenges have not changed.
What must change is the way in which we deal with them, which requires us
to do more of what is planned and engage less in political posturing.

There is a temptation in this House to find the easy way out of the huge
institutional crisis in which our Republic is plunged by resorting to
political opportunism and politicking. I urge that we not to walk down that
road. The urgency of the time requires focusing on the real issues
affecting our people, which have not changed save for their having become
worse.

What must change is how this Parliament deals with these issues. Thus far,
this Parliament has failed in its role. Ours has been a Parliament on call,
operating at the bidding of the executive, with no own capacity to analyse,
criticise, lead or hold accountable. This Parliament has failed our
Republic because it has been led by the nose rather than exercising its
constitutional responsibility of leading, formulating laws and developing
policies.

Bills are handed down to us to merely approve. Any review of the about 900
pieces of legislation passed by this Parliament in the past 13 years shows
how whatever was introduced by the executive was approved by us with little
or no substantive change, and that almost nothing was generated from within
Parliament at its members' initiative. The present crisis must bring about
the centrality and pre-eminence of Parliament. If there is a power vacuum,
it needs to be filled by the expanded policy role and leadership capacity
of this Parliament.

We can only save our Republic by doing what the Constitution requires of
us, which is not only for the judiciary to be independent, the police to be
effective and our Public Service to be honest and motivated, but also for
us, as the legislative branch, to become the powerhouse and real centre of
policy formulation, legislative initiative and political accountability;
which would indeed be “Business Unusual” - but a necessary one, this time.

A year ago, I tabled a Bill which would have split the offices of the head
of state and the head of government. Irrespective of what one may think of
it, it was a timely, urgent and relevant proposal, but this Parliament did
not even consider it because it was not part of the government's agenda.
Yet, as a legislature we have the responsibility and prerogative of setting
that agenda.

Talking about the election, which my colleagues in the DA called for, I
don’t know how they can call for an election before we get people who are
going to count the votes, because the ruling party taught us in Polokwane
that we should not rely on computers, and that, in fact, all the votes must
be counted by hand. [Laughter.] [Applause.]
Let us take the initiative so that we may still capture out of the jaws of
regret, some of the lost opportunities and with them fulfil our people's
hope. Dlamini! [Applause.]

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Madam Speaker, hon President, Deputy President and hon
members, the hon President referred to his esteemed mother during his
speech, and her question of whether this country is still on course. As you
are well aware, she, like you and I, calls the Transkei region of the
Eastern Cape her home.

Today, I wish to hand to you a report on the state of the infrastructure of
the Transkei, which was handed to me on 24 January 2008, in Mthatha, by the
citizens of the Transkei from each of the 28 magisterial districts,
including local government councillors from all political parties.

Like all other people who were subjected to apartheid oppression, there was
a legitimate expectation on their part that the infrastructure of their
region would be upgraded to be on a par with that of the rest of South
Africa.

The truth must be told, as you also said in your address, sir. The NP
regime had always viewed that region as a hotbed of revolutionaries and
therefore prejudiced the region when it came to infrastructure and
development. We hope, therefore, that this report will be taken into
account, along with the other challenges being tasked to the “national war
room” that you referred to.

The nation is gripped by uncertainty. On various fronts we are confronted
by ominous developments. It is true that the way forward for this country
must be based on a unified effort by the entire nation. On that, we agree.

Last year, in this House, I expressed the view that we require a national
indaba or convention to deal with various national issues. Mr President,
you acknowledged that and even suggested some issues such as social
cohesion, which could be dealt with at such a forum.

I followed the matter up in writing with the Speaker, but never even
received acknowledgement of receipt of my correspondence. I believe it is
not too late for your government to identify an institution such as the
Commission for Human Rights to be tasked to prepare for such a national
indaba. We can’t leave it to the Speaker anymore. Such a national
convention would review the progress we have made since 1994, and identify
whether there are any inherent defects.

I take note of what you have said, that you don’t agree with the Charles
Dickens’ quote, but some people outside this House disagree when they
observe rogue business elements, wanted by the law, going out of their way
to finance the youth and future leaders of this country and encouraging
them to attack the judiciary and other democratic institutions.

That move can never be equated with wisdom - these are the same people who
financed and promoted tribalism with T-shirts displaying ethnic slogans -
nor can it be correct that this generation of so-called leaders attacks
elders such as Bishop Tutu, Barney Pityana and others without a sign of
being called to order by their party leadership. We are talking about a
culture of respect that leaders such as those of us in this House should be
cultivating, and not undermining because it serves some short-term party-
political or factional agenda.

At this national convention we might talk about another major challenge
facing the nation regarding the fight against crime. Criminals are becoming
heroes. Robbers and murderers in many communities are now becoming role
models that our youth want to emulate. We should not be surprised if such a
culture permeates our society and even this House.

The basic idea of the ethics of right and wrong and of punishment for crime
is not being promoted. That is the reason we are faced with this massive
crime wave. Don’t you think, Mr President, that the moral fibre of the
nation is shaken to its core when the national Commissioner of Police
counts drug lords amongst his friends?
Your politely-worded reference to the future of the Scorpions, sir, the
Khampepe Commission and criminal justice reform seems to contradict the ANC
resolution to disband the Scorpions. We are waiting with keen interest for
full details.

One thing we have noted is that the concept of combining investigation and
prosecution has delivered results. For some people to now advance the
academic argument that such a combination cannot be allowed is misguided.
Any attempt to blackmail this House – and I dare say even your government,
sir - to bend backwards and forwards to accommodate the funders and
campaigners for the disbandment of the Scorpions will be resisted at all
costs, including resorting to legal action.

We cannot be the victims of this lynch-mob psychological campaign. Perhaps
we should be looking at creating an overarching ministry of crime
prevention for the entire criminal justice system, covering the SA Police
Service, Justice, Correctional Services, Home Affairs, and Intelligence.
Such a ministry could help to better co-ordinate our crime-fighting
resources and alleviate unnecessary tensions between various security
departments and units. Specialised units such as the Directorate of Special
Operations would be accountable to this ministry.

Mr President, you have referred to somebody who suggested a quote to you.
Would such a nameless somebody, looking into this House from outside, not
think that this preoccupation with disbanding or dissolving the Scorpions
was sheer foolishness, given the other major challenges facing the nation,
especially since the people who funded and drove this campaign against the
Scorpions were wanted by the law themselves?

It is still fresh in our memories how easily this country spent R13 million
on the Hefer Commission in order to deal with the allegations of one
journalist who was part of this campaign against the Scorpions and its
leaders. All of the witnesses whose evidence was later discredited were
either under investigation or related to people under investigation for a
range of crimes.

These origins and reasons that gave rise to the 24 Apex Priorities
identified are well-documented. There has been some progress in certain
areas. However, the greediness and looting of state resources by some, be
it at local, provincial or national government level, is gradually dashing
hopes that these priorities will ever be addressed.

Experience has shown elsewhere that members of an outgoing government tend
not to focus as they either look for positions or intensify their looting.
Thus the so-called “national war room” will need to be vigilant against
this.

Regarding the energy crisis, I believe there is an urgent need to appoint
an independent panel of experts to investigate the entire electricity
crisis and propose a complete package of reforms and policies to save us
from even greater disaster. For too long, we have heard a continuous stream
of excuses and reasons for this crisis.

Okokugqibela, tat’ uMtshali, mandibhekise apha kuwe mnt’omdala. Xa
urhulumente – ndiza kukucaphulela nje kumavana am - nimwisa, njengokuba
benikhe namkrobisa ePolokwane, kufuneka niyiqhube inkqubo nide niye
kuyiqukumbela, ningayiyeki  esithubeni. Ndibhekisa kuni ke, maKomanisi.
Niyibambile! Enkosi. [Kwaqhwatywa.]
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[Lastly, I would like to direct this to you, Mr Mtshali, my elder. I will
draw from the little experience that I have - when you overthrow the
government as you tried to do recently in Polokwane, you have to carry that
to its logical conclusion. I am focusing on you, Communists. You get my
drift! Thank you. [Applause.]]

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Madam Speaker, Comrade President,
Comrade Deputy President, hon members of this House, the ANC has declared
2008 the year of mass mobilisation to build a caring society. The programme
of mass mobilisation will extend over the length and breadth of our country
and, in true ANC tradition, we will address the interests of all our people
in the various communities where they are located. [Interjections.] It will
draw all our people, united in action on the ground, into the project to
create conditions for a better life for all in South Africa.

The opportunities that exist for a better life for all and the challenges
we face will be laid bare for all to see and appreciate so that the good
that is there is seized with both hands and the bad is transformed into
opportunity. [Interjections.] One of the challenges we will have to tackle,
of course, is crime and criminality, fraud and corruption.

The fight against crime has always been part of the priorities of the ANC
that defined the programme for the advancement of the cause of our people.
There has hardly been an anniversary statement since we took power in 1994
which has not raised the matter of crime and criminality.

In various discussions, before 1994, we spoke about crime and how, under a
democratic dispensation, that matter would be tackled. At the centre of our
crime-fighting project we put the masses of our people and said: No police
force, however strong, would be able to do its work if it did not enjoy the
support and active participation of the people in the fight against crime.

The ANC this year has called upon all our people to sharpen the anticrime
campaign. Among other things, the anniversary statement said, and I quote:


  In reviving the culture of mass mobilisation, we must seek active
  partnerships with civil society, nongovernmental organisations and
  community-based organisations and all other formations to form a broad
  front against crime and all social ills afflicting our communities.


  We will seek to work with religious formations and traditional leadership
  throughout the country, from urban areas to the countryside, to intensify
  the struggle against crime. We also acknowledge and appreciate the
  ongoing contribution of the business sector in the fight against this
  scourge.


The structure and functioning of the different elements of the criminal
justice system also received attention during the ANC anniversary, given
the importance to the fight against crime and criminality of a properly
functioning system of investigations, prosecutions and detention.

You also raised the matter on Friday, Comrade President, when you said:


  Cabinet has agreed on a set of changes that are required to establish a
  new, modernised, efficient and transformed criminal justice system.


You gave an indication, albeit brief, of how the criminal justice system
would be revamped, saying:


  Among other things, this will entail setting up a new co-ordinating and
  management structure for the system at every level, from national to
  local, bringing together the judiciary and magistracy, the police,
  prosecutors, Correctional Services and the Legal Aid Board as well as
  other interventions including the empowerment of the Community Police
  Forums.

The ANC agrees with you, Comrade President, that if the relevant
initiatives are carried out in an integrated and complementary manner, the
fight against crime will be greatly enhanced. Mass mobilisation against
crime must target all forms of crime, especially those between relatives,
friends and acquaintances and organised crime.

Various surveys that have been done by government and independent entities
have shown that the greater number of serious and violent crimes, where
murder often occurs, happen between people who know one another. They occur
within the social environment where victim and perpetrator are usually
found together.
The answer to social crime, whose victims are mostly women and children,
should include a mindset change among our people. Programmes like the moral
regeneration campaign should be part of the vehicles we need for the
mindset change.

That change, among other things, must include a raised level of
appreciation of the devastation that is caused by substance abuse. Drugs
are killing our children; alcohol is destroying our families.

Those are some of the social ills the president of the ANC, Comrade Jacob
Zuma, was referring to in the ANC National Executive Committee Anniversary
Statement when he was calling for the establishment of “a broad front
against crime and all social ills afflicting our communities”. We must
mobilise for that social movement to fight against crime, fraud and
corruption in our country.

Organised crime, as you noted on Friday, Comrade President, is a big
problem. Drug peddling is part of organised crime; so is fraud, trafficking
in people, theft of marine and mineral resources, theft of firearms and
vehicles, armed robberies, trafficking in endangered species and theft of
copper cables. I have not exhausted the list but all the types of organised
crime I have referred to affect our people one way or another.

A revamped criminal justice system must be able to deal with organised
crime. It must establish a seamless interconnection between investigations
and arrests, prosecutions and sentencing, and imprisonment and
rehabilitation. It must be resolute in its campaign to stop organised
crime. There must be no mercy for the organised criminal gangs who are
undermining the safety and security of our people. What you referred to,
Comrade President, as the holistic approach towards revamping the criminal
justice system in its totality is a project that must raise the question of
organised crime as one of its main priorities.

We need proper measures to deal with organised crime. We need better human
and material resources to achieve our goal in the fight against all crimes,
especially organised crime. You indicated on Friday, Comrade President,
that there would be interfacing, before the end of March, between
government and Parliament, on legislation that we require further to
enhance our capacity to fight organised crime. You said:


   What will continue to inform us as we take this step will be the absolute
   commitment of government to fight organised crime and improve the
   management, efficiency and co-ordination of our law-enforcement agencies.

You mentioned in your address the Directorate of Special Operations, also
known as the Scorpions, as one of the law-enforcement agencies that handle
organised crime. The other one is the Organised Crime Unit of the SA Police
Service.

The DSO has been discussed within the ANC many times since its
establishment. The discussions covered such questions as to whether the
unit was doing its work in accordance with the dictates of its mandate, the
way it carried out its investigations and of course, our belief that there
is merit in keeping investigative units separate from the prosecution
services for better command and control and monitoring, and whether it was
proper, therefore, to locate the investigative arm of the DSO within the
prosecuting services.

It is now history that the matter was subsequently referred for
adjudication to the Khampepe Judicial Commission. The ANC took the matter
to its policy conference last year for further discussion and elaboration
and presented a recommendation to the Polokwane National Conference for the
dissolution of the Scorpions and the redeployment of its investigators to
the SA Police Service for central command and control, and the improvement
of the co-ordination of the work of all law-enforcement agencies that deal
with organised crime.

The ANC is not reckless when it pilots a move to change for the better the
strategies and tactics that are necessary to fight crime. [Interjections.]
We are not averse, in the ANC, to revising our stance in the face of
changes in the tactical terrain to produce better circumstances for our
people. We are a dynamic organisation that has always seized the moment to
rise to higher levels. That is why we continue to occupy the moral high
ground. [Interjections.]

It is not reckless when the ANC determines that the fight against organised
crime requires a re-look and the better utilisation of the services the
country has, to be better able to deal with that scourge in a better co-
ordinated manner under the aegis of a single command and control point.

We want to place on the table a proposal for the creation of a better crime
fighting unit to deal with organised crime where the best experiences of
the Scorpions and the police's Organised Crime Unit will be merged. The
best investigators from the two units will be put together under the SA
Police Service as a reconstructed organised crime fighting unit. The
Scorpions, in the circumstances, will be dissolved and the Organised Crime
Unit of the police will be phased out ... [Applause.] ... and a new
amalgamated unit will be created. [Interjections.]

We note with pride the good work that has been done in the past by the law-
enforcement agencies and the many successes scored in the fight against
organised crime. Both the police and the
Scorpions have done well in that respect. There are many criminals who are
in jail serving long sentences after they were busted by the crime fighting
units.

Organised criminal gangs are also targeting the Department of Home Affairs.
Quite clearly, they have infiltrated that department and, therefore, have
recruited corrupt Home Affairs officials to supply them with all the
country's legalising documents, from birth and marriage certificates to IDs
and passports.

As “Business Unusual”, Comrade President, a process of vetting of officials
who handle the crucial aspects of the work at Home Affairs must be
introduced. Such vetting must be thorough to ensure that only trustworthy
officials are assigned to sensitive work in that department.

We continue to call for improvements in our immigration policies to ensure,
among other things, that our legalising documents are protected. We support
the department's turnaround strategy and hope that it will help to obviate
all the weaknesses there.

We have noted also that Home Affairs, working with the National Treasury,
Intelligence and the police, are developing a new border control strategy.
That strategy will enhance the fight against organised crime and stem the
tide of the illegal entry into our country of foreign organised criminal
gangs.
In conclusion, I want to reiterate the words of the ANC president, when he
said in the NEC anniversary statement:


   We cannot allow criminality and lawlessness to undermine our hard-won
   freedoms and hinder the progress of our nation. We must act now, and act
   together.

Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Madam Speaker, hon President, hon Deputy President: Mr
President, as you rightfully pointed out in your state of the nation
address, our country is faced with a number of challenges. It was good to
hear your honesty about our people’s concerns and government’s failure in
reaching its goals.

However, let us not have another year of failed promises. The ID wants to
see less talk and more action. It is the failure to act decisively that has
allowed our problems to grow. Half a million South Africans who desperately
need antiretrovirals are not receiving them because of our government’s
failure to act earlier. If you had acted earlier in implementing the
Khampepe Commission’s recommendations concerning the Scorpions, we would
not be facing the possibility of their disbandment due to political
interference.

But I think it’s very arrogant of the Minister of Safety and Security to
undermine the authority of Parliament and come and stand here and say, “We
are going to dissolve the Scorpions.” [Applause.] The Scorpions have been
established by an Act of Parliament and the procedures must start here in
Parliament. [Interjections.] It is not for the executive to announce the
dissolving of the Scorpions. [Interjections.]

Mr President, if you had acted earlier concerning the National Police
Commissioner, Jackie Selebi, instead of uttering the phrase, “I trust you”,
we would be in a much stronger position in our fight against crime.

Dr S M VAN DYK: He should be suspended! Jackie Selebi should be suspended!

Mrs P DE LILLE: The ID calls upon you to act on the needs of our people.
Government must provide greater support for the millions of poor and
unemployed in South Africa who are now subjected to the triple burden of
spiralling food, fuel and electricity prices.

While we welcome the lowering of the pension age for men, we also call on
government to extend the child grant for children from 14 to 18 years and
also to extend the school nutrition programme to high schools.

Hon President, you, like the ID, have complete confidence in our people to
overcome the immense challenges we face now. We know what it is to struggle
and to sacrifice for a collective goal. It is the resilience, inner
strength and optimism of our people that overcame apartheid. I know we can
overcome any challenge that is put in the way of achieving a prosperous
South Africa.

The sinews of our collective body are, however, already being strained. Our
workers are working hard and the 40% of our people who are unemployed are
struggling to find jobs in an economy that is not growing to its full
potential. The ID believes that unemployment is the number one challenge
facing the country and that government must act with much greater urgency
in addressing this issue.

The ID has full confidence in the people of South Africa but we have lost
confidence in the government and its leaders. Government is constantly
calling on our people to make sacrifices that you yourselves are not
prepared to make. [Interjections.] Inequality has grown over the past 14
years and the people have been forced to survive in the most dehumanising
conditions while others have accumulated large amounts of wealth.

The people are asking you, hon President: What more can we do when we are
already doing our work? What more can we do when we are already slaving
away for a better life? What more can we do when we have kept our contract
with the government? What more can we do when we go down the mines each
day, putting our lives at risk, while government cannot ensure that there
will be enough power to bring us back out?

While our people are forced to work day in and day out at the risk of being
fired by their bosses for incompetence, government has put thousands of
jobs of our people at risk and it is not held accountable. For the ID,
“Business Unusual” must start with action finally being taken against those
political leaders who have clearly failed South Africa.

HON MEMBERS: Hear, hear!

Mrs P DE LILLE: In standing up for political accountability, the ID is
upholding its constitutional mandate to hold government to account. Since
the inception of the Constitutional Court, government has been guilty of
disregard for the Constitution on several occasions, resulting in the
Constitutional Court ruling against government in 55 cases.

Hon President, we have heard your list of promises before. One of the
reasons that they have not been fulfilled is that you have failed to act
against Ministers who fail to implement government policies and plans. The
time for political accountability is long overdue.

We fail to see how we can trust those who created the electricity crisis to
also now deliver us from it. It is unacceptable that they are still making
decisions on our future energy path and committing us to spending billions
of rands. We will never believe government’s spin that the electricity
crisis is the result of unexpected economic growth because our economic
growth has been lower than what government has predicted. The fact that the
ANC will now benefit from the building of new power stations through
Chancellor House adds insult to injury ...

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: Shame! Disgraceful!

Mrs P DE LILLE: ... and shows the importance of our motion today in setting
up a multiparty committee on public funding.

In view of what I have just said, I want to inform the House that I shall
now deliver a written notice of motion to the Secretary in terms of the
Rules, namely:

  That, as a result of government’s failure to prevent the prevailing
  energy crisis, the House has no confidence in the President and,
  therefore, in accordance with section 102 of the Constitution, he and his
  Cabinet must resign.

[Interjections.]

In this time of crisis, hon members, South Africa needs a government that
can inspire the people and reassure them that solutions can be found if we
are united. The crisis is affecting every single one of us in this country,
black and white, rich and poor, and we need accountability from this
government. Thank you. [Applause.]

Dr G G WOODS: Madam Speaker, Mr President, hon members, having listened
intently to the state of the nation address over a number of years, and
having listened to various Ministers giving their state of department
speeches each year at budget time, one cannot help but become aware of the
standardised two-part format upon which these speeches are based.

First, there is the cursory overview of why things are generally going
well, followed by the itemisation of specific issues to be focused on in
the year ahead and a range of ideas for dealing with those issues. This
approach creates a sense of good progress and of plans to progress further
in the year ahead. The psychology is generally effective, particularly for
the ruling party’s constituency.

I highlight this observation for a number of reasons which will become
apparent. But, in the first instance, I raise this issue because I have
noted in recent years that you, Mr President, have also come to rely on
this tactical formulaic approach. And having appreciated the more composite
and insightful theme-driven speeches of your earlier years as President, I
am disappointed.

However, to critique the approach itself, the opening overviews usually
fall far short of a frank and comprehensive account and are rather a
selectively assembled picture depicting progress and promise. Hence, we
might question the credibility of these important speeches and be less
surprised by some or other subsequent failing in government, or
departments, which we had been led to believe was operationally ascendant.
These speeches often go on to represent unresolved problems alongside yet
another set of corrective plans each year which deductively suggest
inefficient management.

For those that might doubt this contention, I suggest you revisit the
annual budget speeches of the individual ministries over the past ten or so
years - those are the speeches that they give to this House in justifying
their budget allocations - and note the annual assertions of progress
followed by their latest repertoire of plans and how these will deal with
the same issue they ventured solutions for in the previous year’s speech.

At the same time, look at how these issues in question were reported on in
the corresponding annual report. The fairly emphatic finding which emerges
from most government departments is that the political heads of the
departments very often have a limited or misdirected understanding of the
state of affairs within their departments and do not grasp the significance
of failed plans, poorly implemented policies concerning problems which
persist and which, in quite a few cases, have lingered for more than a
decade. For us in Parliament, this finding implies weak accountability and
failed oversight.

Over how many consecutive years has the Department of Justice been giving
us encouraging reports and telling us of their latest ideas of how the
court backlogs will be dealt with and how the legal system will become
accessible to the poor?

For how many years have various Ministers of Education told us they were on
top of the matriculation problem, the maths and science pass rate problem,
the standard of teachers problem and the appalling throughput rate of our
tertiary institutions problem?

How many times has the Department of Trade and Industry found it necessary
to produce yet another plan to fix its failed industrial policy, its failed
small business development policy and its failed fixed investment and
export growth policies?

Then there is the Minister of Labour and his vacillating initiatives to
meet the skills shortage problems which hold back economic growth. There
are the inhumane conditions in our overcrowded prisons which go on year
after year; the crime that ravages our townships; the levels of corruption
in government; the dysfunction of the Department of Home Affairs, and there
are many more such examples.

I have just identified certain of the ongoing situations for which
resolution is necessary if we are to achieve a stable and successful nation
and, may I say it, a better life for all.

Mr President, it is almost as an aside that I register, in recent years,
the seeming conformity of your state of the nation address to that of the
executive template to which I have referred. In this regard, it is
interesting to note your significant repetition of issues albeit with some
shifts in perspective over the past three or four years concerning problem
areas of government and the new initiatives you introduce each year.

My intention is not to paint a picture of a completely ineffectual
government, as Nadeco does recognise and is grateful for the substantial
successes of the ANC government that have been recorded. However, the
situations I have referred to and the examples I have cited speak for
themselves and, unfortunately, speak to those who might have concerns about
the future of South Africa.

While the attitude towards many of the country’s more ominous problems on
the part of some of the executive remains inexplicable, the concerned
observer might well turn his attention to the administration and their
responsibilities in this regard.

The situation here, as many from all spheres of our society have observed,
is that the shortage of necessary experience and acquired skills leaves
government pitifully short on the ability to manage its way out of big
problems other than to churn out expensive and poorly conceived plans.

Yet, in a way, it is wrong to blame these directors-general and hierarchies
of lower managers. How many of us would refuse a high-paid, high-profile,
prestigious position simply because we had limited relevant experience? The
blame should surely be with those who approve the policies which allow such
appointments in the first place.

We observe that government has identified the critical management positions
across government and has had organisational experts draw up qualification-
linked profiles for the sought-after managers but then it tends to all fall
down at the actual appointment stage by constantly and consistently filling
senior posts with individuals who frequently fall short of predetermined
criteria.

For example, there have been a number of directors-general appointments
over the years that we know of where the position was given to intelligent
and degreed individuals who had no management experience at all, let alone
having worked in an organisation with a budget bigger than that of most
private sector corporations. In dozens of cases which we all hear about,
these individuals move on after a year or two when the wheels are about to
come off.

Yet government persists with such appointments at great cost to the country
and in defiance of conventional wisdom. An audit of the CVs of our senior
managers would say it all.

It might be suggested that government’s tendency to confuse promises with
achievements and to accommodate the shortcomings of its administration are
symptomatic of a government that has become complacent. This is not
intended as a provocative comment but one that resonates with international
experiences – experiences which show why governments, especially those
which face limited challenges at the poll, so frequently lose functional
objectivity, and how the longer such governments enjoy their comfortable
stay of tenure, the less rigorous their analysis and the more erratic or
lacklustre their performance.

I end by turning to the opposition parties, including my own, as it is a
Nadeco concern that I articulate, and remind them that they all share a
responsibility for the ANC’s failures. There is a general correlation
between complacent and underperforming governments and the weakness of
political opposition. Thus, while we cannot be directly blamed for the
problems that threaten the country, we must, at least, acknowledge the
consequences of our general ineptitude and of the absence of any meaningful
opposition influence.

As we, little parties, continue in our separate little corners with
inflated dreams of the next general election and of the celestial qualities
of our party leaders, we will individually and collectively remain as
ineffectual as we presently are. I thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Madam Speaker and
hon members, 27 April 1994 is an unforgettable day to millions of South
Africans who celebrated the new dawn, the promise of freedom and equality
and the possibility of restored dignity to millions. It was the onset of
building a just and caring society. These were heady days; a time of great
hope. The country was vibrant with positive energy; people in their
organised formations were seized with defining policies for a post-
apartheid South Africa; and women were mobilised, for the first time, like
never before.

Do you remember all those workshops, the conferences and animated get-
togethers in the towns and rural areas, at universities and colleges, in
school rooms, at taverns and at the chiefs’ gatherings?

Thirteen years on, there has been a significant change for the better,
definitely greater access to economic opportunity and an improved social
life for thousands. Indeed, there is a huge paradigm shift in the arena of
ideas. Today, progressive thinking is dominant.

Most South Africans ascribe to the values enshrined in the Constitution.
For example, notwithstanding their different political backgrounds, hon
members Professor Kadar Asmal and Mr Koos van der Merwe would see
themselves as fervent advocates of human rights.

In society at large, there is more tolerance of differences, greater
interracial connectivity and greater awareness of human rights such as
equality between men and women, workers’ rights – all workers are vocal,
not only those from the progressive wing – and the advancement of
socioeconomic rights. For example, political parties in this House will
assert that they are pro-poor; that the poor should be at the forefront.

Maybe this answers a question that you, Comrade President, asked many years
ago in this House, whether, as South Africans in our different spaces, we
could still say that we are one and we have consensus on some important
issues that relate to our lives. In other words, whether there is
convergence around what is important to South Africans.
President, it is correct that we say we still live in an age of hope. This
is an age of hope. I could be petty and remind all of us in this House that
we do not see the signs of the past. Remember signs like “blankes” and “nie-
blankes”? I think that even in our memory the crude symbols of the past are
fading.

You can tell that the members on my left are such strong adherents to the
Constitution - so they tell us. [Interjections.] Well, that shows that we
are in a new South Africa. We all are and we all should be.
[Interjections.]

No, it is not a gift from me, but you have contradictions in the way you
say things and do things which show that you are still learning.

Mr President, during your state of the nation address, you addressed
Parliament about 24 Apex Priorities for the government in its last term of
office. You urged us to spare no effort in meeting the goals that we have
set for ourselves. You said it should be “Business Unusual”. The ANC also
said that we should be in our trenches out there mobilising our people for
a better life. Amongst the 24 Apex Priorities you mentioned, President, is
the fight against crime and the creation of a safe environment for all
South Africans.

We, in the ANC, recognise the imperative of an efficient criminal justice
system for socioeconomic development. The ANC is committed to the fight
against crime and creating a safe environment for all the people of South
Africa. It is in this context that we are committed to doing all that we
can, indeed, to improve the justice system in our country. We are
committed, for example, to the restructuring of the court system and to the
transformation of the judiciary and the legal sector.

In the past three years, there have been ongoing discussions with all
stakeholders and the judiciary about the transformation of the judiciary. I
would like to thank the judiciary and the legal fraternity for their
invaluable contribution to the discourse on transformation. Members of the
Sidebar and the Bar have contributed immensely in the drafting of the Legal
Services Charter, which was presented to me in November 2007, and which I
will put before Cabinet and bring to Parliament in the first term of this
year.

I must say that great strides have been made in the conceptualisation of a
transformed judiciary. The issues that arise around the transformation of
the judiciary are of great importance. It is about how we go about having a
single judiciary. It is about the whole relationship of important courts in
the country – the Supreme Court of Appeal, the Constitutional Court and the
Labour Court. Thus it is important that there should be discussions and I
must say that Nedlac is also engaged in these discussions.
In the meantime, we have put very important pieces of legislation before
Parliament for the renaming of the High Court Divisions. Every time I met
my colleagues they would say ...

... hhayi bo, ikuphi iBophuthatswana? Njengoba ngithi kukhona izinkantolo e-
Transvaal bathi kukuphi lapho? [... Hey, where is Bophuthatswana? As I am
saying there are courts in the Transvaal, they ask, where is that?]

So, I am pleased to say that we are changing that. I am confident that
before the end of this year, as you have instructed, President, there will
be legislation for the restructuring of the courts before Parliament. Of
course, this is going to be preceded by a paper – elements of which are
being discussed by us and the legal sector.

Last year was also an important year. We completed the draft policy on the
South African traditional court system and we should come before Parliament
with the Bill.

Once again, I would like to thank all those who have participated and,
Shenge, you have been very kind to us. I heard that you have graced one of
the meetings in KwaZulu-Natal and made an immense contribution to the
policy and the draft that we will bring to the attention of the public
quite soon.

We have done this without fanfare, and these were difficult discussions,
but I am pleased and I thank all the persons, in particular our chiefs, for
being part of the discussions that we have had. I am also told that we have
had stakeholders including women’s groups participating in these
discussions.

One important area that my colleague Charles has touched on is the whole
revamp of the criminal justice system. I would also like to say something
about that. It is a two-pronged approach. There is a review that was made
as a result of a decision taken in 2003. This is a project of the Justice,
Crime Prevention and Security cluster, namely the review of the criminal
justice system.

I say it is two-pronged because there is the research level where both
secondary and primary research is undertaken, with inputs from relevant
institutions, including tertiary institutions. There is also an important
intermediary process, which we have come to call the review of the criminal
justice system as well because it is that. This involves the collation of
information that has partly been gathered by the research unit, but also
information that is within all the departments relating to the criminal
justice system.

This project is very important. It is a partnership between us and the
business leadership. An important outcome of this process is the plan of
action which can be implemented, and this is the one we are referring to.
The collated information, which I now call a study, indicates gaps and also
where we have no capacity along the crime-fighting chain, as a result of
which we have immediately embarked on correcting some of the weaknesses
that have been discovered through this intermediary process - the criminal
justice review.

Of importance is that it found, as one of the big weaknesses in the system,
not only a lack of capacity but poor co-ordination and there was a similar
finding by Khampepe. With regard to Khampepe, it was not along the whole
criminal justice system but Khampepe had a specific focus and this related
to the Directorate of Special Operations in its relation with other JCPS
departments.

We have to address this particular challenge of co-ordination. [Time
expired.]

Business suspended at 16:08 and resumed at 16:30.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Welcome back from the break.

Ms H C MGABADELI: Madam Deputy Speaker ...

... akwandele muntu ukukhuluma emva kokuthi abantu kade besaphumule.
Ngiyabonga. [... it is a privilege to speak after people have been on
holiday. I thank you.]

Madam Deputy Speaker, hon President of the country, distinguished guests,
friends and comrades, I greet you all this year. I quote:

  ... the relay race of continuous rebirth so that the dream of a better
  life for all South Africans becomes a reality.

That was said by our President on Friday in his state of the nation
address.

This debate salutes all the efforts dating as far back as the years we
cannot remember, when a black person fought against all wars that were
waged against him or her, including the wars of dehumanisation and the wars
in which the ANC ended up formally forming this organisation in 1912, with
its members ending up being scattered all over the globe. Some even died
there and some of them still cannot be accounted for today.

We, as the ANC, and those who see the logic in caring for those who brought
this nation to where it is today salute the resolution to form the
Veterans’ League of the ANC, its context and impact, both sociologically
and economically. We salute it not just in isolation but within the spirit
of continued mass mobilisation, unity and a caring society. The ANC, like
so many other organisations, cares about their liberators and passed this
resolution that I have spoken about. To all of you ...

... kufanele sikhumbule ukuthi ... [... we must remember that ...]

... we must all remember that we are not talking about veterans who were
fighting another country; we are talking about veterans who were fighting a
war that was caused by apartheid. I happen to know, because my grandmother
was working as a domestic servant for a family of white citizens. We were
all affected; they were also affected because their son was involved.
Almost half of my family were affected, but ...

... ngiyabonga ukuthi sesila esesikhona manje. Ngiyabonga kuMongameli,
kubaholi bethu kanye nakubo bonke abantu abalapha abavela kuwo wonke
amacala. Ngiyabonga. Ngicela sikhumbule maqabane ukuthi kwakungemnandi
ngesikhathi sitshelwa ngaso leso sikhathi ukuthi uMkhonto Wesizwe awuqedwe.
Kwakungemnandi. Kwakungakabi yisikhathi. Kwenzeka izinto eziningi
ezibuhlungu ezidinga isikhathi ukuthi sibuyele emuva sibheke ukuthi yikuphi
okwenzeka ngendlela eyiyo nokwenzeka ngokungeyikho. (Translation of isiZulu
paragraph follows.)

[... I am grateful that we are where we are now. I thank the President, our
leaders and everybody present here who come from all walks of life. Thank
you. Comrades, I want us to remember that it was not nice when we were told
that Umkhonto we Sizwe should be disbanded. It was not nice. It was not the
right time yet. There were so many painful things that happened for which
we needed some time to look back and reflect on what was done right or what
went wrong.]

However, in the spirit of unity that the President spoke about on Friday, I
will talk later about what I am requesting the President and our leaders to
allow us to do.

To ensure that this unity of the mobilised masses towards the building of a
caring society is sustainable, we need, among other things, to ensure that
all organs of national security are on their toes, day and night, and that
they are all willing to be monitored, reviewed and redirected to combat
different forms and kinds of robbers that are robbing our land and its
resources.

We need to ensure that there is a sharp and fast critical analysis of the
rising mountains of private security companies, because they are not
organising the masses - they are just private security companies. Let them
be replaced by collective security in the form of empowered people, street
committees and people that are well empowered.

The opportunity of the presidential pardon that will end on 16 April will
add to the process of healing by genuine exposure for the purposes of real
closure. We need to utilise it very well.

Uthe uMongameli ... [The President said ...]
... our nation should unite now as never before and strain every sinew of
its collective body to address our common challenges and keep alive the
dream that has sustained all of us as we travelled along the uncharted road
towards the creation of the South Africa visualised in our Constitution,
not in our different constitutional parties but in our Constitution.

I want to pause for a moment here and say that I agree with the President.
However, I am going to beg everybody. Some of us who were not spectators
when we were requested to respect the Truth and Reconciliation Commission
were a little hurt a few weeks ago. You know, we were forced to forgive,
forget and toe the line but when the President asked for forgiveness for
the electricity and energy failure, most South African citizens said it was
not enough ...

... abantu esinabo lapha ePhalamente basho kahle bathi akwenele ukuxolisa.
Kanti thina sasenziwa izilima yini uma kuthiwa asixole? [Ihlombe.]
Sasingakhulumi ngogesi thina kodwa sasikhuluma ngegazi, ukulahleka kwabantu
kanye nokuvunjululwa kwabantu ababengcwatshwe lapho singazi khona. Ugesi
yinto esingayazi ngoba ngisho nasemakhaya nasezindlini zasemalokishini
ugesi wawungekho. Kwakwakhiwa izindlu zangasese le kude bese uhamba
ngomnyama uye endlini yangasese ugula. Size sazifakela thina ugesi. Angisho
ukuthi asiwufuni. Siyawuthanda kodwa ngeke uthi ukuxolisa akwenele kodwa
thina satshelwa ukuthi asixole. Sesize siyaselula lesi sikhathi sokuxolelwa
ukuze wonke umuntu ongakaze axolelwe kahle aqhubeke nokuxolelwa. [Uhleko.]

Ngizocela sizigade ukuthi sithini ngemilomo yethu. Simele umphakathi ngakho
asingadidi umphakathi esiwumele. Ngiyacela Mongameli nakubaphathi noma
ngingazi ukuthi into engiyicelayo yake yenzeka yini ngesikhathi esedlule,
kodwa ngizocela ukuthi yenzeke noma ingakaze yenzeke ukuze lokhu kusebenza
ngokuhlangana esikushoyo kungabi eyamaqembu ehlukahlukene. Ngizoke ngicele
nje ukuthi kube nemihlangano okuzofundiswana kuyo onke amaqembu lapho
sizofundisana khona ukuthi sisukaphi nokuthi siyaphi. Siyeke ukwehlukana
ngokwemiqondo yokuthi uvela kumuphi umndeni. Lokho yizinto ezincane.

Sizobe sibambe i-Inter-Parliamentary Union, i-IPU, kulo nyaka ngo-Ephreli.
Maqabane, bangani nozwakwethu abathanda izwe lethu i-Kenya ... (Translation
of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[... people who are with us here in Parliament, have stated categorically
that apologising is not enough. Were we being made fools of when we were
asked to forgive? [Applause.] We were not talking about electricity but we
were talking about blood; about people who went missing and about the
exhumation of people who were buried in unknown places. We did not know
electricity because there was no electricity in rural homesteads as well as
in township houses. Toilets were built far away and one had to walk in the
dark to the toilet even when one was sick. We eventually installed
electricity ourselves. I do not mean that we do not want it; we like it,
but you cannot say that apologising is not enough whereas we were asked to
forgive. We are extending the time for pardon so that everybody who was not
properly pardoned can go on with it. [Laughter.]

I want us to mind what we say with our mouths. We are representing the
public, therefore we should not confuse the public we represent. I request
the President and the leadership, even though I do not know whether what I
am asking for has ever happened in the past, but I will request that it be
done so that the collaboration we are talking about does not take place
only within different parties. I propose that we hold multi-party workshops
where we will educate one another about where we come from and where we are
heading to. We should stop these different mentalities which are informed
by our families’ background. Those are minor issues.

This year, in April, we will be hosting an Inter-Parliamentary Union
conference. Comrades, friends and colleagues who love our country, Kenya
...]

... is not stupid as it is going through what it is going through now. We
would blame nobody if what happened in Kenya happened here. We still have
time to rectify this matter ...

... siziphe isikhathi sokuthi ake sibambe imihlangano sifundisane ... [...
by giving ourselves time to hold workshops to educate one another ...]

... as South African MPs who are representing the people of South Africa
from different constituencies.

Sizehlise nje ... [Just humble ourselves ...]

... for the sake of our country and then we go back to our political
ideologies ...

... sibone ukuthi iyafana yini lento esiyishoyo emibonweni yethu
yezombusazwe kanye nalokho esifundisane khona. Ngiyacela. Kungakuhle uma
lokhu kungenzeka. [... to see if what we are saying through our political
ideologies is the same as what we taught one another. Please, it would be
great if that could be done.]

Let’s try it. The road that we need to travel is really long. We cannot
travel it disunited as a country. [Applause.]

During the January 8 statement, the president of the ANC said something
that I want to share with you. We need to openly confront the roots of our
difficulties, correct our errors and move on. We cannot just pretend to be
moving on when we don’t know whether we have corrected our errors and
understand what we are – I am not going to be long at all. I am not going
to count the number of issues. I am counting this because Kenya is just
here. Some of us who normally travel for the IPU are saddened by what is
happening. They are not fools but very intelligent and yet it happened to
them. Let us not beat about the bush; let us come together and talk.

Some members mentioned these things, including the general – where is he?
He has now gone out. He and others did mention these things. Maybe we
differ in words and terminology but it is the same logic. Let us do it. Hon
Speaker, Deputy Speaker, the House, my leaders, I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr N T GODI: Madam Deputy Speaker, comrades and hon members, allow me to
join the House in congratulating the President on his address to the Joint
Sitting of Parliament last Friday.

“Business Unusual” - what an appropriate imperative! It must, indeed, be
business unusual if tomorrow is to be better than today. A better tomorrow
must not be a mere speculation, wish or hope but must be manifested by what
we do today. Business as usual would imply that a better tomorrow remains a
dream perpetually deferred. That would be a cruel visitation on the people;
it would disqualify us from claiming to be walking in the footsteps of,
amongst others, President Nelson Mandela, the martyred Rick Turner and the
outstanding patriot and leader Robert Sobukwe.
The values of the liberation movement – of people-centredness - have been
contaminated by alien class values of corruption and egocentrism. Business
as usual would mean the coexistence of these contradictory values.
Therefore “Business Unusual” should go further than mere administrative
jacking-up to also imply the reassertion of the superior values of selfless
service to the people.

It is the conviction of the APC that we must never lose sight of our
international responsibilities, especially to the oppressed people of
Palestine. We must never lower our voices in speaking out for and in
solidarity with the Palestinians, who suffer daily destruction, murder and
humiliation.

Comrade President, Africa remains a continent of challenges and
opportunities. There are challenges of peace, reconstruction and
development in many parts of Africa. The APC adds its voice of concern
about developments in places such as Kenya, Chad and Darfur in Sudan. Our
leaders and people can and should do better than what we are witnessing
right now.

The APC congratulates you, Comrade President, and the government on
fulfilling your Pan-African duties and finding solutions to challenges
facing the continent, from the reconstruction of the land of Patrice
Lumumba, the DRC, to facilitating the Zimbabwe dialogue. We congratulate
you and your government; you have our support and that of progressive
Africa.

Comrade President, we do concur that the issues you raised as things that
government would like to see realised are indeed important. If done
expeditiously and fully, they can fundamentally transform the lives of our
people for, indeed, the freedom we have must have material meaning to the
poor.

The fundamental challenge is developing the capacity of the machinery of
government. Commitments and targets can be set but in the absence of
government capacity, they will remain paper commitments. Last year you
spoke about the eradication of the bucket system but its unhealthy stench
is still a daily experience of many communities in our country such as Boys
Town in Crossroads here in Cape Town, which has no toilets, roads or
electricity.

To us, the starting point is to deal with the high vacancy rates,
especially those affecting management and supervisory positions. The
timeous filling of key performance agreements will be a welcome improvement
but critical will be the content of those KPAs in relation to the
objectives of government and the challenges facing the department.

We firmly agree with you, Comrade President, that improved performance
depends on the quality of leadership provided by the executive or Ministers
and senior management in a department. This challenge does not,
particularly and only, relate to Home Affairs, but can surely include
departments such as Defence, Correctional Services, Water Affairs and
Forestry and parastatals such as the Land Bank if the Auditor-General’s
reports are anything to go by.

We would have loved to hear you, Comrade President, talk about the missed
bucket system eradication deadline. Why has the deadline not been met? Is
there a new deadline or is it sliding off your radar?

We expected that in dealing with educational matters you would have touched
on the matric results. They have been steadily declining for some years
now. This is surely a cause for national concern.

Comrade President, you touched on the issue of accelerated land reform,
which you did last year, including increased support for new beneficiaries
and emerging farmers. We are worried that there don’t appear to have been
any dramatic shifts. Support for new beneficiaries is definitely not
enough, coupled, of course, with the embarrassing shenanigans in the Land
Bank. Can we be assured that this time around there will be visible and
dramatic movements, including the fixing of the Land Bank?

The same can be said of our health system. The experience of many in our
public facilities is not a proud one. Much effort and focus are needed to
provide health care facilities and services to our people, which should
confirm that today is better than yesterday. Our capacity to provide
support and care for people with HIV and Aids is not up to desirable
levels. If we reacted to this challenge in the same way we dealt with the
energy crisis, I believe, we would have reached almost all those who need
treatment and support. We can and must do more, faster. [Applause.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Izwe! Azania! [Interjections.] Madam Deputy Speaker, Mr
President and Madam Deputy President, the President’s state of the nation
address was comprehensive. It was prudent that you dealt with the
electricity crisis and reassured our nation that things were not falling
apart. Your reference to the issue of the Scorpions and the SAPS was
important. You talked about the 24 Apex Priorities. Some are not new;
nevertheless, they sound like good pudding, but the proof of the pudding is
in the eating.

Implementation is critical. Many members of the public have requested me to
mention in my response to the President’s state of the nation address that
they are still humiliated by the bucket system after they were told that
this degrading system of sanitation would be ended by the end of 2006.

Mr President, there are dark clouds threatening to reverse the relatively
few gains of our national liberation struggle for which our martyrs made
the supreme sacrifice. Events are calling all of us to a higher patriotism
where the spirits of our heroic ancestors have ordered that this nation
must come first and its leaders last.

Let it be fulfilled what was said by that great African writer, the Rev J J
R Jolobe, when he wrote:

   Apho igazi lenu lithe lathontsizela khona
   Komila intyantyambo evumba limnandi
   Eliya kuthwalwa ngamaphiko empepho
   Zithi zonke izizwe zilirhogele.


Serious challenges remain in our country. Land evictions of the African
people continue. These evictions are done in the name of development but,
in fact, they are done for superprofits. Two weeks ago, I met the Kanana
community in Hammanskraal. They said this was happening in their area. The
residents are going to the High Court to challenge their eviction on 15
February.

How do the African people enjoy the fruits of liberation when they have no
security of shelter or land? What does liberation mean to those who are
being evicted from land and houses? Why is there land for golf courses and
game reserves but not for decent homes for many of our people?

Mr President, this may sound monotonous and tautological but I must repeat
it: There must be legislation forbidding the sale of land to foreigners.
[Interjections.] Those who need land for foreign investment must have land
leased to them. The sale of land to foreigners when our own people remain
dispossessed and landless, and live in inhuman squatter camps has
disastrous consequences for the future of our country.

On 21 November 2007, you made a historically bold statement in this House
in regard to presidential pardons of especially former freedom fighters
such as the Azanian People’s Liberation Army, Apla. Hon President, we are
not questioning the TRC decisions, nor are we casting any aspersions on the
integrity of the commissioners but for the presidential pardons process to
achieve its intended objective, I appeal to you to approve applications
that were turned down by the TRC.

I advance six reasons for this appeal: The TRC had flaws although it did
register many achievements in a difficult and unprecedented situation. The
TRC ignored the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment
of the Crime of Apartheid through which the United Nations declared
apartheid a crime against humanity. People such as the late P W Botha
refused to appear before the TRC but they were never imprisoned for the
crimes of apartheid. In fact, Mr P W Botha was offered a state funeral when
he died.

Crimes committed by the perpetrators of apartheid exceeded the offences
committed by the victims of apartheid, for instance, numerous massacres of
the victims and heinous atrocities by the creators of the “Third Force”.

The victims of apartheid were disadvantaged when appearing before the TRC
in that they had no adequate legal representation. Many applied for amnesty
from prisons. The perpetrators of apartheid, on the other hand, applied for
amnesty from the comfort of their homes and cushy jobs. They had first-
class legal representation. For example, the state spent R6 million on
Eugene de Kock alone.

Mr President, free education for the poor is the best national ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon member! I did allow you some extra time to
go through the six reasons that you wanted to give to the President but now
your time has expired.

Dr S E M PHEKO: Izwe lethu! [Our country!]

Mr M S BOOI: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon President, hon Deputy President,
members of the Cabinet and hon members, the President has given a lot of
challenges to the nation and to each of us as individuals. This is very
important.

The things that Comrade President has said leave some of us to continuously
reflect as individuals. I want to read out the point that you have made
because I want to engage you, as you know I always do. You said:


  I am confident that 2008 will be one of the most remarkable years of our
  democracy, as we all work together to realise the core aspiration of our
  people to attain a better life for all. I say this because in our own
  estimation, it is not often that a nation is called upon to strain every
  sinew of its collective body to attain a dream. And such is the
  injunction that history has imposed on us today.

That is a tall order, Comrade President, because you are asking each one of
us to reflect on the progress that has been made in the democratic system
that has been created. You are asking us how we  are conducting ourselves
towards the type of the Constitution we have put together and what we think
of the type of system of governance we have created. Is it functioning? Is
it making it possible for ordinary people to reach out to us? Are we able
to maintain, in ANC speak, a type of people’s contract with our own people?


That is the type of tall order you are asking us to find answers to. That
is a huge challenge but a challenge that I do think we would be able to
take on as leaders and representatives. If you listened to Prince
Buthelezi, you would have a sense of what society is confronted with.
Hon President, I think, as the ANC, we will have to live up to that
challenge. It is a challenge that we cannot run away from. If we want to
continue to entrench and maintain the democratic practices that we have
introduced in our society in the past 10 years, it does call on all of us
as a collective embodiment in this House to live up to that.

One of the other things that you have mentioned, which to me is crucial –
and I hope hon members will be able to live up to as well – is the issue of
unity. I have heard it many times this year and I hope that you will not
mind if I reflect on it again because it is a huge challenge to each of us
as individuals.

Let me therefore be so bold as to say that historic moments demand that our
nation should unite as never before and strain every sinew of its
collective body to address our common challenges and keep alive the dream
that has sustained all of us as we travelled along the uncharted road
towards the creation of a South Africa visualised in our Constitution.
These are challenges that you have placed upon us.

We, as members of the ANC, have been debating the various resolutions that
we have been presented with. We continuously have to reflect on the type of
mandate we have been given by our own constituencies because if it had gone
according to what our constituencies and our branches have been demanding,
we would have loved to break up the system and make it work totally
differently. But under your leadership, we would be able to say this is how
the system had to operate for you have laid the foundation for it.

One of the things that you mentioned and presented to us as a challenge in
your state of the nation address is how Parliament has to deal with the
dissolution of the Scorpions. For me, the most important thing that you
have done is that you have been able to strike a relationship between the
executive and Parliament.

Parliament has always felt it is being neglected and isolated but through
the manner in which you have presented it, you have laid the responsibility
in our own hands, to live up to that and redefine exactly what we mean when
we talk of revamping and transforming the justice system. That is a
challenge and I welcome it because it presents a challenge to us as
parliamentarians: What is going to happen to the Scorpions? And what will
happen to the SA Police Service?

But the challenge is not just about them, because both of those comprise
good South Africans. The Scorpions have people of high calibre who have
been able to do a lot of good work and investigate high-calibre cases. One
thing that is very challenging to all of us is: What do we do with those
South Africans in an environment where skills are always an area of
complaint? Where do you take that type of people? What do you do with them?
And how do you place them so that, as South Africans and as a collective
embodiment, we are able to live up to those challenges you have put to us?

One of the challenges that the late Minister Steve Tshwete put forward on
the occasion of launching the Scorpions was that “prosecution led an
intelligence-driven investigation, a key element in the fight against crime
and corruption. All prosecutions are being brought into line with the
national strategy concerning crime and crime prevention”. This is the
challenge that he left us with.

I think the Khampepe Report presents that type of challenge. For us, as a
movement and an organisation, if we reflect on the occasions when the issue
of intelligence arose, it was with issues such as Pango and Quatro. Those
are the type of experiences we are talking about and we are saying it is
within that context that we are raising this issue of the DSO; we are not
raising it because we want to alienate or attack certain individuals. We
are saying that historically, within the movement, within this embodiment
called the ANC, those who were part of Umkhonto we Siswe know that when an
intelligence officer is not accountable, it becomes very reckless and it
presents you with a very serious problem.

Those types of experiences, Comrade President, cannot be forgotten. It is
within that context that we, as the ANC, have presented to the nation that
we want to deal with the dissolution of that type of background. We have
seen such types of things where you will find that when intelligence
officers are not guided and they do not remain accountable, they create a
problem within society. That is what we are confronted with and we should
be able to deal with it.

The call from the ANC conference is to say: Let us reflect on that and let
us take it as a challenge so that when we deal with the type of people we
are dealing with, we do not deal with them recklessly and in a manner that
will look as if we are chasing them away. You must deal with them in a
manner that enhances democracy … [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon President, hon members,
allow me to start by quoting Amilcar Cabral in Tell No Lies, Claim No Easy
Victories when he says:


  Always bear in mind that the people are not fighting for ideas, for
  things in anyone’s head. They are fighting to win material benefits, to
  live better and in peace, see their lives go forward to guarantee the
  future of their children.

In the context of Amilcar Cabral’s statement, this debate provides Azapo
with an opportunity to raise issues of national importance. Secondly, it
provides the people of our country with some idea as to where the national
debate relating to issues that affect their lives is heading.
For the people to “win these material benefits”, in Cabral’s terms, they
need jobs, shelter, water, food, sanitation and other basic necessities of
life. To this end, Comrade President, we are in agreement with you about
your undertaking to establish a national war room for the war against
poverty. The crisis of poverty in the rural areas in particular requires
the total commitment and alignment of all government departments and
programmes.

Azapo, through the Is’baya Development Trust, has, together with other
institutions, developed an Integrated Village Renewal Programme model which
is ready for mass implementation, should government be willing to adopt
this programme as a national programme. I submit, Comrade President, that
government therefore does not need to start at ground level to develop a
renewal development programme that can be implemented on a mass scale.

To date Is’baya, in partnership with the Agricultural Research Council, has
implemented this programme in over 50 villages in the former Transkei area.

To live better and in peace, our people need a state which has the capacity
to fight organised crime and all other forms of crime. In Azapo’s terms, we
need a strong, determined and dedicated army of people that are willing,
equipped and ready to crush the criminals.

With this in mind, Azapo will remain firm and resist the temptation to
weaken or completely do away with the Scorpions. To Azapo it would be a sad
day in South Africa if the Scorpions were to be disbanded merely on the
basis that no one knows to whom they report.

Azapo believes that, if anything, the high success rate of the Scorpions
against organised crime, should be strengthened at all costs. If there are
management, reporting or investigation issues that are based on a vendetta
agenda by the Scorpions, these must be corrected and eliminated without
weakening the country’s resolve to fight organised crime. Azapo is
therefore pleased that Parliament will have a say in this matter.

Concerning the crisis and challenges in Eskom, Azapo does understand,
Comrade President, that you apologised, as a matter of principle. What is
important, however, is that it should not be enough that those who are
employed to manage Eskom should be left to hide behind your principled
apology. They should not underperform and take decisions which put the
country in difficulties and merely ask for forgiveness without anything
being done about it.

Azapo agrees with Business Unity South Africa, that there has to be some
form of accountability; more so since for the past years management at
Eskom has been receiving bonuses. People cannot be allowed to plunge a
country into darkness and still receive bonuses. We should all insist that
there is a culture of accountability. For instance, because of a lack of
accountability, companies that make bread colluded to push the price up and
subsequently paid a fine but the price of bread remained at the level
reached after cheating.

Azapo is not aware of any reversal that was demanded and we learn that
prices even increased after this incident. In other words, Comrade
President, in South Africa the rich can cheat, knowing full well that by
the time this is discovered they will be able to pay and nothing will be
done about it. The poor then continue to pay the price. I thank you. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before we continue, I would like members to join me in
welcoming a former member, a former whip of the National Assembly, Oom
Jannie Momberg. [Applause.]

Nk N W NGWENYA: Mhlonishwa Phini likaSomlomo, mhlonishwa Mongameli,
bahlonishwa, oNgqongqoshe bonke, malungu esakhiwo sokuvikela nozinzo,
ngivumeleni ukuthi ngiqale ngokuveza isinqumo sombutho kaKhongolose
sengqungquthela kazwelonke esiveza isidingo sokwakhiwa kohlelo olunzulu
lokugcinwa kwalabo esebelindele izigwebo. Lokhu kusukela ezimweni
ezehlukene ezitholakala ezikhungweni zokuhlunyeleliswa kwezimilo.

Lokhu kufaka phakathi amacala ngokwehlukana kwawo kanye nobucayi bamacala
abasuke bewenzile; iminyaka yobudala yalabo abalindele izigwebo; kanye
nokusetshenziswa kwezigwebo zokudonsela ngaphandle. Lesi sinqumo sincoma
izindlela ezingcono ezingasetshenziswa ukubhekana nalesi simo. Inkulumo
kaMongameli uThabo Mbeki kuleli sonto eledlule ngoLwesihlanu ibhekiswe
esizweni – engineqiniso lokhu noMaMkhize lena ngaphandle balalele kepha
ngizophinde futhi ngicaphune – ethi uhulumeni uzoshintsha uhlelo lokuqulwa
kwamacala obugebengu ngokuphelele. Lo mbono uza nezindlela ezingcono
zokuhlunyeleliswa kwezimilo.

Phini likaSomlomo, ngivumele ngisho ukuthi siyazi sonke ngezindlela
ezisetshenziswa yizikhungo zokuhlunyeleliswa kwezimilo zokubhekana
nokugcinwa kwezikhungo zokuhlunyeleliswa kwezimilo njengokugcwala
kwezikhungo. Lena yinselelo endala ebhekene nohlelo lokuhlunyeleliswa
kwezimilo. Lolu hlelo-ke lokulinda kwalabo asebelindele izigwebo
luzobhekana nokuxazulula le nselelo.

Mongameli, ngempela kufanele sivume ukuthi baningi labo abalindele ukuqulwa
kwamacala abagcinwe ezikhungweni. Kubukeka sengathi futhi badlala indima
enkulu ekugcwalisweni izikhungo. Kumele kusetshenziswe izindlela eziningi
ezinqala kubhekwe nezimo zecala ngalinye. Lokhu kubuye futhi kuncome ukuthi
abantu abalindele ukuqulwa kwamacala bagcinwe ezikhungweni ngokunakekelwa.
Lokhu kuzoqinisekisa ukuthi baphathwa ngendlela eyahlukileyo kuleyo eyalabo
esebedonsa izigwebo zabo.
Ezinye zalezi zindlela eyokubhekisisa imibandela yebheyili kanye nalezo
zindlela ezingaphoqi ukuvalelwa. Imibandela yebheyili kufanele izwelane
nalabo abangeke bakwazi ukuyikhokha. Abanye balabo abalindele ukuqulwa
kwamacala abo kumele baye ezikhungweni zokuhlunyeleliswa izimilo uma
bengakwazi ukukhokha ibheyili. Esinye isimo yilesi esithi izinkantolo
azikwazi ukubheka lo mqulu obizwa ngokuthi yi-F62 wokufakwa kwezicelo
zebheyili. Izinkantolo ziqinisa izifociya ikakhulukazi kulabo okusamele
bavele kwezinkantolo.

Lesi simo senza kakhulu ukuthi abasolwa bahlale kakhulu besalindele
ukuqulwa kwamacala abo. Ngesinye isikhathi amacala aba mancane. Kungezeka
ukuthi abasolwa bahambe ekuqulweni kwamacala abo besuswa ezikhungweni baye
ezinkantolo. Lokhu kungavikela nokweqa kwabasolwa ngalesi sikhathi.
Kuyavela-ke nokuthi izindlela zokuhlunyeleliswa kwezimilo ezisemiphakathini
nakho kungalekelela ekwehliseni izinga lokugcwala kwezikhungo kanye
nasekusizeni abasolwa ekutheni bashintshe ezenzweni ezimbi.

Izigwebo zabasolwa lapho bengavalelwe khona kufanele ziqiniswe ikakhulukazi
emacaleni amancane. Izingane ezineminyaka engaphansi kwe-18 eziboshelwe
amacala amancane kufanele zisiswe ezikoleni ezibhekene nezingane
ngohlunyeleliswa kwezimilo zazo. Lokhu kudinga ukwakhiwa kwezikhungo
zokunakelela, imali kanye nabantu abazokwelekelela kulezi zimo. Ukuqinisa-
ke ukushintshwa kwalokhu, iPhepha eliMhlophe lemisebenzi yokuhlunyeleliswa
kwezimilo ngonyaka ka-2005 liqinisekisa ukusebenzisana phakathi
kukahulumeni nezinhlaka zemiphakathi kanye nobuhlobo nokusebenzisana
eminyangweni eyehlukene kanjalo nokugqugquzela ukubuyisana komphakathi.

Lokhu futhi kuqinisekisa izinhlelo zemiphakathi ezibhekene nokuphatha.
Lokhu kufake phakathi lokhu okulandelayo: Ukubhekwa kwabantu abathola
ukukhishwa ejele ngesethembiso sokungabaleki; ukuhlunyeleliswa kwezimilo
okusemphakathini; kanye nokusebenzisana. Imiphakathi kanye nalabo
abasemabhizinisini kumele basize futhi banxenxe ukuthi babemukele labo
asebeqede izigwebo zabo futhi bemukele namakhono abo abawathole ngesikhathi
bedonsa izigwebo zabo. Bakwazi nokuthi bawasebenzise ukuze bakwazi ukuthola
amasentshana ukuze baqhubeke nempilo emphakathini.

Imiphakathi kumele ibhekele lokhu okulandelayo: Ukulungiselela ukukhululeka
kwalabo ebebedonsa izigwebo zabo. Lokho kuzosiza ekuthini umuntu uma ebuya
ekuboshweni angathi kungcono abuyele ejele ngoba lapha akemukelekanga.
Ngiyabonga. [Kuphele isikhathi.] [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu speech
follows.)

[Ms N W NGWENYA: Hon Madam Deputy Speaker, hon President, hon members, all
the Ministers, members of the peace and security cluster, allow me to start
by outlining the African National Congress’ National Conference resolution
which identifies a need to come up with a comprehensive programme of
accommodating those who are awaiting trial. This is as a result of
different situations found at the correctional services centres.

This includes, amongst other things, different cases and their merits and
the seriousness of the crimes they have committed; the ages of those
awaiting trial and the use of community correctional services. This
resolution recommends better ways which could be used to deal with this
challenge. In his state of the nation address, last week Friday - which I
am sure even people out there were listening to, but I will quote him again
- President Thabo Mbeki said,”In this regard, in the spirit of “Business
Unusual”, Cabinet has agreed on a set of changes that are required to
establish a new, modernised, efficient and transformed criminal justice
system”.

Madam Deputy Speaker, allow me to say that we are all aware of the methods
that are used by correctional services centres, regarding the way these
centres are managed, for example overcrowding. This is the old challenge
that is facing the correctional services programme. This programme will
address the challenges facing awaiting-trial prisoners.

Mr President, we have to indeed acknowledge that there are many awaiting-
trial prisoners who are detained at correctional services centres. It seems
like they contribute to overcrowding at correctional services centres.
There must be a number of strict methods to be used and each case should be
treated according to its merits. It is also recommended that awaiting-trial
prisoners should be detained and treated with proper care at correctional
services centres. This will ensure that they are treated differently from
those who are already serving their sentences.

One of these methods is careful consideration of bail conditions and
alternative sentencing which does not warrant direct imprisonment. Bail
conditions should be favourable towards those who cannot afford it. Some of
those who are awaiting trial have to go to correctional services centres if
they can’t raise bail. The other situation is that courts do not apply the
provisions of Section 62(f) of the Criminal Procedure Act when considering
bail applications. Courts apply trite rules, especially, to those who are
still going to appear before the courts.

This situation makes suspects wait too long for their cases to be tried.
Sometimes the crimes they committed are just minor crimes. It is possible
to transport suspects from correctional services centres to courts. This
could also prevent suspects from escaping during this time. It is also
evident that interventions such as correctional supervision can also help
to reduce levels of overcrowding at correctional services centres and help
the suspects change their bad behaviour.

Convicted criminals who are not serving custodial sentences for petty
crimes should be dealt with harshly. Children under the age of 18 who are
arrested for petty crimes should be sent to rehabilitation centres. These
interventions will necessitate the construction of more rehabilitation
centres. Personnel who are going to help in these situations, and money
will be made available. To ensure the implementation of this, the White
Paper on correctional services ensures co-operation between the government
and community structures, thereby establishing working relations and
collaboration between different departments which encourages reconciliation
within the community.

This will also strengthen community-based programmes which are aimed at
good governance. This includes the following: The monitoring of parolees
who are released from prison so that they do not evade justice, community
correctional supervision and co-operation. Communities and the business
sector should help and be encouraged to accept those who have served their
sentences. The business sector should acknowledge their skills acquired
while they were serving their sentences so that they can use these skills
in order to earn some money and continue with life in their communities.

The community should look at the following: Preparing for the integration
of those who are serving sentences. That will help ex-convicts not to think
that it is better back in prison because they are not accepted here. Thank
you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]]

Mr W J SEREMANE: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon President, hon Deputy President,
hon members of the House, please allow me, before getting into my speech,
to pay special tribute to my colleagues on this side, namely Sandra Botha,
Nkosi Buthelezi, General Holomisa and the others who said very important
things. I also cannot neglect to thank members on that side who listened
very intently because intent listening leads to intent and responsible
debate and dialogue and this is what our continent needs desperately.

On the surface – coming back home – the South African foreign policy is
commendable even though some aspects of it leave much to be desired or
write home about. How much contact does the Foreign Affairs department have
with our citizenry, the electorate or taxpayers who finance these outreach
initiatives? We may as well ask how much it costs the country, South
Africa, given the massive needs and wants within the country. The adage
“being one’s brother’s or sister’s keeper” in itself does not generate
revenue or save goodwill.

The message is very clear: South Africa should desist from being the
sweeper of the mess created by despotic and authoritarian African heads of
state and their lackeys. Our overstretched local delivery services and
needs will soon be stretched to the limit. Remember that “instability is
associated with change that fails to gratify social demands of the people
and leaves an increasing proportion of frustrated citizens”.

How effective and sustainable are our peace initiative inputs into the
continent? The Democratic Republic of the Congo is a case in point. Do we
hold the DRC stakeholders accountable for strides already made at great
cost to the South African citizenry? The Sudan-Darfur saga does not say
much about the effectiveness of our intervention in this region. We are
mindful, though, of the prevailing intransigence of some key role-players
in this somewhat genocidal tragedy.

Closer to home we have the festering sore that is Zimbabwe. Nine months
have passed since SADC mandated our President Mbeki to facilitate the
restoration of democracy, and I repeat, restoration of democracy. Yet
democracy still remains an elusive mirage to many Zimbabweans.

Every time South Africa has promised or seemingly announced to the sane
world some success in finding negotiated settlements to Zimbabwe’s
political crisis, evidence has proved the contrary, if not worse.

For instance, Deputy Foreign Affairs Minister Aziz Pahad claims all is well
for resolving political implosion, and I quote him:
  There are no longer negotiations needed. What is left is procedural.

That does not seem to tally with the harsh reality on the ground in
Zimbabwe! Let’s admit our sotto voce or quiet diplomacy has no results at
all. Recently, Zanu-PF war veterans’ utterances that “Zanu-PF knows how to
deal with betrayers” in response to Simba Makoni’s announcement that he
would stand against Mugabe in the elections contradict Deputy Minister Aziz
Pahad’s rosy picture of what Zimbabwe is today. Outside Zanu-PF circles we
– South Africans – are suspect and not convincing peacebrokers.

Mr President, simply put, peacemakers or peacebrokers of repute do not take
sides in disputes; their function is to facilitate processes intended to
resolve conflicts. In the light of the African Renaissance vision and the
Nepad initiative, Africa has to come to grips with the many basic
challenges of development, undergirded by a firm consistency of peace and
stability. We have to insist on the plethora of protocols and treaties that
abound in our regional structures and so forth to avoid situations such as
those in Kenya and other African hotspots.

Last, but not least, we need to pay even more attention to how we vote at
the UN by not voting in such a way that we contradict the very principles
of our strong human rights bias, for instance, with regard to our stand on
the Burma issue.
Our quest to get into both bilateral and multilateral relations with other
countries is very prudent indeed. It is therefore very important that
reckless attacks on parties with whom we want to enter into such relations
need to be curbed. I refer here to the sabre-rattling attack on the EU
members by our chairman of the Foreign Affairs Portfolio Committee, which
is, of course, contrary to his style of doing things. I don’t know what
went wrong then. Sound and fury signifying nothing achieves nothing
remarkable, indeed. South Africa and Africa need and deserve far better
than empty rhetoric. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J P CRONIN: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker, Comrade President, Comrade
Deputy President and hon members. Well, we are halfway through the party-
political responses to the state of the nation address. I think good things
have been said, obviously from this side of the House but also good things
have been said from that side and I want to acknowledge some of those in a
while. But underlying the inputs coming from this side is an agenda, often
subtly put, sometimes more crudely put.

For the better part of two years, the ANC or, at least, parts of the ANC,
have been having a debate about the so-called two centres of power.
Hallelujah! Across on this side, suddenly, a number of these opposition
parties have woken up and said: What is in it for us? One prominent speaker
on this side talked about a power vacuum following Polokwane. They are all
circling around this issue, hoping for a gap in the market. There is no gap
in the market and still less is there a market for you in that gap which
doesn’t exist.

Some of you are trying to pit the ANC against the ANC government.
[Interjections.] “Let’s have a vote of no confidence in the ANC government”
says the ID, thinking that it is riding some Polokwane wave, completely
misunderstanding what happened. They are riding a wave but there is no one
with them on that wave. [Interjections.]

Others are trying to pit the government against the ANC. The leader of the
DA said that the President must stop the national democratic revolution.
[Laughter.] That is, presumably, the national democratic revolution of
populists and “the unrealistic left” that the hon Sandra Botha referred to.
The DA has changed its tune a little bit. Typical! Having tried to pit the
government against the ANC, they are now hedging their bets. They are
trying to do both things. Dissolve the current government, they say on the
one hand but on the other hand they say: Let us try and flirt with
President Mbeki against the ANC. Let us present ourselves as the moderate
centre.

Hon Botha, do not confuse sitting on the fence with being in the centre of
South African politics. [Applause.] Sitting on the fence, which appears to
be the historical mission of your party and all its predecessors in their
various acronyms, means you are on the left, not my left but the left of
the left-behinds. [Laughter.]

The hon Holomisa also played this game quite subtly. He began by playing
the homeboy game. There is nothing wrong with that. He referred to his
Transkei origins. At the end of his speech he switched to Xhosa – nothing
wrong with that, of course – and then used that to infer jokingly - but in
jokes there is always a serious point - that there was some Communist
threat and some Commmunist conspiracy, and then came and shook your hand.

This was a joke and it was subtly done but lurking in there is the kind of
issue that we are seeing in Kenya today – the flirtation with gaps or
imagined gaps and playing cards which are very dangerous cards. There is no
gap and you will not succeed in seeking to divide the ANC from the ANC
government. [Applause.] The evidence of your failure is already apparent in
the course of this debate.

President Mbeki’s state of the nation address has been very well received
by not only the general public but by the ANC, Cosatu, the SACP – let it be
said. [Applause.] And that was not choreographed. That was not a
choreographed response. The SACP - I happen to have read their statement
since I managed to come across it - commended the state of the nation
address for many, many things, in detail, the general thrust of it and many
specific issues.
There were also differences. The SACP, for instance, says:


  Commending the President for his role in Zimbabwe, for the long hours put
  into a very difficult situation, bringing together intractable sides ...

But the SACP said:

  We are not sure that what remains is simply procedural.

We are not sure that is a good choice of words. It is not the fault of the
South African government if these agreements are not implemented. They
cannot be implemented by SADC or the South African government. They need to
be implemented by the Zimbabwean government. [Applause.]

In the view of the SACP, which I am not representing here, that is not just
a procedural matter; that is a matter for debate. That is not some
strategic clash, some parting of ways within the alliance; it is democracy,
it is a debate and a discussion.

At the heart of the ANC’s debate around the two centres of power has been a
reaffirmation of longstanding ANC policy. In the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s, at
a time when the ANC was conducting an armed struggle, amongst other things,
we had to be extremely and constantly vigilant that the pressures, the
excitement, the logistic challenges of our military struggle did not
overwhelm the essential political content of our struggle. We said, in the
slogan of the day, that the political must be in the command and therefore,
at that time, institutionally, programmatically and in terms of codes of
conduct and values, we had to work constantly against the danger which
exists in any national liberation struggle where there is a military
component and make sure that the ANC was a political centre first and
foremost.

A ruling party, as opposed to an illegal national liberation movement
conducting an armed struggle, has other challenges and other dangers - we
know those, from any ruling party situation - of technocratic and
bureaucratic capture. There is that danger, even of corporate capture and
of corruption.

When the hon Buthelezi spoke of corruption, we were listening to him. We
don’t disagree with you. If you want to see a very sustained concern about
the problems of corruption and the problems of being a ruling party and the
challenges it brings, have a look at the organisational report of the ANC
at Polokwane. It is a real issue and therefore, institutionally,
organisationally and programmatically, we need to be very vigilant as a
ruling party against those dangers. This means allowing the circulation of
democratic oxygen within our own organisation.

How can 4 000 delegates decide on the future president of South Africa?
That is what we are asked. Some of those parties will have three delegates,
and five delegates, and maybe 200 delegates, deciding who is going to be at
the top of their list next year in the election.

The 4 000 delegates of the ANC at Polokwane did not decide who is going to
be the future president of South Africa. They decided who would be at the
top of the ANC list. The voters of South Africa will decide, who will be
the next president of South Africa. The voters in their majority will
decide and if they decide not to go with the top of the list of a three-
delegate party, then it is not the fault of the ANC.

To affirm that the ANC needs to be a key political strategic centre doesn’t
mean the abolition or dissolution of other centres of power. In fact,
sometimes the two-centres-of-power debate can give you the impression that
there are only two possible centres of power. There are multiple centres of
power in any modern society.

On the contrary, for the ANC to play the role of a political strategic
centre, it requires many centres of power to be flourishing. We need to
respect the professionalism, the technical capacity and the autonomy of
state organs. It is absolutely essential if we want to play that political
centre role.

Also, we need to respect Parliament. If the ANC is going to play a
political strategic centre role, then we need to transform, develop and
enhance the capacities of Parliament. This is absolutely critical. We need
a multiparty institution – which it is.

When the hon Holomisa calls for a national indaba, that national indaba
should be held here. This is what we are. We are voted to be the national
indaba, so let it be that - not a rubber stamp for anyone. Let us be
vibrant. For this reason, amongst the hundreds of resolutions passed at
Polokwane by the ANC - you only remember one resolution and are completely
fixated about that - was an important resolution that we must, as this
Parliament, before we come to an end next year – and not this year, because
we are not going to have elections this year – put an end to floor-
crossing. There has been a debate in the ANC. There has been a debate in
other political parties. [Applause.]

From the ANC’s side we are convinced that we must enhance the legitimacy
and good standing of Parliament. The lesson we have learned from the floor-
crossing episode is that though it may or may not have had its legitimation
in an earlier period, it runs the danger of dragging us into the politics
of politicians, of us as full-time professional politicians, the politics
of lists, of wheeling and dealing and of individual career interests, and
it takes us away from the politics of millions of ordinary people, of
housing, unemployment, poverty and so on. That is one of the important
mandates we are carrying, to strengthen Parliament and not to weaken it.

Also, coming out of Polokwane, the ANC’s political committee is committed
to fulfilling an important constitutional requirement. The Constitution
says that this Parliament must develop legislation to enable us to amend
money Bills. This is very important. We are not going to play wild and free
with money Bills and the Budget but it is an important responsibility. We
have to have oversight over public spending. As the ANC we expect the
support of all political parties in driving through what is in fact not a
“maybe” or an “if”, but a constitutional requirement.

The opposition parties will do their best to divide the ANC but they won’t
succeed. The ANC is united not because it is a monolithic identity ...
[Interjections.] ... but based on our political vision, our commitment to
the Freedom Charter, but above all, a sense of responsibility to over two-
thirds of the electorate who know from their own lives that “amandla
awethu, maatla ke a rona!” [power to the people!] is not just a slogan but
a profound understanding that they might have few things, few resources,
little capital, no shares perhaps on the JSE but they do have the
possibility of a united, collective power, their majority.

That is the historical and contemporary role of the ANC: To provide a
political, unifying coherence to that majority. That is a role that will
not be assumed by proclamation. It is not a role that you can just affirm
through a resolution at Polokwane. It is something that requires daily
struggle. You have to earn that role in struggle daily. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Debate interrupted.

The House adjourned at 17:33.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           FRIDAY, 18 JANUARY 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) Diamond Export Levy Bill [B 22 – 2007] – Act No 15 of 2007
         (assented to and signed by President on 2 December 2007).


      2) Diamond Export Levy (Administration) Bill [B 23 - 2007] – Act No 14
         of 2007 (assented to and signed by President on 5 December 2007).

      3) Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 41 – 2007] – Act No 27 of 2007
         (assented to and signed by President on 7 December 2007).

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled


     1) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Environmental Affairs and Tourism:

        a) General Notice No 1301 published in Government Gazette No 30389
           dated 19 October 2007: Nomination for the appointment of
           suitable persons as members on the Board of South African
           Weather Services (SAWS) in terms of the South African Weather
           Service Act, 2001 (Act No 8 of 2001).


        b) General Notice No 1024 published in Government Gazette No 30418
           dated 26 October 2007: Notice in terms of section 16 of the
           Marine Living Resources Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of 1998).


        c) General Notice No 1112 published in Government Gazette No 30262
           dated 5 September 2007: Proposed Guideline regarding the
           Determination of Bioregions and the Preparation and Publication
           of Bioregional Plans in terms of the National Environmental
           Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of 2004).


        d) General Notice No 1108 published in Government Gazette No 30269
           dated 6 September 2007: National Norms and Standards for the
           Development of the Biodiversity Management Plans for Species
           (BMP-S) in terms of the National Environmental Management:
           Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of 2004).


        e) General Notice No 1109 published in Government Gazette No 30263
           dated 7 September 2007: Policy for the Development of a
           Sustainable Marine Aquaculture Sector in South Africa, in terms
           of the Marine Living Resources Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of 1998).


        f) General Notice No 1138 published in Government Gazette No 30284
           dated 11 September 2007: Notice to establish the National
           Framework in terms of section 7(1) of the National Environmental
           Management: Air Quality Act, 2004 (Act No 39 of 2004).


        g) Government Notice No 878 published in Government Gazette No
           30310 dated 21 September 2007: Regulations for the prohibition
           of the use, manufacturing, import and export of asbestos and
           asbestos containing materials, in terms of the Environmental
           Conservation Act, 1089 (Act No 73 of 1989).


     2) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Environmental Affairs and Tourism and the Portfolio Committee on
        Water Affairs and Forestry:

        a) General Notice No 1146 published in Government Gazette No 30293
           dated 17 September 2007: Draft alien and invasive species
           regulations 2007, in terms of the National Environmental
           Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of 2004).


        b) General Notice No 1147 published in Government Gazette No 30293
           dated 17 September 2007: Draft lists of exempted alien species,
           prohibited alien species and invasive species for which a permit
           is required under certain circumstances, in terms of the
           National Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act
           No 10 of 2004).

     3) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Correctional Services for consideration and report:

        (a)      Report of the Judicial Inspectorate of Prisons for 2006-
     2007 [RP 82-2007].

     4) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Defence and the Joint Standing Committee on Defence:

        (a)      The President of the Republic submitted a letter dated 7
           November 2007 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, informing
           Members of the Assembly of the employment of the South African
           National Defence Force in Darfur in Sudan.


        (b)      The President of the Republic submitted a letter dated 9
           November 2007 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, informing
           Members of the Assembly of the employment of the South African
           National Defence Force during the 2007/2008 festive season.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     1) Report and Financial Statements of the Film and Publication Board
        for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2006-2007.

                           FRIDAY, 25 JANUARY 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)    South African National Water Resources Infrastructure Agency
         Limited Bill, 2007, submitted by the Minister of Water Affairs and
         Forestry. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and
         Forestry and the Select Committee on Land and Environmental
         Affairs.

    (2)    Renaming of High Courts Bill, 2007, submitted by the Minister
         for Justice and Constitutional Development. Referred to the
         Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development and
         the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs.

    (3)    Reform of Customary Law of Succession Bill, 2007, submitted by
         the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development. Referred
         to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
         Development and the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
         Affairs.


National Assembly

The Speaker

 1. Membership of Assembly

    (1)     The vacancy which occurred owing to the resignation of Mr D H M
        Gibson has been filled with effect from  15  January  2008  by  the
        nomination of Dr D T George.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Report of the Auditor-General on the management  and  provision
        of official accommodation to staff at the Department of  Defence  –
        November 2007 [RP 252-2007].

    (b)     The President of the Republic submitted  the  following  letter
        dated 30 November 2007 to the Chairperson  of  the  Joint  Standing
        Committee on  Defence  informing  Members  of  the  Joint  Standing
        Committee on  Defence  of  the  employment  of  the  South  African
        National Defence Force for a service in co-operation with the South
        African Police Service during the 2010 FIFA World  Cup  preliminary
        draw:


        EMPLOYMENT OF THE  SOUTH  AFRICAN  NATIONAL  DEFENCE  FORCE  FOR  A
        SERVICE IN CO-OPERATION WITH THE SOUTH AFRICAN POLICE SERVICE


        This serves to inform the Joint Standing Committee on Defence  that
        I have authorised the employment  of  the  South  African  National
        Defence Force (SANDF) personnel, for a service in co-operation with
        the South African Police Service in  preventing  and  combating  of
        crime and maintenance and preservation of law and order during  the
        2010 FIFA World Cup preliminary draw.


        This employment is authorised in accordance with the provisions  of
        section 201(2)(a) of the Constitution  of  the  Republic  of  South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002).


        A total of one hundred and twenty (120) SANDF members were employed
        as from 17 November to 27 November 2007.


        I will communicate this report  to  the  members  of  the  National
        Council of Provinces and of the  National  Assembly,  and  wish  to
        request that you bring the contents hereof to the attention of  the
        Joint Standing Committee on Defence.




        signed
        TM Mbeki

 2. The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

    Report in terms of section 13(4A)(b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993  (Act
    No 90 of 1993): Withholding of remuneration of Magistrate M  K  Chauke,
    an additional Magistrate at Pretoria.


 3. The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

    Report and Financial Statements of Marine  Living  Resources  Fund  for
    2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
    Statements and Performance Information for 2006-2007.

National Assembly

The Speaker

 1. Submission of Private Members’ Legislative Proposals

    The following private member’s legislative proposal  was  submitted  to
    the Speaker on 7 November 2007, in accordance with Rule 234:


    (a)     Legislative proposal to amend the Employment Equity Act, No  55
        of 1998 (A Dreyer)


    Referred to the Standing  Committee  on  Private  Members’  Legislative
    Proposals and Special Petitions for consideration and report.


 2. The President of the Republic submitted the following letter  dated  30
    November 2007 to the Speaker of the National Assembly informing Members
    of the National  Assembly  of  the  employment  of  the  South  African
    National Defence Force for a service in  co-operation  with  the  South
    African Police Service during the 2010 FIFA World Cup preliminary draw:


    EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE FOR A SERVICE IN
    CO-OPERATION WITH THE SOUTH AFRICAN POLICE SERVICE


    This serves to inform the National Assembly that I have authorised  the
    employment  of  the  South  African  National  Defence  Force   (SANDF)
    personnel, for a service in co-operation with the South African  Police
    Service in preventing  and  combating  of  crime  and  maintenance  and
    preservation  of  law  and  order  during  the  2010  FIFA  World   Cup
    preliminary draw.


    This employment is authorised in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of
    section 201(2)(a) of the Constitution of the Republic of South  Africa,
    1996, read with section 93 of the Defence  Act,  2002  (Act  No  42  of
    2002).


    A total of one hundred and twenty (120) SANDF members were employed  as
    from 17 November to 27 November 2007.


    I will communicate this report to the members of the  National  Council
    of Provinces and the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on  Defence,
    and wish to request that you bring the contents hereof to the attention
    of the National Assembly.




    signed
    TM Mbeki


COMMITTEE REPORTS


   National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Joint Standing Committee on Defence (JSCD) on  Oversight
    Visit the South African Army Combat Training Centre, Lohatla,  Northern
    Cape

     1.     Introduction

     The Joint Standing Committee on Defence  is  mandated  to  monitor  the
     morale and well-being of  the  South  African  National  Defence  Force
     (SANDF). This includes monitoring the  training  of  soldiers  and  the
     conditions of the infrastructure of the SANDF.


     Nine SANDF soldiers were killed and 15 wounded on Friday,  October  12,
     2007 during a training  exercise  at  the  South  African  Army  Combat
     Training Centre in Lohatla, Northern Cape.


     The   Committee,   as   part   of   its   mandate   and   Parliamentary
     responsibilities, undertook an oversight visit  to  the  South  African
     Army Combat Training Centre in Lohatla,  Northern  Cape,  on  Wednesday
     October 24, 2007 to try and establish what happened and what  could  be
     done to prevent such incidents occurring in future.


     2. Composition of Delegation
         • Dr E A Schoeman, Chairperson and Leader of Delegation (ANC)
         • Mr. M S Booi (ANC)
         • Mr O R Monareng (ANC)
         • Ms P Daniels (ANC)
         • Mr J Schippers (ANC)
         • Mr. S B Ntuli (ANC)
         • Mr Sayedali-Shah (DA)
         • Rev N W Ngcobo (ANC)
         • Mr A L Moseki  (NCOP -ANC)
         • Mr J Ramrock ( Committee Secretary)


     3. Findings.


        3.1      Waterkloof Air Force Base


        The  Delegation,  which  consisted  of  Members  of  the  Portfolio
        Committee on Defence as well, met and interacted with  families  of
        the deceased at the Waterkloof Air Force Base, Pretoria,  and  then
        proceeded to the Memorial Service in Kimberly.

        3.2      Memorial Service, Kimberly.


        The Minister of Defence, M P Lekota,  in  addressing  the  memorial
        service, extended the condolence of Government and the  country  to
        family and friends of the fallen soldiers. He assured them  that  a
        full investigation will be conducted to establish what happened and
        what can be done to prevent such accidents in future.


        The Delegation also  addressed  compatriots  of  the  departed  and
        shared words of comfort and  encouragement  and  reminded  them  of
        their importance to the country and our democracy.


        3.3      Lohatla Military Base.


        The Delegation  together  with  family  members  of  the  deceased,
        visited the South African Army Combat Training Centre, Lohatla, for
        an in-loco inspection where  the  accident  occurred.  The  Officer
        Commanding of the base briefed the Delegation on the  accident  and
        what could possibly have gone wrong.


        Members were also  reminded  that  a  full  investigation  will  be
        conducted and that a report will be provided to  the  Committee  on
        the outcome.

     4. Conclusion

     The Committee, mindful of the fact that an investigation is in progress
     to try and find answers to the cause of the incident,  will  await  the
     conclusion of the process and the outcome of the report.


2.    Report of the Joint Standing Committee on Defence (JSCD) on  Oversight
    Tour to Makhado Air Force Base, Limpopo
     1.     Introduction

     Chapter two of the White Paper on  Defence,  dealing  with  matters  on
     human resource, outlines and mandates the Joint Standing  Committee  on
     Defence to carry out certain tasks with respect to:
    • transformation within the SANDF
    • the integration of members of the SANDF
    • the recruitment and training of members
    • the moral and well being of members and
    • the condition of infrastructure.

     The Committee, as part of this mandate and its  Parliamentary  mandate,
     undertook an oversight visit to Makhado Air Force Base in Limpopo on  6
     August  2007.

     2. Composition of Delegation


    • Mr S D Montsitsi, Chairperson and Leader of Delegation (ANC)
    • Ms D M Seadimo (ANC)
    • Mr N Diale (ANC)
    • Ms P Daniels (ANC)
    • Mr J Schippers (ANC)
    • Mr J Ramrock ( Committee Secretary)

     3. Findings.


     General C Gagiano, Chief  of  the  Air  Force,  assisted  by  Brigadier
     General C  J  Delport,  Officer  Commanding  Air  Force  Base  Makhado,
     addressed the delegation on the history of the base.  Makhado  AFB  was
     established in 1987, some 20 years ago. It is the  second  largest  air
     force base in the country, behind Waterkloof  AFB.  Makhado  AFB  is  a
     combat base that only operates with fighter aircraft and is  recognized
     as center of excellence.


     The base  plays  an  important  strategic  role  in  the  SADC  region.
     Neighboring countries like Angola and Zimbabwe participate  in  fighter
     training exercises conducted at this base. Border patrol operations are
     also performed, and have resulted in the arrest  of  countless  illegal
     immigrants from for instance Zimbabwe.


     Serious breaches on security have been identified with  aliens  gaining
     access to the premises.


     Force preparations, so that individuals can be combat  ready,  is  also
     done at the base.


     Some of the challenges faced included shortage of staff at  the  health
     center, scarcity of water and road transport. Discussions are  on-going
     with the local authority with the laying of a water pipeline that  will
     assist the base.


        3.1      Combat flying school.


        Lt Col D J Van der Linde, Officer Commanding Combat Flying  School,
        addressed the delegation on the function of the school. The phasing
        out of the Cheetah training aircraft in 2005 has created a  problem
        concerning combat training. Students are trained on the Cheetah  in
        preparation  for  flying  the  recently  acquired   Gripen   combat
        aircraft. It takes about 2 ½ years to complete training to fly  the
        Gripen. The school presently has  106  students.  The  most  senior
        black within the Air Force is a major, who joined in 1994. All  the
        instructors are white, while  there  are  45  black  and  55  white
        technicians that have been trained,  5  of  these  are  women.  The
        demographics are slowly being corrected, but much work still  needs
        to be done. The problem related to  the  small  seat  in  the  Hawk
        aircraft is being addressed to try and  accommodate  all  students.
        Almost 250 technicians  resigned  from  the  Air  Force  last  year
        (2006), with most joining the private sector. Language proficiency,
        lack of computer skills and the type of psychometric  testing  done
        was identified as some of the major challenges  faced  by  previous
        disadvantaged candidates who wanted to join the Air Force.


        The Air Force is under- funded and needs, at least, R1.2 billion to
        be used  on  infrastructure.  Interaction  to  address  the  budget
        challenge is currently taking place with DENEL.


        3.2      Air Servicing Unit.


        Lt Col D J Blom, Officer Commanding 3  Air  Servicing  Unit  (ASU),
        addressed the Delegation on the role and functions of the Unit. One
        of the main aims of the Unit is to be the  benchmark  for  aircraft
        maintenance in the SAAF. Clients include  visiting  squadrons  from
        other countries. On avionics the Unit  looks  at  fault  isolation,
        fault verification, performance verification and  repair.  Some  of
        the challenges facing the Unit include the sequence of construction
        of Gripen facilities vs Cheetah/Hawk support, the Cheetah phase-out
        period, scarcity of  resources  and  the  difficulty  in  retaining
        skilled staff.


        3.3      Tour of the Base.


        The Delegation was taken on a  tour  of  the  base  which  included
        visiting the Centralised Training Centre,  the  Operational  Flight
        Trainer and the 2 Squadron.    Lt Col D Dormehl, Officer Commanding
        2  Squadron,  briefed  the  Delegation  on  the  functions  of  the
        Squadron.


        Members  observed  attempts   on   integration   but   noted   that
        transformation remains a challenge.


     4.     Conclusion.


     The Delegation commended the good  work  done  at  the  Base  and  will
     continue to monitor  progress  that  had  been  made  to  some  of  the
     challenges faced by the Base. The Committee  also  requested  that  the
     Inspector General ensures that problems that  were  identified  at  the
     Base are corrected.


                          TUESDAY, 29 JANUARY 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


                   CALLING OF JOINT SITTING OF PARLIAMENT


The Speaker of the National Assembly, Ms B Mbete, and the Chairperson of
the National Council of Provinces, Mr M J Mahlangu, in terms of Joint Rule
7 (2), have called a joint sitting of the Houses of Parliament for
Wednesday, 30 January 2008 at 14:00 to conduct a debate on the current
national energy challenges.

B MBETE, MP                                  M J MAHLANGU, MP
SPEAKER OF THE                               CHAIRPERSON OF THE
NATIONAL ASSEMBLY            NATIONAL COUNCIL OF
                                             PROVINCES

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

    (a)     Government Notice No 1147 published in Government Gazette No
        30537 dated 7 December 2007: Assignment of the Management of Mokala
        National park to south African National Parks (SANParks), in terms
        of the National Environmental Management: Protected Areas Act, 2003
        (Act No 57 of 2003).




    (b)     General Notice No 1717 published in Government Gazette No 30534
        dated 7 December 2007: Publication of Policy on the Management of
        Seals, Seabirds and Shorebirds, in terms of the Marine Living
        Resources Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of 1998).




    (c)     General Notice No 1718 published in Government Gazette No 30535
        dated 7 December 2007: Invitation to comment on the draft policy
        and application forms concerning the allocation and management of
        long term fishing rights in the Large Pelagic (Tuna and Swordfish)
        Sector - 2007, in terms of the Marine Living Resources Act, 1998
        (Act No 18 of 1998).

    (d)     Government Notice No R.1187 published in Government Gazette No
        30568 dated 14 December 2007: Amendment of critically endangered,
        endangered, vulnerable and protected species list, in terms of the
        National Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No
        10 of 2004).




    (e)     Government Notice No R.1188 published in Government Gazette No
        30568 dated 14 December 2007: Threatened or Protected Species
        Amendment Regulations, in terms of the National Environmental
        Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of 2004).




    (f)     General Notice No 1767 published in Government Gazette No 30574
        dated 21 December 2007: Invitation to comment on the Draft Policy
        for the Transfer of Commercial Fishing Rights - 2007, in terms of
        the Marine Living Resources Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of 1998).




    (g)     General Notice No 1197 published in Government Gazette No 30590
        dated 18 December 2007: Proclamation of the Fossil Hominid Sites of
        South Africa (Consisting of Fossil Hominid Site of Sterkfontein,
        Swartkrans, Kromdraai and the Environs, Taung Skull Fossil Site and
        Makapan Valley) in terms of the World Heritage Convention Act, 1999
        (Act No 49 of 1999).




    (h)     General Notice No 1198 published in Government Gazette No 30590
        dated 18 December 2007: Proclamation of Robben Island as a World
        Heritage Site in terms of the World Heritage Convention Act, 1999
        (Act No 49 of 1999).

    (i)     General Notice No 1199 published in Government Gazette No 30590
        dated 18 December 2007: Notice in connection with the Proclamation
        of uKhahlamba Drakensberg Park as a World Heritage Site in terms of
        the World Heritage Convention Act, 1999 (Act No 49 of 1999).




    (j)     General Notice No 1200 published in Government Gazette No 30590
        dated 18 December 2007: Proclamation of Mapungubwe Cultural
        Landscape as a World Heritage Site in terms of the World Heritage
        Convention Act, 1999 (Act No 49 of 1999).




    (k)     General Notice No 1201 published in Government Gazette No 30590
        dated 18 December 2007: Proclamation of Vredefort Dome as a World
        Heritage Site in terms of the World Heritage Convention Act, 1999
        (Act No 49 of 1999).




    (l)     General Notice No 1202 published in Government Gazette No 30590
        dated 18 December 2007: Declaration of the Member of the Executive
        Council for Economic Development, Environment and Tourism, Limpopo
        Province as the Authority for Makapan Valley Serial World Heritage
        Site in terms of the World Heritage Convention Act, 1999 (Act No 49
        of 1999).




    (m)     General Notice No 1203 published in Government Gazette No 30590
        dated 18 December 2007: Declaration of the North West Member of the
        Executive Council for Agriculture, Conservation and Environment as
        the Authority for the Taung Skull Fossil Site in terms of the World
        Heritage Convention Act, 1999 (Act No 49 of 1999).

    (n)     General Notice No 1204 published in Government Gazette No 30590
        dated 18 December 2007: Declaration of the Member of the Executive
        Council for Sport, Arts and Culture, Northern Cape Province as the
        Authority for the Richtersveld Cultural and Botanical Landscape
        World Heritage Site in terms of the World Heritage Convention Act,
        1999 (Act No 49 of 1999).




    (o)     General Notice No 1205 published in Government Gazette No 30590
        dated 18 December 2007: Declaration of the Kwazulu-Natal Nature
        Conservation Board as the Authority for the uKhahlamba Drakensberg
        Park World Heritage Site in terms of the World Heritage Convention
        Act, 1999 (Act No 49 of 1999).




    (p)     General Notice No 1768 published in Government Gazette No 30575
        dated 21 December 2007: Publication of Policy on the Management of
        Seals, Seabirds and Shorebirds, in terms of the Sea Birds and Seals
        Protection Act, 1973 (Act No 46 of 1973).




    (q)     Government Notice No 1141 published in Government Gazette No
        30542 dated 3 December 2007: Draft Regulations for the protection
        of Abalone (Haliotis) (wild), in terms of the Marine Living
        Resources Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of 1998).




    (r)     Government Notice No 1123 published in Government Gazette No
        30518 dated 23 November 2007: Declaration of the Highveld as
        priority area in terms of section 18(1) of the National
        Environmental Management: Air Quality Act, 2004 (Act No 39 of
        2004).

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

    (a)     Special report by the Auditor-General in terms of section
        126(4) of the Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act,
        2003 (Act No 56 of 2003), outlining the reasons for the delay in
        completing the audit of the Eden District Municipality for the
        financial year ended 30 June 2007.


     b) Reply from the Department of Labour to recommendations in
        Nineteenth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts on
        Department of Labour, as adopted by the House on 21 November 2007.


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Committee on Private Members` Legislative Proposals and
    Special Petitions, dated 21 November 2007:


    The Committee on Private Members’ Legislative Proposals and Special
    Petitions, having considered the legislative proposals by Mr P A Gerber
    referred to it on 19 June 2007, and having consulted the affected
    churches and organisations (Dutch Reformed Church, Apostolic Faith
    Mission, Methodist Church, South African Council of Churches and Bible
    Society), recommends that permission be given to the member to proceed
    with the proposals, namely that the following Acts be repealed:
      • Dutch Reformed Church Union Act, No 23 of 1911
      • Apostolic Faith Mission of South Africa Act, No 24 of 1961
      • Apostolic Faith Mission of South Africa Amendment Act, No 4 of 1970


      • Methodist Church of South Africa Act, No 111 of 1978
      • Bible Society of South Africa Act, No 15 of 1970
      • Bible Society of South Africa Amendment Act, No 97 of 1985


     Report to be considered.


                         WEDNESDAY, 30 JANUARY 2008

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Government Notice No R.1090 published in Government Gazette No
          30491 dated 16 November 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
          1/1/1348) in terms of Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
          1964).




    (b)     Proclamation No 36 published in Government Gazette No 30508
          dated 30 November 2007: Commencement of sections 7(1)(m), 9(1) and
          34(1) of the Revenue Laws Second Amendment Act, 2006 (Act No 21 of
          2006).

    (c)     Government Notice No R.1139 published in Government Gazette No
          30532 dated 30 November 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
          1/1/149) in terms of Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
          1964).




    (d)     Government Notice No R.1196 published in Government Gazette No
          30581 dated 14 December 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No
          2/294) in terms of Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
          1964).




    (e)     Government Notice No 1207 published in Government Gazette No
          30592 dated 20 December 2007: Approval of allocations, in terms of
          the Division of Revenue Act, 2007 (Act No 1 of 2007).




    (f)     Government Notice No R.1211 published in Government Gazette No
          30586 dated 21 December 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No
          2/295) in terms of Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
          1964).




    (g)     Government Notice No R.1212 published in Government Gazette No
          30586 dated 21 December 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No
          2/296) in terms of Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
          1964).




    (h)     Government Notice No R.1213 published in Government Gazette No
          30586 dated 21 December 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
          3/624) in terms of Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
          1964).

    (i)     Government Notice No R.1214 published in Government Gazette No
          30586 dated 21 December 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
          3/625) in terms of Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
          1964).




    (j)     Government Notice No R.1215 published in Government Gazette No
          30586 dated 21 December 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
          3/626) in terms of Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
          1964).




    (k)     Government Notice No R.1216 published in Government Gazette No
          30586 dated 21 December 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
          3/627) in terms of Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
          1964).




    (l)     Government Notice No R.1217 published in Government Gazette No
          30586 dated 21 December 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No
          4/310) in terms of Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
          1964).




    (m)     Government Notice No R.1218 published in Government Gazette No
          30586 dated 21 December 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 5 (No 5/87)
          in terms of Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly
CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORTS - Insert T080130-insert1 – PAGES 43-72

                          THURSDAY, 31 JANUARY 2008

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

COMMITTEE REPORTS

 National Assembly

1.    PRELIMINARY REPORT ON THE OVERSIGHT VISIT OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE
   ON DEFENCE TO LOHATLA COMBAT TRAINING CENTRE, NORTHERN CAPE

1.    INTRODUCTION
The Portfolio and Joint Standing Committees on Defence conducted a joint
oversight visit to the Lohatla Combat Training Centre (LCTC) on Wednesday,
23 October 2007. Both committees have constitutionally mandated
parliamentary oversight responsibilities of the Department of Defence and
are obligated to ensure that the morale and well-being of the South African
National Defence Force [SANDF] remain at a high level.

The visit was aimed at determining the circumstances around the shooting
accident during training on 12 October 2007 that resulted in the death of 9
soldiers and 14 wounded at LCTC. This report is based on the interactions
between the Parliamentary Delegation and members of the SANDF, and the
bereaved families.

The delegation comprised:

Portfolio Committee on Defence

Mr F Bhengu      (Chairperson: Portfolio Committee on Defene)
Mr P Daniels           (ANC)
Mr M Booi        (ANC)
Mr J Schippers   (ANC)
Mr S B Ntuli           (ANC)
Dr P Pheko       (PAC)

Joint Standing Committee on Defence

Dr M Schoemann   (Chairperson: Joint Standing Committee on Defence)
Mr O E Monareng  (ANC)
Mr J Schippers   (ANC)
Rev N W Ngcobo   (ANC)
Mr A L Moseki    (NCOP -ANC)
Mr M Shah        (DA)

2.    FINDINGS:

2.1   Meeting with relatives of the deceased:

The Parliamentary Delegation, hosted by the SANDF at Waterkloof Airforce
Base in Thaba Tshwane, met with relatives of the deceased and extended
condolences on behalf of Parliament to the families. The two groups then
proceeded to the Memorial Service in Kimberley.

2.2   Address by Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee at the memorial
    service in Kimberley:

The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Defence, Mr F Bhengu, in his
address on behalf of Parliament to mourners, reiterated both the
Committees’ condolences to the families of the deceased and stressed
Parliament’s oversight responsibility to ensure that a thorough
investigation into the events of that day is conducted.

2.3   Address by the Minister of Defence, Minister M P Lekota:

The Minister of Defence, Mr M P Lekota, extended condolences on behalf of
the Government and country to relatives and paid tribute to the deceased.
He gave the assurance that a full investigation will be conducted to
establish the causes of the accident. The Department will lend every
possible assistance to the families of the deceased.

2.4   Meeting with members of the South African National Defence Force:

The Delegation met with approximately 100 soldiers in the church hall after
the Memorial Service, and expressed its pride and appreciation for the
selfless dedication displayed by troops, despite the dangers associated
with military service.  Soldiers were encouraged to maintain the high
levels of professionalism and dedication.

3.    Visit to Lohatla Combat Training Centre (LCTC):

Upon arrival at LCTC, the Parliamentary Delegation was escorted to the
scene of the accident and was briefed on the events of that day.  As there
is an official investigation underway, a general overview of the events of
that day was provided. A detailed briefing will be held with the Department
subsequent to the tabling of the report on the outcomes of the
investigation.

4.    CONCLUSION

The Portfolio Committee on Defence, mindful of the investigations by the
official Board of Enquiry and the South African Police Service (SAPS),
await the findings of the Department. The Committee will table its final
report subsequent to the tabling and the deliberations on the outcomes of
the Department’s official enquiry.

2.    REPORT OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE ON ITS   OVERSIGHT VISIT
   TO SIMON’S TOWN NAVAL BASE AND THE SOUTH AFRICAN MILITARY ACADEMY AT
   SALDANHA: 07 – 08 MAY 2007

The Portfolio Committee on Defence, having undertaken an oversight visit to
the South African Naval Base at Simon’s Town and South African Military
Academy at Saldanha, on 07 and 08 May 2007, reports as follows:

INTRODUCTION

This report is presented in the context of the oversight role assigned to
the National Assembly by the Constitution. These visits were conducted as
part of the Portfolio Committee’s oversight and monitoring role over the
Department of Defence, the South African National Defence Force (SANDF) and
their institutions.

Information contained in this report is based on presentations made and
interactions   between the Committee and officials of both institutions, as
well as relevant documentation. A full list of delegation members,
officials from the South African Naval Base and Military Academy, as well
as the presentations delivered, are provided in Appendix 1, 2 and 3.

TERMS OF REFERENCE

In addition to the aforementioned exercise of the Committee’s
constitutionally mandated oversight role; and within the framework of the
constitutional imperatives of transformation; affirmative action and
employment equity, good governance, delivery, accountability and non-
racialism, the Committee had the following objectives:

i)    Simon’s Town Naval Base:

The efficacy of psychometric testing: The Committee sought greater clarity
on the standards and procedures followed in the psychological assessment
and processes of naval officers, and whether these were effective in
addressing the imperatives of transformation.

Transformation of the South African Navy:  The Committee hoped to ascertain
the progress made in the transformation of the South African Navy,
including the successes and challenges to this process.

Conditions of facilities:
The Committee wanted to view the state of both living and training
facilities, to gain insight into the conditions in which naval officers
work and live.

ii)   The South African Military Academy at Saldanha:

Lessons learnt from Canadian Study Tour:
Both the Portfolio Committee on Defence and officials from the Saldanha
Military Academy undertook separate study tours to the Canadian Royal
Military Academy on 4 to 12 November 2006 and 26 February to 1 March 2007,
respectively. The Committee wanted to engage with officials on the findings
of this trip to assess how the South African Military Academy compared to
its international counterparts. Furthermore, the Committee intended to
exchange ideas on how lessons learnt from this visit could be utilised to
enhance and ensure the highest levels of competitiveness, academic
excellence and professionalism.

Previous oversight visits to the Military Academy at Saldanha:
One of the ways in which the Committee can monitor the implementation of
legislation and policies of the Department, is to investigate the
implementation of policies and recommendations made on the previous two
oversight visits on 19 January 2005 and 5 September 2006.

Staff Concerns: The Committee intended to meet with lecturers of the
Military Academy in order to discuss staff concerns and solutions to the
problems faced by lecturers.

Student Concerns: The delegation intended to meet with the students at the
Military Academy to discuss their concerns and solution to problems faced
by the student population.

Interaction with senior management of the Academy: The delegation wanted to
meet with the senior officials from the Academy to highlight the concerns
raised by both lecturers and students and to highlight the necessity of
critical areas to attention.

FINDINGS

The Committee made the following findings, based on the presentations made
and subsequent discussions with officials:

DAY 1: Simon’s Town Naval Base (Monday, 07 May 2007)

1.    Briefing by Admiral R W Higgs (Chief of Fleet Staff) and Admiral
    Madimu (Chief of the South African Navy)

In their briefing to the Committee, officials from the South African Fleet
Command identified the South African Navy’s core mission as follows: ‘to
fight at sea; to win at sea, to become unchallenged at sea.’ In this vain,
the purpose of the Chief of Navy was to provide supported combat ready
naval forces for CJ operations while the Fleet Command needed to prepare
supported combat ready naval forces for the C Navy.
Key priorities of the South African Navy were identified as:
Greater involvement in Africa.
Participation in government initiatives in Africa.
Greater South-South Co-operation.
Building a People’s Navy.

The South African Navy is enhancing its continental focus through the
following initiatives:

Operationalisation of frigates and submarines.
Augmentation of current forces with new capabilities
Ensuring compatibility with neighbours in terms of standard operating
procedures, doctrines as well as common training.

Efforts to improve the delivery and performance of the fleet was also
highlighted and included:
Rationalisation of combat hardware and ships, thus disposing of old and non-
cost effective vessels.
Continued transformation and revitalisation of the Reserve Forces.
The upgrading of facilities which include modernised headquarters, and the
construction of new training facilities.

The SA Navy has integrated the previous seven standing reserves into the
units of the South African Navy which was part of efforts to bring about an
integrated SA Navy corps.

Certain challenges were also highlighted, which could have a negative
impact on the ability to achieve key goals and priorities:
The Navy struggled to retain specialised or scarce skilled personnel. These
could not be easily replaced due to the limited availability of such
skills.
The strained ability to adapt and transform infrastructure required to
support the strategic defence packages into service.
Strained ability to conduct the required and contracted qualification
trials necessary to integrate the strategic defence packages into service.
The age profile is a cause of concern, since the retention and recruitment
of youth remains a challenge.
Although the rationalisation process was necessary, the SA Navy could be
challenged by the reduction in both manpower and budget. Although the SA
Navy was working towards increasing its relevance in the African battle
space as well as to align itself with broader government initiatives; such
an increasing role necessitates increased in available funding.

2.    Summary of key issues raised by the Committee, emanating from
    presentation

Noting the down-scaling of fleet; the Committee expressed concern over the
possible impact on the Navy’s ability to secure the South African
coastlines.
The ability to respond adequately to natural disasters anywhere in South
Africa.
The effect of limited staff capacity on the implementation of key projects
such as Project Millennium.
The training of cadettes and the relationship between the SA Navy and SA
Air force.
The SA Navy’s involvement in deep-sea mining activities and the recovery of
sunken vessels.
The Chairperson urged greater exposure of female officers, regardless of
rank, to high-level discussions and interactions with the Portfolio
Committee.
The retaining of institutional memory of the Navy was critical, and
therefore the success of projects such as project millennium was essential.


3.    Postponement of discussions on the efficacy of psychometric testing
    of naval       officers

Due to time constraints and the sensitive nature of psychometric
assessments in the SANDF, the Committee agreed that a meeting be
rescheduled for a lengthier and comprehensive discussion on this matter.
Officials acknowledged the public sensitivity and controversy surrounding
such tests; the nature of which also merrited discussion.

The Chairperson cautioned officials that the Portfolio Committee’s interest
in better understanding the process of psychometric testing of naval
officers was not informed by any allegations. As these tests were utilised
as an important tool in determining the pschycological eligibility for
entrance into the Navy, an investigation into such processes was needed.
This was particularly important as South Africa struggled with its history
of discrimination and the present imperatives of transformation.

The Committee noted the following key areas of need in terms of
transformation:

The middle management of the SANDF must be made fully representative.
Given the strategic objectives of the Department of Defence; the
transformation of the SA Navy needed to reflect the South African
demographics.
The Portfolio Committee had a responsibility to ensure the implementation
of all strategic objectives set, as well as to ensure the global
competitiveness of the Navy.
There needed to be a deliberate intention of transformation to deal with
the legacies of past discrimination.

4.    Tour of facilities

Rear Admiral K Louw accompanied the Committee on a tour of the Simon’s Town
Naval facilities.  The building plans for new accommodation were also
explained. The building of new facilities was scheduled to commence at the
end of 2007. The following facilities were viewed:

The site for the planned new accommodation.
The new modernised headquarters which will improve the practical operation
of the naval base.
Recently completed housing facilities for junior naval officers and their
families.
The shipping and docking facilities.
Training facilities.

The total cost for the construction was estimated at R256 million, of which
R30 million would be budgeted from the annual operational budget. Although
the necessary funding for this project was not readily available,
construction could be completed over a three year period. The revenue
generated from the closure and sale of  SAS Wingfield in Durban could be
used as additional funding for building projects at the Base. The
Department of Public Works would negotiate the selling of properties on
behalf of the SA Navy.

DAY 2: South African Military Academy (Tuesday, 8 May 2007)

1.    Background
The Portfolio Committee on Defence conducted a visit to the South African
Military Academy on both 19 January 2005 and 5 September 2006 as part of
its oversight and monitoring of Department of Defence, the South African
National Defence Force [SANDF] and their institutions. During both visit
(s) the Committee assessed the implementation of recommendations made in
2005 and made further recommendations based on their findings.

The report is based on the second follow-up visit, led by the Committee
Chairperson, Ms Thandi Tobias, to investigate the implementation of
recommendations made during the 2006 oversight visit.

Additional items on the Committee’s agenda included an exchange of ideas on
separate study tours to the Canadian Defence Academy as well as
interactions with staff; students and the Academy’s management.

2.    Briefing on the study tour to the Royal Military College and Canadian
    Defence Academy

Officials from the South African Military Academy at Saldanha undertook a
study tour to the Royal Military College and Canadian Defence Academy from
26 February to 1 March 2007. The purpose of the study tour was to draw
lessons and comparisons between the military academies of South Africa and
Canada. Given the similarities in faculty, training and support sections,
the following key observations were highlighted:

Royal Military College functions as a university and awards its own
degrees. Currently, the South African Military Academy at Saldanha awards
degrees in partnership with Stellenbosch University.

While the Royal Military College offers a four-year degree programme, its
South African counterpart currently offers a three - year degree programme.
Discussions amongst the lecturers in South African Military Academy at
Saldanha continued regarding a possible change to a four year degree
programme. Such a programme was viewed as more beneficial to students as
practical training and academics would enjoy equal emphasis.

South Africa could also learn from its Canadian counterpart’s stress on
three important pillars in the development of students, namely academic
excellence and training; the importance of physical training as well as
bilingualism.

Differences in the reporting lines of the Deans of the respective Academies
were also noted. While the Dean of the South African Military Academy at
Saldanha reports to the Commandant, her Canadian counterpart reports
directly to the Minister of Defence. Canada perceived its Military Academy
to be the think-tank and a rich source of information for defence
operations. South Africa should head in such direction.

South Africa needed to improve its student/faculty ratios overtime. Unlike
South Africa, a PHD is the minimum requirement for a teaching position in
the Canadian Military Academy. South Africa needed to learn from this, as
current requirements were merely an honours degree. Lecturers should be
rotated and must be encouraged to develop themselves academically.

Unlike its South African counterpart, the Canadian Military Academy
benefits from greater private sector investment in its research. Access to
greater research funding needs to be promoted.

South Africa could draw a lesson from the Canadian strategy to attract the
finest academics as well as improvements in its peer review systems, which
is important in the academic promotion of teaching staff.

Like the Royal Academy, South Africa needs to generate research on current
peacekeeping operations it involved itself with, especially those in
Darfur, Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC). The
contextualisation of teaching was essential. Lessons learnt form these
missions should also be incorporated when theorising on these conflicts.

Unlike its Canadian counterpart, library services at the Academy were not
up to standard. This needs greater attention.

3.    The Committee’s response to the presentation

The Committee made the following observations, based on both the
Committee’s experiences during the study tour of Canadian Military Academy,
as well as the delivered presentation:

The ethos of the South African Military Academy at Saldanha needs to be
reflected in the image of the institution. A professional culture needs to
be developed and the physical infrastructure needed to be upgraded.

A pragmatic approach to learning and teaching is important to both
transform the culture of teaching at the institution and to produce
research and theorising on current security issues, conflicts and peace
keeping operations. The extent to which the work of the Academy directs and
informs the administration is very important.
A synergy between the physical and academic development of students at
South African Military Academy at Saldanha was important to ensure the
nurturing of well-balanced, educated, physically resilient and competitive
members of the Defence Forces.

Pride in being part of the SANDF needs to be instilled through honouring
and commemorating the contribution of war veterans made in the defence of
our country.

Improvements in the reporting lines of the Dean need to be investigated and
improved upon.

The relevance of specialisation and the PHDs produced to the defence or
security field is necessary, rather than only an increase in research
produced. This research needed to be useful to the Department and to
contribute in the understanding of security matters.

The extension of the degree programme to four years merits further
discussion.

The exchange programme needs to focus on both students and lecturers, to
ensure that both parties are allowed to develop academically.

Language in the context of the role and priorities of the South African
Military Academy at Saldanha was central. The significance of language in
the South African Military Academy at Saldanha, given the strategic
priorities of the SANDF, needed to be reflected in the curriculum.

Lessons drawn from the study tour needed to be utilised to achieve higher
standards of professionalism, internationally competitive military and
academic skills, and to assist in the development of a model to ensure the
harmonious co-existence of both military training and academics.

Creative ways of transforming South African Military Academy at Saldanha in
the context of budgetary constraints are needed. Government’s budgetary
priorities and emphasis on social spending reflect the pressing development
challenges and latent security threats such as poverty and unemployment.
Although the military development was important, the overall development of
South Africa took precedence.

Although lessons could be drawn from the Royal Academy; the development
paths of both countries diverged and South Africa is faced with particular
developmental challenges.

Given the centrality of the NEPAD programme and South Africa’s involvement
in peacekeeping missions on the continent, greater engagements with
Commonwealth states are needed to ensure that these states too become
greatly involved in peacekeeping on the continent. South Africa should not
risk over-extending itself.

Advantage needed to be taken of the various technological advancements to
ensure the continuous improvement in teaching and training at the South
African Military Academy at Saldanha.
The ways in which training is incorporated into the curriculum needed re-
examination to ensure that academic development and training co-exist
harmoniously.

Greater levels of maturity and co-operation at the South African Military
Academy at Saldanha were needed to develop a professional culture.

Greater relationships between stakeholders as well as foreign institutions
need to be fostered to ensure access to greater research funding.

4.    The implementation of Committee recommendations: Briefing by Admiral
    D J Christian of the South African Military Academy

Recommendation 1: The curriculum should be carefully reviewed and improved.

Progress made: A Task Team, set up by the Dean of the Academy, produced a
draft report on the outcomes of its review of the current curriculum in
March 2007. Due to the complexity of changing a curriculum, the Department
is due to consult with as many stakeholders as possible, including the
Portfolio Committee on Defence.  This process would not be hurried, and a
final report is due during 2008.

Recommendation 2:
The Academy needs to be transformed into an ‘Academy of Excellence’

Progress made: The Department incorporated the twin goals of academic
excellence and the nurturing of world class leaders in the military and
academic field, in its vision and new goals, adopted in 2006. Although this
was not an immediately attainable goal; the Department believed that the
foundations for the development of internationally competitive Military
Academy and students have been established. The Department refocused on the
following areas:
Staff participation in both international and national conferences is
encouraged.
Greater research outputs were demanded. This followed the result of a study
undertaken by the Department of Education which illustrated the decline in
research outputs by the Academy. In this vain, the number of PHDs
candidates produced by South African Military Academy at Saldanha would
increase over time.

Annual staff development visits take place in June each year. Interviews
are also conducted to ensure that faculty members and lecturers are
enjoying their current research.
Two national conferences are being planned for 2007.

Recommendation 3
The Higher Education Assessment Committee should review the professional
degrees offered by the Academy.

Progress made: Independent studies conducted by the Higher Education
Quality Committee of the Department of Education, the School for Science
and Technology as well as the School for Security and African Studies
highlighted the following problem areas:
Insufficient funding
Issues related to the contractual relationship between the Department and
the University of Stellenbosch
Lack of staff
The need to improve research outputs
Ineffective human resource management
Problems associated with its certificate programme

The remaining three schools would be assessed during the course of 2007.

The Dean would submit a development plan to the University of
Stellenbosch’s Senate in May 2007. A work session is scheduled for 24 and
25 May 2007, to review contracts. Although the operating budget had
increased to R8.9 million, a greater budget was needed to develop the
institution. 10 new faculty members are in the process of being appointed.

Recommendation 4:

The process for reporting and addressing the complaints of sexual
harassment must be addressed.

Progress made: A representative Sexual Harassment Committee has been
appointed, chaired by Ms N Van Der Waag. No formal complaints had been
received since April 2006.

Recommendation 5:

The language policy needs to be reviewed, especially as it relates to
practical matters such as meetings and correspondence within the Academy.

Progress made: Although English had been formally adopted as the language
of instruction, it is very difficult to change the institutional culture of
which communication in Afrikaans was a cornerstone. Correspondence from
management was sometimes received in Afrikaans. R100 000 had been provided
for translation services.
Recommendation 6

The Academy’s Distance Education courses should be done in close
cooperation with Department of Education.
Progress made: From the inception of Distance Education courses in 2003,
this programme had produced its first two graduates in 2003. There are
currently 64 undergraduates and 71 post - graduate students. The management
of Distance learning programmes offered has improved due to the appointment
of the necessary competent staff.   A project was currently underway which
would link University of Stellenbosch classrooms via satellite to South
Africa and the rest of the continent. The University was thus taking
advantage of the latest technological advancements.

Recommendation 7:

The Department of Public Works and Department of Defence to upgrade
facilities; Computer facilities needed to be upgraded.

Progress made: Computers had been upgraded and were regularly replaced or
upgraded.

Recommendation 8:

Vacancies should be advertised and filled within a maximum of three month
period

Progress made: The recruitment and appointment process of the DOD was
explained, and allowed for a six-week advertising time frame; one week
short listing process; a three week selection process by the selection
board, a three week waiting time for feed back on recommendations submitted
to the University of Stellenbosch; three weeks waiting period for approval
by Minister, before letters of appointment can be issued.

Recommendation 9:
Recommendation should be given to the Department of Education for funding
through the usual block grant.

Progress made: The block grant will be done through the University of
Stellenbosch ensure success. Prof Tobie De Conning was facilitating the
process.

Recommendation 10:

In the interest of Academic excellence; the system of paying lecturers
according to the South African National Defence Force salary scales should
be terminated. At present, the Department of Defence is responsible for the
remuneration of academic personnel

Progress made: The University of Stellenbosch was reluctant to give details
of the remuneration packages of their Academic staff. At a recent
Stellenbosch University Board meeting it was agreed to provide the
information that was requested through a letter from the DoD. This
information is still pending and is to be included in the proposal on
remuneration to be submitted for consideration.

Recommendation 11

The critical tuning point in the relationship between Stellenbosch
University and the DoD must be reached.

Progress made: The relationship between University of Stellenbosch and the
Department had improved significantly since the attachment of Dr Van Harte
as the Associated Dean in June 2006. A work session scheduled for 24 and 25
May would focus on reaching agreement on staffing processes.

Recommendation 12

Dean should be given security of tenure:

Progress made: The appointment of the Dr van Harte as the Dean for a period
of five years had been done through a Memorandum of Understanding. The Dean
would report via the Vice Rector of Education to the Rector and would be
remunerated by the University.

5.    The Committee identified the following matters that needed further
    clarification

An imbalance between the level of vacancies at the Academy and the high
levels of new students recruited posed a challenge. What was being done to
remedy the situation?

The quality of the distance learning programme in comparison with the full-
time study programme at the South African Military Academy at Saldanha
needed to be assessed. Information on total enrolment in the distance
learning programme needed to be provided.

The reach of South African Military Academy at Saldanha should be expanded
to other military bases. The idea of satellite campuses merited further
exploration.

The rejuvenation of the South African Military Academy at Saldanha research
capacity is critical. The private sector must be made a partner in
financing research.
Given the lack of improvement in the academic results, much more needed to
be done to improve the overall pass rate.

A lack of confidence in the future relevance of the South African Military
Academy at Saldanha was detected. The Committee urged officials to engage
Members of Parliament on the reasons for this. This would assist the
committee in formulating recommendations on the ways to strengthen the
institution.

Clarity on the extent of opportunities for further study opportunities
beyond the Military Skills Development System [MSDS] curriculum and
employment opportunities for graduates were also probed.

The establishment of the Sexual Harassment Committee was noted. The South
African Military Academy at Saldanha needed to provide clarification on the
operating procedures of this Committee. How was sexual harassment cases
managed?

6.    Meeting with Lecturers and Teaching Assistants

As in 2005, the Committee delegation met again with about 100 staff
members. Their key areas of concern included:

The high turn-over of black academics. Staff members felt that the
Committee had a key role to play to ensure the retention and attraction of
black lecturers to South African Military Academy at Saldanha

The existing recruitment and equity plans were ineffective. It was felt
that the Committee has a responsibility to ensure the full transformation
of the culture of the institution.

Securing promotion according to the current promotion plan was difficult.
Delays in the finalisation of promotions were impacting negatively on the
morale of staff.

Current salary scales were not sufficiently competitive, compared to those
of other universities.

The research capacities of faculties needed to be improved to ensure that
both professors and junior researchers further develop their research
skills. Greater allocation of funds to build the research capacity and
profile South African Military Academy at Saldanha as a research
institution, were needed. Lecturing without continuous development of the
research capacity was not feasible.

The institution’s profile as a higher education facility needed to be
raised to ensure comparability with similar, domestic and international
tertiary institutions. This should be twinned with the upgrading of
facilities.

Vacant posts needed to be filled as a matter of urgency.
Although committed to transformation, there was a need for a dedicated
diversity management programme.

The budget should be increased in line with the growth in student intake.

7.    Meeting with students

As in 2005, the Committee delegation met again with approximately 200
students. The following issues were raised:

Incongruence between the standard procedures and policies introduced by
different arms of services and the overall DOD policy was identified.  The
Committee needed to provide clarity on which policy took precedence.
Preference for entrance into the Military Skills Development System [MSDS]
programme should be given to matriculants. Enrolment at other tertiary
institutions should be encouraged for those applicants with incomplete
degrees.
Concerns were raised over the employment prospects in the public sector,
since many students will not be recruited to work in other departments. How
could the portfolio committee assist in dealing with this matter?
Although the South African Military Academy at Saldanha was encouraged to
accelerate transformation of the Academy, a progress report on the extent
of this transformation was still pending.
In terms of the Military Skills Development System, what criteria were
being used to identify those skills that are considered marketable?
South African Military Academy at Saldanha was recruiting a high number of
students without consideration of the spatial constraints to accommodate
students coupled with the inability to ensure employment of students.
The lack of funding to recruit lecturers and retain postgraduate students,
especially those of previously disadvantaged backgrounds, constrained the
transformation of this Academy.
There was a need for more skilled personnel.
Concerns were expressed over the high rate of failure, and the impact the
limited access to adequate library services had on the successful
completion of studies.
The faculties were not spending their budgets as required.
Given the lack of security of employment, many are tempted to work in the
private sector.

8.    Meeting with the management of the Academy

The management team, which included the Dean of the Academy, Dr E Van
Harte, noted the concerns raised by students and staff, and provided the
following responses to specific matters:

The Academy is committed to the spending of the budget. However due to the
ring-fencing of the Academy’s budget, some departments could not spend
their budgets timeously.

The understaffing of the library is acknowledged, but cautioned that the
appointment of staff was a function of the command management. Management
was aware of the shortages of library material and inconvenient closing
times of the library. This matter was closely monitored.

Challenges to the implementation of the MSDS experienced by both students
and teachers were noted. Although the South African Military Academy at
Saldanha is trying to address the legacies of the Apartheid education
system, the time constraints for the implementation hampered teachers and
students’ appreciation of and reflection on the goals of the systems
(skills development). Given these challenges, the value of education
received could not be fully appreciated.

D: COMMITTEE RECOMMENDATIONS

Following the outcomes of the Portfolio Committee on Defence’s interactions
with officials from the South African Navy in Simonstown and the South
African Military Academy at Saldanha as well as careful consideration of
information provided, the Committee submits the following recommendations:

(i)   South African Navy, Simon’s Town

The Committee acknowledges and appreciates the continued efforts to enhance
the effectiveness and competitiveness of the South African Navy.  The
preservation of the institutional memory of the SA Navy is critical and
thus the implementation of strategies such as the 2010 Human Resource
Strategy.

The Committee recommends lengthier discussions with the Department on the
psychometric testing within the SANDF. The rescheduling of such interaction
should be prioritised.

The Committee acknowledges concerns expressed over the funding limitations
faced by the South African Navy. However, given the developmental
imperatives of the South African government, reflected in budgetary
priorities, creative ways to address challenges needs to be developed.

The exposure of women officers, regardless of rank, to interactions with
the Portfolio Committee, should be promoted.

(ii)  South African Military Academy, Saldanha

The transformation of the Academy remains critical. The staff and student
population needs to be reflective of the national demographics.

The staff vacancy rate is too high. It is imperative that the Academy
remains sufficiently staffed.

The need for further development of the Academy’s research capacity is
noted. Creative methods of accessing additional sources of research funding
needs to be developed. Closer links between the private sector,
particularly fellow research institutions, both domestically and abroad,
needs to be fostered.

There is a need for satellite campuses to particularly other military bases
across South Africa.

Much work needs to be done to improve the quality of both exam results and
low pass rates.

Library services currently offered are insufficient to the study needs of
students. Such services and the study material available must be urgently
improved. Advantage needs to be taken of current technological development.

Greater balance between the physical and intellectual development of
students are needed. The review of the current three year degree programme
offered by the Academy to accommodate this balance is important.

Commitment to National Service and the aims of the public service needs to
be encouraged among both students and staff members.  It is important that
students are not demoralised, as this would affect professionalism at the
Academy.

The retention of lecturers and the increased development of PHD students
needs to be prioritised.  The recruitment of specialised lecturers,
particularly black and female, should be actively promoted.
FORMAL ADOPTION OF REPORT BY THE COMMITTEE:

This report of the oversight visit to the South African Military Academy,
having been put to the Committee, was adopted on 9 October 2007.

Report to be considered.

APPENDIX 1

COMMITTEE DELEGATION LIST

Ms T V Tobias    [Chairperson and leader of the delegation]
Mr S B Ntuli           [ANC]
Mr J Schippers   [ANC]
Ms P Daniels           [ANC]
Mr L Diale       [ANC]
Mr S Pheko       [PAC]

APPENDIX 2

OFFICIALS FROM SOUTH AFRICAN NAVAL BASE, SIMONSTOWN:

Vice Admiral J. Mudimu

Rear Admiral H. Bester
Rear Admiral (JG) K. Louw

Rear Admiral (JG) P. Duze

Rear Admiral (JG) R. Higgs

Capt L. Fourie

Capt L. Hutton

APPENDIX 3

Officials from the South African Military Academy [Management]:
Commandant of the Military Academy
R Adm D J Christian

Academic Programmes:
Dean of the Faculty of Military Science: Professor D J Malan
Dean of Students: Dr E Van Harte, University of Stellenbosch

Military Professional Development Programmes:
Lieutenant Colonel S B Nombewu

Support Services
Colonel G M Louw
Learnerhip Leadership:
Ensign S Ndlovu

General Officer Commanding Training Command
Maj Gen M A Ntshinga

Chief of Staff
Col K Mancotywa

Chief of Joint Operations of the South African National Defence
Lieutenant General Themba Matanzima

3.    REPORT ON VISIT TO POLLSMOOR PRISON TO CONSIDER POSITION OF AWAITING
    TRIAL PRISONERS

Report of the Portfolio Committees on Justice and Constitutional
Development, and Correctional Services on a joint oversight visit to
Pollsmoor Prison to consider the position of awaiting-trial prisoners,
dated 21 November 2007.

The Portfolio Committees on Justice and Constitutional Development, and
Correctional Services, having undertaken the above oversight visit report
as follows:

Aim of the visit

On 23 October 2007, the Portfolio Committees on Justice and Constitutional
Development, and Correctional Services, and the Select Committee on
Security and Constitutional Affairs undertook a joint oversight visit to
the Pollsmoor Correctional Facility. The aim was to consider overcrowding
in  prisons, particularly the position of awaiting-trial prisoners.
Representatives from the Magistracy, the National Prosecuting Authority and
the Judicial Inspectorate of Prisons were also present.

Participants

The following members of the Portfolio Committees on Correctional Services,
and Justice and Constitutional Development, and the Select Committee on
Security and Constitutional Affairs visited the Pollsmoor Correctional
Centre:

Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services: Mr D Bloem [Chairperson], Ms
LS Chikunga (ANC),Mr S Mahote (ANC),Mr E Xolo (ANC),Ms W Ngwenya (ANC), Mr
J Selfe (DA) and Mr H Cupido (ACDP)

Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development: Mr G
Magwanishe [Acting Chairperson], Mr J Sibanyoni (ANC),Ms M Meruti (ANC) and
Ms C Johnson (ANC)

Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs: Kgoshi L M Mokoena
[Chairperson] – Limpopo, Ms F Nyanda (ANC) – Mpumalanga and Mr L H Fielding
(DA) – Northern Cape.

The Committees were accompanied by the following parliamentary support
staff:
Ms R Lawrence (Personal Assistant to the Chairperson of the Portfolio
Committee on  Correctional Services) and Ms G Dinizulu (Committee Secretary
to the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs), Ms C Balie
(Committee Secretary to the Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services),
Ms N Skaka (Committee Assistant) and  Ms C Silkstone (Researcher to the
Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development)

Pollsmoor Correctional Facility was represented by:  Mr Mkabela ( Area
Commissioner),   Mr Nthombeni  ( Regional Commissioner: Corporate
Services),   Mr Modisadife (Head: Admission Centre),   Ms Dayimani  (Head:
Medium B Centre),
Mr Molefe (Head: Medium C Centre),  Mr Scholtz (Acting Head: Medium A Youth
Centre) and  Ms Claassen (Head: Female Section)

The Department of Justice was represented by the following members of the
Judiciary: Ms M van Eeden (Acting Senior Magistrate, Wynberg)   Mr M
Dimbaza  (Chief Magistrate, Wynberg), Mr H Swart (Acting Chief Magistrate,
Cape Town) and Mr Zantsi  (Senior Public Prosecutor, Athlone)

The Judicial Inspectorate of Prisons was represented by: Ms Pritima Osman
(Acting Director: Functional Services), Mr T Titus (Visitor’s Committee Co-
ordinator)

Overview of proceedings

The Department of Correctional Services gave a short briefing to the
Committees on the Pollsmoor Management Area, which was followed by
extensive discussions. MPs then spoke with a number of awaiting-trial
prisoners, especially pregnant women, juveniles and children.

Briefing on the Pollsmoor Management Area

Pollsmoor is overcrowded. The present occupancy rate is 168%. While
Pollsmoor is designed to accommodate 4 252 offenders, at present the
facility accommodates 7 296 offenders in total. Of these, 4 823 (66.8%) are
awaiting-trial prisoners. At the Female Centre, which MPs visited, there
are 397 offenders, of which 47% are awaiting trial. The occupancy rate is
162%.

The Department provided the Committees with the breakdown in the table
below of awaiting-trial prisoners, who had either not been granted bail or
had been granted bail but could not afford to pay. Sentenced juvenile
offenders as well as awaiting-trial juveniles (18-21) are housed in the
Medium A section.

4.2

|                |Admission Centre  |Medium A          |Female        |
|No bail         |2 531             |877               |152           |
|Less than R 1000|851               |242               |40            |
|Above R 1000    |124               |60                |10            |

The Department also provided the information, which is set out in the table
below, on the number of successful conversions to correctional supervision
in terms of sections 62 (f), 71 and 72 of the Criminal Procedure Act 51 of
1977 from 1 March 2007 – 30 September 2007. Section 62(f) of the Criminal
Procedure Act 51 of 1977 empowers the court to release an accused on bail
under the supervision of a probation officer or a correctional official.
Section 71 of the Criminal Procedure Act provides that awaiting-trial
juveniles may be placed in a place of safety or under supervision, instead
of release on bail or detention in custody, while section 72 refers to
release of an accused on warning.

|Month    |Admission           |Medium A              |Female              |


 |Submitted |Successful |Submitted |Successful |Submitted |Successful |
|March |69 |48 (69.5%) |59 |47 (79.7%) |0 |0 | |April |75 |32 (42.7%) |29
|14 (48.3%) |0 |0 | |May |48 |32 (66.7%) |23 |19 (82.6%) |1 |0 | |June |48
|38 (79.2%) |15 |12 (80%) |0 |0 | |July |43 |43 (100%) |44 |28 (63.6%) |8
|8 (100%) | |August |104 |21 (20.2%) |90 |48 (53.3%) |5 |2 (40%) |
|September |96 |56 (58.3%) |225 |129(57.3%) |14 |10 (71.4%) | |
4.3   Interventions to address overcrowding at Pollsmoor include:

The appointment of four additional court officials (now a total of seven)
to assist with the reduced bail applications and alternative placements for
awaiting-trial prisoners.
A list of section 62(f) and 63 applications is submitted weekly by the
court officials to the various courts.
Heads of centres attend monthly case-flow meetings to address the
management of overcrowding.
A list of awaiting-trail children is provided to various courts and at case
flow meetings on a monthly basis.
The names of awaiting-trial children are given to the Department of Social
Development each Friday.
There is constant interaction between the in-house social workers and the
Department of Social Development for available bed space at places of
safety.

Issues Arising

Applications in terms of section 62(f) of the Criminal Procedure Act

In response to queries about the granting of applications to place an
accused under the supervision of a correctional or probation officer in
terms of section 62 (f) of the Criminal Procedure Act of 1977,
representatives from the Magistracy expressed doubt that the Department of
Correctional Services has sufficient capacity to monitor those released in
terms of this section. It was said that magistrates are unable to simply
release persons awaiting-trial without the assurance that there are
arrangements in place to ensure that they will return to court. MPs also
heard that a common concern is that the majority of juveniles are being
held for ‘aggressive’ offences. Their parents do not always want them at
home for reasons that include being unable to guarantee that they will be
able to bring their children to court on the appointed dates. There are
also not enough places of safety and secure care facilities.

Conditions of Bail

Pollsmoor officials explained that there were many awaiting-trial prisoners
who could not afford bail, even if it was below R1000, as shown in the
Table in paragraph 3.2. above. However, they could not provide the
Committees with a breakdown of the bail amounts under R1000, nor could they
tell the Committees precise details of the alleged crimes committed.

It emerged that the factors involved in granting bail are complex: bail is
intended to ensure that an accused returns to court on the appointed date,
and is meant to take into account the issue of whether the accused can
afford bail. Where the bail amount is small, it does not necessarily mean
that the offence is not serious. Magistrates also take into account the
seriousness of the offence, the strength of the case against the accused
and the personal circumstances of the accused. The number of previous
convictions is also taken into account.

Amendments to the Criminal Procedure Act were designed to make it more
difficult to get bail. Schedules 5 and 6 to the Act state that bail may not
be granted for the offences listed in these Schedules, unless there are
exceptional circumstances.

Lack of information on the committal warrant

Awaiting-trial prisoners are not assessed when first brought to Pollsmoor.
The committal warrants that accompany awaiting-trial prisoners do not
provide sufficient details of the crime for which the accused is being
detained. Typically, the committal warrant will simply state in broad terms
the crime for which the accused is being held.

This makes it difficult for prison officials to establish whether a
particular awaiting-trial prisoner’s case should be brought to the
attention of the authorities. The lack of information means that awaiting-
trial prisoners can spend unnecessary time in prison. Prison officials need
access to the court file in order to properly understand why an awaiting-
trial prisoners is being held.

Legal facilities available to awaiting trial detainees

Correctional Services officials said that there are facilities available to
awaiting-trial prisoners to meet with their legal representatives. The
Committees were informed that the Legal Aid Board visits the facility on
Tuesdays, Thursdays and Fridays. Officials from the Department of Justice
have also visited to explain plea bargaining.

However, through further engagement with the officials, MPs established
that the Legal Aid Board does not always visit the facility and that
consultations between attorneys and their clients tend to take place at
court. The representative from the Office of the Inspecting Judge was of
the view that if the Legal Aid Board visited the facility more regularly
there would be far more applications for reduction of bail. The Legal Aid
Board, however, has a shortage of available practitioners, which impacts on
its ability to conduct prison visits.

It was also alleged that awaiting-trial prisoners, who are children or
juveniles, are often not given a chance to contact their parents when first
arriving at Pollsmoor.

Co-operation and liaison between Departments of Correctional Services and
Justice and Constitutional Development.

The Committees heard that there are inter-sectoral structures in place to
streamline or facilitate the processing of awaiting-trial prisoners. These
structures meet monthly. The Committees heard that awaiting-trial prisoners
are considered to be a priority for magistrates, and that magistrates are
well versed on issues such as juveniles in custody and the granting of bail
of relatively small amounts.

Visits from Magistrates

While magistrates used to visit offenders in prisons, this is no longer
common practice. With the creation of the Office of the Inspecting Judge,
magistrates no longer feel that this is part of their function, and only
visit when invited.

Caseload Backlogs

Although there are systems in place, the enormous in-flow of cases creates
backlogs. The Committees were informed that the Department of Justice has
once again, from September, instituted backlog courts to reduce this
problem.

Interventions to reduce the number of Children Awaiting Trial at Pollsmoor

There are interventions to reduce the number of awaiting-trial children in
Pollsmoor. Every month a list of names is provided to courts and to the
case flow meetings. Every Friday, Pollsmoor provides the Department of
Social Development with a list of sentenced and awaiting-trial children.
Pollsmoor is also provided with information on the number of places
available at places of safety and at secure care facilities. There is
constant networking taking place between the in-house Social Workers
regarding diversion, as well as available bed-space at places of safety.
This has seen a reduction in the number of male children incarcerated from
the end of August 2007 from 195 to 140 in late October 2007.

Committees’ Recommendations

In different forms, several of the observations and recommendations in this
section have been made before. They are not particularly novel or
exceptional and can even be seen as predictable. The difference however is
in the current approach of the Committees. We are determined to follow up
on these recommendations and actively monitor progress in regard to them.
We are acutely aware of the challenges the relevant departments and other
role-players face, but we believe that incremental improvements are
possible and certainly necessary – and it is these modest, incremental
improvements that our Committees are seeking to pursue. We are also aware
of our own limitations, with our “over-loaded” programmes and inadequate
research, technical and other support, and so we would not be too ambitious
in setting our own oversight targets. We need to be strategic and selective
in our oversight targets. In this respect, our main aim is to see
incremental improvements in the position of awaiting-trial prisoners in
Pollsmoor and put appropriate pressure, consistent with our oversight role,
on the relevant departments and other role-players for incremental
improvements in the position of awaiting trial prisoners in other
correctional facilities. The Correctional Services Portfolio Committee
will, of course, focus more on the general conditions at correctional
facilities and further advance its oversight role in this regard. However,
our two Committees will work closer together to follow through on the
recommendations set out below. This will mean working both jointly and, in
a complementary way, in our own respective portfolios to monitor progress
in respect of the recommendations. We might also work with other relevant
portfolio and select committees to follow through on the recommendations
below.

As part of the monitoring process, this report will be sent to the
Departments of Justice and Constitutional Development and Correctional
Services for an initial written response within two months of the date of
its adoption. The aim of the response would be to provide information to
the Committees, convey the initial views of the departments on the
recommendations below, and set the basis for the briefing referred to in
5.3 below. The report will also be sent to the Pollsmoor management and
other relevant stakeholders.

The Committees will also convene a joint meeting of the relevant
Departments, the Pollsmoor management and other stakeholders within six
months to monitor progress in regard to the issues raised in this report
and take matters further.

While the Committees appreciate the challenges, we feel that for awaiting-
trial offenders to constitute 66.8% of the Pollsmoor offender population is
altogether unacceptable. The Committees require a more comprehensive
explanation than we got during our visit on why this is the case and what
is being done to improve the situation, even if gradually over time. The
Committees are keen to get a better sense of how Pollsmoor fares compared
to other correctional facilities.

The Pollsmoor officials explained their approach to dealing with the high
number of awaiting-trial prisoners, especially children. However, the
Committees are not clear that this approach is being implemented
effectively – and will engage further on this at the briefing referred to
in 5.3 above. The Committees welcome the reduction in the number of male
children incarcerated, from 195 to 140, between the end of August and late
October this year.

The Committees are concerned about the number of awaiting-trial prisoners
who are being detained in prison simply because they are unable to meet
bail, especially when the bail is below R1000. It is not cost-effective to
accommodate awaiting-trial prisoners where the bail amounts are small. The
Committees note that the Department of Justice and Constitutional
Development’s 2006/07 Annual Report refers to section 63(A) of the Criminal
Procedure Act that allows for the release of awaiting trial prisoners, who
have been granted bail, but are unable to pay the bail. The Committees note
that the Department of Correctional Services was requested by the Criminal
Justice System Review Project to prioritise the release of such prisoners,
and to submit a report by end of May 2007, indicating progress. The
Committees are interested in what progress there has been in this regard.
The Committees feel that the judiciary should, where possible, make use of
alternative sentencing so as to ensure that those who have committed petty
offences are not sent to the already overcrowded prisons. Prison should be
for serious offenders.

The Committees are concerned that Legal Aid Board practitioners do not
regularly visit Pollsmoor, except when they are informed that an accused
does not have legal representation. More immediate access to a legal
representative will result in more applications for reduction of bail, and
a decrease in the number of awaiting-trial prisoners. However, the
Committees are aware that there was no representative from the Legal Aid
Board present during the oversight visit. The Committees are also aware of
the capacity constraints that face the Legal Aid Board. The Committees will
send this report to the Legal Aid Board and request a report, within two
months of the adoption of the report, on the Board’s visits to Pollsmoor
and other correctional facilities and the challenges it faces in this
regard.

The Committees feel that when an awaiting-trial prisoner is committed to a
correctional facility, adequate information of the crime, in respect of
which the accused has been charged, has to be contained in the accompanying
documentation. This information is usually contained in the case docket or
court file. If the information is made available, stakeholders will be
better able to ensure that awaiting-trial prisoners do not spend
unnecessary time in prison. The Committees request the Department of
Justice and Constitutional Development to report on the feasibility of
providing the Department of Correctional Services with such information.

The Committees feels that, within their constraints, magistrates should
seek to visit correctional facilities, particularly in respect of awaiting-
trial prisoners. The Committees are keen to understand what the
difficulties are in regard to this and how they might be addressed. The
Committees will also raise this with the Magistrates Commission, and also
confer with the Judicial Inspectorate of Prison.

While it is clear that there are structures in place that provide for
intersectoral engagement, it is not clear to what extent these structures
are effective. The Committees will engage on this further at the briefing
referred to in 6.3 above.

The Committees feel that there should be greater collaboration between all
role players around ensuring better conditions for and the speedy
sentencing of awaiting trial detainees – co-operation between the
Departments of Justice, Social Development, Safety and Security and
Correctional Services should be ongoing.

The Committees note that while sentenced children and juveniles take part
in education, sport and developmental programmes in Pollsmoor, awaiting-
trial children and juveniles are not allowed to take part. This is
apparently because the latter category “fall under justice, not
correctional services”. The Committees are clear that this “silo” approach
is not acceptable and inconsistent with the notion of an integrated justice
system, and feel that all children and juveniles, both those sentenced and
those awaiting-trial, should be allowed to take part in the above-mentioned
programmes. Some of the awaiting-trial juveniles have been awaiting trial
for long periods, some as long as three years.

The Committees note the interventions to address overcrowding in Pollsmoor.
There is obviously a need for more places of safety as children and
juveniles released from prison cannot always go back to their homes;
sometimes there are not even contact details of the families of those
released, especially if their families are in rural areas or provinces
other than the Western Cape. The Committees note that the Department of
Social Development also serves on the intersectoral task team, referred to
in 6.11 above, and are interested to receive more information on the
availability of places of safety. The matter will also be raised with the
Social Development Portfolio Committee and, if necessary, the Department of
Social Development will also be asked to attend the briefing referred to in
6.3 above.

The Committees welcome the use of “backlog courts” and are interested in
progress in this regard.

The Committees agree that more should be done to ensure that pregnant
women, who have committed petty crimes, are not detained in prison but are
diverted to community corrections or to other appropriate intervention
programmes.

The Committees will follow through on the recommendations set out above and
are keen to see progress in regard to them. We do not believe that we
should simply carry out oversight visits and write reports for the sake of
doing so; there have to be material outcomes. The responsibility for this
does not reside solely with the executive. Parliament also has a major
responsibility - and, consistent with our oversight role, we commit
ourselves to working with the relevant departments and other stakeholders
to achieve progress in regard to the above recommendations.

Acknowledgements

The Committees express their appreciation to the Department of Correctional
Services, the Pollsmoor management and other stakeholders for their co-
operation in ensuring that the study visit was productive. The Committees
acknowledge the assistance of Ms Christine Silkstone of the Parliamentary
Research and Information Unit in the preparation of this report.
Report to be considered.

4.    Report of the Committee on Private Members’ Legislative Proposals and
     Special Petitions on the legislative proposal on Fund for victims of
    violent crime, dated 31 August 2007:

The Committee on Private Members` Legislative Proposals and Special
Petitions, having considered the legislative proposal on Fund for victims
of violent crime by Ms D Kohler-Barnard, and having consulted with the
following stakeholders:

    • Department of Justice and Constitutional Development
    • Department of Social Development
    • National Prosecuting Authority
    • National Treasury
    • South African Human Rights Commission
    • State Law Advisers,

recommends that permission not be given to the member to proceed with the
proposal.

Report to be considered.

                           FRIDAY, 1 FEBRUARY 2008

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report on the Hearing of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the
   Annual Report 2006/2007 of the Financial Services Board (FSB)

   1. Introduction

   The Portfolio Committee on Finance met on 23 October 2007 to consider the
   Annual Report 2006/2007 of the Financial Services Board (FSB).

   The Annual Report was presented by the Executive Officer of the Financial
   Services Board. After the presentation discussions followed which are
   recorded below.


   Recommendations based on the engagement of the Committee with the FSB are
   provided in the final section.

   2. Risk-Based Supervision

   The Committee enquired what model is used in risk supervision, and
   whether the approached followed prioritised high-risk entities as there
   appears to be a low number of inspections in long-term insurance and
   collective investment relative to the value of the assets managed by
   entities. The Committee also raised concerns about the difference between
   on-site visits and inspections, and whether failure to submit reports led
   to inspections. The Committee noted that some of the responsibility for
   inspections was outsourced and enquired how the FSB was dealing with
   sensitive information, and what mechanisms were in place to ensure the
   integrity of the information.


   The FSB responded that in 2004 it had adopted risk-based-supervision.
   Given the limited resources and the extent of its regulatory and
   supervisory responsibilities, there was clearly an imbalance between what
   the FSB needed to do and the resources it had available to do this. Some
   form of risk-prioritisation was therefore required.


   The FSB approach entailed ‘risk-weighting’ each of the supervised
   institutions - the risk rating then determined the nature of the
   interaction between the FSB and a company. Where the risk-weighting was
   low interaction would be less frequent than in the case of an institution
   characterised by significant risk of one form or another.


   Certain levels of risk would immediately result in an on-site review.
   Following an on-site review, if fraud or corruption were detected, an
   inspection would be called for, as enabled by the Inspections Act. This
   was a more drastic form of intervention.


   In some instances aspects of an inspection needed to be outsourced - this
   occurred where FSB resources were being fully utilised elsewhere or where
   the FSB did not possess the particular skills required. In the experience
   of the FSB there had never been a problem where outside supervision had
   led to sensitive information being released. The FSB primarily outsourced
   to specialists, like chartered accountants, and also outsourced work that
   required highly specialised skills such as computer forensics. The FSB
   was of the opinion that it was not outsourcing its ‘core work’.


   3. The Road Accident Fund

   Regarding the investigation of the Road Accident Fund (RAF) the Committee
   noted that essentially the RAF was insolvent. The Committee asked what
   the reasons were for the RAF to be insolvent.


   The FSB responded that this was quite a difficult case and confirmed that
   the RAF was indeed insolvent. Some steps had been taken to rectify the
   situation, but from the perspective of the FSB their report could do no
   more than refer to the financial situation of the RAF. The FSB did not do
   extensive, detailed work on the fund and in fact the question why the FSB
   was required to supervise the RAF was worth asking, as the RAF was not an
   “insurance company’ in the traditional sense.


   4. Inducements

   Regarding ‘inducements’ offered by companies to prospective customers,
   and as mentioned in the FSB Annual Report, the Committee enquired whether
   such practices were prevalent in some of the industries or were they
   limited to isolated incidents?


   The FSB noted that there were many situations where customers were
   confronted with inducements. The most familiar one currently was probably
   the cell phone that came with many cell phone service contracts. However,
   legislation prohibited using inducements in the case of insurance polices
   because, unlike a cell phone contract, such polices were for life. One
   did not want a situation where potential customers were being
   ‘overinduced,’ that is purchasing insurance more for the inducement than
   the policy itself.
   5. Accumulated Surpluses

   Referring to the accumulated surpluses reported on in the financial
   statements, the Committee enquired why there was a huge accumulated
   surplus at a specific time. The Committee also noted that there had been
   quite a substantial increase in levies and enquired how the levy rate was
   determined, and whether industry members who paid these levies were happy
   with the FSB’s accumulated surpluses.


   The FSB responded that the levy income provided for in the budget was
   based on ‘old’ statistics, for example the extent of the assets and
   liabilities of a particular entity based on information available at the
   time. However, when actual income was collected there was sometimes a
   divergence: so invariably there was over-recovery of levies. This could
   also be attributed to the fact that the size of industries, that is of
   the levy base, had grown. For the period under review the FSB had decided
   to rebate R 23 million of a levy surplus of R 61 million.


   6. FAIS Ombudsman

   Regarding the FAIS Ombudsman, the Committee enquired whether this would
   in future be budgeted for, and, whether, levies would be raised to fund
   this office?


   The FSB indicated that previously this office was accounted for in the
   balance sheet, but that the FSB’s auditors had advised that this was an
   incorrect way of accounting for it: it should instead be reflected on the
   income statement. This would be done in future.

   7. Employment Equity
   The Committee referred to the fact that the Annual Report provided no
   details on the disability and other employment equity targets set by
   government, and asked the FSB to please provide details on this.


   The FSB responded that it was doing everything it could. The FSB did have
   a blind actuary, for example. Admittedly they were not close to the 2%
   target, but they were aiming for it. A particular problem in the case of
   the FSB was that not all its buildings catered for people with physical
   disabilities. The new premises that they were probably moving into in
   2009 would cater for this.


   8. FSB Success Stories


   The Committee noted that cases such as Fidentia represented failures to
   detect and address wrongdoings. The Committee wondered to what extent the
   FSB had success stories when it came to finding perpetrators. There were
   no successes that were reported on in the Annual Report.


   The FSB noted that the executive committee had in fact had a strategic
   workshop where precisely this issue was also discussed. The question that
   had been posed there was whether the FSB was doing enough to publicise
   its successes. The answer was clearly not. The FSB had not yet decided
   whether it should for example employ a ‘spin doctor’ or a public
   relations officer to ensure that the public was aware of what it was
   achieving. However, the FSB assured the Committee that it had achieved a
   great deal. The FSB’s point of departure was always to try to get back
   for investors what they had lost, and indeed there had been numerous
   successes in this regard.
   Even after the FSB had recovered what needed to be recovered for
   investors it still handed cases over to the NPA. The NPA had a high case
   load, however. The currently existing enforcement tribunal dealt with
   cases and recovered funds and issues administrative sanctions covered
   only by the Securities Act. Soon the FSB would request of the Committee
   that it be permitted to establish FSB-wide enforcement tribunals so that
   cases could be dealt with expeditiously through this mechanism. The
   Committee requested that the FSB should report on its successes in future
   Annual Reports.


   9. Repayment of Surplus Apportionments


   The Committee referred to the reference in the Annual Report to the fact
   that there was some resistance amongst some pension fund administrators
   to paying back ‘secret profit’ funds. The Committee enquired what the FSB
   was doing to speed up the process. Were any further measures going to be
   considered in the future if the response rate remained poor?


   The FSB responded that this issue had been an ongoing battle between
   itself and the industry. Some legal positions that were taken by some
   industry service providers also complicated matters: legal clarity had
   had to be obtained on some issues, causing further delays. The FSB had
   subsequently gone back to the industry supported by the increased clarity
   associated with the Pension Fund Second Amendment Act and was certainly
   expecting improvement in paybacks as a result.


   The chief actuary, through interaction with the industry, was also trying
   to improve submission rates. The FSB hoped that the additional powers
   conferred on the registrar would enable more of a ‘big stick’ approach.
   Ultimately the issue remained that where funds were penalized the penalty
   would fall on the fund rather than the trustees who were the difficult
   parties.  However, administrators could now be fined rather than the
   fund, which was a power brought in by the amended act and which gave the
   FSB increased power. Fines could now be up to R 5 million a day.


   The Committee enquired whether the FSB was able to establish how far back
   these pension fund practices went, and whether the records were
   sufficient to establish amounts due so that corrective action could be
   completed.


   The FSB responded that it went back quite a long way, to the mid-1990’s,
   and that it wasn’t difficult to identify when it started because it
   coincided with the introduction of cash management systems within pension
   fund administrations.


   10.      Consumer Education


   The Committee enquired what the strategy of the FSB is to reach out to
   the most rural areas, noting that these often consisted of marginalized
   people who do not necessarily have insight into some forms of complex
   financial and insurance issues.


   The FSB indicated that its strategy was multi-pronged - one aspect was to
   get better financial awareness programmes into school curriculums, and
   there had been interaction between the FSB and National Department of
   Education in this regard.


   Another aspect was the extensive distribution of consumer education
   booklets that were being produced by the FSB. These were targeted more
   too rural areas. These booklets were produced in Sotho, Nguni and
   English. They were generally distributed through obtaining sponsorship
   from some supervised entities.


   The Committee commented that perhaps the FSB should not rely on
   sponsorship to fund such initiatives but that they should be funded
   through the budget. The Committee further enquired what the measurements
   of success were regarding consumer education, and to what extent was
   there awareness of the FSB and its activities. The Committee noted that
   FSB offices needed to be located where it could be accessible to the
   marginalized, and that the booklets were not enough.


   The FSB referred to the Annual Report where it was stated that the
   problem with consumer education was that one could spend a lot of money
   and not know if it was being spent well. The FSB was presently conducting
   research regarding how to go about effective measurement of consumer
   education Initiatives.


   11.      Promoting the Macroeconomic Environment


   The Committee noted the important role the Financial Services Board had
   to play in promoting a strong macroeconomic climate by ensuring
   confidence in the financial sector of South Africa and enquired whether
   the FSB was competent and effective in this regard. The Committee noted
   that the industry opinion survey that had been conducted, indicated that
   72% of clients were satisfied with the FSB with 28% not. The Committee
   enquired into the main reasons why some clients were not satisfied and
   how the FSB would address the matter.


   The FSB stated that it believed it could say without hesitation that it
   was contributing to the macroeconomic climate by enhancing faith in the
   financial services sector. It was, however, also difficult to ensure that
   no problems existed in the sector.


   Regarding the score of 72%, the FSB pointed out that it was not a
   commercial organisation that was aiming for a higher approval rating than
   this. It was, after all, a regulatory and supervisory body. There were
   inevitably firms that had been on the receiving end of regulatory action
   and that in consequence regarded the FSB more negatively.


   Regarding international norms for approval ratings of an entity such as
   the FSB, the FSB indicated it had in fact asked the consultants who
   conducted its survey what the international benchmarks for industry
   satisfaction were. They had, however, replied that an entity such as the
   FSB was quite unique. They did, however, also indicate that any
   commercial organisation would be proud of the degree of client-
   satisfaction received by the FSB.


   12.      The FSB Balance Sheet


   The Committee enquired how appropriate the structure of the balance sheet
   was for an organisation like the FSB. It noted that the use of rebates
   was good, but that the FSB was still retaining a large share of funds for
   itself. The Committee raised concern about the FSB not being too risk-
   averse for an entity that was protected by law.


   The FSB pointed out that its contingency reserve actually represented
   less than 6 months of operating expenditure. It was reasonable that the
   FSB’s contingency reserve should cover 3-6 months of such expenditure.
   These were normal guidelines, within which the FSB worked.
   The FSB, though, had various forms of reserves. There was firstly a
   contingency reserve which was limited to a maximum of 10% of gross
   income. There was also a discretionary reserve consisting of income from
   fines, which was used to fund consumer education initiatives. Lastly,
   there were general reserves: these were unlimited.


   Regarding the related question of the investment portfolio held by the
   FSB, the FSB pointed out that this stemmed from a long-term liability the
   FSB had to fund retirement benefits of some retired employees. Because it
   was a long-term liability the FSB had decided to establish a long-term
   investment portfolio to cover it. The portfolio was managed independently
   so that any risks of insider trading were eliminated. At presents the
   value of the fund’s assets was double its liabilities.


   13.      The FSB Remuneration Policy

   Regarding the FSB’s remuneration policy, the Committee referred to the
   call by the Governor of the Reserve Bank to maintain rates of
   remuneration equal to or below the inflation rate. It noted, however,
   that the remuneration of senior executives had increased by about 25%
   during the period under review and that of staff by almost 9%. The
   Committee requested that the FSB comment on what the remuneration policy
   of the FSB was and how it was determined.


   Regarding performance bonuses, the Committee noted that during the period
   under review there had been a number of market failures and enquired how
   this equated with the significant performance bonuses paid out to FSB
   staff and executives, given its role as regulatory and supervisory
   entity. The Committee further enquired why it was indicated that the top
   25% of staff received performance bonuses, whilst all the executive
   committee members received them. A related question was how the bonus
   amount as a percentage of total remuneration was determined, since this
   appeared to vary quite significantly by executive committee member.


   The FSB noted that its remuneration policy consisted of two parts, namely
   that which dealt with straight remuneration and that which dealt with the
   determination of performance bonuses.


   Regarding straight remuneration, the FSB needed to attract specialised
   skills and needed to retain the skills that it had. Accordingly, the FSB
   policy was not to pay what the market paid, as such, but to pay market-
   related salaries.  If it did not do so, it would lose its skilled staff
   to the very entities that were being regulated. The FSB had to date
   largely succeeded in retaining staff.


   Regarding performance bonuses, clearly top performers had to be rewarded.
   The FSB’s board had initially said that only the top 20% of staff should
   receive performance bonuses. The executive committee had argued against
   this with the board because strict adherence to such a percentage would
   mean, in reality, that most of the bonuses would be paid out to white
   employees. There had to be a mechanism, or an allowance made, for
   recognising outstanding performance relative to a current endowment of
   skills. As more convergence of skills occurred between black and white
   employees the 25% figure would be decreased. That is, this would happen
   when the racial mix of top performers was where it needed to be from an
   equity perspective. This 25% of staff receiving performance bonuses
   excluded members of the executive committee, whose remuneration was
   determined by a sub-committee of the board which executive committee
   members were not part of. In the case of executive committee performance
   bonuses, the sub-committee of the board again recognised that at
   executive level some incentives had to be provided to attract and retain
   staff. Bonuses were calculated using a market-related benchmark level,
   adjusted by a measure of individual performance.
   14.      Staff Retention Measures

   The Committee referred to reports that there was a fair amount of
   poaching of staff occurring, and asked what corrective or preventive
   measures were being taken by the FSB. It was not enough to merely pay
   staff ‘market-related’ salaries in order to retain them. Were there any
   forms of skills development, internship, learnerships and the like?


   The FSB noted that it did have a staff retention programme which had
   provided extensive additional training to staff. An internal staff
   opinion survey indicated a very high regard for training and development
   opportunities available to them. Such measures did help to retain staff.
   However, it needed to be appreciated that the FSB was to some extent a
   training ground before people left for positions in the industries
   themselves. Although the FSB paid market-related salaries, which was
   legally provided for through the Financial Services Board Act, it could
   not match the large incentives that were being paid in the financial
   services industry.


   Regarding the employee band consisting of junior management and
   professional staff, the Committee referred to what appeared to be a
   fairly high staff turnover rate.


   The FSB emphasised that all organisations at times experienced
   difficulties with recruiting the right people. The FSB relied heavily on
   employing newly qualified graduates and developing them to senior level.
   In effect, all its newly qualified graduates that were employed were
   learnerships.


   The FSB further noted that too little staff turnover could also become a
   problem as there were then not enough new opportunities available to
   staff. It further needed to be noted that within the FSB it was not the
   top people who left. A last point was that the more rigourous measurement
   of performance was within an organisation, the more people would be
   ‘lost’ who were not performing well.


   15.      Recommendations

     1. The Committee recommends that the FSB report quantitatively in its
        Annual Reports on what had been and what had not been achieved with
        regard to employment equity with special reference to people with
        disabilities.
   15.2     The Committee recommends that the FSB give consideration to
        funding consumer education initiatives through its budget rather
        than relying on sponsorships.

2.    Report the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Annual Report
   2006/2007 of the South African Revenue Service (SARS), 9 November 2007

   1. Introduction

   The Portfolio Committee on Finance met on 10 October 2007 to consider the
   Annual Report 2006/2007 of the South African Revenue Service (SARS).


   The Annual Report was presented by the Commissioner of SARS. After the
   presentation discussions followed which are recorded below.


   Recommendations based on the engagement of the Committee with SARS are
   provided in the final section.
   2. Strategy for dealing with tax payment delays of big companies

   The Committee thanked SARS for the quality of its report and
   presentation. The Committee referred to one of the challenges SARS had
   identified in its Annual Report as being the delays of some of the big
   companies in paying their taxes and enquired what strategy SARS had for
   ensuring payment, other than the general promotion of good corporate
   governance.


   SARS indicated that generally the approach was to engage with such
   companies through their taxpayer relations managers who would discuss the
   matter with chief financial officers as well as chief executive officers
   in order to raise their awareness of such practices.


   SARS noted, however, that these efforts were not sufficient as it
   appeared to have become common practice. It was therefore worth
   considering amending the legislation to ensure more severe penalties than
   currently legislated, in order to disincentives’ such behaviour. The
   Commissioner noted that he hoped SARS did not get accused of taking an
   overly hard line in this regard, but that such measures were perhaps the
   only way to ensure that things changed for the better.


   SARS also doing monitor newspaper articles in terms of how recalcitrant
   companies were performing, since evidence suggested that they tended to
   underestimate future profit in their interaction with the tax
   authorities. Through challenging some of these estimates SARS was able to
   bring in additional money.


   3. Costs of Litigation

   The Committee enquired how much it cost SARS to go to court in the period
   under review.


   SARS responded that the cost of court cases in the last financial year
   was about R 60 million.


   4. The Role of SARS in border control

   The Committee referred to the Cabinet decision that SARS would be the
   lead agency in border control and enquired whether it was the
   international norm that the revenue and customs agency also managed
   border control.


   SARS indicated that the international trend post-9/11 was that customs
   administrations were moving away from just customs administration and
   taking up the role of border security. In most countries a multiplicity
   of agencies still existed and they battled with how to integrate all
   their activities. It was clear that, in the South African case too, more
   cohesiveness among the border agencies was needed and SARS would
   contribute as best as possible in its role as lead agency. The border
   control centre that had been set up would be useful in this regard,
   together with new technology.


   5. Increased revenue collection and the extent of tax relief

   The Committee congratulated SARS on once again achieving success in
   revenue collected. It asked SARS to elaborate more on the contributing
   factors that led to the huge increase in revenue collection, referring
   specifically to personal income tax revenue gains and the fact that
   corporate income tax now represented a high of 24.5 per cent of total tax
   collected. As a result of this, tax as a percentage of GDP was now
   greater than 27 per cent. The Committee asked SARS to specifically link
   this question to the supposed ‘tax relief’ of recent fiscal years, since
   in some respects these trends suggested that the burden on the person in
   the street had increased, even if nominal personal income tax rates had
   been lowered.


   SARS referred to a number of factors which produced revenue overruns.
   Firstly, there was improvement in the rate of employment as well as
   increased remuneration. Wages increased at a higher rate than inflation
   so nominal personal income tax revenue had increased correspondingly.
   Bonuses paid out were also higher in certain sectors. A second factor was
   business profitability, which impacted on corporate income tax collected.
   The Commissioner referred to the SARS presentation which had showed that
   there was a significant increase in corporate surpluses in the period
   under review when compared to previous years. Domestic expenditure was
   also higher as a result of higher household consumption. This meant that
   more VAT as well as personal income tax was being collected.  A higher
   level of imports occurred than anticipated which also resulted in a
   slight increase in the customs duty collected.


   Regarding the tax burden, SARS stated that the issue was that of the
   right fiscal balance. What was needed was to retain tax progressivity so
   that if you earned more, you also paid more. It was also necessary,
   however, to ensure that the lower ends of the income scale were not
   overburdened. SARS noted that the policy intent for most of the last ten
   years had been that as South Africa created additional fiscal space, the
   lower income brackets benefited more - thus, for example, 8 to 9 years
   ago the threshold income for income tax was R 18 000.00, whilst this year
   it was R 43 000.00.


   As the tax base broadened, the burden on particular tax payers was
   reduced. SARS wanted to ensure that all South Africans paid their right
   and fair share and believed that the current system was a fair and
   equitable one. Whilst all over the world people said that they didn’t
   like to pay tax, South Africans were different. People were comparatively
   happy to pay tax because they knew they were contributing to a better
   country. South Africa continue to face a structural constraint as the tax
   base remained a narrow one - it was only as the economy grew that the
   number of tax payers would also increase and the structure of the tax
   system would change further.


   The tax mix in SA had also changed considerably over the last decade.
   There had previously been a huge dependency on some individuals to carry
   the tax burden and it was now distributed more evenly.


   Regarding the fact that tax now stood at 27 per cent of GDP, there was an
   argument amongst observers that even this was too low because South
   Africa was a developing country with a large developmental role required
   of government. Even though the figure now exceeded 25 per cent SARS felt
   that there was still a balance between public and private sectors and
   that too many resources were not being transferred from the private to
   the public sector. Lastly, all of South Africa’s tax rates were
   comparable, as SARS had pointed out repeatedly, to those of other
   countries.


   6. Employment equity and disability figures

   Referring to employment equity, the Committee noted with disappointment
   that, in reporting on disability figures, the Annual Report did not
   provide disability figures broken down by race, gender and level of
   staff, which was necessary in order to get a good picture of equitability
   in this respect.
   SARS began by pointing out that the labour department had a new
   compliance model which rated an organisation based on a composite score.
   Issues of disability actually had a very low rating in this particular
   compliance model and it would be of interest to go back and determine why
   this was the case.

   SARS had, however, made significant progress in this regard, if the last
   five years were considered. And amongst the 233 disabled peopled SARS
   employed, 4 advocates were included. It was not only at a low skills
   level that disabled people were employed by SARS.

   7. The debt to revenue ratio

   The Committee noted that the debt to revenue ratio had decreased and that
   SARS was doing well in this respect. It also referred to the statement by
   SARS in April that there would be further changes in this regard. The
   Committee noted that the international benchmark was 3 to 7 per cent and
   wondered when and how SARS would reach that target.


   SARS confirmed that its present ratio was about 12 per cent. Whilst this
   ratio looked quite high on paper, one of the reasons for this was how
   debt was classified. The SARS debt book included debt under dispute,
   which was different from the way many other countries classified their
   debt. SARS was currently working on a proposal to reclassify debt. This
   would immediately result in about R16 billion not being shown as debt and
   the ratio would come down to 8 to 9 per cent.

   8. Customs

   In the case of customs, the Committee referred to the Annual Report’s
   statement that a substantial number of vehicles had been seized and
   requested more information on this, such as where seizures took place,
   what types of vehicles were seized, and what procedures Customs followed
   to ensure that it was acting reasonably and not seizing vehicles which in
   fact were legal. The Committee also requested information on Customs
   officials and what their job descriptions were, so as to ensure that they
   did not go beyond their mandates in the exercise of their duties.  The
   Committee also enquired whether SARS would be able to initiate a
   commission of inquiry should there be reasonable evidence that wrongdoing
   and misuse of positions was in fact occurring.


   On the seizure of vehicles, SARS emphasised that no seizure of vehicles
   should take place outside of the law or an unfair basis. Where any
   transgression of either the rules or the required levels of integrity
   occurred, SARS would deal with the offenders in terms of the law. They
   would be given a written or a verbal warning, appear before disciplinary
   committees and the like.


   Though it would probably not establish commissions of inquiry, SARS would
   always try to find out what went wrong and who was responsible, and then
   address that wrong. SARS was, however, a human organisation and mistakes
   and lapses of judgement sometimes occurred. What was important was to put
   systems in place to ensure that when such lapses did happen, the public
   was not unfairly treated.


   Regarding the legal seizure of motor vehicles, SARS detailed the process
   to be followed. SARS detained second hand motor vehicles for at least 42
   days to allow the clearing agent or the importer to claim or produce all
   the necessary documents. If, after 42 days, those documents were not
   produced, the process moved to the seizure stage.


   Motor vehicles were a complex problem for a number of reasons. Firstly,
   South Africa allowed second hand cars to cross through its territory to
   neighbouring countries but these vehicles did not all get there and those
   that got there often found a way of getting back.


   There were also a number of entities which had forms of jurisdiction over
   vehicles coming into the country. For example, apart from the Department
   of Transport, there was also the SABS, since vehicles actually had to
   meet their standards. The DTI also made decisions in terms of what
   imports they did and didn’t allow in a desire to protect the domestic
   motor industry.

   9. High-risk and low-risk tax-payers

   The Committee referred to the distinction made in the Annual Report and
   elsewhere between high-risk and low-risk tax-payers and asked SARS to
   clarify the distinction.


   SARS typified a low-risk tax-payer as one whose income was limited to a
   monthly salary. A more high-risk category would be a tax payer receiving
   income from a range of investments where the risk would reside in the
   question of whether all investment income had been adequately reported.


   The key aspect for SARS was to use its limited resources in a manner
   which concentrated efforts on high-risk tax-payers. There were a number
   of attributes SARS associated with high-risk tax-payers, such as being
   involved in an industry associated with structured tax products, having a
   history of non-compliance, a tendency for accounting income and taxable
   income of the company to be markedly different, as well as marked
   divergences between the nominal and effective tax rate paid by the
   company, the amount of time tax matters featured in the board meetings of
   the company, and the frequency with which the company was ready to
   interpret tax law differently from SARS.

   10.      Measures to reduce tax risks in the property market

   The Committee referred to the statement in the Annual Report that some
   risks and challenges existed regarding property sales. The Committee
   enquired whether, in SARS’s endeavour to address the problem, it had made
   any attempts to link up with stakeholders who were involved in the bond
   registration process.


   SARS noted that, as mentioned in the Annual Report, property was one of
   the emerging focus areas. SARS had been working very hard with the
   information provided by intelligence colleagues, and had dedicated
   resources specifically to this area. A lot of cases were already underway
   and SARS would probably be in a position next year to provide details of
   the outcomes of these efforts.


   SARS indicated that it relied on information from the SARS hotline where
   people phoned in and identified suspicious activities within the property
   sector. SARS also had a third party interface with the deeds registry.
   There had also been efforts to talk to the Estate Agents Board.


   From a broader policy perspective it needed to be considered whether
   special reporting requirements needed to be imposed on the industry, for
   example when someone bought a particular property for R 10 million in
   cash. Under such circumstances it would be good for SARS to know where
   the cash and income came from, for example. SARS was still in the early
   days of its work here and the reporting requirement might still be given
   greater consideration.


   11.      Impairment loss in 2006/2007

   The Committee enquired after the statement in the Annual Report that in
   2006/2007 there had been an impairment loss of R 68.4 million for certain
   software programmes and asked after the circumstances that led to the
   impairment of these assets.


   SARS responded that it had contracted for particular software that it was
   using for call centre services. In December 2005, the company it had
   contracted signed a further contract for the next few years which would
   enhance that software and provide a range of additional services as well.
   That company was then taken over by another software company and the
   people who took over the company said that the previous contract was not
   going to bind them and that the additional services that SARS was
   expecting at the negotiated rate would not be supplied. SARS then had new
   software developed in order to ensure that the initial software it had
   purchased would be useable. But in accounting terms it was necessary to
   write off the loss. SARS would still try to recover some of this
   ‘theoretical’ loss by seeing if other government entities were interested
   in using the initial software.

   12.      Empowerment of small businesses

   The Committee enquired after the extent to which small businesses were
   being empowered and noted that the Annual Report contained a section
   discussing the Large Business Centre but did not have a corresponding
   section on small business measures.


   SARS noted that small business was now of equivalent importance to large
   business, except that they provided less revenue. SARS reviewed some of
   the things that it and the National Treasury had done to assist and
   empower small businesses. There was firstly the separate tax regime for
   small businesses, where they only paid a marginal tax rate of 0per cent
   for taxable income up to R 40 000.00 and only 10per cent for taxable
   income from R 40 001.00 to R 300 000.00. There were also the educational
   programmes which were directed at small businesses, as well as the work
   done during the small business amnesty. Further, in the budget of this
   year the Minister of Finance had announced that SARS and Treasury would
   be working on a new tax product for small businesses. SARS had also set
   up small business desks at most of its offices which were intended to
   provide assistance geared especially at the concerns of small business
   owners.


   A significant difference between large and small businesses was that
   there were fewer large businesses and so it was possible to concentrate
   the staff that handled large businesses into one big centre instead of
   many smaller ones. For small business support one needed to decentralise
   and ensure that more facilities were created on the ground where owners
   could interact with SARS, receive assistance, education and the like.
   What SARS now intended was to have a small business unit at its head
   office which managed all of these programmes in a more coherent way and
   developed products in consultations with small business which were more
   in line with their own capability.

   13.      The Performance of SARS
   The Committee noted that it was difficult to exercise oversight over SARS
   because it was difficult to set numerical measurable objectives for its
   activities. It further noted that, three or four years ago, SARS had
   appeared very good, but given the amount of revenue it was collecting
   now, it had perhaps not been as good as supposed then! One international
   measure of performance for revenue collection agencies was that total
   expenditure should be between 1 and 2 per cent of revenue collection.
   SARS’s was currently closer to 1 than to 2per cent, which suggested very
   good performance.


   SARS noted that the Committee had clearly described the trajectory of a
   state institution in the democratic era in South Africa. There had been a
   state in the past which had dealt with a minority in a particular way and
   with a majority in another way. In a very short space of time, this same
   state machinery had transformed itself to deal with the majority in a
   very different way that is as part of the citizenry of the country.
   Further to this challenge, SARS had always said that it was a very old
   and well established institution with old systems, old processes and huge
   people challenges. The Annual Reports reflected the progress that had
   been made against this background in turning SARS into a more modern,
   effective and efficient institution. The strategic plans on the other
   hand, set out SARS’s ambition or aspiration to be as “world-class” as
   possible, using as a benchmark countries that had had tax systems
   operating for fifty years or more.


   There were, however, constraints that SARS had to contend with, such as
   that there had been no really significant investments in technology
   systems in the organisation. SARS had put in new computers and was going
   to put in a new network over the next few years, but the old technology
   systems were still the base on which it operated, which was, by the way,
   not too different from many other similar agencies around the world as
   well. Regarding human resources, significant numbers of people had also
   left, as a result of poaching by the private sector as the economy
   boomed. Skills retention was becoming a significant challenge. SARS
   anticipated that the salary bill would increase as a result of trying
   retaining scarce skills in the organisation.


   14.      The role of compliance in revenue collection increases

   Wit respect to a previous question about the reasons for more revenue
   being collect, the Committee enquired whether the increased over-runs was
   maybe due to compliance and how much of SARS’s revenue gains and over-
   runs were in fact accounted for by compliance improvements. The Committee
   further referred to the Katz Commission estimate of some years ago that
   the tax gap was approximately R 15 billion and enquired whether SARS had
   any estimates of what the current tax gap was.


   SARS pointed out that its compliance model made it easy for people to
   comply, and that it was trying to get increasing numbers of people to buy
   into the recognition that they also had to do their bit. More and more
   disincentives also had to be created, as well as campaigns with big and
   small businesses to ensure that businesses bought into this enhanced
   compliance culture. This required greater frequency of contact between
   SARS and business in order to ensure the consolidation of the right
   behavioural patterns and interactions. Where businesses did not comply,
   however, the law existed and would be utilised by SARS.


   In a sense voluntary compliance was an end destination. Compliance was
   largely determined by the tax and broader culture of that society and how
   it would behave if there were no other pressures on it to pay all taxes
   due than the recognition of it being the right thing to do. Tax
   administrations around the world dreamt of achieving true voluntary
   compliance. Studies suggested that the factors which determined the
   degree of compliance included the credibility of government and its
   institutions, and the extent to which the tax administration was
   respected and regarded as competent and fair.


   Regarding the tax gap, a key consideration was how to better identify
   risk and this needed better information than SARS had at present. Third
   party information was a key aspect of SARS’s strategy in this regard. The
   better the risk engines, the more progress SARS would make in eradicating
   the tax gap. SARS noted, however, that no real estimates had been made
   recently of the size of the tax gap.


   15.      Writing off outstanding debt

   The Committee noted that SARS expected to collect some R 11 billion of
   its outstanding R 57 billion debt, that is R 46 billion was expected to
   be written off. The Committee recognised that one never collected 100per
   cent of bad debts, but wondered why SARS was expecting to write off such
   a large amount. The Committee also wondered what measures could be
   applied to delinquent tax payers in this regard.


   Regarding especially older debt, SARS indicated that in the last 2 to 3
   years the debt book had been stabilised in the sense that the debt book
   hadn’t grown further. A much bigger focus was intended in the next few
   years on old debt. At the end of the process all debt had to be either
   collected, adjusted or written off. SARS noted that a large portion of
   debt in the twenty-four months or more categories was estate debt or debt
   of companies which had ceased to trade. Debt collection thus also
   depended on third parties which made this a challenging category of debt.


   16.      Tax disputes

   The Committee referred to the fact that where SARS made a ruling on a tax
   issue, most tax payers capitulated to this ruling even if they found the
   SARS explanation somewhat clumsy. The normal person in the street was
   unlikely to contest the issue further in court. The Committee therefore
   wondered what percentage of entities that capitulated to SARS rulings
   were people and what percentage were corporates who could afford lawyers,
   since this might be useful information.


   SARS argued that resource imbalances in fact generally favoured tax
   payers rather than tax administrations. SARS almost never initiated
   litigation. A court process generally started when tax payers were
   unhappy with their assessments. Tax payers could appeal to special courts
   that had been created for tax matters: a tax board existed for smaller
   questions which were similar to a small claims court. This was precisely
   to make the legal process more accessible to the person on the street. A
   tax court also existed for larger cases. If a party was not satisfied
   with a decision of the tax court then they could also go to a higher
   court.


   However, various measures also existed to help resolve matters in a non-
   litigious manner through mediation and facilitation of disputes outside
   the more adversarial court environment.

   17.      Information security at SARS

   The Committee enquired how secure information was at SARS.


   SARS noted the importance of information security given the nature of the
   information it held. IT security was a constant game of ‘safe maker’ and
   ‘safe breaker’. A key issue was ensuring that staff followed procedures
   as required: typically where security was compromised it was not the IT
   security system which was at fault but people who had not followed
   procedures properly. To date there had been no significant instances of
   IT security problems at SARS.

   18.      Small business tax amnesty

   The Committee referred to the small business tax amnesty drive and
   enquired how many convictions had been made of people who did not comply
   with tax law.


   SARS emphasised that the purpose of the tax amnesty had not been punitive
   but had been aimed at getting small businesses compliant. They then
   benefited from a clean slate and SARS benefited from the added revenue
   and increased integrity of the system. Therefore the current phase was
   primarily concerned with processing and adjudicating applications. SARS
   would however follow up non-compliant businesses in future.

   19.      Tax payer contact details

   The Committee noted that SARS had been making an effort to clean up the
   contact details of taxpayers to reduce the quantity of undelivered
   returns, which was cited as one of the reasons for the outstanding return
   book. The Committee enquired after the practical measures taken by SARS
   to ensure that contact details were current and accurate.

   SARS firstly noted that the obligation rested on tax payers to ensure
   that their details were correct and updated.  SARS had, however, used the
   opportunity of returns being submitted every year to ensure that details
   were still correct. There had also been address campaigns.

   Such measures had not always proved to be enough and SARS had also come
   to rely more on third party sources. The institutions that SARS believed
   had the best details of this sort were the credit bureaux and SARS had
   started using them as a reference point for tax payer data. Details were
   compared and where they corresponded was ticked off as being in all
   probability correct. Using this approach, SARS was able to send returns
   only to those tax payers where a fairly strong likelihood existed that
   the address and other details were accurate. In the previous filing
   season about 300 000 returns came back. To date, of 3.9 million sent only
   27 000 had come back: thus this approach had already delivered clear
   benefits.

   20.      Recommendations

    1. The Committee recommends that SARS, in reporting on disability
       figures, provide such figures broken down by race, gender and level
       of staff, as this disaggregation was necessary in order to get a
       better understanding of its performance with regard to the Employment
       Equity Act.
    2. The Committee recommends that SARS provides a report on the need to
       consider changing existing legislation to enable SARS to have
       recourse to more severe penalties in the case of tax payment delays
       by companies.
    3. The Committee recommends that SARS provides it with a detailed update
       on progress made with respect to the measures to reclassify existing
       debt.
    4. The Committee recommends that SARS provides it with a more detailed
       report of trends in SARS’s salary bill, following from its comments
       at their Annual Report hearing that SARS might have to increase
       salaries in some instances as part of its staff retention strategy.

3.    Report the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Annual Report
   2006/2007 of Statistics South Africa (Stats SA), dated 9 November 2007

   1. Introduction

   The Portfolio Committee on Finance met on 17 October 2007 to consider the
   Annual Report 2006/2007 of Statistics South Africa (StatsSA).


   The Annual Report was presented by the Statistician-General. After the
   presentation discussions followed which are recorded below.


   Recommendations based on the engagement of the Committee with Stats SA
   are provided in the final section.

   2. Fruitless and wasteful expenditure

   The Committee requested that StatsSA provide a more detailed explanation
   of the fruitless and wasteful expenditure documented in the Annual
   Report, particularly referring to services procured and paid for but not
   utilised, in excess of R2,4 million (p 136).


   StatsSA indicated that this expenditure was primarily related to field
   operators appointed to conduct the Community Survey. The Statistician-
   General explained that the particular company appointed had opted to
   accommodate fieldworkers at the Sheraton Hotel in Cape Town, at an
   excessive cost to StatSA. An immediate decision was made to dismiss the
   company, but expenditure had already been made. However, StatsSA
   contended that despite the financial loss, a clear and important signal
   had been sent about misuse of funds, and maintaining reasonable standards
   affordable to the department.

   3. Debts written off

   The Committee queried debts written off in the amount of R704,000 (p
   135), as well as the source and circumstances around the non-recovery of
   funds.


   StatsSA responded that the funds written off primarily refer to debts
   from the 1996 and 2001 censuses. StatsSA applies the law of prescription,
   meaning that debts will be written off if they are more than three years
   old and have little positive feasibility in terms of recovering funds.
   Most of these are small debts, in which the cost of recovery would be
   higher than the debt itself, and therefore would not constitute efficient
   use of public funds.

   4. Re-weighting and updating of the CPI and PPI

   The Committee requested further information on the reported processes of
   re-weighting and updating of the CPI and PPI.


   StatsSA responded by emphasising the organisational priority placed on
   Economic Statistics. The CPI is re-weighted approximately every five
   years or so based on the results of the Income and Expenditure Survey
   (IES), although this year the re-weighting is taking place slightly
   outside of the five year period. Currently, there are just over 1,020
   products in the CPI basket, which is relatively high in comparison with
   other countries. Internationally, in both developed and developing
   countries, CPI baskets generally include between 200 and 800 products.


   The current CPI basket is based on products that represent 0.01% or more
   of total national household expenditure. This relatively low threshold
   means that too many items are reflected in the basket. StatsSA also
   indicated that the CPI basket has been criticised as a “rich man’s
   basket” that is overly reflective of expensive luxury goods, rather than
   products used regularly by “normal day-to-day people”. StatsSA reported
   that a new system of identifying products for the basket would address
   this issue. A provincial approach has also been adopted, whereby a basket
   is developed for each province based on both household expenditure, and
   the number of households that have bought a particular product. This will
   to some extent exclude items that are expensive, but are bought by very
   few households, as a minimum number of households will have to have
   purchased the product in order for it to appear in the basket.


   A document detailing this approach was posted on the StatsSA website last
   month, and has received good media coverage. It outlines a total of 400
   products which should appear in the new CPI basket, 300 of which were
   found to be common across all provinces. StatsSA now needs to begin
   collection of the items not currently in the basket, so that when the CPI
   is published in January of 2009 it will be based on the new basket of
   goods and will have new weights from the IES, which will be published in
   November of this year.


   StatsSA contends that this approach will mean a more “streamlined” CPI,
   which includes items bought by more people. Although the CPI will still
   very much be determined by expenditure, and therefore to some extent
   dominated by the spending habits of wealthier households, StatsSA
   suggests that it will nonetheless still be more reflective of the
   products average households buy, and the impacts of these on inflation.

   5. StatsSA website

   The Committee requested more information on use of the StatsSA website,
   particularly related to the visitors accessing the site, and any feedback
   obtained. The Annual Report indicated an increase of up to 15% in
   visitors to the website.


   StatsSA responded that indeed the issue of how many people visited the
   website was less relevant than others, including: the specific hits
   received; how often links are followed from search engines; whether
   experiences in use of the website are positive or negative; whether
   queries can be dealt with automatically; whether the website is
   accessible; and who is accessing the website, and whether they are
   statisticians or other interested parties.


   Although the website has limitations in terms of providing information to
   people who are not connected to the internet, it remains and efficient
   and cost-effective means of providing a large amount of information to
   users.


   At one level, StatsSA receives hits from “tourists”, who look at the
   front page, sometimes for access to the indicators that appear in the
   scrolling banner (e.g. CPI, PPI, GDP, etc). StatsSA keeps data on a
   monthly basis about what pages are accessed by visitors; incidentally,
   the vacancies page is one of the most frequently visited.


   At a second level, StatsSA looks at “harvesters” of information from the
   website, particularly in terms of publications that are downloaded. For
   example, on the day of the CPI release, numbers of hits to the website
   are very high. The most popular publication downloaded between July 2006
   and July of 2007 was the Labour Force Survey.


   StatsSA also looks at “data miners”, as the website offers the ability to
   tabulate data online. Specific programmes are in places to facilitate
   access to time series data, including the household surveys and censuses.
   StatsSA also requests that users subscribe to data publications although
   these are free, in order to obtain information on who is interested in
   the data and how they use it. About one-third of subscribers are located
   in the private sector.


   StatsSA also runs a user satisfaction survey, and contends that over time
   satisfaction among external users is increasing, but this data is not
   released publicly.

   6. Security of statistical information

   The Committee enquired about the security of statistical information,
   given that this is very sensitive.


   StatsSA responded that there are systems in place to protect the security
   of data, but that in relation to the website in particular, these are
   admittedly weak. The website has not been hacked successfully for several
   years, despite frequent automated attempts. But there is room for more
   vigilance.


   Also, StatsSA suggested that there are inevitably always some security
   issues with regards to personnel. StatsSA depends on staff within the
   organisation to maintain data security, and staff are required to sign an
   oath of confidentiality. StatsSA is looking at standardising
   confidentiality clauses for anyone working with statistical information.




   However, staff shortages and overlapping functions also threaten the
   security of data to a certain extent. For example, some staff are able to
   access statistical information systems, and also access logs that track
   entries in and out, and it would be good practice to have these
   separated. However, many staff members have had to assume multiple
   responsibilities due to HR shortages.


   StatsSA is, however, attempting to build internal IT capacity through
   training internal systems developers. Some StatsSA interns are working in
   the Data Management and Information Delivery programme, and are being
   mentored by a contracted external company. StatsSA is monitoring progress
   in the development of these skills, and the programme may serve as a
   model for further growing IT skills within the organisation.

   7. Financial performance and under-spending

   The Committee raised several questions related to financial performance
   and under-spending in the past financial year. Members questioned whether
   under-spending in some programmes was a result of poor planning, or an
   inability or lack of capacity to spend the allocated budget.
   StatsSA responded that overall, 94.3% of 2005/06 budget was spent, which
   represented a significant increase from the previous year, in which only
   86% of the budget was spent. One of the major sources of under-spending
   was in relation to the Community Survey conducted with more than 200,000
   participants across the country. Some payments towards the Community
   Survey were not completed by the end of the financial year, resulting in
   an under-spending outcome.


   However, StatsSA also indicated that total departmental expenditure on a
   “modified cash basis”, was 94%. There was a departmental savings of R65
   million, of which R56 million has been requested from National Treasury
   for roll-overs, particularly for payments in the Community Survey project
   (p 102). On an accrual accounting basis, StatsSA would have spent 99% of
   the final appropriation allocated.


   StatsSA also contended that the organisation had fared well in terms of
   under-spending in comparison to other departments in the cluster. The
   Chief Financial Officer suggested that StatsSA should take a lead in
   terms of accrual accounting. She indicated that rollovers should also be
   taken into account, because those funds are now available to StatsSA in
   the current financial year.


   In another issue related to financial performance, Committee Members
   asked about the reasons behind high expenditure on consultants and
   contractors.


   Again, StatsSA responded that use of consultants in the department is
   relatively low when compared with other government departments. However,
   StatsSA also indicated that the reported number of consultants and
   contractors used also reflected the large number of temporary
   fieldworkers appointed to work on surveys, who were paid out of this line
   item. StatsSA cannot afford to employ fieldworkers on a permanent basis
   when they are not working on a particular survey. However, the
   organisation is developing an integrated fieldwork strategy that would
   result in different surveys running continuously, and would therefore
   allow for more permanent fieldwork staff.


   In terms of expenditure on fieldworkers over the past year, about 6,000
   persons were employed temporarily for the Community Survey. Over the same
   period, about 2000 cars were hired. Rollovers related to the Community
   Survey explained poor spending performance in Programme 3.


   Also, again for the Community Survey, regional offices were opened up to
   accommodate logistical operations and provide a base for the 6,000
   fieldworkers employed. There were also significant costs related to
   travel and subsistence. One of the areas of most significant expenditure
   was in hired cars, because the core business of StatsSA requires moving
   to different parts of the country. There were also high petrol costs, and
   issues around cash flow for petrol have been overcome by introducing
   petrol cards. StatsSA also hired a lot of venues for training
   fieldworkers in the various areas and regions, and on airfare to
   transport trainers to those venues. This explains some expenditure
   trends.

   8. Virements

   The Committee questioned StatsSA on the extent of virements appearing in
   the Annual Report, and the effect that the shifting of funds may have had
   on particular programmes. Members asked whether these virements
   ultimately helped StatsSA to achieve programmatic objectives, or whether
   any programmes and outcomes were sacrificed. The explanations offered in
   the Annual Report were thought to be inadequate, given that
   Administration gained in excess of R5 million, and the Statistical
   Support and Informatics Programme gained in excess of R10 million. At the
   same time, Economic Statistics lost more than R7 million, Population and
   Social Statistics lost in excess of R5 million, and Quality and
   Integration lost R4 million.


   StatsSA responded that the virements conducted were within the limits of
   Section 43 of the PFMA. Some funds were taken from the compensation line,
   in congruence with the high numbers of vacancies recorded within the
   organisation. StatsSA indicated that savings in various programmes were
   used to correct budgeting imbalances, and highlighted the issue of not
   always receiving the full amount of funds requested from Treasury.


   StatsSA also indicated that all programmes are assessed in terms of
   achievements towards targets set in the work programme. The work
   programme is linked to MTF requests, which are also linked to the
   allocation of financial resources. Any virements or funding shifts are
   only made based on savings realised in the previous six months, and after
   careful consideration of the impacts and effects of such shifts. No
   virements take place where projects or programmes have not achieved their
   goals. StatsSA contended that no programmes have suffered as a result of
   virements.

   9. Human resources and capacity

   Issues around human resource constraints were raised several times during
   the course of the Hearing. Members were concerned about high levels of
   reported vacancies, skills shortages, and the absence of team leaders, as
   well as staff withdrawing from training courses, or failing to compete
   them altogether. Members suggested that these issues could have serious
   consequences in terms of the overall performance of the organisation.


   StatsSA indicated that in many places in the Annual Report, the term
   “resource constraints” was used to explain a lack of adequate staff,
   rather than insufficient funding.


   StatsSA also indicated that the organisation faces a number of challenges
   related to Human Resources, including a shortage of specialised skills in
   South Africa and the region. Areas of acute shortage are in IT skills,
   statistical computation abilities, and statistical analysis. This is to
   some extent related to the ongoing problem of poor performance in maths
   among learners for historical reasons.


   Vacancy rates within StatsSA remain very high. The organisation reported
   difficulties in attracting highly skilled workers into temporary contract
   posts. Therefore, StatsSA is looking to create more permanent positions.
   HR management, together with the Human Capacity Development programme, is
   working to identify internal capacity development programmes that will
   produce an internal pool of staff for recruitment to specialised
   positions.


   StatsSA has also acknowledged that the current advertising strategy,
   where vacancies appear in papers such as the Sunday Times, has not
   resulted in attracting the skills required. Despite high numbers of
   applicants, only between 10-20% are generally sufficiently qualified to
   be short-listed. StatsSA is investigating other forms of media to use for
   advertising, and also making use of a head-hunting policy.


   Resignations remain a problem, and have highlighted the problem of a lack
   of career progression options within the organisation. Many competing
   organisations are able to offer better career progression options and
   benefits, and StatsSA staff tend to be skilled and highly mobile. Human
   Resources Management will be tabling a Retention Strategy, because
   ultimately it is not effective to direct efforts within the organisation
   towards skills development, and then lose newly-trained staff.


   StatsSA also discussed the need for more effective managers within the
   organisation. A new programme on leadership for managers has been
   introduced. Resignations are often related to the immediate working
   environment, including both physical working conditions and relationships
   with managers. The programme will focus on improving management skills
   and leadership.


   Human capacity development programmes have also been put in place to
   build awareness among learners about careers in statistics, which should
   be beneficial in the long-term. Bursaries will also be made available
   from StatsSA both inside and outside of South Africa


   Members also queried high expenditure on consulting, contractors and
   special services, given high vacancy rates within StatsSA. Members asked
   how long this use of consultants, contractors and special services was
   likely to continue.


   In response, as discussed above, StatsSA responded that high levels of
   expenditure on consulting, contractors and special services, was
   generally related to the use of temporary fieldworkers in the surveys
   conducted. StatsSA currently cannot afford to employ fieldworkers on a
   permanent basis, while they are not working on specific surveys.
   Members also expressed concern about the lack of a learnership programme,
   on order to promote better access to the skills required by StatsSA.


   StatsSA reported that an internship programme is in place, and has been
   supported by the East African Statistical Organisation. The programme
   currently has twice the number of interns than last year, and the number
   is expected to double again by next year. However, many more skilled
   employees are needed still, and StatsSA contends that it needs to open a
   Training Centre, which will be pan-African but will largely train people
   within the country.


   A learnership programme will also be initiated in the next financial
   year, and a plan and draft strategy are already in place. Given the
   organisation’s skills shortage problem, when the Department of Public
   Service and Administration requested that Departments pilot internal
   skills audits, StatsSA was one of the organisations that volunteered.
   Phase one of the pilot has been completed, and two phases remain. StatsSA
   has also embarked on a skills audit programmatic exercise as well, which
   focuses on management and the recruitment of suitable staff.


   Also, StatsSA will begin offering training to teachers, related to
   learning outcome 4 in the FET grouping, for grades 9-12. It is hoped that
   this will eventually be implemented across 27,000 schools, whereby at
   least one teacher in each will receive training at the FET level. This
   will also support awareness and entrants into the bursary programme, and
   other initiatives to enthuse learners about careers in statistics.
   StatsSA then plans to expand training to include the GET level. A
   national coordinator for this initiative has been appointed, as well as a
   coordinator in each of the nine provinces.


   In response to a query around StatsSA’s relationship with tertiary
   institutions, these relationships exist within at least three programmes.
   One programme is specifically looking at course content related to social
   statistics. Progress has also been made with one specific university,
   while others are still being developed. This is particularly important in
   relation to the statistics training institute that is being developed.


   Members also queried why certain HR processes, including HR audits, were
   not conducted as planned.


   In response, StatsSA explained that a specific Team Leader who was not
   available, and therefore as a consequence, an internal audit in human
   resources functions conducted by the Internal Audit Unit could not be
   completed. This again highlights issues of staff shortages and capacity
   constraints. The Audit has been included in next year’s financial plans.



   10.      Employment of staff with disabilities

   Members also queried the low percentage of persons with disabilities
   employed by StatsSA.


   StatsSA responded that recruitment for data processors in particular has
   been skewed in an attempt to attract more applicants with disabilities.
   Percentages of persons with disabilities who are employed within StatsSA
   may also increase as the organisation moves towards the creation of more
   permanent positions. A specific unit has also been established to address
   issues of disability within the organisation, including recruitment
   strategies. A DDG within the department has agreed to champion of this
   programme. StatsSA indicated that the percentage of staff with
   disabilities is unlikely to increase by year-end, or possibly even next
   year, but will rise in the medium- and long-term.

   11.      Management and planning

   Committee Members raised some general issues related to overall planning
   within StatsSA, as reflected by under-spending, virements and lack of
   delivery in some survey products.


   StatsSA responded that in some cases, it is difficult to set priorities
   in the face of competing demands, but that a Programme and Projects
   office dealing with integrated planning had been established in an
   attempt to better address this issue. In some cases, StatsSA acknowledged
   that the organisation had “bit off more than it could chew” in terms of
   delivery.

   12.      Poverty line

   Committee Members queried whether progress had been made in the
   establishment of a national poverty line, as announced in the Budget in
   February.


   StatsSA responded that a report had been launched with National Treasury
   in February detailing the methodology for the construction of a proposed
   poverty line. Since then, talks have been underway with Treasury and
   consultation has been invited from the public. A progress report will be
   provided in February of 2008.


   The development of a Poverty Survey is also underway, and StatsSA
   anticipates that the survey will be have been piloted by end-2007. The
   survey includes a number of non-money metric measures of “subjective
   poverty” alongside money metric measures, which together will provide a
   multi-dimensional picture of poverty in the country. StatsSA anticipates
   that the results of the pilot will be available in 2008.

   13.      Delivery of survey products


   Committee Members queried a number of survey products that had not been
   completed as planned, including data on Health and Vital Statistics, and
   Tourism and Migration annual reports. Resource constraints were cited as
   reasons for non-completion and failure to reach targets.


   StatsSA once again indicated that resource constraints generally referred
   to skills and staff shortages, rather than insufficient funding.


   In terms of the Health and Vital Statistics, and Tourism and Migration
   reports, these were delayed in part due to the introduction of new
   programmes for editing data. Further, in both of these specific areas,
   StatsSA depends on other departments for data. In the case of Tourism and
   Migration, StatsSA is dependent on the Department of Home Affairs, and
   has worked with the department of issues of data quality.


   Last year, StatsSA reported on similar problems in releasing data on
   Health and Vital Statistics, and there is a need to improve HR
   specifically in the division.  StatsSA is now working more closely with
   the Department of Health in order to ensure that in the next year, a
   demographic and health survey can be conducted, and that the quality of
   thematic reports can be improved.


   In terms of the work programme, StatsSA has committed to undertaking a
   transport survey, and needs to ensure that that commitment is followed
   through. StatsSA has developed a comprehensive strategy for economic
   statistics over the next three to five year, based on the international
   framework system of national accounts. All economic statistics feed into
   the system of national accounts so that the GDP can be calculated. The
   Economic Statistics Strategy identifies ten sectors to be measured in GDP
   calculations, as well as quality and data gaps that currently exist. This
   is how the need for a transport survey and business survey were
   identified. One of StatsSA’s priorities is to improve measures of
   economic growth, so these surveys will remain in place.


   StatsSA indicated that each year, the organisation undergoes a rigorous
   business planning process, whereby targets are re-examined, and feature
   in the next work programme. StatsSA contends that close follow-ups are
   conducted on targets committed to in the previous year.


   In terms of future survey products, postal surveys will continue as they
   are relatively successful. StatsSA is planning an agricultural census in
   the next few years, and one is underway already. This will feature a
   combination of postal surveys, phone follow-ups and evidence from the
   audited books of farms. There will be a poverty survey conducted in 2008,
   a tourism survey in 2008. The Statistics Training Institute is planned
   for 2009, and the Census will be conducted in 2011.


   14.      Business register

   Members asked a number of questions related to the Business Register,
   including how accurate and up to date the register would be, and whether
   it would give a good indication of the different kinds of businesses
   operating in South Africa.


   StatsSA responded that to some extent, the accuracy of the register is
   based on assumptions. Businesses that are registered for taxation through
   SARS appear in the register, and those which are unregistered do not.
   Classification is based on standards used by DTI and the Small Business
   Act, and these were revised in 2003. The classifications are quite
   detailed in terms of industry and turnover, but there are large numbers
   of businesses which do not provide financial information, and thus cannot
   be classified in terms of the Act. A summary of this information is
   available on the StatsSA website.


   The Committee queried why StatsSA does not simply use data from SARS for
   the Business register. One aspect of this is that VAT and revenue
   collection grows at a different rate to that of the GDP. In general,
   these should be going in the same direction, but they may not be of the
   same magnitude due to the specific ways in which calculations are done.
   The business frame that StatsSA has deduced from SARS data indicates the
   existence of businesses producing goods and services, as well as the size
   of these businesses, numbers of employees, and turnover. However, this
   does not allow for businesses to be located in specific sectors, which is
   a basic classification in terms of the system of national accounts. The
   data required beyond what is available from SARS requires specialised
   economic research.


   In terms of the question of completeness, in a closed economy in which
   national accounts are compiled, it is ideal to be able to measure the
   totality of all entities involved in the production of all goods and
   services for the marketplace. There are equivalent questions about
   people, and where they live. The best way to measure this within the
   population is to assign unique identity numbers, and most people know the
   advantages and disadvantages of an ID number. It is negative if the
   number is associated with a high number of traffic offences. The
   population register and system of assigning ID numbers has certain
   limitations, but is useful overall.


   Similarly, it is useful to assign unique numbers to businesses, and in
   the same way, a business ID number associated with tax evasion is a
   business you would not want to identify with. The project concept behind
   the Business Register is that we need something as unique as the ID’s
   used in the population register. If citizens or businesses perform well
   in terms of the law, they should be rewarded with clean certificates and
   permitted to do business. If they err, they should be held accountable
   and punished.


   The Business Register also offers possibilities of tracking the nature of
   ownership and empowerment, and changes in the distribution of wealth. By
   associating a person’s ID number and the number of the businesses in
   which they are registered as a director, it is possible to map out how
   much a particular group is associated with ownership and directorships,
   if that is an indicator of empowerment. It also allows for a closer look
   into ownership patterns by sectors of the economy.


   Members also queried the health of the Companies and Intellectual
   Property Registration Office (CIPRO), housed within DTI. Without
   commenting on the health of a sister department, it is important to note
   that the Board is mandated by law to register and manage certain entities
   and companies, and to ensure that the register is updated so that
   entities that are created are timeously registered, and liquidations are
   timeously registered as well. Timeous registrations are particularly
   important so that there is an equation related to the net stock of people
   and the net stock of businesses that are registered.


   In terms of the health of the business database, rather than CIPRO
   itself, it can be difficult to ascertain whether or not companies are
   actually active. The register only therefore provides information on
   aspirations, rather than economic activity. This is limiting, and it
   would be valuable to move towards a register that separates active and
   dormant businesses, or even more preferably, one which only includes
   active businesses, rather than indicating economic intention.


   StatsSA indicated that a national registration system would be
   advantageous. Economic trusts are not registered under CIRPO law or
   through SARS. StatsSA suggested that a streamlined, national registration
   process would be useful, in that businesses would be uniquely registered
   and would also be registered for tax. Businesses would therefore not be
   allowed to transact in the economy without SARS registration. Businesses
   ceasing to transact would also be taken out of the accounting system.
   Some progress in this direction has been made already – Treasury, DTI and
   StatsSA have agreed to form a project team, and each department has
   nominated 2 senior official s to represent them on a Project Steering
   Committee

   15.      Internal and external auditing processes

   Members specifically queried references to a BAUD asset register that was
   reported to be unavailable at the time of the audit (p 64).


   StatsSA responded that the BAUD is a basic asset register system, but
   that it had not been available due to timing. The Internal Audit
   conducted coincided with the External Audit, and the external auditors
   were likely to keep the BAUD register for a longer time, due to lack of
   familiarity with systems and controls.


   In response to issues raised about attendance to the Audit Committee, the
   Chair of the Audit Committee was absent due to ill health, and this was
   also explained to the external auditor. However, the Chair provided
   feedback and support throughout the audit process, although was not
   compliant with attendance. The Chair has now returned and is in good
   health, but his absence also highlighted the need to address strategic
   and risk issues that could potentially threaten the health of the
   organisation.


   The Auditor-General identified some management and control weaknesses
   within StatsSA, but these were not of sufficient concern to lead to a
   matter of emphasis or an audit qualification. StatsSA contends that most
   of the issues have been addressed on an ongoing basis, as soon as
   feedback is received.

   16.      Dwelling frame

   Members queried some aspects of the Dwelling Frame used by StatsSA in
   household surveys.


   In some survey exercises, StatsSA has assisted in providing addresses in
   communities, and this has been an important restorative process.


   StatsSA explained the processes behind the referencing of residences,
   addresses and built structures. The first step is to obtain imagery of
   survey areas, either from satellite pictures or from the Department of
   Land Affairs. Built structures, including dwellings, are then identified
   within these particular areas. In areas where no other information is
   available, satellite imagery is used. Where information is held by other
   partners and stakeholders - such as the Post Office, which often assigns
   numbers to houses in rural areas – StatsSA also uses this information.
   StatsSA also attempts to work with municipalities, particularly in
   validating information obtained through imagery. Some municipalities have
   strong databases, particularly for service delivery, but there are often
   pockets of informal settlements that do not feature in these databases.
   In these cases, StatsSA works through databases and points out gaps in
   information, working in partnership with municipalities to ensure that
   databases are as complete as possible.


   In some areas, information held by municipalities is very poor or
   outdated, and this is reflected in an assessment conducted by StatsSA and
   the Department of Provincial and Local Government (DPLG) of Geographic
   Information Systems (GIS) capacity. StatsSA is looking to partner with
   local government in order to produce coverage for the whole country in
   terms of dwelling structures, but often information and infrastructure in
   municipalities is poor, and generally capacity to manage information
   exists only in better-resourced areas where more people pay rates.


   In areas where no information exists beyond satellite imagery, StatsSA
   goes into the field and attempts to identify and better understand
   information gleaned from the photo or satellite image. In the past,
   StatsSA has outsourced this fieldwork to the private sector, although
   information comes back to StatsSA for quality assurance and vetting
   before any payments are made. StatsSA is also moving towards building
   capacity through an internal fieldwork team that would be able to conduct
   information capturing and verification on dwelling units, but this will
   take time due to recruitment and training processes. Some small teams are
   already in place, but these will need to be upscaled dramatically in
   order to prepare for the Census in 2011.
   17.      Building public trust in StatSA

   The Statistician-General discussed the need to change the public face of
   StatsSA, and to build higher levels of confidence in the institution.
   This process is being progressively achieved, and has been supported
   through closer links with the South African Statistics Council.


   Amongst other interventions, StatsSA has operated a programme called
   Census in Schools, and will repeat this process. StatsSA indicated that
   statistics are increasingly being used within the country, and encourages
   debate and engagement with the numbers produced.

   18.      Recommendations

   18.1     The Committee recommends that StatsSA provide more detail in
        future on the reasons for underspending when they occur.
   18.2     The Committee recommends that StatsSA take a more innovative and
        active approach to recruit the staff it needs in order to address
        the challenges of human resource constraints, which in some cases
        appear to have hampered its ability to attain its objectives.
   18.3     The Committee recommends that StatsSA make more of an effort to
        employ disabled people in functions across the organisation in
        compliance with the Employment Equity Act.


4.    Report the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Annual Report
   2006/2007 of the National Treasury, dated 9 November 2007

   1. Introduction
   The Portfolio Committee on Finance met on 10 October 2007 to consider the
   Annual Report 2006/2007 of the National Treasury.


   The Annual Report was presented by the Director-General of the National
   Treasury. After the presentation discussions followed which are recorded
   below by National Treasury Programme and topic of discussion.


   Recommendations are based on the engagement of the Committee with the
   National Treasury is provided in the final section.


   Programme 1: Administration


   Staff numbers


   Regarding staff numbers the Committee referred to Table 3.1 (page 200) of
   the Annual Report, which correlated with other tables providing staff
   numbers, but not with Table 6.1, which provided equity information. Dates
   of the staff number tables were also not the same. The Committee
   requested that this be clarified.


   National Treasury indicated that the distinction that was made in these
   tables was between positions that existed within and without the
   establishment. Certain specialised activities required specialists who
   one might use on particular projects but who could not be absorbed into a
   particular full-time position. So instead of using consultants such staff
   were employed ‘out of establishment,’ using funds from vacant posts.
   Thus, in the tables referred to in the Annual Report, 710 staff were
   employed in the establishment and another 57 were employed out of
   establishment. Table 5.3, for example, dealt with promotion by salary
   band and thus by its very nature would not include the positions ‘outside
   of establishment’.


   Employment Equity and Disability Statistics


   Regarding the employment equity table provided in the Annual Report, the
   Committee indicated that no mention was made of National Treasury’s
   performance regarding disability: no target or measures of performance
   were provided, nor a breakdown by category. The Committee indicated that
   National Treasury had to do more in this regard.


   National Treasury responded that it could not force somebody within its
   organisation to classify themselves as an employee with disability.
   National Treasury did have employees who would be regarded as having a
   particular physical disability but these people did not want to be
   classified as such: this impacted adversely on the numbers in the
   employment equity table. In applying for positions at National Treasury
   people were of course at liberty to disclose on their application whether
   they had a disability and where this was the case special consideration
   was given to the application. National Treasury’s experience however had
   been that people preferred not to disclose this, asserting that a
   physical disability did not impact on their ability to do their job and
   therefore why did they need to disclose it.


   With regard to the targets set by the DPSA, National Treasury indicated
   that it continued to focus on the method by which it was recruiting. It
   was also going beyond just South Africa. There were many South African
   who found themselves abroad and National Treasury had joined forces with
   organisations working actively on this campaign, the so-called homecoming
   revolution.
   National Treasury had also launched a talent management program, which
   encompassed issues around performance, performance management,
   remuneration and reward. National Treasury was essentially setting its
   own development programs for staff and in this way creating its own
   supply to fill senior positions. In addition to performance management
   and creating own supply National Treasury also had two other programs,
   the internship program and the talent pool program. There were now about
   60 people in the internship program. The talent pool program was also
   beginning to expand and in addition National Treasury was making
   bursaries available. The reality however was that the job market was
   tight for the kinds of skills sought by Treasury.


   The Committee responded that it would still like to have the
   disaggregated disability figures and that there was no reason why
   National Treasury could not provide these as other departments did so.
   The Committee also indicated that the reasons provided for the low
   disability equity score did not appear adequate.


   National Treasury responded by reiterating its previous remark that
   people who could be categorised as disabled within the National Treasury
   at times did not want to be categorised as such. National Treasury
   accepted that it had not met the target but emphasised that this was not
   for lack of trying. National Treasury could not insist on including
   people as disabled when compiling its equity statistics who refused to be
   categorised as such. Treasury further emphasised that in recruiting staff
   it made use of an agency that specialised in the placing of disabled
   people. All of its job advertisements also indicated that National
   Treasury buildings were disabled-friendly.


   Secondment to the World Bank and IMF


   Regarding the secondment of senior advisers to multilateral institutions,
   especially the World Bank and IMF, the Committee enquired after the
   policy-impact of such secondment on transformation of the global
   financial and development system.


   National Treasury responded that part of the arrangement in question was
   that South Africa was entitled to place senior advisors in the World Bank
   and the IMF. The current approach was for a particular person not to be
   seconded for more than 5 years, and the norm was three to four years.


   One of the main roles of these officials was to link National Treasury to
   discussions taking place on a weekly basis in the boards of these
   institutions. It was also a means for South Africa to engage with and
   influence the discourses around development and the flow of resources.
   Thus, for example, a key current issue was that some developing countries
   were stating that they weren’t meeting their Gleneagles commitments with
   regard to aid flows because developing countries lacked sufficient
   absorptive capacity. South Africa, however, was articulating the position
   that independent verifiable sources showed that a number of countries
   were good performers and could absorb significant additional resources.


   Programme 2: Economic Planning and Budget Management


   Underspending


   The Committee referred to the fact that significant underspending had
   occurred in a number of programmes of the National Treasury. The
   Committee enquired whether there were any common reasons accounting for
   this. There was a shortage of information provided in the Annual Report
   on what the reasons for underspending were in particular instances,
   though it seldom appeared to be the result of any simple efficiency
   gains. The underspending did also raise concerns about the quality of the
   strategic planning of the National Treasury.


   National Treasury indicated that details per program on their spending
   performance was on page 119 of the Annual Report which stated why a
   particular program had under-spent or had saved. Treasury highlighted
   that the biggest underspending or saving had occurred in programme 4, the
   financial systems programme, which was an environment that used to be
   dominated by consultants. Contract management of those consultants had
   tightened significantly over the past 3 years and savings had therefore
   been realised there.


   A primary reason for underspending had been delays in the implementation
   of the integrated financial management system (IFMS). Most of the
   required tenders eventually only went out at the beginning of 2007 and
   the adjudication was now taking place. There was a delay in the
   finalisation of the user requirement statements, mainly on the HR module.
   National Treasury had to rely on the DPSA coordination with other
   government departments to ensure that everyone was on board.


   Regarding broader trends underlying underspending, National Treasury
   noted that if one looked through the programs, with the exception of
   program 5, one would notice that the issue of vacancies had been a key
   driver of the underspending. One noticed that the programs that had the
   lowest spending also tended to have higher vacancy rates.


   In the case of the IFMS, because of changes that were taking place and
   the roll out of a new system, it didn’t make sense to immediately fill
   all of the positions. Just as National Treasury preached to the other
   departments that if they could not spend their money it needed to be
   returned to the National Revenue Fund, so National Treasury had returned
   this money to the National Revenue Fund when it realised that there was a
   delay in the implementation of the project.


   The Committee then noted that underspending in each programme had
   occurred and enquired whether the management of the planning process was
   adequate. The Committee raised concerns to what extent the underspending
   was a once-off occurrence or a trend across programmes which would have
   to be taken into account in future appropriations.


   National Treasury agreed that the Committee was raising a point, which
   was of general application to all departments when it came to
   underspending, namely whether departments failed to plan, planned badly,
   or planned well but didn’t execute the plan.


   National Treasury emphasised that it did its best to ensure that the
   measurable objectives it provided related to what it was expected to
   deliver.  Across the board, there was however a struggle to quantify
   measurable objectives.


   In National Treasury, on an annual basis, once the update of the
   strategic plan had been completed, the DG entered into a contract with
   each programme manager and checked on progress formally on a quarterly
   basis. This approach however did not necessarily capture the financial
   aspect.


   National Treasury agreed that underspending should lead to reallocation,
   and that funds could even be removed from the vote if necessary. The
   vacancy rate was high and was a key driver of underspending. Although
   over the next 12 months existing positions could be filled, people were
   also leaving, so net change was likely to remain small.


   Regarding programme 4’s R166.6 million underspending, delays in the
   implementation of the Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS) and
   in the rollout of training were to blame. Approximately 160 million was
   associated with delays in the IFMS. These delays would not however affect
   the attainment of the deadline for the project as a whole.


   Regarding delays in training, in 2006/2007 responsibility for financial
   management training was shifted to SAMDI. Less courses were offered in
   2006/2007 because a strategy had been developed in this period. This was
   now finalised and unspent funds from the period under review would still
   be used for this.


   Other variances related to conditions for transfers under the DORA not
   being met. Transferring funds where conditions were not met would be
   tantamount to throwing money away. This also accounted for a great deal
   of underspending.


   The Land Bank


   Regarding the Land Bank and guarantees by government, the Committee asked
   National Treasury to comment on the fact that the initial agreement had
   been for the Land Bank to submit its turnaround strategy to both National
   Treasury and the Department of Agriculture by 15 November 2005. This was
   subsequently changed to 30 November 2007.


   National Treasury firstly confirmed that the Land Bank was supposed to
   have provided government with a turnaround strategy by 15 November 2005.
   It was due to their failure to do so that National Treasury decided to
   extend the guarantee rather than to inject cash into the Land Bank.


   Subsequently a couple of events had taken place, which had created an
   environment in which it was difficult to get the turnaround strategy
   ready. The Department of Agriculture wanted to have a clear understanding
   of what was happening at the Land Bank and had requested that the
   executive committee vacate the office to give them space to get a clear
   understanding of what was happening. Seven to eight weeks thereafter the
   executive committee was brought back in. Unfortunately, while they were
   still working on the turnaround strategy the CEO of the Land Bank
   resigned. Accordingly there was something of a vacuum and government was
   still waiting, and working very closely with the Land Bank to ensure that
   a turnaround strategy was completed. Currently the Land Bank was under
   the acting CEO who is also working on this strategy. Though the Land Bank
   was provided with a guarantee and an extended guarantee, the main
   condition for this was that they would still have to provide the
   turnaround strategy.


   The Pebble Bed Modular Reactor (PBMR)


   Regarding the Pebble Bed Modular Reactor (PBMR), the Committee enquired
   after the financial aspect of this project. When would the PBMR generate
   revenue? Current costs for salaries alone, in terms of the Adjustments
   Appropriation, were in the region of R 300 - 500 million per year.


   National Treasury noted that it had not been directly involved in the
   review and feasibility work that was done for the PBMR project. In very
   broad terms the feasibility assessment indicated that the commercial
   viability of the PBMR was very long term and depended on the PBMR
   becoming a significant international supplier of new generation nuclear
   technology.


   Partly because this was a project that depended on its becoming a
   significant supplier internationally, the intention had always been that
   the development of the project needed to involve an international
   business partner, or possibly several, and there had been a great deal of
   work on exploring the possibility of a relationship with an investment
   partner in the project. The R 6 billion that had been set aside on the
   budget for the project was a South African Government contribution, but
   there was as yet no clarity on investment partners and therefore the
   overall eventual ownership structure of the company.


   The project would not generate revenue for a long time. It was now going
   into a demonstration construction phase and so the full viability of the
   project was still to some extent under review. The project was still in a
   research and development stage regarding the full commercial viability of
   the initiative. The project, if all went according to plan, would begin
   to generate revenue in about four years.

   Research on Capital Spending Plans


   The Committee referred to a reference in the Annual Report to research
   conducted on capital spending plans in government and asked what the
   issues were that arose from this report.

   National Treasury responded that this was an initiative that had been
   underway for 2 to 3 years which had seen the development of a capital
   projects register within the budget office. This was quite a detailed
   exercise in terms of which National Treasury staff had engaged not only
   with line departments that dealt with large capital projects but had also
   been engaging with SOE’s and was beginning to consolidate the major
   capital projects and present information on them at their different
   stages of development, from the planning stage to procurement to the
   actual development on the ground. The data that was gathered was obtained
   firstly from the reports that were available from the different entities
   themselves, but trips and on-site visits had also been conducted. The
   purpose of this project register was to feed into the capital budgets
   committee of the budget office so that when departments came to request
   funds for additional capital spending, National Treasury would be able to
   determine the performance of these departments and decide accordingly.

   The Public Entities Governance Framework Review


   The Committee enquired how far National Treasury was with the
   implementation of the 2004/2005 recommendations for the Public Entities
   Governance Framework Review and what its impact had been to date.


   National Treasury indicated that the project had been completed and the
   review had now moved into an implementation phase which had several
   aspects to it. One was the collection of information and financial
   records of public entities which constituted an information base National
   Treasury was now able to draw on in extending the Estimates of National
   Expenditure documentation.


   There were also some legislative and regulatory aspects and the public
   finance management amendment process was still outstanding business.


   There had also already been amendments to the Public Service Act tabled
   by the Minister of Public Service Administration which followed from this
   review and there would possibly be further aspects to this.


   Lastly, National Treasury pointed out that various departments, such as
   the Department of Transport, the Department of Housing and National
   Treasury itself, had over the course of the last two years strengthened
   their departmental oversight capacity over the entities that reported to
   them and this too had been to some extent triggered and informed by the
   review.


   The Neighbourhood Partnership Development Grant


   Regarding the Neighbourhood Partnership Development Grant (NPDG), the
   Committee noted that it was a bit confused as to where it belonged as in
   the ENE it was located under programme 6 but in the Annual Report it was
   reported on as part of programme 2.


   National Treasury responded that the grant itself, as a flow of funds to
   municipalities, was included in programme 6 along with the other
   provincial and municipal transfers, but that the unit which ran the
   program was part of the budget office.


   Official Development Assistance (ODA) and the budget


   The Committee noted that in programme 2 one of the milestones for
   2006/2007 was improved coordination of ODA programming with the budget
   processes. The Committee enquired whether progress was being made there
   as it wasn’t sure where in the Annual Report it was reported on.


   National Treasury noted that this remained a challenging area. Although
   the ODA programme did not involve a large amount of money compared to the
   budget, it did involve a substantial number of country assistance
   programmes and a range of bureaucratic requirements. To align all of
   these with the budget was not easy and thus this was best regarded as
   ongoing work.


   In a further question on official development assistance (ODA), the
   Committee enquired what percentage of donor funds were actually aligned
   with the budget and were addressing budget objectives, and whether there
   were any further plans to ensure that donor funds addressed South
   Africa’s priorities.


   National Treasury noted that South Africa was in a privileged position in
   that the country was capable of funding its development from its own
   resources. In engaging with the multilateral institutions it was
   important to ensure that the integrity of domestic policy was protected.
   ODA therefore had to fit in with the framework of domestic policies.
   South Africa had not been willing to receive aid with ‘strings attached’,
   where such aid was not aligned with the domestic development agenda.


   Home Affairs


   The Committee noted that National Treasury had been involved in the re-
   engineering of home affairs and enquired the lessons learned and what was
   the state of financial management in home affairs.


   National Treasury responded that in general, support to departments
   related firstly to supporting them in preparing their reports to the
   oversight institutions. National Treasury provided training in this
   regard, which was valuable as long as departments sent the right people
   to the training. But in some cases this did not occur.


   Regarding Home Affairs and the lessons learned, National Treasury
   indicated the importance of leadership. If leadership did not focus on
   issues of administration, then problems were likely to occur. And this
   indeed was the case with Home Affairs. Policies needed to be implemented
   and administrated well and this was not the case for Home Affairs.


   The basic things needed to be done and done well in the case of Home
   Affairs. National Treasury worked with the turnaround team appointed by
   the Minster in this regard. It was however still too early to assess the
   impact of these actions.


   Correctional Services


   Regarding correctional services, the Annual Report indicated that
   National Treasury gave guidance to Correctional Services in the case of
   an efficient way forward for 5 new correctional facilities. The Committee
   enquired whether Correctional Services valued this assistance and whether
   they cooperated and whether there had been an improvement in the
   management of correctional services.
   National Treasury noted that Correctional services had also had some
   financial management problems, especially related to costs and contract
   management of the building programmes, resulting in delays in facilities
   getting built as well as delays from facilities being built to their
   being operational.


   National Treasury had played a role in ensuring that new facilities
   needed to be planned properly, not just the construction costs but also
   the subsequent operating costs. This had been a process of tough
   engagement but National Treasury believed correctional services had found
   it useful.


   Programme 3: Asset and Liability Management


   Turnover in the Domestic Bond Market


   The Committee enquired after the reasons for the turnover in the domestic
   bond market in the period under review.


   National Treasury confirmed that liquidity had improved from 8, 1 to 11,
   4 trillion, a 40.7% increase, during the period under review. Although
   this issue had not been dealt with in detail in the Annual Report, it was
   covered in the Budget Review. International investors had shown an
   increased appetite for domestic bonds. Their participation increased from
   16.5% in 2005 to 20% in 2006, when they purchased R 34.1 billion bonds in
   the domestic market.


   This trend was due to the upgrades that the country continued to receive
   in investment ratings, and which was beginning to attract investors who
   would not otherwise have been attracted to South Africa. Globally there
   had also been an increase in demand for emerging markets, though this
   declined subsequently due to increased volatility. But the probability of
   South African default had continuously decreased because of the increase
   in reserves and adherence to strong macroeconomic fundamentals. Thus
   there had been a consolidation on the South African market and the
   liquidity that was experienced by other emerging markets had not been a
   significant factor in South Africa.


   Management of guarantees


   Regarding the management of guarantees, the Committee referred to the R
   1.3 billion guarantee issued to South African Airways (SAA) at the end of
   March and the fact that this guarantee had conditions attached to it. The
   Committee enquired what mechanisms had been put in place to ensure that
   SAA did adhere to these conditions. The Committee referred also in this
   regard to comments by SAA in the media that it required recapitalisation
   to the value of R 4 billion.


   National Treasury confirmed that on the 31st March 2007 SAA had requested
   a capital injection from government but it was understood then that they
   were working on their strategy. Government decided that, instead of an
   injection of capital, SAA would be provided with capital to meet their
   current obligations and to satisfy solvency issues. This was expected to
   continue until the 30th September 2008. In the meantime there had been
   some discussion between the DPE, SAA and National Treasury in trying to
   come to an agreement with regards to the strategy.


   The Committee followed up by pointing out that one of the conditions that
   was set for SAA was that SAA would not compete as a global airline but
   would function as an African airline with global reach. The latter
   implied that international routes would be limited to key cities on each
   continent. The Committee enquired whether National Treasury was satisfied
   that SAA was meeting this condition.


   National Treasury noted that SAA had previously announced new inter
   continental routes but that they hadn’t taken on those routes. They had
   also withdrawn from certain routes. So in these respects they were
   meeting the conditions. National Treasury emphasised that what was
   transpiring with SAA was not something which would be happening again and
   again.


   Hedging by State-Owned Enterprises


   On the general issue of state owned enterprises, the Committee enquired
   whether any state owned enterprise had hedged any of their borrowings and
   what risks existed for government as a result of current guarantees.


   National Treasury indicated that it used to regard its liabilities as the
   area where the risks lay, but that risk now resided in its assets, and
   specifically in the exposure on the SOE’s. National Treasury had
   conducted various stress tests to determine the probability of guarantees
   being called and there was indeed some cause for concern.


   Regarding hedging activities, National Treasury noted that a treasury
   review had ascertained whether SOE hedge positions had in fact exposed
   government beyond a basic hedge position which sought to cover interest
   rate and currency risk. National Treasury could confirm that there was no
   SOE which had taken a hedge position beyond its core business mandate and
   the requirements thereof. The SOE’s were also clear now on the position
   of National Treasury in this regard.
   Mzansi Accounts and Retail Bonds


   The Committee requested National Treasury to comment on the Mzansi
   accounts and retail bounds and on the extent to which the public was
   participating in these two initiatives.


   Regarding retail bonds, National Treasury responded that, in gross terms,
   since the retail bonds  were introduced 2 ½ years back it had been able
   to raise an amount of  about R3 billion. About 1.5 billion had been
   redeemed since, that has been given back to the investors, since the bond
   maturity had been two years. But the majority of investors that had
   invested in retail bonds (about 65%) preferred not to earn interest on a
   monthly basis or twice a year but instead re-invested. For National
   Treasury this was a very positive trend as it indicated the willingness
   of investors to invest further rather than enjoy the immediate benefits
   of investment returns.


   Treasury would also be introducing inflation-linked retail bonds and had
   signed a deal with a major retail company to sell the bond through them
   as well as through the post office and the office of the National
   Treasury.


   Although the retail bond share (R 3 billion) of the total debt of R 550
   billion was small, the retail bond had actually had a great impact.
   Institutions and organisations were for example issuing instruments that
   were structured around the retail bonds. Most importantly of all, the new
   instruments encouraged and would continue to encourage more South
   Africans to save.


   Regarding the Mzansi accounts, National Treasury noted that according to
   the Financial Sector Council report for 2006 that was released recently,
   about 4.2 million Mzansi accounts had been opened by people leaving  in
   the Living Standard Measure 1-5 of the adult population. This number
   included the accounts provided by the Post Bank. If one took away the
   Post Bank accounts the number was 2.8 million. Treasury noted that at the
   same time last year the total number of accounts supplied by all the
   commercial banks including post banks was 3 million, so there been
   increase from 2005 to 2006 of about 1.2 million.


   The Mandate of the Development Finance Institutions


   On the Development Finance Institutions (DFI’s) the Committee referred to
   a review of these institutions and enquired whether there was any closure
   on the nature of their mandate. The issue was especially pertinent given
   the role these institutions needed to play in the development of
   especially the underserviced and unbanked areas.


   Treasury responded that it was happy to indicate that the first phase of
   the DFI review had been completed and a broad picture now existed of the
   current challenges facing the DFI’s in South Africa. They seemed to face
   almost the same challenges. However, such questions were part of the
   second phase where National Treasury would try to establish the nature of
   the South African DFI system, before it came up with a formal DFI policy.




   Programme 6: Provincial and Local Government Transfers


   Support to Municipalities


   Regarding municipalities, the Committee referred to information provided
   in the Annual Report on the financial management conditional grant. The
   Committee noted that at the end of the national fiscal year an average
   38% of disbursed amounts had been spent. Given that this was three
   quarters into the municipal financial year, the Committee enquired what
   Treasury was doing to improve spending performance by the municipalities,
   since this kind of challenge was at the heart of service delivery
   problems.  A further, related question posed by the Committee concerned
   the direct support provided by National Treasury to municipalities. The
   Strategic Plan had indicated that 157 municipalities were to be supported
   in the medium term, with an intermediate target of 50 for 2006/2007. It
   was however reported in the Annual Report that hands-on support had only
   been provided to 25 municipalities in 2006/2007. This issue required
   comment because again matters of capacity appeared to be at the heart of
   current service delivery problems.


   National Treasury responded that it currently engaged in a package of
   initiatives to assist municipalities to effectively spend the conditional
   grants they received. Siyenza Manje was one such initiative that provided
   direct hands -on support; the financial management technical advisers
   were there to provide secondary support as well. There were also DPLG
   programmes that supported municipalities. A further big initiative around
   technical capacity support was the 469 graduate interns that were serving
   in municipalities already for a 2 year period. So there was a critical
   mass of capacity support being provided to municipalities.

   A further means of support was the direct meetings and visits to
   municipalities to get them to deliver appropriate plans to ensure that
   they did provide reports to the councillors themselves firstly, and to
   move accountability towards the municipal managers. National Treasury
   believed these initiatives were beginning to bear fruit.

   However, it had to be acknowledged that in some of the municipalities
   there was a high turnover of staff. Because of high turnover of actual
   senior management staff there was a dip in the use of conditional grants
   and renewed commitment then needed to be attained through council
   resolutions.

   National Treasury indicated that the 469 graduates that were in position
   were in fact working in over 220 municipalities, so the target of 157
   municipalities being supported was actually exceeded if one counted these
   graduate interns. One also needed to understand that there was definitely
   a scarcity of skills in the financial management area. And to get people
   to want to serve a year or two as advisors and technical experts in some
   of the municipalities was a challenge that needed to be recognised.  The
   other measure that had proved useful had actually been to call the
   municipal managers in to account to committees of parliament and this had
   apparently really changed the mindsets of managers who were now eagerly
   providing reports and the support needed to track progress with reforms.

   Recommendations


     1. The Committee recommends that National Treasury provides more
        disaggregated figures in reporting on its attainment or non-
        attainment of disability targets.


     2. The Committee recommends that National Treasury, in future, provides
        more specific as well as detailed reasons for underspending of
        particular programmes. The Committee felt that in some respects the
        shortage of information made the annual report inadequate as an
        oversight document.


     3. The Committee recommends that National Treasury provide a report on
        Official Development Assistance (ODA) indicating both current
        amounts of ODA inflows and the policy framework utilised by National
        Treasury in determining whether potential ODA funding was in line
        with the objectives of Government.

                           MONDAY, 4 FEBRUARY 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

 1. Membership of Committees

     1) The following changes have been made to the membership of Portfolio
        Committees:

        Education
        Appointed:          Van der Walt, Ms D
        Discharged:    Coetzee, Mr R

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Report of the Auditor-General on a performance audit of
        official housing at the South African Police Service – November
        2007 [RP 252-2007].


2.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services Board
        on the Registrar of Collective Investment Schemes for the year
        ended 31 December 2006 [RP 250-2007].




    (b)     Report of the South African Statistics Council for 2006-2007
        [RP 238-2007].




    (c)     Government Notice No R.1228 published in Government Gazette No
        30601 dated 21 December 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1350) in terms of Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
        1964).




    (d)     Government Notice No R.1229 published in Government Gazette No
        30601 dated 21 December 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1351) in terms of Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
        1964).




    (e)     Government Notice No R.1230 published in Government Gazette No
        30601 dated 21 December 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1352) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1664 (Act No 91
        of 1964).




    (f)     Government Notice No R.1231 published in Government Gazette No
        30601 dated 21 December 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 10 (No
        10/11) in terms of Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
        1964).

    (g)     Government Notice No R.1232 published in Government Gazette No
        30601 dated 21 December 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No 3/628)
        in terms of Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).




    (h)     Government Notice No R.1253 published in Government Gazette No
        30601 dated 21 December 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1354) in terms of Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
        1964).




    (i)     Government Notice No R.1 published in Government Gazette No
        30627 dated 1 January 2008: Amendment of regulations, in terms of
        the Banks Act, 1994 (Act No 94 of 1990).




    (j)     Government Notice No R.3 published in Government Gazette No
        30629 dated 1 January 2008: Regulations relating to banks, in terms
        of the Banks Act, 1994 (Act No 94 of 1990).




    (k)     Government Notice No R.4 published in Government Gazette No
        30631 dated 1 January 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1353) in terms of Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
        1964).




    (l)     Government Notice No R.5 published in Government Gazette No
        30631 dated 1 January 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No 3/629)
        in terms of Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

    (m)     Government Notice No R.6 published in Government Gazette No
        30631 dated 1 January 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No 4/311)
        in terms of Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).




    (n)     Government Notice No 7 published in Government Gazette No 30637
        dated 4 January 2008: Listing and delisting of public entities in
        terms of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of
        1999).


3.    The Minister of Science and Technology

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Advisory
        Council on Innovation for 2006-2007.


                          TUESDAY, 6 FEBRUARY 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

CREDA PLEASE INSERT - T080206 – Insert 1 PAGE 143

2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159
    (1)    Consumer Protection Bill, 2008, submitted by the Minister of
         Trade and Industry. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Trade
         and Industry and the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign
         Affairs.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     General Report of the Auditor-General on the Audit Outcomes of
        National and Provincial Departments, Public Entities and
        Constitutional Institutions for 2006-2007 [RP 226-2007].


2.    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government
    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Local
        Government Association (SALGA) for 2006-2007, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2006-2007 [RP 9-2008].


3.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Ikangala Water for the year
        ended 30 June 2007, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
        2007.


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of Pelladrift Water Board for
        the year ended 30 June 2007, including the Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended
        30 June 2007.


     c) Report and Financial Statements of Bloem Water for the year ended
        30 June 2007, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
        the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2007.


    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of Amatola Water for the year
        ended 30 June 2007, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
        2007.


    (e)     Report and Financial Statements of the Overberg Water for the
        year ended 30 June 2007, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
        2007.


                           FRIDAY, 8 FEBRUARY 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills
      1) Traditional Health Practioners Bill [B 20 – 2007] – Act No 22 of
         2007 (assented to and signed by President on 7 January 2008).


    (2)    Securities Transfer Tax Bill [B 44 – 2007] – Act No 25 of 2007
         (assented to and signed by President on 21 December 2007).


    (3)    Securities Transfer Tax Administration Bill [B 45 – 2007] – Act
         No 26 of 2007 (assented to and signed by President on 21 December
         2007).


    (4)    Health Professions Amendment Bill [B 10D – 2006] – Act No 29 of
         2007 (assented to and signed by President on 11 January 2008).


    (5)    Public Service Amendment Bill [B 31B – 2006] – Act No 30 of 2007
         (assented to and signed by President on 11 January 2008).


    (6)    Education Laws Amendment Bill [B 33D – 2007] – Act No 31 of 2007
         (assented to and signed by President on 21 December 2007).


    (7)    Broadband Infraco Bill [B 26B – 2007] – Act No 33 of 2007
         (assented to and signed by President on 21 December 2007).


    (8)    South African Express Bill [B 14D – 2007] – Act No 34 of 2007
         (assented to and signed by President on 21 December 2007).


    (9)    Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 42 – 2007] – Act No 35 of 2007
         (assented to and signed by President on 21 December 2007).


    (10)   Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 43 – 2007] – Act No 36 of
         2007 (assented to and signed by President on 21 December 2007).


    (11)   Electronic Communications Amendment Bill [B 38B – 2007] – Act No
         37 of 2007 (assented to and signed by President on 21 December
         2007).


    (12)   Criminal Law (Sentencing) Amendment Bill [15B – 2007] – Act No
         38 of 2007 (assented to and signed by President on 21 December
         2007).

2.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Housing


          a) Housing Development Agency  Bill [B 1 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 76) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
             prior notice of its introduction published in Government
             Gazette No 30346 of 26 October 2007.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Housing of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
             Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
             Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.


     (2)    The Minister of Safety and Security


          a) Second-Hand Goods  Bill [B 2 – 2008] (National Assembly –
             proposed sec 76) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
             of its introduction published in Government Gazette No 30559
             of 14 December 2007.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Safety
             and Security of the National Assembly, as well as referral to
             the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
             of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.


    3.      Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for
        assent


        (1)      Bill passed by National Council of Provinces on 7 February
             2008.


               a) Choice on Termination of Pregnancy Amendment Bill [B 21B
                  – 2007 (National Council of Provinces – sec 76).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Defence

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Castle of Good Hope for
        2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 130-2007].


    (b)     Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
        Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Central African
        Republic concerning Defence Cooperation, tabled in terms of section
        231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


    (c)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of Understanding
        between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
        Government of the Central African Republic concerning Defence
        Cooperation.


    (d)     Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
        Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic of
        Gabon on Defence Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of
        the Constitution, 1996.


    (e)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of Understanding
        between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
        Government of the Republic of Gabon on Defence Cooperation.


    (f)     Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
        Africa and the Government of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau on
        Defence Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
        Constitution, 1996.


    (g)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government
        of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic
        of Guinea-Bissau on Defence Cooperation.


    (h)     Agreement for the Establishment of a Joint Permanent Commission
        on Defence and Security between the Government of the Republic of
        South Africa and the Government of the Republic of Mozambique,
        tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


    (i)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement for the Establishment
        of a Joint Permanent Commission on Defence and Security between the
        Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
        the Republic of Mozambique.

    (j)     Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of
        South Africa and the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO)
        regarding Naval Exercises in the Republic of South Africa from 28
        August to 10 September 2007, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of
        the Constitution, 1996.


    (k)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Exchange of Letters between the
        Republic of South Africa and the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation
        (NATO) regarding the Modalities relating to the Status of members
        of Nato’s Naval Group 1 Participating in Exercise Amazolo.


    (l)     Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
        Africa and the Government of the Kingdom of the Netherlands
        concerning the Status of Military and Civilian Personnel of their
        Department/Ministry of Defence present in each other’s territory
        for activities related to Military Cooperation, tabled in terms of
        section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


    (m)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government
        of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Kingdom
        of the Netherlands concerning the Status of Military and Civilian
        Personnel of their Department/Ministry of Defence present in each
        other’s territory for activities related to Military Cooperation.


    (n)     Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
        Africa and the Government of the Kingdom of Spain concerning
        Defence Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
        Constitution, 1996.




    (o)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government
        of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Kingdom
        of Spain concerning Defence Cooperation.


    (p)     Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
        Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic of
        Sudan on Defence Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of
        the Constitution, 1996.


    (q)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of Understanding
        between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
        Government of the Republic of Sudan on Defence Cooperation.




    (r)     Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
        Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic of
        Uganda regarding the Renovation of the O R Tambo School of
        Leadership, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
        1996.


    (s)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of Understanding
        between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
        Government of the Republic of Uganda regarding the Renovation of
        the O R Tambo School of Leadership.


    (t)     Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
        Republic of South Africa and the Government of the United Kingdom
        of Great Britain and Northern Ireland concerning Defence
        Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
        1996.


    (u)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of Understanding
        between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
        Government of the Republic of Uganda regarding the Renovation of
        the O R Tambo School of Leadership.


2.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

    (a)     Government Notice No R.69 published in Government Gazette No
        30703 dated 28 January 2008: Threatened or Protected Species:
        Amendment regulations, in terms of the National Environmental
        Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of 2004).




    (b)     Government Notice No R.70 published in Government Gazette No
        30703 dated 28 January 2008: Notice to repeal: Threatened or
        Protected Species: Amendment Regulations, in terms of the National
        Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of
        2004).




    (c)     General Notice No R.62 published in Government Gazette No 30716
        dated 1 February 2008: Regulation for the Protection of Wild
        Abalone (Haliotis), in terms of the Marine Living Resources Act,
        1998 (Act No 18 of 1998).


3.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Umgeni Water for the year
        ended 30 June 2007, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
        2007.

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of Bushbuckridge Water for the
        year ended 30 June 2007, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
        2007.




    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of Rand Water for the year
        ended 30 June 2007, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
        2007.


    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Lepelle Northern Water
        for the year ended 30 June 2007, including the Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended
        30 June 2007.

4.    Minister of Finance

    (a)     Convention on Temporary Admission (Istanbul Convention), tabled
        in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.



    (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Temporary Admission (Istanbul
        Convention).


    (c)     Response of the South African Revenue Services to the
        resolution of Parliament on the report of the Portfolio Committee
        on Finance on the  South African Revenue Services Strategic Plan
        for 2007/2008 – 2009/2010.


COMMITTEE REPORTS
National Assembly

CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORTS - Insert T080208-insert1 – PAGES 170-189

                          TUESDAY, 12 FEBRUARY 2008

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Transport

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Maritime
        Safety Authority (including the Maritime Fund) for 2006-2007,
        including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2006-2007 [RP 213-2007].




    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Cross-Border Road
        Transport Agency (C-BRTA) for 2006-2007, including the Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2006-2007 [RP 151-2007].


2.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Magalies Water for the year
        ended 30 June 2007, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
        2007.


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of Sedibeng Water for the year
        ended 30 June 2007, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
        2007.



