---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 03 June 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2008-06-03
---

TUESDAY, 3 JUNE 2008
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 15:11.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House, I shall move, on behalf of the IFP:

  That this House –


    1) notes that the horrific xenophobic violence which has engulfed parts
       of our country has left many of our foreign brothers and sisters
       homeless and in a very vulnerable state;


    2) further notes that angry residents near the makeshift tent camp in
       Corlett Gardens Extension, in Johannesburg, were angry that they were
       not consulted when it was decided to erect tents on an open piece of
       land belonging to the Gauteng education department, and proceeded to
       verbally abuse the displaced persons;

    3) acknowledges that the relevant authorities should have been more
       considerate and consulted with the residents before erecting the
       tents but the reaction of the residents was uncalled for; and

    4) pleads with the residents to be patient, considerate and to show
       kindness to the displaced people.

   VARIOUS SECTORS OF SOCIETY COMMENDED FOR HELPING VICTIMS OF XENOPHOBIC
                                   ATTACKS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms J M MASILO: Chairperson, on behalf of the ANC, I move without notice:

   That the Council -

     1) notes the heartening support and overwhelming positive response by
        many South Africans, including students, churches, non-governmental
        organisations, the private sector, media houses, artists and
        musicians, national and provincial governments, municipalities and
        even local communities, to victims of the thuggery and hooliganism
        that recently confronted many people of foreign nationalities in
        certain parts of our country;


     2) takes this opportunity to congratulate these institutions,
        organisations and individuals for showing the real spirit of ubuntu
        and African unity by providing humanitarian support, including
        shelter, physical support to assist those who were relocated and
        food to those who were placed in temporary places in order to help
        them and their families rebuild their lives; and


     3) calls strongly on African leaders and states to collectively seek
        immediate solutions to address the political, economic and social
        crisis confronting many countries on our continent.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                  MURDER COMMITTED BY BANGLADESHI NATIONALS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms K A KGAREBE: Chairperson, I move without notice:


   That the Council -

      1) notes the sad story of Nosipho Olebile, aged 28, who was killed six
         months ago by two Bangladeshi nationals in Rooival village in the
         Bophirima region, Taung, in North West and was buried in the floor
         of the Ikageng Café in the village;


      2) further notes that her grave was dug up and sealed in cement; and


      3) requests the Government to reconsider, revise and firmly enforce
         laws on foreigners.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 16 – Social Development:

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Hon Chairperson, hon delegates, hon
Deputy Minister of Social Development, members of provincial executive
councils, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, on Sunday, 1 June
2008, we marked International Children’s Day under the theme “Listen to
children”.
We have listened with our heads bowed in shame, as children of foreign
nationals screamed for help on account of what was happening – what we call
xenophobic attacks.

Speaking to us during the Take a Girl-Child to Work campaign, the girls of
Solomon Mahlangu Freedom College in Mamelodi pleaded with the director-
general and me to go beyond listening, by acting decisively to root out
this social anomaly. Over the past two weeks, I have moved from settlement
to settlement in order to better appreciate the situation. I have noted the
positive actions of people from all walks of life who have given their time
and resources to lend a helping hand to our brothers and sisters from
across the continent and elsewhere.

Ndithi kuni bantu baseMzantsi Afrika: Ningadinwa nangomso! [To you, people
of South Africa, thank you very much.]

Long after the aid has dried up and the tents have been folded up, the
emotional scars of this unfortunate turn of events will remain with these
children and their caregivers. Consequently, over the next few days we will
work with social workers from various provinces and organisations to ensure
that we begin to provide psychosocial support to these children. This, we
believe, will reverse the tide and build for us a more caring society, but
will not necessarily heal the wound.

This, we believe, fits squarely within the mandate of the department.
Together with the provinces, we remain determined to create islands of hope
amidst the sea of poverty that surrounds us. Our efforts have been
challenged by rising food and energy prices. To address this and the root
causes of poverty and inequality, we remain determined, more than ever
before, to ensure that our response to poverty empowers people to access
economic opportunities, while creating a comprehensive social security
network to protect the most vulnerable in our society. This is reflected in
both the Apex Priorities of government as well as in the Vote No 16
“Provincial Allocations”.

Central to the objectives of the Apex Priorities is the war against
poverty, which is anchored in quality education and health as an objective
measure of building a caring society.

Given that poverty has both spatial and gender dimensions, we have
allocated just under 60% of our resources to the largely rural and
impoverished provinces of KwaZulu-Natal, the Eastern Cape, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga and North West. We are also actively engaged in reversing the
description of poverty as a rural woman with a child on her back.

For us the passing of the Children's Amendment Act holds the promise of
reversing this picture and is the dawn of a new era in the care and
protection of children. To advance this prospect, we are relying on
national, provincial and local government, as well as all relevant
stakeholders, to implement the Act in a co-ordinated manner so as to
maximise the limited resources available. It was with this in mind that
last week during Child Protection Week we hosted a conference, “Getting
South Africa ready to implement the Children's Act”. We have allocated more
than R22 million to this end.

Over the past 10 years we have been progressively widening the safety net
for children through the care dependency, child support and foster care
grants. The child support grant has been fundamental to these efforts and
currently 8,6 million children are in receipt of this grant. A total of
R19,3 billion has been allocated to the CSG, which has been increased to
R210 per month and will further be increased to R220 from October.

The remaining challenge is the linking of social grant recipients to
economic opportunities and other public services and goods. Consequently we
are currently examining proposals to link certain child-related grants to
health and education outcomes, as displayed in the internationally
acclaimed programmes such as the Bolsa Familia in Brazil.

Integral to overcoming the effects of child poverty is early childhood
development. Consequently we have renewed our registration drive of ECD
places and centres. Already we have registered close on 2 000 ECD sites
during the past year. Going forward, we intend to register another 1 000
new sites by March 2009. This will bring the total to more than 12 000
registered ECD sites throughout the country.

In order to ensure quality education and reach the objective of ensuring
that every child in South Africa receives at least one nutritional meal a
day, we will subsidise 600 000 children at a minimum of R9 per child per
day during this financial year. Our ultimate aim is to ensure that our work
permeates the lives of the poor by also lending a human face to the work of
our government.

Such a human face requires of us to respond speedily and effectively to the
needs and requirements of our people. It is with this in mind that as from
the 1 June 2008 we have accepted all social grant applications from
potentially eligible applicants even if they are not in possession of all
the necessary documents. The South African Social Security Agency, or
Sassa, will accept sworn affidavits deposed to before a commissioner of
oaths testifying to, amongst other details, the names, age and parentage of
the child or any other applicant.

Since this will go a long way in giving government a more human
countenance, I take this opportunity to ask members of this House to assist
in their constituencies with the issuance of such affidavits because all of
you are commissioners of oaths. As can be witnessed through our programmes,
accelerated and integrated service delivery remains a cornerstone of our
war against poverty as in income support. Consequently, we will, amongst
other measures, accelerate delivery towards the alleviation of poverty
amongst older persons. In this regard, the old age grant has increased by
27% since 2004.

We are also working towards a progressive realisation of age equalisation
with regard to the qualification for the old age grant, which we will
implement as follows; 63 and 64-year-old men in 2008 once the law is
amended; 61 and 62- year-old men in 2009; 60-year-old men in 2010. I urge
all those eligible applicants to wait patiently until the Social Assistance
Amendment Bill is passed during the course of this year.

In the meantime, we will ensure that Sassa reaches the poorest of the poor
through the Integrated Community Registration Outreach Programme which
involves the participation of the Department of Social Development, Sassa
together with Home Affairs, Health, Education and the South African Police
Service. Our aim is to enhance the quality of life of all persons,
including older persons.

It is therefore heartening to note the success of initiatives such as the
Golden Games in the Western Cape. These initiatives will be enhanced by the
establishment of older persons forums in all provinces so as to provide a
voice for the elderly.

Hon delegates, family violence and child abuse continues to eat away at the
fabric which has bound our communities together. Together with other
departments in the Justice, Crime Prevention and Security, JCPS, cluster we
have enhanced measures to tackle family violence and child abuse. Our work
has also received the support of the European Union which has supported our
service improvement initiatives in the King Sabata Dalindyebo, Nelson
Mandela Bay, Buffalo City and the Lukhanji localities. These efforts will
be complemented by the establishment of some children’s homes and places of
safety. This will, amongst other things, ensure that children in conflict
with the law are separated from hardened criminals.

In order to deter young people from a life of crime and engage them in
community development we will launch the Masupatsela Youth Pioneer
Programme. These Masupatsela youth will form part of our broad National
Youth Service Programmes. So far we have also trained 198 young people as
voluntary assistant probation officers. I am pleased to announce that the
department has permanently employed 140 of these young people.

Our own studies have linked maternal mortality with childbirth and have
also indicated that currently there are just over 1,5 million maternal
orphans in our country. Consequently, by this financial year we will
improve the number of community-based cluster homes in provinces. This will
ensure that the likelihood of having to remove orphaned children from their
homes is minimised.

This requires added support to these households through the various home
and community-based care programmes. These programmes are beginning to
provide psychosocial support to these children. One such organisation is
the Ububele Community Programme in Alexandra, which has innovatively
partnered with the University of the Witwatersrand to train caregivers in
the provision of this vital service. In honouring the work of Ububele, the
department will scale up the model together with the University of the
Witwatersrand, the Global Fund and the German Development Bank through KFW.
All these actions, and those that are directed towards the upkeep of
children, are to be co-ordinated by functional community-based childcare
forums.

Unfortunately the pace of establishing these forums has been somewhat slow,
mainly because childcare skills at that level are scarce. We have
therefore, through the generous support of the United Nations Children’s
Fund or Unicef, partnered with the University of the Witwatersrand in order
to train childcare forum facilitators. These facilitators will be at the
frontline of ensuring that children’s needs are ultimately addressed at a
community level. The meeting of these needs requires that we have at our
disposal all the necessary information in order to make the right services
and policy choices.
In order to meet these objectives we have allocated R11 million towards the
development of a management information system for social services. This
will complement our long-term plans for welfare infrastructure in provinces
which includes the upgrading of social development offices in all the
provinces and districts. In order to address the needs of vulnerable
households we will have to attract, retain, and reorientate social services
professionals. Consequently, the implementation of the recruitment and
retention strategy for social workers remains important in realising our
long-term objective of building a caring society.

In the coming weeks we will finalise our negotiation processes with labour
so as to implement the proposed Occupation Specific Dispensation Bill for
social services professionals in the public sector. The finalisation of
these negotiations will enable us also to pay greater attention to
conditions of service for social services professionals outside the public
service. In the meantime we have already trained more than 1 126 social
auxiliary workers and supported 1 428 social work students in the last
academic year.

Through the bursary schemes, we will reach an additional 1 917 social work
students with a view of guaranteeing employment to 5 000 of them by 2010.
These initiatives have also offered us an opportunity to complement the
international work we have conducted in the context of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation, Unesco, and the
Management of Social Transformations, Most, Programme.

This initiative seeks to build solid bridges between communities, academics
and policy-makers in the social sector and the realisation of the
objectives requires at most, amongst other things, the strengthening of the
South-South collaboration. This has motivated us to establish the Social
Development Working Group of the India-Brazil-South Africa, Ibsa,
trilateral.

These collaborations will also strengthen and guide the proposed National
Anti-Poverty Strategy. The strategy will also address the multidimensional
aspects of poverty through government and society wide actions. Given this
multidimensional nature of poverty, we must also implement multidimensional
partnerships. Such partnerships require the involvement of all sectors of
society. This was our principal motivator in setting up the National
Development Agency, NDA. Through supporting projects directed at meeting
the developmental needs of poor communities, the NDA has developed
expertise in social facilitation and community development. Through
strengthening the institutional capacity of civil society organisations
which provide services to these communities, the NDA is beginning to ensure
sustainable forms of community mobilisation and asset management. Despite
these excellent examples of groundbreaking work, the NDA continues to
receive resources that are disproportionate to its mandate. I therefore
take this opportunity to recognise the efforts of the board and staff at
the NDA, and also wish to invite the donor and corporate sector to offer
its support to the NDA.

In conclusion, let me recall the words of former President Nelson Mandela,
who in reaction to the so-called xenophobia attacks said:

   Remember the horror from which we come; never forget the greatness of a
   nation that could overcome its divisions ... Let us never descend into
   destructive divisiveness ...

Budget Vote 16 reaffirms our commitment to ensuring a united democratic
South Africa and an Africa with a more human face which is emancipated from
the brutality of poverty and inequality. I urge all members gathered here
to lend their support to Vote 16. I thank you.

Ms J M MASILO: Chairperson, hon Minister, Deputy Minister of Social
Development, the MECs present, hon members, special delegates from the
provinces, senior management, ladies and gentlemen, the aim of the
Department of Social Development is to ensure the provision of
comprehensive, integrated, sustainable and quality social development
services targeted at vulnerability and poverty, and to create an enabling
environment for sustainable development in partnership with those committed
to building a caring society.

The budget of the Department of Social Development is directed at
addressing poverty, unemployment, inequality and related social challenges
facing the country.

In addition to the aforementioned strategic priorities, the 2008 state of
the nation address called for a national war room for the war against
poverty. The war against poverty should involve the following departments:
Social Development, Provincial and Local Government, Trade and Industry,
Agriculture and Land Affairs, Public Works and Health - and we also should
not forget to add Home Affairs to assist with documentation and the
antipoverty strategy.

Part of implementing the war against poverty includes fighting poverty
through reforms in the comprehensive social security system, identifying
households and individuals in dire need and putting in place interventions
aimed at alleviating poverty. It also calls for the development of a
comprehensive antipoverty strategy that seeks to address the needs of
vulnerable groups, namely children, women, the youth, people with
disabilities or chronic illnesses and the elderly.

The SA Social Security Agency has expanded significantly in respect of
social assistance, growing from a coverage rate of 2,5 million in 1994 to
cover 12,7 million in 2008. This amounts to about 3,4% of the GDP which
covers at least 28% of the South African population.

The select committee welcomes the large transfer to the departmental
entities, which includes R4,5 billion for the SA Social Security Agency;
R136 million for the National Development Agency; R105 million for social
workers’ bursaries for 2008-09; R41 million to the loveLife awareness
campaign; and also, in addition, transfers to social assistance programmes.
We also welcome the R8 billion increase by Treasury to the total budget of
R76 billion for the 2008-09 financial year.

The budget allocation for social assistance transfers increases due to the
policy shift on old age pensions as part of the retirement reforms. The
grant eligibility age for male beneficiaries will be adjusted from 65 to 60
years over the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework period as per the
Polokwane resolution and this year’s state of the nation address. This is a
long-standing resolution of the ANC on gender parity - viva, gender
equality, viva! Applications will wait until the Act comes into operation.

Mainly black males were excluded by the apartheid regime from obtaining a
retirement pension and protection against poverty. The legislation
acknowledges the strategic role that older persons play in society. The
committee is seriously concerned about the slow pace of the implementation
of the Older Persons Act which was passed in 2006, as the department says
they are busy with regulations. The significance of the Act is that it will
give the older persons, future and present, an opportunity to grow older
and live with dignity until their last days.

With regard to the progress report on then shortage with regard  to social
workers’ skills, the select committee welcomes the introduction and rapid
expansion of the Social Work Scholarship programme in 2007-08, which
recruited more personnel for policy development and legislation and
provided leadership to provinces on welfare service delivery. The
department in conjunction with the provincial departments initiated a
Social Work Student Scholarship for which National Treasury has allocated
R105 million for the 2008-09 financial year, and R210 million for the 2009-
10 financial year towards the National Student Financial Aid Scheme. In
2007, 1 428 students were awarded bursaries which amounted to R40 000 per
student per annum. Well done, hon Minister, for initiating this programme
to address the shortage of social workers in our country.

Concerning early childhood development, the select committee is concerned
about the lack of adequate infrastructure, sanitation and relevant
educators in the Foundation Phase sector, Grade 0 to Grade 4, after this
was taken over from the Department of Education. But the department has
improved on national parity to provinces by equalising the grant, as the
Minister has already said, by giving R9,00 per child per day. This is a
great achievement.

In addition to fighting child poverty, the child support grant will be
extended to children up to the age of 15 years. It should be gradually
extended up to the age of 18 years.

In conclusion, the select committee acknowledges the challenges it was
faced with during 2007-08 to date. We did not have the opportunity to do
oversight on the department’s provincial visits due to many pieces of
legislation before us. Legislation is the priority of the committee and as
a result our interaction with the department was compromised.

Ke rata go leboga maloko a komiti, segolo maloko a ANC study group ka maele
le tshegetso e ba e nayang modulasetulo wa komiti ka dinako tsotlhe tsa
tsamaiso ya komiti. Ke leboga Tona ya Lefapha, Motlatsa-Tona ya Lefapha le
badiredipuso. Ke a leboga. Ke tshegetsa Tlhopho ya Tekanyetsokabo ya 16.
[Legofi.] (Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[I would like to thank the members of the committee, especially the members
of the ANC study group, for the advice and support they give to the
chairperson of the committee at all times. I thank the Minister of the
department, the deputy Minister of the department as well as government
employees. I thank you. I support Budget Vote 16. [Applause.]]

Ms H LAMOELA: Hon Chair, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister, members and
officials from the department, in the past social welfare has been the
joint responsibility of government and civil society, with government
providing financial support to organisations through subsidisation. To
date, our democratic government is still faced with the challenges of
providing the best possible service to the poorest and most vulnerable
sectors of society.

The Department of Social Development’s main responsibility is the
development of policies, legislation and systems to ensure the provision of
social services to meet the socioeconomic needs of the poorest, the
marginalised and the most vulnerable. This it has to do within the
constraints of available resources, thus creating an enabling environment
for sustainable development.

Limited resources, no set timeframes to implement strategies and a lack of
partnership with civil society still hamper service delivery to a vast
majority of beneficiaries, leaving some people to live in conditions of
poverty and social exclusion, with our children suffering the most.

The Department of Social Development spends about 93% of its budget on
South Africans, such as the disabled, the elderly and children in need. In
the current financial year this will amount to more than R70 billion, to be
spent on approximately 25% of the population. However, there will always be
South Africans and also foreigners coming into our country, who will need
state support to survive. Like all human beings who believe in humanity
towards others, the DA supports this concept.

Voorsitter, stygende brandstof- en voedselpryse plaas dan ook ’n geweldige
las op ’n groot persentasie van reeds versukkelde Suid-Afrikaners. Die
impak van stygende pryse op hul begrotings is oorweldigend en die
verligting van armoede is geensins in sig nie. Die oorlog teen armoede duur
dus voort. Daar moet aanhoudend samewerking met alle rolspelers beplan en
voorsorg getref word om volhoubare verligting te bewerkstellig. ’n Groot
persentasie van ons bevolking is reeds deur MIV/Vigs geraak en genoegsame
voeding is van kardinale belang om herstel te verseker en armoede te help
verlig. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Chairperson, rising fuel and food prices are putting a severe burden on a
large percentage of South Africans who are already living in poverty. The
impact of rising prices on their budgets is overwhelming and poverty
alleviation is nowhere in sight. Therefore, the war against poverty
continues. Co-operation with all role-players should take place constantly
and precautions should be taken to bring about sustainable alleviation. A
large percentage of our population has already been affected by HIV/Aids
and sufficient nutrition is of cardinal importance to ensure recovery and
to aid poverty alleviation.]

The disabled in our country continue to be severely marginalised. Not only
do state doctors decide who can obtain a grant, but these applicants have
to be reassessed every six months. Many of these applicants, especially
those in the rural areas, still have to wait in long queues and in some
cases need to return the next day to complete the necessary documentation.

Epilepsy sufferers are hardly recognised for any form of disability and it
is simply impossible for an ordinary GP to ascertain their disability.
Rural applicants are even harder hit by this process.

The Care Dependency Grant can only be accessed by disabled children under
the age of eighteen years when the combined income of the parents does not
exceed R48 000 per annum.

According to the Children’s Act, a child is a child up to eighteen years of
age, yet a large percentage of disabled children, even after an appeal,
still cannot gain access to this state grant because the combined income of
their parents exceeds R48 000 per annum.

Disabled children under eighteen - and may I state that some suffer from
severe disabilities with very special day-to-day needs - should not be
discriminated against because their parents’ combined income exceeds the
guidelines set, but should be regarded as high-care individuals in need of
government’s care and support.
Section 28(1)(c) of our Constitution confirms this argument by stating
that:

   (1)      Every child has the right –


        (c) to basic nutrition, shelter, basic health care services and
             social services ...

View also section 28(2) of our Constitution.

Though contributions such as annuities, pensions, UIF and medical funds
paid can be deducted, hospitalization and medicine, etc, bought over the
counter cannot be deducted. I have often witnessed the needs of these
children exceed the combined income by far. I therefore urge our hon
Minister to please look at the revision of the means test for the Care
Dependency Grant, seeing that the needs of these children exceed the
combined income platform most of the time.

In my begrotingstoespraak van 2005, en selfs verlede jaar, het ek van
geslagsgelykheid in Suid-Afrika melding gemaak. Ek het ook genoem dat mans
en vrouens dieselfde behandel moet word, omdat daar geensins ’n verskil in
beide geslagte se behoeftes is nie.

Vandag is ek uiters dankbaar dat die regstelling uiteindelik in wetgewing
opgeneem gaan word en dat mans vanaf 63-jarige ouderdom spoedig vir
ouderdomspensioen sal kan aansoek doen, en ook 62-jarige mans en 60-jarige
mans sal onderskeidelik vanaf 2009 en 2010 kan aansoek doen. Hierdie
moedige stap word veral in die plattelandse gebiede met groot dank
verwelkom en die impak op reeds erg versukkelde mans in hierdie gebiede
gaan groot verligting bring. Baie dankie aan ons agb Minister wat stellig
’n leidende rol gespeel het. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[In my budget speech of 2005, and even last year, I made mention of gender
equality in South Africa. I also stated that men and women should be
treated equally, as there is absolutely no difference in the needs of both
sexes.

Today, I am extremely thankful that this adjustment will eventually be
included in legislation and that men will soon be able to apply for the old
age pension from the age of 63, and 62-year-old and 60-year-old men will be
able to apply as from 2009 and 2010 respectively. This courageous step is
warmly welcomed in the rural areas in particular and the impact on those
men in these areas, who are already living in abject poverty, will bring
much-needed relief. Thank you very much to our hon Minister who certainly
had played a leading role.]

Regarding the old age pension, many married women cannot gain access to it
owing to the fact that their husbands receive a state pension totalling
just R40 or R50 more than the required R43 704 per annum. In some instances
some married women receive R100 per month, as the husband’s pension exceeds
the threshold set.

I believe that much more is spent on administration costs, and I simply
cannot see this as a justifiable situation.

Vrouens, deur die jare heen, trek steeds aan die kortste ent en in baie
gevalle het hulle geen inkomste nie. Hulle is dus geheel en al afhanklik
van hul mans se inkomste. Is dit nie nou die tyd om vroue waarlik te
bemagtig deur toelating tot hul ouderdomspensioen, afgesien van hul mans se
inkomste, in geheel te hersien nie, al word dit oor ’n paar jaar gedoen?
Mans het steeds die hef in die hand en word gesien as die sterker en
dominante persoon in die huwelik of familie.

Monitering en implementering van wetgewing, en ek verwys graag na die
Kinderwet wat verlede jaar voltooi is, verg steeds baie aandag en die
tekort aan maatskaplike werkers bly ’n groot uitdaging vir die departement.
Alhoewel R105 miljoen aan beurse vir voornemende studente beskikbaar gestel
is, sal die oplossing steeds nie onmiddellik teweeggebring word nie. [Tyd
verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Through the ages, women still get the short end of the stick and in many
instances they have no income at all. They are thus completely dependent on
the income of their husbands. Has the time not come for women to become
truly empowered by reviewing their access to old age pensions in its
entirety, regardless of their husbands’ income, even if it takes a number
of years? Men still have the upper hand and are seen as the stronger and
dominant party in the marriage or family.

Monitoring and implementation of legislation, and here I am referring to
the Children’s Act that was finalised last year, still needs much
attention. The shortage of social workers still remains a great challenge
for the department. Although R105 million has been made available for
bursaries to prospective students, the solution will not be immediately
forthcoming. [Time expired.]]

Nkk N F MAZIBUKO: Sihlalo, ngibingelela iNdlu kanye noNgqongqoshe
abasivakashele namhlanje nabasebenzi bakahulumeni. Ilungu eliqeda ukusuka
lapha elisuka kuleli qenjana elisafufusa alivumi ukuthi kuningi osekwenziwe
uhulumeni we-ANC. Umbuso we-ANC kuphela onakekela izakhamuzi zaseNingizimu
Afrika. I-ANC kuphela futhi eyenza i-Freedom Charter ngonyaka ka-1955 iveza
imigomo yokuthi thina siwuKhongolose sizobaphatha kanjani abantu umangabe
senza imithetho futhi siphucula nezimpilo zabo.

Ngaphansi kukahulumeni wencindezelo ugogo wami, Ngqongqoshe, wayehola imali
eyi-R120 emuva kwezinyanga ezimbili. Umkhulu wami waze washona
engumantshingelana e-Union Carriage, e-Nigel ezama ukuthi abe nemali, kepha
ngaphansi kukahulumeni we-ANC ogogo nomkhulu bethu cishe sebezohola
inkulungwane yamarandi ngoba kuyaziwa ukuthi yibona abanakekela imindeni.
Ngaphansi kukahulumeni wamabhunu izingane zazingenawo amalungelo futhi
kungacatshangwa nokuthi kufanele zidle zithole nobisi, kepha kunele
kwaphatha uhulumeni we-ANC izingane sezithola isondlo lesi esibizwa
phecelezi nge-child support grant.

Ngaphansi kukahulumeni wencindezelo yayingekho imithetho eyayenzelwe ukuthi
izingane ziphile kangcono, kepha selokhu kwabusa i-ANC sesenze imithetho
efana noMthetho Wezingane ukuze izingane ziphile impilo engcono. Ngisho
nayo imthetho yamazwe omhlaba ebhekele amalungelo ezingane ebizwa phecelezi
nge-Convention on the Rights of the Child, uhulumeni oholwa i-ANC owabamba
iqhaza ekusayindeni lezo zivumelwano.

UNgqongqoshe usechaze kabanzi ngemithetho esiphasisiwe ebhekelele omkhulu
nogogo bethu ofana nalona esiwubiza nge-Older Persons Act, lapho
kugcizelelwa khona ukuphathwa kahle kwabantu asebekhulile – bangabhekwa
njengabathakathi njengoba kwakwenziwa ekuqaleni. Lokhu kwenziwa ngaphansi
kukahulumeni ophethwe i-ANC. I-ANC kuphela eyaziyo ukuthi abantu abampofu
bayanakekelwa futhi ibakhuthaza ukuthi bavuke bazenzele ngoba ngeke
bayithole behlezi ekhoneni. Konke lokhu kwenzeka ngoba uKhongolose kuphela
onakekela abantu.

Uma ngiphetha-ke, kungensuku zatshwala sizobe sesiphasisa umthetho owenza
ukuthi abesilisa nabesifazane nabo bathole imali elinganayo umangabe befika
eminyakeni engama-60. Lokhu kwaba esinye sezinqumo ezathathwa ePolokwane
lapho savumelana khona ukuthi nabesilisa bayayidinga imali ukuze nabo
basize ekondleni izingane. Yebo, khona abanye babo sebekhulile ngakho ngeke
besakwazi ukubheja. Ngethemba ukuthi bazosizana nogogo bethu ukuze izingane
zikwazi ukudla.
Lokhu kwenziwa ukuthi uhulumeni we-ANC uyanakekela futhi uthanda bonke
abantu. Umsebenzi omuhle wenziwa kuphela uhulumeni ophethwe i-ANC.
Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu speech follows.)

[Ms N F MAZIBUKO: Chairperson, I greet the House, Ministers present here as
well as government officials. The speaker who spoke before me, who is a
member from a small budding political party, does not agree that the ANC-
led government has done a lot. It is only the ANC-led government that
caters for the South African citizens. It is also the ANC only which wrote
the Freedom Charter in 1955 which sets out the principles of how we as the
ANC were going to govern when we are drafting legislation and making the
people’s lives better.

Hon Minister, under the apartheid government my grandmother received R120
after two months. My grandfather worked as a security guard at Union
Carriage, in Nigel, and he died whilst he was working there because he was
trying to supplement his meagre pension. But now under the ANC government
our grandparents are getting almost a thousand rand because we know that
they are the ones who look after their families. Under the apartheid
government children did not have rights and it was not even in its mind
that children eat and that they need to get milk, but soon after the ANC
government took over, the children started receiving the child support
grant.

Under the apartheid government there were no laws which were made to better
the lives of children, but since the ANC took over, we have passed laws
such as the Children’s Act so as to make the lives of children better. It
was also the ANC government which adopted the Convention on the Rights of
the Child.

The Minister has elaborated in detail about the laws that have been passed
such as the Older Persons Act which is about treating the older persons in
a dignified manner without them being labelled as witches as was the case
in the past. This is done under the ANC-led government. It is only the ANC
which knows that destitute people are to be taken care of and also
encourages them to do things for themselves because they will not get paid
for doing nothing. All this is happening because it is only the ANC that
cares for the people.

In conclusion, in no distant future, we shall be passing an Act which
allows both males and females to get the same amount of money when they
reach 60 years of age. This was one of the resolutions adopted at the ANC
conference in Polokwane where we resolved that even males do need money in
order to support their children. It is indeed true that some of them are
old therefore they are no longer able to bet. I just hope that they will
work hand in hand with our grandmothers to see to it that children get
food. This is because the ANC government cares and loves everybody. The ANC
government does its job well. I thank you. [Applause.]]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, hon Minister of
Social Development, hon members of the NCOP, members of the Provincial
Executive Council, distinguished guests, members of the community present
here today, ladies and gentlemen, let me acknowledge the presence of 20
learners from 10 local schools in our midst today. Their presence here is a
reminder of the heroic actions and sacrifices of the youth of 1976 who
propelled our country into freedom.

While traditionally we use this month to pay tribute to the youth of 1976,
we are also reminded of the challenges that confront young people today,
such as unemployment, HIV/Aids and limited access to economic
opportunities. We still have too many youth who struggle to get access to
educational opportunities to improve their lives. I need not remind you
that posterity will judge us harshly if we fail to break down the
socioeconomic barriers that prevent young people from reaping the benefits
of the democratic South Africa.

In 2004 I stood in this House and delivered my first speech as Deputy
Minister of Social Development. In the four years that I have been involved
in this portfolio, I have seen the remarkable contribution that we have
collectively made in advancing the social development agenda. Today I
present my last Budget Vote speech in my capacity as the Deputy Minister of
Social Development for the current term of government.

I trust that in the future we shall see a vast improvement in the
conditions of work of social services professionals, so that we shall be
able to recruit and retain them. I further trust that, through our social
developmental services, we shall be able to lift our people out of extreme
poverty and enable them to live economically sustainable lives, free from
crime, violence and social degradation.

Over the past years we have been hard at work and mindful of our
constitutional obligation and the social contract we made with our people
through the Freedom Charter. It is, therefore, fitting that Budget Vote 16
not only serves as a yardstick to measure our performance, but also to
consolidate the successes and lay the building blocks for the future. As we
take the last stretch for the current term of office, the major achievement
of the department is the provision of social security grants to over 12
million vulnerable people.

Social security has been and remains an effective government strategy of
poverty reduction. It represents the first foothold on the development
ladder out of poverty for many people. With the establishment of the SA
Social Security Agency, Sassa, the space has been created to attend to
raising the quality of services and we are hard at work doing just this.

The provision of developmental services is informed by the Integrated
Service Delivery Model, which is premised on the sustainable development
approach. The model further recognises the capacity of individuals,
families and communities to interact creatively with the environment to
utilise available resources in order to address their socioeconomic needs.

The acute shortage of social services professionals remains our biggest
challenge to meet the increasing demand for developmental social services.
Hence the implementation of plans for the recruitment and retention of
social workers, part of which is to improve the quality of social work
services and the working conditions. To this effect, the draft report on
the assessment of physical infrastructure is available and will be used to
develop a detailed infrastructure plan.

We will finalise the norms and standards for social welfare services and
the draft supervision framework for social work services. In addition, we
will implement the occupation specific dispensation as part of the Public
Service Co-ordinating Bargaining Council resolution. In the previous
financial year I indicated that provinces will train and employ auxilliary
social workers as part of skills development and empowerment programmes to
enhance the capacity of social workers. I am happy to announce that
provinces have recorded significant progress in this regard.  In Limpopo,
50 are currently undergoing training. In the Northern Cape, 98 have been
trained and are currently employed by both the government and NGO sectors.
In the Eastern Cape, 300 are currently appointed. In KwaZulu-Natal, 258
have just completed their training and will be placed in the current
financial year.

We will continue to work closely with the SA Council for Social Service
Professions to finalise the regulations for the recognition and
registration of child and youth care workers to bolster human capital for
social services. The backbone of our interventions in mitigating the impact
of the HIV/Aids epidemic is the home- and community-based care programme.
To ensure the provision of quality services, we have finalised the training
of provincial officials on norms and standards for home and community-based
care. The provinces will roll out the training in their respective
provinces.

In partnership with the Department of Health and the Japan International Co-
operation Agency, we are implementing a monitoring and evaluation system
for home and community-based care. The first phase of the system is
currently being implemented in KwaZulu-Natal and the North West province,
which will be followed by the second phase and the roll out to other
provinces. Last year alone, 1 579 organizations and 617 drop-in centres
were funded by the provincial departments. The numbers will be increased
this year to ensure continued provision of essential services.

As part of the capacity-building programme, 135 organisations and
17 084 community caregivers were trained. A total of 41 757 caregivers are
receiving stipends as community caregivers. In our endeavour to build Aids-
competent communities, we aim to train 500 groundbreakers through the
loveLife programme. After completion of the training, the groundbreakers
will be deployed as ambassadors in their respective communities to reach
out to other young people. We have been allocating funds to loveLife to
implement this programme and this year alone the allocation is R41 million.

This year marks the 10th anniversary of the Victim Empowerment Programme;
yet the nature of the violence that continues to be perpetrated against
women and children in this country is unacceptable. The victims of violent
crimes and abuse need appropriate services and support to restore their
normal functioning. To this effect, we have commenced with the review of
the shelter strategy to align it with the Victims’ Charter. In addition, we
will finalise guidelines on services related to human trafficking and
domestic violence.

The programme focuses on promoting a victim-centered approach to crime
prevention and is based on a partnership between national, provincial and
local government departments and civil society.
In collaboration with the European Union, we will be hosting a victim
empowerment stakeholder’s consultative summit from 18 to 19 June 2008. The
purpose is to strengthen the partnership between government and the civil
society sector in the provision of services. To date, 26 NGOs have been
assessed for possible funding through the Criminal Assets Recovery Account
funds.  Of this number, 19 NGOs were funded in the 2007-08 financial year
and funds will be transferred to four other NGOs this year.

Substance abuse has reached epidemic proportions in our country. The
increase in the abuse of methamphetamine, which is known as “tik” or as
“nyaope” in the townships, plus the number of reported cases of fetal
alcohol syndrome in the Northern Cape bears further testimony to this
phenomenon. Traditionally, the Western Cape is known as the province with
the worst record related to drug abuse, but emerging evidence suggests that
this is a national problem.

We launched the Ke Moja Champions Campaign in Franschoek with 25 champions
to assist in the implementation of the Ke Moja campaign. We also launched
the Ke Moja Hip Hop chapter in partnership with the Department of Arts and
Culture earlier this year. We hope that in and out of school youth will use
hip hop to spread antidrug messages among their peers.

All provinces are directed by the National Drug Master Plan to develop
provincial mini-master drug plans to implement prevention, early
intervention and treatment in a co-ordinated manner. To facilitate this,
the budget of the Central Drug Authority, CDA, which has a responsibility
to oversee the implementation of the National Drug Master Plan, has been
increased substantially to R13 million, which is a 57,2% increase since
2004.

It is encouraging to note that provinces have launched substance abuse
forums and that municipalities are establishing local drug action
committees in which officials and members of the community will formulate
local plans of action to combat substance abuse in their communities.

I am reliably informed that the Western Cape provincial department has
already established 29 local drug action committees.

Partnerships between government, civil society, business and vigilant
community members can prevent the substance abuse phenomenon from becoming
a national crisis.

About 150 members of the provincial drug forums will be trained in
substance abuse interventions in this financial year. I, therefore,
encourage provinces to intensify the fight against drug abuse through
innovative programmes using sport, arts and culture. I also call on the hon
members in this House to participate in the processes to ensure the
finalisation of the Prevention of and Treatment for Substance Abuse Bill in
this financial year. This Bill is meant to extend our interventions to
empower communities to take control as well as strengthen our treatment
interventions.

The department is tasked with the implementation of the Probation Services
Act, Act 116 of 1991, as amended, and has an obligation to provide early
intervention services and prevention programmes to offenders and victims of
crime at provincial and national level. [Time expired.] Thank you.
[Applause.]

Ms A N T MCHUNU: Chairperson, hon Minister, Deputy Ministers, members and
the staff of the departments, the Department of Social Development’s core
functions are poverty alleviation, development, care and protection of the
vulnerable. The IFP welcomes this year’s social grant increases as well as
the move towards the equalisation of the pensionable age. However, we want
the child support grant to be extended to all children irrespective of
their age so that their constitutional rights to good health, dignity and
education are not compromised.

It is a good thing that the hon Minister has agreed to adjust the means
test in line with inflation for the child support grant, so that the
government can reduce the extent of child poverty in our country. The IFP,
therefore, supports the Budget.

We, however, want to point out the following concerns regarding the
upgrading of pay points. The purpose of these improvements is to ensure
that pensioners receive their grants under humane conditions and that they
are not made to queue outside any hall to receive their benefits. All pay
points have to meet the national norms and standards in terms of the
infrastructure, ablution, seating, water toilets, shelter and security. The
service provider must also provide the disabled with wheelchairs, if they
need them.

Pensioners who receive their grants through the banks feel that they are
being discriminated against. They do not receive their money on time if the
payday falls on a weekend or a public holiday. For example, this year they
received their pension on 5 May, instead of 30 April because there were
holidays. This is an unfair delay, which further exposes them to cash loans
and desperation.

Development is gauged by the death rate of children under the age of five
years. According to the SA Institute of Race Relations Survey No 4 of
April, 2008, in KwaZulu-Natal, for every thousand children under five years
of age, 90 died; in the Eastern Cape, 87; the Free State, 87; Gauteng, 56;
Limpopo, 54; Mpumalanga, 76; North West, 66; Northern Cape, 50; Western
Cape, 38; and the average is 69. It is through these figures that we gauge
our challenges in development. Some people might say that KwaZulu-Natal is
getting so much, but that is because of both the numbers that we have of
people and also the death rate of children under the age of five years.

Coming to the plight of orphans and vulnerable children, OVCs, as we know,
the rapid increase of HIV orphans in the country has resulted in the
increase in foster care grant applications in recent years, and the
government’s policy of not awarding foster care grants to undocumented
orphans has come under the spotlight since it alienates many vulnerable
children.

We suggest that the government make use of traditional and religious
authorities to attest to the identification of vulnerable children in cases
where birth certificates and IDs cannot be found.

Faith-based structures and traditional leaders are in the communities and
along with the people, they are the ones who give guidance and counselling
to those communities who experience pain and suffering. However, children
with the required documents also struggle to get foster care grants as it
often takes long for those grants to be approved. Why should a child remain
on the foster care grant waiting list for three years? That is why the
number of children who are assisted by orphanages is not decreasing because
they are not receiving foster care grants.

The Department of Social Development is about leading people to social
development. We support the Budget Vote. Thank you. [Time expired.]

Mrs A N D QIKANI: Thank you Deputy Chairperson, Minister and Deputy
Minister, MECs, members of this House, officials, friends and comrades.

Mandiqale ngokubulelela abantu abadala, abathe bafumana uchatha
kwisibonelelo, into leyo etsho, yasusa ikati eziko. Ndithi, maz’ enethole!

I-UDM iyaluxhasa uhlahlolwabiwo-mali lwakho, Sihlalo. Kukho izinto
ekufuneka ukuba isebe lifake ingqwalasela kakhulu kuzo. Kusekho amasebe
asebenza kabuhlungu ngenxa yokunqongophala kwee-ofisi kuwo. Kwiphondo
leMpuma Koloni, eGcuwa, amasebe amathathu asebenzela kwindawo enye,
kwindlwana encin ane. Nangona kukho izihlomelo ezenziwe ngenxa-ngaphambili
okanye iiprefabs, nazo azaneli kakuhle. Loo nto itsho abantu basezilalini
baxakwe ukuba  bangene kuwuphi na umnyango, ngoba naba bantu babancedayo
ababaniki hoyo kakuhle.

Into yokuba abantu abadala bathathelwe amakhadi abo okurhola ngoomatshonisa
isaqhuba. Kunga kungakho enye indlela elungiswa ngayo le nto, ngoba
ayintle. Xa esi sibonelelo siphuma, ndicinga ukuba siya kunceda ekhaya.
Oonovenkile ngokunjalo bakwalithatha ithuba kuba amaxhegwazana ethatha
ukutya ezivenkileni zabo, aye athi xa eye kuhlawula afike ityala
lingaphezulu lee kunemali ayirholayo. Kwanga kungakho umthetho othi xa
benika umntu omdala ityala mabangagqithi kwisixa esithile, ukwenzela ukuba
naye lo mntu abe nemali agoduka nayo xa esiya ekhaya, kuba kaloku le mali
ayijongananga naye kuphela, koko ijonge nempilo yakhe. Lilonke i-UDM
iyaxhasa. Enkosi. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Let me start off by expressing a few words of gratitude on behalf of the
pensioners, who received a little more in their grants, which has gone some
way in alleviating hunger. I thank you!

The UDM supports this budget, Chairperson. There are things that the
department must take serious note of. There are still departments that work
under very difficult conditions, because there are not enough offices. In
the Eastern Cape province, at Butterworth, three departments are sharing a
small house. Although there are prefabricated extensions, there is still
not enough space. This causes confusion when people from the rural areas go
there for a service, as they are not sure which door to enter. Moreover,
even the people who are supposed to help them do not attend to them
properly.

Money lenders continue to keep pensioners’ pay cards. I wish there could be
a way of rectifying this situation, because it is not good. I thought the
aim of this grant was to assist households. Even shop owners take advantage
of pensioners who buy groceries on credit by allowing them to run up a
grocery bill that is more than the grant itself. I wish there could be a
Bill to set a credit limit for pensioners, so that they will have some
money left to take home, as this money still has to be used to take care of
other needs, such as health care. All in all, the UDM supports the budget.
Thank you.]

Ms M A TSOPO (Free State): Deputy Chairperson of the National Council of
Provinces, hon Minister and Deputy minister, members of the House,
distinguished members of the social development fraternity, ladies and
gentlemen, I stand here before you to pledge my support and that of the
collective leadership of the province to Budget Vote 16 as presented by the
hon Minister, Dr Zola Skweyiya. I do this firmly believing in the catalytic
nature and role of social development in ushering in social transformation.


Comrade Kader Asmal correctly captured the true essence of social
development when he declared, and I quote:


  If the Constitution is the head, social welfare is the heart. It is where
  many of the most basic rights which are enshrined in the Constitution are
  translated into reality.

The Budget Vote speech by the Minister articulates the aspirations of the
electorate, demonstrating an appreciation of the concrete social reality
faced by vulnerable groups and provides practical measures to deepen the
provision of developmental safety nets. In the province we have declared
that we stand ready to deliver as per the line of command given by the
Minister which reflects the priorities of the sector as part of the broad
mandate of government.
The department has made serious efforts to address human resource and
skills shortages which constituted one of the key challenges in the
acceleration of services. Greater emphasis was placed on recruiting social
workers and improving their conditions of employment as part of our
retention strategy which is currently in force.

The following successes were registered by the Department of Social
Development in the Free State in 2007-08. We started outreach programmes in
respect of access to grants and government services with all the
stakeholders, including national stakeholders, such as the Department of
Home Affairs and Justice.

In partnership with local government and housing in the Free State, we will
be building houses for older people, child-headed households and people
with disabilities.

One hundred and twenty five social workers were appointed, Minister,
because we knew that the majority of social workers were leaving the
profession because they were not happy with the manner in which things were
happening in the Free State in the last financial year.

All social workers doing fieldwork were afforded the tools of the trade
such as appropriate cars, cellular phones and laptops. In this financial
year 172 social work students were awarded bursaries.
Social work students who were unable to complete their three and four-year
programmes have been recruited by the department in this financial year and
have been deployed as social auxiliary workers. They are also encouraged to
complete their full four-year programme and supported by the department in
this regard. We do this because many of the students who drop out do not
have anybody to take care of them. That is why in the province we are
running a recruitment strategy to make sure that all social workers who
have fallen out of the system are brought back because, once more, the
University of the Free State is the culprit. Once the children fail, they
are not prepared to take them on board; that is why we have registered them
with the University of South Africa.

Salary increments for social workers in the funded nongovernmental
organisations was affected. Matete Matches, which had been a problem in the
Free State for a very long time, was upgraded and renovated in partnership
with Correctional Services.

Ladies and gentlemen, we have boldly declared an assault on poverty with
particular focus on children, adults and older persons. We have developed a
comprehensive service package to tackle child poverty and the following
deserves to be highlighted. We have increased our subsidies for Early
Childhood Development, ECD, from R5,20 to R9 this financial year.

We have also increased our subsidies in this financial year to day care
facilities who provide for children with disabilities. We have also taken a
position to expand services for ECD centres which had registered but were
not supported by government.

In the Free State, starting form the last financial year we are now
increasing the number of children from 4 000 who are supposed to be
subsidised by government and we are currently standing at 36 558 children
of the 82 000 children who have registered in our ECD centres in the
province.

We are also increasing the intake of children in facilities and community-
based programmes. Foster care backlogs were reduced in the last financial
year, due to the partnership we have with Sassa and the Justice department,
from 29 000 to 9 053 by March 2008. We are also planning to wipe out the
review of foster care grants, including applications, as we have developed
a strategy in the province with all relevant stakeholders. The partnership
with Sassa to create greater access to social grants is also taking place.
An additional 35 000 children will benefit form the progressive
implementation of the child support grant in January 2009.

In a joint venture with Correctional Services we will be upgrading
children’s facilities in the Free State as well as old age homes so that
they are conducive to the needs of the vulnerable groups in our province.
Our elderly continue to play a pivotal role in the continuum of care. We
are, however, obliged to reciprocate their love, and to acknowledge their
care and resilience in sustaining our families in the case of all socio-
economic shocks. Through the implementation of the Older Persons Act we
have undertaken to do the following: to increase the subsidies of service
centres from R37 000 to R72 000; and to fast-track the transformation of
old age homes to create greater access to the disadvantaged groups.

The introduction of the equalisation of the old age pension and its
progressive implementation will benefit 5 000 men in the age cohort of 63
and 64.

War against poverty is not a vocation, but a moral imperative that requires
coherent, persistent and aggressive effort. To this end, the Free State
will be launching its provincial poverty eradication strategy under the
stewardship of the hon Premier Beatrice Marshoff. Sustainable development
and livelihood, including youth development, will be the defining
conceptual features of our strategy.

We remain steadfast and committed to a people’s contract. The department
has developed partnerships with resource organisations and the business
community to accelerate service delivery. The department is beginning to
reap the dividends of this partnership and it has received donations in the
form of food, blankets, equipment and clothing which have predominantly
benefited community-based facilities rendering services to children.

Before I close let me remind you that the subject of social cohesion is at
the heart of the agenda for nation-building and social integration. Social
cohesion seeks to find the glue that holds us together when everything else
is tearing us apart.

The increase in the occurrence of incidences of crime and xenophobic
attacks are symptomatic of a weakening in the social and moral fibre of
society. We stand behind the call to build cohesive societies with the
capacity to respond to all forms of social crimes. In this regard we
pronounce our disdain with regard to xenophobic attacks which are a
reflection of the residue of a colonial mentality of divide and rule.

Hon Minister, let me once more assure you that in the province we have
taken the baton and are running the mile. We understand, as Comrade Mao Tse-
tung observed, that so many deeds cry out to be done and always urgently.
Let us seize the day and hour in unison with progressive forces to protect
and restore the dignity of the vulnerable groups.

Before I support the Budget Vote let me indicate that in the Free State we
are standing up to ensure that we deliver services to the vulnerable groups
of our province which we must be able to use as a show case that we are a
caring government; that is why our motto says: We are building a caring
society. And together with civil society and the private sector, because we
are calling them on board, we will be able to deliver on the objectives we
set for ourselves for 2008-09. I support the budget. [Applause.]

Ms K A KGAREBE: Chairperson and hon members, the Batho Pele principles
should be the cornerstone of the Department of Social Development in
respect of the lives of our people. Social Development and Social Services
are twin sisters. Their principles are so similar that nobody can separate
the two.

The UCDP agrees that everyone should be educated, trained and involved in
all these social developments. Rural people in the villages should be
exposed to training by experts who know practical work thoroughly. Society
must learn to create jobs after they have had training and follow-ups
should also be made. People must be trained in the type of projects they
enjoy being involved with and which they can do best.

The UCDP asks, “Where is Vukuzenzele?” “Tsoga o itirele.” [Wake up and do
it yourself.] It is not practised nowadays. Grants are offered specifically
to teenagers who have babies and who are supposed to be at school. Social
Development’s intention will fail if the government continues with this
system. The UCDP believes that receiving a grant encourages laziness among
our young people.
The UCDP appreciates the efforts made and supports the Bill. Thank you.

Mr J GELDERBLOM (Western Cape): Hon Deputy Chair, Minister Skweyiya, Deputy
Minister, MEC, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, I want to start
by acknowledging the contributions and sacrifices made by the employees of
the department of social development in our province. Without them, the
department wouldn’t have been able to achieve what it has.

I also want to acknowledge the stability created by the ANC government.
This stability has actually brought this change into our systems and it has
enabled us to improve the pace and quality of service delivery.

It is the first time that this department has been under a single political
leadership for four consecutive years. It is this stability that has
enabled us to transform the department, to the pride of everyone in our
province.

According to the Western Cape provincial minister of social development,
the department has reached its equity targets; it has a transformation plan
that guides both its service delivery and that of its NGO partners; it has
also set aside 25% of its transfer budget to develop the capacity of
emerging organisations and inculcate in them a new mindset of a nonracial,
democratic South Africa; it has received unqualified audit reports for the
past three consecutive years; it is the first provincial department of
social development to have a fully fledged monitoring and evaluation
directorate in place; and it has exceeded the BEE targets in 2006-07, which
must now be maintained. Their mandate remains that of ensuring a quality
service to the most vulnerable, enhancing delivery capacity, promoting
social cohesion and working with people to better the lives of the poor.

The department of social development in the Western Cape delivers on this
mandate through their support services, as well as eight key programmes,
namely children and families, older persons, substance abuse, disability,
youth, sustainable livelihoods, HIV/Aids and institutional capacity-
building.

In delivering on our mandate for the 2008-09 financial year, we are
encouraged by a total budget allocation of R1,088 billion, which represents
a growth of 22% in respect of the previous budget.

Certainly, when history judges us, it will say that an important part of
our legacy was that we worked with the people to build a legacy for
themselves, their children, their families and their future. This I believe
must fill us with a sense of pride.

During this term of office we took a conscious decision to make Early
Childhood Development, ECD, one of our top priorities. This is based on our
belief that an investment in the development of the education of children
from a very young age is one of the best investments one can make for the
future. It is our responsibility to protect children and to allow them to
grow up as children in a free, safe environment.

We are driven by a passion to provide quality education for children and we
will continue to mobilise resources until every child has access to the
best possible quality ECD provision, whether they are living on farms, or
in informal settlements or townships.

It is therefore with pride that we inform this House that in 2005-06, we
funded 568 registered sites, accommodating 46 337 children at a cost of
R4,50 per child. In the last financial year, we funded 841 sites,
accommodating 70 309 children, at a cost of R7,50 per child. I think that
is good news.

We thus reached a total of 75 528 children in the last financial year, and
we plan to increase this number by an additional 5 000 in this financial
year.

On child protection: Towards the end of last year the department launched
the Integrated Provincial Child Protection Plan in Paarl. This plan is a
partnership between our department, all other provincial departments, some
national departments such as Labour and Justice, as well as NGOs working in
the field of child protection. At the heart of this plan is the recognition
that people in the community are best placed to recognise child abuse and
neglect and to do something about it. Therefore, if we want to win the
battle against child abuse, it must be in partnership with the community.

Only if there are strong social networks in communities will children be
safe and protected. We therefore place emphasis on public awareness and
education, parent training and the establishment of safe houses at ward
level.

We hear that 2 billion people in the world are living in poverty, the
majority of whom come from Asia and sub-Saharan Africa. Closer to home, our
own communities are experiencing a crisis due to high food prices. Through
our sustainable programmes we address food security, income security,
social relief of distress and skills development to enhance employability.

In the last financial year we were able to provide a meal to more than
47 000 people. Together with the Department of Agriculture we will seek
ways to expand these initiatives.

To date, we have also funded various self-help projects throughout the
province. This ranges from food gardens, brickmaking, landscaping to nappy-
making. The highlight of the brickmaking projects is Khayelitsha Phakamani
Brickmaking, which produces SABS-approved bricks and sells them directly to
the community. In the past three months the project has generated R153 000
from sales to date. They are proud to have more than R120 000 in their bank
account.

In partnership with the Bitou Municipality we have supported a cluster of
projects with an average monthly income of R1 200 per beneficiary. We are
happy to have improved the quality of lives of people in Elim and
Swellendam. In Elim we are funding the Elim clothing project that supplies
overalls to Brady’s Construction, among other companies.

The tender for all municipal landscaping work in Swellendam has been
awarded to Swellendam Gardening Services, which we have helped to set up.
Both these projects benefit people who were previously unemployed.

I also want to thank Minister Skweyiya.

Minister, as ek dit in my moedertaal kan sê, u het ’n gees van passie
ingebring in Maatskaplike Dienste. Ek wil vir u namens die Wes-Kaap sê,
baie dankie dat u omgee vir die oues van dae, vir die armes, vir die
kinders wat dikwels onder baie moeilike omstandighede leer. Mag die Skepper
vir u nog baie jare spaar, en seënwense op die pad vorentoe. Dankie.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Minister, if I can say this in my vernacular, you brought a spirit of
passion into social services. On behalf of the Western Cape, I would like
to say to you, thank you very much that you care for the aged, for the
poor, and for the children who often have to study under very difficult
circumstances. May the Lord keep you for many years to come, and blessings
for the road ahead. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, hon Minister, Deputy Minister, comrades,
ladies and gentlemen, we are gathered here today to consider Budget Vote 16
of the Department of Social Development.

To really give consideration to this, one has to use the resolutions of the
52nd national conference of the ruling party, the ANC. We need to use that
as a yardstick. I am sure that the Minister would agree that to do anything
less would not do any justice to what we are gathered here for today.
Therefore I will start off by looking at the first and second resolutions,
which speak of providing a comprehensive safety net in a targeted and
integral approach to eradicate poverty and unemployment, as well as
creating a mandatory pension fund scheme.

I am sure that the new pension fund system would go a long way in ensuring
that many more people have access to their money when they reach retirement
age. This would further free more funds, which are now used for old age
pensions, to assist the poor and to create a viable safety net that we want
to see. This reminds me of what the old regime did before 1994. They used
pensions as a tool to tell our people to just sit in their little
“pandokkies” [huts], and not to get economically involved in the activities
of South Africa. This is the kind of discrimination that they have
implemented in this country.

We, as the ANC, in conjunction with our Minister, are saying no, we can’t
carry on like this. We need to do something. Once we have implemented this
pension scheme system, it will be a relief to government’s budget if you
can sustain yourself at the end of the day when you reach a pensionable
age.

The majority party also resolves to prioritise the welfare of children and
to develop services that seek to deal with child poverty. The new
integrated community registration drive of the department should give us a
very good idea of how many child-headed households there are, how many
children are caught in the vicious trap of poverty, and thus provide us
with accurate figures to work with. Minister, I am sure that your
department would then be in a position to react properly to eradicate the
scourge of poverty among our children in our country.

The Department of Social Development is responsible for the component of
early childhood development that caters for children between the ages of 0
to 4. In 2007 quite a number of registered ECD sites were registered and
the numbers keep on increasing, which is a positive thing. There are,
however, variations per province that point to the inequitable access to
ECDs that must be addressed, as per the Polokwane resolutions and the Apex
Priorities, as identified. Maybe, Minister, you should be looking at a
singular set of guidelines to which all provinces should conform, so that
our children are developed in the same way in all our provinces.

We also hope that the Minister will return very soon to report to this
august House on the role of the department in terms of the national war
room against poverty, as announced during the state of the nation address
earlier this year. I am sure that all of us expect the department to play a
central and leading role in this war room as at the end of the day this
particular department, under your Ministry, hon Minister, is the closest to
our people.

Despite government having adopted a developmental approach to social
welfare services, based on the principles of equity, sustainability,
accessibility and people-centeredness, the last 13 years have been
characterised mainly by the provision of social assistance. The massive
expansion of the social assistance budget led to the crowding out of many
social welfare services and thus an inability to reduce inequity.

The restructuring of the social development sector, which was partly
triggered by shifting the social security function to the national sphere,
resulted in positive developments. This sector has grown and is expected to
grow over the MTEF period. This provides a basis from which improved
service delivery to the most vulnerable can be ensured.

Given the growing budgets, the sector has to reposition itself to deliver a
comprehensive package of social services. Budgets and expenditure shows
that provinces have adequate resources to fund social services and are in a
good position to scale up preventative programmes, early interventions and
protection services.

I also need to commend the hon Minister on the just concluded agreement
with, among other things, the Association of Schools of Social Work in
Africa and the African Federation of Social Workers, with regard to how the
department could assist victims of the recent cowardly attacks on foreign
nationals in South Africa. Minister, please know that we are behind you
200%. [Interjections.] One must say that what has recently happened in
South Africa is something that we cannot allow and I think it is our
responsibility as public representatives to go out to our communities and
explain to them that these foreign nationals are our own African brothers
and sisters, mothers, aunts and uncles. It is our responsibility to do
that, and if we fail to do that we will be failing Africa at the end of the
day. [Interjections.]

I know for a fact that we, as members of the ANC, are going to embark on
that particular programme, but I must be very honest with you, I doubt
whether the DA will do it. [Interjections.] I have my doubts about that,
because “what is bad for South Africa is good for the DA”! [Interjections.]
That is their motto. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order!

Mr M A SULLIMAN: So I challenge you to go to the people and speak to them.
[Interjections.] They are also human beings. We want them to stay here,
because for all we know, your grandchild and my grandchild might go and
work in Zimbabwe one of these days. [Interjections.] Yes! Don’t say no. How
would you feel if that happened to your child one day?

This once again brings me to the question of pensions, and I think we need
to remind ourselves, we must remind ourselves ...

... wat het voor 1994 gebeur? Hulle het vir die blankes die beste pensioene
gegee. Die sogenaamde kleurlinge en Indiërs het so ‘n bietjie minder
verdien. [Tussenwerpsels.] [... what happened before 1994? They gave the
whites the best pensions. The so-called coloureds and Indians earned a bit
less.][Interjections.]]

The poor African people used to get their money every second or third
month! [Interjections.] This is what your forefathers did to our people.
That is what you people did. [Laughter.] It was only the ANC that fought
for freedom.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order, order!

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Dit is net die ANC wat met trots kan sê ... [It is only
the ANC that can proudly say ...]

... that we are a nonracial, nonsexist organisation. You can’t say that.
[Interjections.] You can’t!

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order! Just a minute
please, hon Sulliman. Can I have order in this House, please.

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Hon Minister, you will be surprised. We were involved in
the by-election some two weeks ago and all the parties were out in the
field canvassing. And we were saying that the Minister of the ANC who is
responsible for social development is now busy equalising the old age
pension. [Time expired.] Minister, we support your Budget Vote. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Madam Chair, it was just beginning to
become exciting!

I think it has been an honour and a privilege for me to be here today
because no contradiction has been raised as part and parcel of our debate,
which will most probably assist us to perform much better than we have. So
I will not necessarily answer each and every question; and we’ve heard the
points that you were raising.
The regulations, especially with regard to the Older Persons Bill, have
been finalised and the department is gearing up to delivery within the next
two months.

On the question of the infrastructure for the ECD, we completely agree with
you. Quite obviously some of it leaves much to be desired and I think we
want to do as much as possible to ensure that it does happen. We have laid
out R600 million to initiate an infrastructure plan and process which will
inform the infrastructure requirements.

On the question of the pay points, this will also be upgraded and the South
African Social Security Agency is engaging with various municipalities,
faith-based organisations and traditional councils to make available their
facilities for payment of social grants. I think we can rent their
premises, especially churches, and pay for the services that they offer us.
The delay in pension pay outs was because of the holidays and nothing could
be done about that. You know South Africans, they love their holidays. You
can’t force them to do anything at all.

With regard to children without birth certificates, if you had listened
properly, most probably from 1 June, that is this month, anybody who does
not have the proper identity documents to get a grant can go to the
department for that. Individually and collectively as Members of Parliament
of both the National Assembly and this House, you are commissioners of
oaths and can easily sign to certify that that person is entitled to that
grant. We will give that child, older person or orphan whatever they need.

With regard to child support grants I understand you are talking in
reference to the means test. We are working towards removing the means test
or in fact lowering it, I hope within the next three to four months. We
would then be able to ensure that the 2 million people who are not getting
the grant, because they happen to be just R50 or R60 or even R100 above the
means test, will be able to get it. We calculated that the number of people
in that category will be about 2 million or a little bit more than that.

Do you understand what is meant by “means test”? We are changing it so that
people who are not getting the grant at the moment simply because they get
about R50 more and sometimes merely R3 or R10 above the means test, are not
simply cut off. So, we are beginning to work on that. At the moment it will
enable 2 million people to get the grant that they are entitled to, but
later on, after negotiations with Trevor, we might be able to remove it all
- in the future, not now.

There are many things that we are working on which we have basically been
able to do simply because of the support that we received from the
communities, particularly from Members of Parliament and all concerned
South Africans. And for that we really thank you all. We have worked very
well together and I think we have been able to reach out to as many people
as possible.

I think one of the things which has not happened since I came to this
Parliament 15 years ago is that we have not been out there to see what is
happening, not in the cities but definitely in the rural areas of South
Africa first of all. Only when we do this will we be able to understand
what we are talking about when we say there is poverty in this country.

I remember when I first said this, many comrades thought that I was very
critical of the way in which we were working as government. But the reality
is that if you go out there as a Member of Parliament – don’t sit around
Durban, Cape Town, the Rand or Gauteng, get into the bundus; go to the
former Bantustans - then you will see the face of poverty in our own
country, amongst our own people, the people who sent us here and who hope
that we will be able to improve their lives. I think that is where it ought
to be.

Don’t only go when the Chairperson is calling you there, because you just
go and sit in that hall and after that you get into your car and fly back
and say you have seen the local people. Go there with your people; go and
talk to your church; go and listen to what the people are saying and then
ask them how they live under those conditions. Then you will be able to
work with us all to ensure that every child gets his or her grant.

It is not an easy task but I think in the process we have been able to
ensure that at least 12,8 million South Africans get a little bit of
support from government. I know that that money is not enough. You can’t
bring up a child on R200 a month. It’s just not possible, but at least it
does assist in one way or the other. We should therefore be thankful for
the efforts that have been made by this ANC government.

I want to take this opportunity to thank you all for the support you have
given my department and I in the past ten years in respect of social
development. It is my tenth year in Social Development and it is a very
long time. It is a very long time and it is a very stressful job! It makes
you old and causes sleepless nights sometimes. It’s not a nice job like
running around the world being a diplomat and all those other things.
[Laughter.]

It actually makes you think: What did we come here for, who are we, where
do we come from and where do we want to go to? I know many people don’t
want to be associated with poverty. We forgot how we came here, who sent us
here, and what we are doing here for our people in general. So, it has been
very stressful and I think the time has come for somebody to take over,
especially these young people around here. [Interjections.] I hope you are
not coming with me, because I don’t think I will be coming here next year.
But I want to say that you have helped; your comments and criticisms have
made us in the department a bit more aware of our duties individually and
collectively as public servants and representatives of our people.

There are many things that our people still want. It has been proved beyond
any reasonable doubt that you can’t get by on the grants alone. The
majority of South Africans are very proud people. In fact, when some of
them take this social grant, most of them maintain, “I would not take it,
hon Minister, but there is nothing at home. I would appreciate it if I
could get a job so that I can take care of my own children and not only
depend on somebody from somewhere whom I don’t know, who pays this tax.’’

So, the best thing that we can do is to ensure that we encourage our people
to educate themselves, and that they get more skills to make themselves
employable. It’s not easy; it’s difficult. It becomes worse for instance in
the provinces. You can ask the MECs there, they will tell you. Not all
provinces are like the Western Cape or Gauteng. Definitely not! So we’ve
got to work together to ensure that the services that we give to our people
ensures their dignity. We shouldn’t turn them into beggars; we should
encourage them to demand their rights. Sometimes it’s not nice to be
criticised, but when you find that it is true and it is the only thing that
person has and is dependent on, then you agree and accept the criticism.
I take this opportunity to thank you all for the assistance you have given
us here. I hope that when we come to your provinces next time we will be
able to see you. We will be going to Limpopo in July and all these MECs
will also be coming to Limpopo. Last month we were in North West, while
others were in Mpumalanga and KwaZulu-Natal. We are going to Limpopo, then
afterwards to the Free State to try and see what we can do together as MECs
and top officials of the department.

It’s not been a nice time; hard work has been the basics and that has been
done. But I would not have done that first of all had it not been for the
support I received particularly from the MECs themselves from all the
provinces. They have made a very wonderful team; they have been able to say
things and do things that I would not have been able to do alone. They have
really been true servants of the people and in this new phase they’ve been
soldiers of uMkhonto we-Sizwe, sacrificing everything that they could for
the benefit of our people. And more importantly, I thank the staff of my
department, both nationally and provincially, the director-general, his
deputies and especially the chief financial officer who has been looking
after our money in order to ensure that everybody gets what he or she is
entitled to; and, of course, the hon Deputy Minister.

You have been a wonderful team and as I leave to become an ordinary South
African for the first time, not a Member of Parliament, just ...
Ndibe ngumntu nje ... [... an ordinary citizen ...]

... I would be very pleased to know that I can rest. I don’t have to wake
up in the middle of the night and say, “Oh my God, there are children in
North West whom I saw today and I don’t know what’s going to happen to
them”. Leave that to somebody else; a young man or woman who will be able
to run around - not in cars and all these other things - and do the work
that he or she is supposed to do.

Ndithi kuni, nonke nangamso; ningadinwa. Anga uNkulunkulu anganani. [I
thank you all for what you have done for me; may you do it to others as
well. May the Almighty Lord be with you all.]

God bless you all. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): That concludes the
debate. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the hon Dr Skweyiya
and the Deputy Minister, Dr Jean Swanson-Jacobs for their comprehensive and
informative contribution to the debate. In the same breath I would like to
welcome the hon Deputy Minister of Home Affairs, hon Gigaba, to this
plenary and thank you for honouring us with your presence. Thank you.

                    FILMS AND PUBLICATIONS AMENDMENT BILL
                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, they say I must carry on where I stopped in
the previous debate but I don’t think it will be right. The Films and
Publications Amendment Bill that is before us today, is a piece of
legislation that has been with us since June last year, which is quite a
long time.

I still remember that if I am not mistaken the Deputy Minister was present
when we had our first briefing somewhere in September. So we had to sit
down and work out a proper plan as to how to approach this piece of
legislation. On many occasions we are accused of just trying to push
legislation through to Parliament but one can testify here today that we
have thoroughly scrutinised this piece of legislation.

We had public hearings on this Bill, we had submissions from various
stakeholders and we even had some legal opinion from an advocate who came
to assist us on this particular piece of legislation. We conducted
workshops and we deliberated on the Bill, and so forth. So we have spent
quality time in order to deal with the Films and Publications Amendment
Bill.

This piece of legislation is very important because the purpose of this
Bill is in actual fact to amend the Films and Publications Act, Act 65 of
1996. If one looks at what is really going on in South Africa and
throughout the world with regard to pornography and all the kinds of sex-
related matters, we had to come up with legislation in order to put some
control mechanisms in place. This is what this Bill is basically doing.

There will be a board and a tribunal that will deal with certain complaints
and so forth. There were threats at times when people said that this
particular piece of legislation is unconstitutional. But I am sure we have
a responsibility to our children in this country. We can’t leave things as
they are. Things are really getting out of hand.

I am not going to go into detail with this particular piece of legislation,
but I must say that the select committee came up with quite a number of
proposed amendments to this particular Bill. So we hope and trust that this
august House will approve this Bill and it will then go back to the
National Assembly. I thank you very much.

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): I shall now put the
question and the question is that the Bill, subject to the proposed
amendments, be agreed to. In accordance with Rule 63 I shall first allow
political parties the opportunity to make their declaration of vote if they
so wish. There are none.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. Those in favour will
say aye and those against will say “No”. I think the “Ayes” have it. The
majority of members have voted in favour and I therefore declare the Bill
subject to the proposed amendments agreed to.
Bill, subject to proposed amendments, agreed to in accordance with section
75 of the Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 17:01.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                             MONDAY, 2 JUNE 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.          Introduction of Bills

     (1)    The Minister of Finance
          a) Special Pensions Amendment Bill [B 29 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
             prior notice of its introduction published in Government
             Gazette No 31046 of 9 May 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Finance of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
             Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
             Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)    Higher Education Amendment Bill, 2008, submitted by the Minister
         of Education. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Education and
         the Select Committee on Education and Recreation.

    (2)    National Qualifications Framework Bill, 2008, submitted by the
         Minister of Education. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Education and the Select Committee on Education and Recreation.

    (3)    General and Further Education and Training Quality Assurance
         Amendment Bill, 2008, submitted by the Minister of Education.
         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Education and the Select
         Committee on Education and Recreation.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

Report of the Parliamentary Oversight Authority on “Facilities for Members
of the National Assembly and Permanent Delegates to the National Council of
Provinces” (generally referred to as L19), dated 21 May 2008.

REPORT OF THE PARLIAMENTARY OVERSIGHT AUTHORITY

The Parliamentary Oversight Authority having considered proposed amendments
to “Facilities for Members of the National Assembly and Permanent Delegates
to the National Council of Provinces” (generally referred to as L19) on 21
May 2008 recommends for adoption by the Houses the following amended policy
to replace the existing policy:-

   1. AIR JOURNEYS

(1)   (a)   A member (including her/his spouse or companion) is entitled to
           undertake the following air journeys in the economy class per
           financial year (1 April to 31 March of any year) on any sector
           of the national internal airline services at the expense of
           Parliament.


              i) Members resident in the Western Cape whose constituency
                 offices are in Cape Town – 54 single air journeys.
       ii) All other members – 78 single air journeys.

      (b)   The following members (including their spouse companion) are
           entitled to travel in business class:

            i) Members with 10 or more collective year’s legislative and
               parliamentary service; and
           ii) Members who are 70 years and older.

      (c)   If there are no seats available in the economy class when a
           booking is made a member may upgrade to the business class upon
           payment of the cost of the additional airfare.  The member may
           then claim 80% of the additional payment back from the Secretary
           to Parliament (Secretary).  The airline or travel bureau
           concerned must certify that the economy class was fully booked.
           A maximum of 4 single air journeys of the combined total quota
           per financial year of a member and her/his spouse or companion
           and the other registered persons who are entitled to travel
           facilities, may be used for this purpose.

      (d)   A member may upgrade to the business class the tickets to which
           she/he or her/his spouse/companion, dependant, parent or parent-
           in-law is entitled (even when there are seats available in the
           economy class) upon payment of the cost of the additional
           airfare.

(2)   Each dependant (see paragraph 10) of a member is entitled to
      undertake 12 single economy class air journeys per financial year. A
      journey undertaken by -
      (a)   a dependant under the age of 2 years will be counted as one
           fifth of an air journey; and

        b) a dependant over the age of 2 years but under the age of 12 years
           will be counted as half an air journey.

(3)   A member may use any number of her/his quota per financial year of
      air journeys for travelling by her/his registered companion, spouse or
      dependant.


   4) Birth certificates must be submitted with all dependant’s
      applications.

   5) Affidavits must be submitted during each financial year to confirm
      that a dependant is, or remains, a direct dependant.

   6) The parent or parent-in-law of a member who is wholly dependent upon
      her/him and is regularly maintained by her/him─

      (a)   is entitled to 2 single economy class air journeys per
         financial year if the total monthly income of that parent or
         parent-in-law does not exceed the amount of the current old-age
         pension; or

        b) may use 2 of the member's quota of air journeys per financial
           year if the total monthly income of that parent or parent-in-law
           exceeds the amount of the current old-age pension.


        c) Either of the 2 parents or current parents-in-law may be
           registered for this purpose.  A Member will only be entitled to
           register two persons per financial year.
        d) A parent’s/parent-in-law’s travel facilities will be limited to
           journeys from the member’s or the parent’s/parent-in-law’s home
           base to Cape Town and back.

(7)   Travel facilities for dependants, parents/parents-in-law and former
      members for the purposes referred to in paragraph 9(3), must be
      applied for at the Finance Section.

(8)   Air journeys will only be reinstated for unused or lost air tickets
      when the Finance Section receives the refund from the travel bureau or
      airline concerned.

2.    JOURNEYS BY TRAIN

   1) A member, her/his spouse or companion, dependant, parent or parent-in-
      law may use a single air journey for a single train journey. Each
      train journey is offset against the quota per financial year of air
      journeys. Single air journeys may be used to travel by luxury train if
      the member pays the difference between the fare by air over the same
      route and the fare by luxury train.

(2)   Members must pay the full cost of the luxury train fare and claim the
      cost of the equivalent air journey from the Finance Section on
      production of proof of travel

(3)         (a)  When a member travels alone, a journey by train may be
      undertaken in a coupé reserved for the member. The surcharge is
      payable by the Secretary.

        b) When a member is accompanied by her/his spouse or companion, a
           journey by train may be undertaken in a compartment reserved for
           the couple. The surcharge is payable by the Secretary.
3.    JOURNEYS BY BUS

      A member, her/his spouse or companion, dependant, parent or parent-in-
      law may use a single air journey for a single bus journey. Each bus
      journey is offset against the quota per financial year of air
      journeys.

4.    JOURNEYS BY MOTOR VEHICLE

(1)   If a member or her/his spouse or companion, dependant, parent or
      parent-in-law travels by motor vehicle, the member is reimbursed for
      the full cost of the journey via the shortest route, at the higher of
      the AA rate or the government rate per km, provided it works out
      cheaper or the same as a journey between Cape Town and the member’s
      registered home/constituency base.  Each such journey is offset
      against the quota per financial year of air journeys.

   2) A claim for such a journey must be accompanied by acceptable proof of
      the journey (for example, petrol slips, tollgate slips or proof of
      other expenditure in connection with the journey).


   3) A member who travels a distance of more than 800km between Cape Town
      and his/her registered home/constituency base is entitled to overnight
      accommodation on route to a maximum of R950 per night dinner bed and
      breakfast

5.    DAILY COMMUTING

(1)   A member who commutes daily between her/his place of residence and
      Cape Town during the period that there are parliamentary sittings, is
      reimbursed at the higher of the AA rate or the government rate per km
      for the distance travelled in excess of 30 kilometres return per day.

(2)   A member must register her/his place of residence for this facility.


(3)   Claims for daily commuting must be submitted within 3 months of the
      journey. Claims for the period January to March of any year must be
      submitted before 10 April of that year.

6.    TRAVELLING TO AND FROM AIRPORTS

(1)   A member is reimbursed for expenditure incurred with regard to
      travelling by her/him or her/his spouse or companion, dependant,
      parent or parent-in-law between her/his home base/constituency base or
      residence and the nearest airport for an air journey referred to in
      paragraph 1, and between her/his place of residence in Cape Town and
      Cape Town International Airport, as follows:

      (a)   If the journey is undertaken by private motor vehicle and the
         motor vehicle is parked at the airport, at the higher of the AA
         rate or the government rate per km for the distance between
         her/his home base/constituency base or place of residence and the
         nearest airport;

      (b)   if the journey is undertaken by private motor vehicle to
         transport the member or her/his spouse or companion, dependant,
         parent or parent-in-law to the airport, or to fetch such person,
         at the higher of the AA rate or the government rate per km for the
         distance between her/his home base/constituency base or place of
         residence to the nearest airport and back to the home
         base/constituency base or place of residence; and
      (c)   the journey is undertaken by public transport or taxi, the
         actual cost of such journey, provided it is reasonable and
         competitive.

(2)   A member must submit the relevant boarding pass together with any
      claim for travelling to and from an airport, as well as acceptable
      proof of the journey (for example, petrol slips, tollgate slips or
      proof of other expenditure in connection with the journey), for
      kilometre claims in excess of 400 km.

(3)   Claims for travelling to and from airports must be submitted within 3
      months. Claims for the period January to March of any year must be
      submitted before 10 April of that year.

7.    PARKING AT AIRPORT

      A member is reimbursed for airport parking to a maximum of R1500 per
      month.

8.    CONVEYING OF MOTOR VEHICLES

(1)   A member may once per financial year transport or drive her/his motor
      vehicle between her/his home base/constituency base and Cape Town and
      back at the cost of the Secretary. Such a journey is not offset
      against her/his quota per financial year of air journeys.  If the
      distance exceeds 800km, the member is entitled to overnight
      accommodation on route to a maximum of R950 per night dinner bed and
      breakfast

(2)   If the vehicle is transported, the member is reimbursed for the
      actual cost.  The claim must be accompanied by an invoice.
(3)   If the vehicle is driven, the member is reimbursed at the higher of
      the AA rate or the government rate per km for the distance via the
      shortest route.  Acceptable proof of the journey (for example, petrol
      slips, tollgate slips or proof of other expenditure in connection with
      the journey) must be submitted.

(4)   A member may during the Easter and July recess periods and each
      intermediate recess of longer than 6 weeks transport her/his motor
      vehicle from Cape Town to her/his home base/constituency base and
      back, each such railing to be offset against the member’s quota per
      financial year of air journeys.

(5)   The cost of any additional transportation of a motor vehicle will be
      offset against a member's quota per financial year of air journeys. If
      the cost of additional transportation is more than the cost of an air
      journey over the same distance, the member must pay the extra cost.

9.    RELOCATION COSTS

(1)   A person who has to relocate to the Cape Town area when elected or
      appointed to Parliament, and a person who is not re-elected or re-
      appointed after an election and has to relocate to her/his home base,
      may transport her/his belongings to Cape Town or to her/his home base,
      whichever is applicable, by─

        a) using a Spoornet mini-container at the Secretary’s cost; or


        b) making use of a removal company at the Secretary’s cost to a
           maximum of R15 925.

(2)   If a removal company is to be used, three quotations must be
      submitted.  Payment is made directly to the service provider.  No
      money will be paid to a member.

(3)   A person who is not re-elected or re-appointed after an election, is
      entitled to one return flight between her/his home base and Cape Town
      to enable her/him to pack and make arrangements for the removal of
      her/his belongings to her/his home base.

(4)   Payment for relocation costs, including the return flight referred to
      in subparagraph (3), will only be considered if a claim is submitted
      within 3 months of election or appointment or termination of
      membership, whichever is applicable.

(5)   A person who has to relocate to Cape Town on becoming a member for
      the first time may, instead of making use of the R15 925 relocation
      facility, choose to be paid an establishment fee of R13 310 with which
      to purchase household goods.  A member with 10 years service who is re-
      elected or re-appointed is entitled to a further R5 000 for
      replacement of household goods.

(6)   Members will be reimbursed on submission of paid invoices, or the
      Secretary will pay suppliers directly, on submission of invoices.

10.   DEFINITION OF MEMBER'S DEPENDANT


      The following persons are recognised as a member's dependants for the
      purposes of travel facilities:

(1)   A member's─
      (a)   child, stepchild, legally adopted child and ward of court; and

      (b)   grandchild, niece or nephew who permanently resides with the
         member and is regularly maintained by him/her,
      who-
          i) is under the age of 18 years,
       ii) is unmarried,
      iii) does not receive a regular monthly income, grant or allowance in
           excess of the amount of the current disability grant.

(2)   A member's─

      (a)   child, stepchild, legally adopted child and ward of court; and

      (b)   grandchild, niece or nephew who permanently resides with the
         member and is regularly supported by him/her,

         who─

      (i)   is over the age of 18 years but not over the age of 27 years,
          ii) is unmarried,
         iii) is studying full-time at a recognised secondary or tertiary
              institution;
          iv) does not receive a regular income, grant or allowance in
              excess of the amount of the current disability grant; and
           v) is recognised by the Speaker: NA or the Chairperson: NCOP,
              respectively, as a dependant of the member for periods not
              exceeding 12 months at a time.

      (c)   The number of dependants of a member in this category is limited
         to 5.  However, the Secretary may on request of a member increase
         this limit.

(3)   A member's─

      (a)   child, stepchild, legally adopted child and ward of court; and

      (b)   grandchild, niece or nephew who permanently resides with
         him/her and is regularly supported by him/her,

         who─

      (i)   is over the age of 18 years,

      (ii)  owing to mental or physical disability, does not receive a
              regular income, grant or allowance in excess of the amount of
              the current disability grant; and

      (iii) is recognised by the Speaker: NA or the Chairperson: NCOP,
              respectively, as a dependant of the member for periods of 12
              months at a time.


11.   REGISTER OF PERSONS OTHER THAN MEMBERS WHO ARE ENTITLED TO TRAVEL
      FACILITIES
(1)   A member must register the name of her/his spouse or companion,
      dependant, parent or parent-in-law in a register kept by the
      Secretary.

(2)   A member may register more than one spouse for the purposes of travel
      facilities.

(3)   A member may register only one companion for the purposes of travel
      facilities.

(4)   A member may not register a spouse(s) as well as a companion.

(5)   A member must inform the Secretary of any change in the status of a
      person registered for the purpose of travel facilities that might
      affect that person's entitlement to the use of travel facilities.

12.   GENERAL CONDITIONS RELATING TO UTILISATION OF TRAVEL FACILITIES

(1)   A member's spouse or companion, dependant, parent or parent-in-law is
      entitled only to the travel facilities specifically allocated as set
      out above.

(2)   If a member registers her/his parent/parent-in-law as a companion,
      this does not exclude that person from any other specific facilities
      to which she/he may be entitled in terms of these rules.

(3)   A member is required to register a "home base" as well as a
      "constituency base" for the purposes of travel facilities. An
      application for the registration of a constituency base must be
      accompanied by a letter from the Chief/Senior Whip of the Party
      concerned certifying that a particular area has been allocated to the
      member, and must also contain the address of the constituency office
      in that area.

(4)   A journey undertaken on a feeder airline service is not counted as
      one of the quota per financial year of air journeys if it is
      undertaken to connect with a journey by a national airline service.
      Such a connecting journey must be undertaken via the most economical
      route. The Secretary will pay for such a journey and one single air
      journey may be used for all connecting journeys.

(5)   A journey by private motor vehicle, public transport or taxi to an
      airport, must undertaken via the shortest route.  If a longer route is
      used, a member is reimbursed for the shorter route only.

(6)   All reimbursement for travel by motor vehicle, which is refundable at
      the fixed Government rate, is calculated at the fixed Government rate
      determined from time to time by the Department of Transport for a car
      with an engine capacity of 2001-2500 cm3 .

   7) All reimbursement for travel by motor vehicle which is refundable at
      full AA rates, is calculated at the full AA rates determined from time
      to time by the Automobile Association of South Africa for a 4 cylinder
      car with an engine capacity of 2000 cm3 costing approximately R140 000
      and covering a distance of 30 000 km per year.

(8)   Travel facilities for members with disabilities are determined by a
      separate policy document.  Members with special needs must inform the
      Chief Whip of the most senior Whip of their party of his/her special
      needs.

(9)   A member may not purchase air tickets for which a reservation has not
      been made (ie open bookings are not allowed).
(10)  Unused air journeys to which a member's dependants, parents or
      parents-in-law are entitled may not be used by the member or her/his
      spouse or companion, and may not be transferred or exchanged among
      such dependants, parents/parents-in-law.

(11)  Air journeys to which a member or her/his spouse or companion,
      dependant, parent or parent-in-law is entitled, may not be carried
      over from one financial year to the next.

(12)  All air tickets issued, but which a member does not intend using, or
      expired tickets, must be handed over to the Manager: Finance Section
      and not to the travel bureau or airline service concerned.


(13)  The date of the journey, and not the date of the purchase of an air
      ticket, determines the financial year to which the air journey is
      allocated.

(14)  Any fees payable in respect of air tickets booked for collection at
      an airport will be for the account of the member concerned.

(15)  A member must, together with any claim, submit proof of expenditure
      incurred. As proof of a journey undertaken by using a private motor
      vehicle, petrol slips, tollgate slips or proof of other expenditure in
      connection with the journey, etc, must be submitted.

(16)  Claim forms must be completed in full and signed by the member. One
      claim form must be handed in for each single or return journey.

(17)  A member must submit original boarding passes and expenditure slips.
      Duplicate copies and faxed claims will not be accepted.

(18)  For purposes of application of these facilities, where relevant, a
      leave period and a constituency period are periods designated as such
      in any financial year by the Joint Programme Committee. A constituency
      period is a period set aside for members to attend to constituency
      work.

13.   TELEPHONE ALLOCATION

(1)   Members are entitled to the following telephone allocations per
      month:

            Chief Whip of Majority Party: NA/NCOP        R3553-00
            Leader of Largest Minority Party R3553-00
            Deputy Chief Whip of Majority Party: NA/NCOP R2734-00
            Chief Whip of Largest Minority Party:  NA/NCOP    R2734-00
            House Chairpersons NA/NCOP  R2734-00
            Chairperson of a NA/NCOP Committee     R2734-00
            Leader of other Minority Parties R2734-00
            Senior Whip of Party other than Majority/Largest
      Minority    R2461-00
            Deputy Chairperson of Committees: NA/NCOP    R2461-00
            Parliamentary Counsellor in Office of President   R2461-00
            Provincial Whip: NCOP R2186-00
            Parliamentary Counsellor: Office of Deputy President
      R2186-00
            Whip of a Party in a House  R2186-00
            All other office bearers and Members of Parliament
      R1914-00

(2)   The following calls made by a member will be offset against her/his
      telephone allocation on submission of paid accounts:

      (a)   Residential telephone calls;
      (b)   calls for the purpose of fax transmissions;
        c) calls on a cellular phone registered with the Secretary; and
        d)  monthly internet subscriptions.

(3)   Accounts will be reconciled monthly.

(4)   Telephone allocations not used during a month will be carried over to
      the following month, but not to the next financial year.

(5)   Members will not be paid out for unused allocations.

(6)   If a member exceeds her/his allocation for a month, including any
      unused allocations from previous months, any excess cost for
      Parliament will be recovered from the member’s salary.

(7)   Claims for a specific financial year will be reimbursed only if the
      claims are submitted on or before 10 April of the following year (31
      March - end of financial year).

14.   ATTENDANCE AT APPROVED COMMITTEE MEETINGS WHILE PARLIAMENT IS NOT
      SITTING OR AT VENUES OTHER THAN IN CAPE TOWN DURING SITTINGS

(1)   Daily Allowance


      A member is paid a daily allowance, as determined from time to time by
      the Speaker: NA and the Chairperson: NCOP, for attendance at approved
      committee meetings while Parliament is not sitting, including a
      constituency period, or during sittings, at venues other than Cape
      Town. The member must complete a committee claim form.

(2)   Air Journeys


      An air journey undertaken in order to attend an approved committee
      meeting is not counted as part of the member's quota per financial
      year of air journeys. If a member used a single air journey for such a
      journey, this must be indicated on the committee claim form, and the
      relevant airways ticket must be attached to the claim form, to enable
      the Finance Section to reverse the allocation. Original boarding
      passes must also be attached to the claim form.


      The class of air travel will be in accordance with 1. AIR JOURNEYS
section
      1 (b)


(3)   Journey to and from Airport


      A member is reimbursed in accordance with paragraph 6 for any
      expenditure incurred by her/him for travelling to and from an airport
      on the way to and from an approved committee meeting.

(4)   Motor Vehicle Journey
      If a member travels by motor vehicle to attend an approved committee
      meeting, she/he will be reimbursed at higher of the AA rate or the
      government rate per km. If such a journey could have been undertaken
      more cheaply by air, the member will be compensated for─

      (a)   one return motor vehicle journey between her/his home
         base/place of residence and the nearest airport and one return
         journey between the airport nearest to the venue of the meeting
         and the venue itself at the higher of the AA rate or the
         government rate per km; or

      (b)   the cost of a single or return air journey, whichever is
         applicable, by air between the airport nearest to the member's
         home base/place of residence and the airport nearest to the venue
         of the meeting.

(5)   Hotel or Similar Accommodation

      A member is reimbursed as follows:

      Dinner Bed and Breakfast:   Actual expenses to a maximum of R950 per
      day.
      S&T of R150 per day to cover lunch and other incidentals

(6)   Private Accommodation

      A member is reimbursed at R150 per day.


(7)   Motor vehicle Hire

      A member is reimbursed for the actual cost for a Class B motor vehicle
      provided that it is authorised by the Chairperson of a Committee when
      the Member is executing Parliamentary activities.

15.   CATERING FACILITIES

(1)   Bookings for catering services may be made only in the name of a
      member, Minister or Deputy Minister.

(2)   Accounts for catering services rendered must be settled immediately.

(3)   If a member does not settle an account before the end of the month in
      which the service was rendered, the full amount will be deducted from
      the member's next salary.

(4)   If a Minister or Deputy Minister does not settle an account before
      the end of the month in which the service was rendered, the account
      will be forwarded to the Director-General of the Department concerned
      for immediate settlement.

16.   VISITS TO PROVINCES BY PERMANENT DELEGATES TO NCOP

(1)   Members who are required to visit the provinces on official business
      must obtain prior authorisation from the Chairperson/Deputy
      Chairperson: NCOP or the Chairperson of Committees: NCOP before any
      arrangements are made for air tickets, hotel bookings or other
      transport.

 1) Bookings must be made through the Transport Unit.

 2) The class of air travel will be in accordance with 1. AIR JOURNEYS
    section
    1 (b)

(4)   If Members have incurred any expenses relating to using their private
      vehicle to undertake such a visit, they must within 7 days after
      returning from the visit, hand their completed claim forms to a staff
      member of the NCOP Administration, who will send them to the Finance
      Section.

17.   RECOVERY OF DEBTS

      If any of the facilities in respect of a member or her/his spouse or
      companion, dependants, parents or parent-in-law, is exceeded, any
      excess costs for Parliament, the amount of such excess is recovered
      immediately in one sum, from the member's salary, unless arrangements
      have been made with the Secretary to pay off the amount.

18.   EQUIPMENT AND FURNITURE FOR MEMBERS

(1)   The Secretary will provide each member with the following items:

        a) one laptop computer;
        b) one printer;
        c)       one Internet connection and software;
        d) One Personal digital assistant (PDA)
        e)       one medium-sized desk;
        f)       one small desk;
        g)       one desk-linking unit;
        h)       two mobile pedestals;
        i)       one upholstered high-back office chair with armrests and
           [swivel/tilt mechanism] or high-back typist chair with armrests;
        j) two visitor chairs with armrests;
        k) One wooden double door bookcase with shelves of one wooden
           double door stationery cupboard
        l) One four drawer steel filing cabinet
        m) One telephone table with shelf
        n)       two wooden letter trays;
        o) one wooden hat stand;
        p) one wooden/steel waste-paper bin; and
        q) one carpet protector.

(2)   The Secretary will, in his or her discretion, in exceptional
      circumstances, supply a member with additional bookcases/stationery
      cupboards and filing cabinets.

19.   STATIONERY

(1)   Quantities of stationery supplied to a member

      The Secretary annually supplies each Party, for distribution to their
      members, with the following maximum quantities of stationery:

      (a)   Parliamentary letterheads - 500 per member year
        b) Parliamentary envelopes – 500 per member year
        c) Business cards  - 500 per member per year

      Members must requisition these letterheads and envelopes from their
      Parties.


(2)   Use of stationery


(1)   Parliamentary letterheads and envelopes may be used only for letters
      that deal with Parliamentary business and that are directed and
      addressed to individuals and are personally signed.


(2)   Parliamentary letterheads and envelopes may not be used for letters
      written with the object of raising funds or taking a collection.


(3)   Parliamentary envelopes may be used for greeting cards directed and
      addressed to individuals, but greeting cards may not be submitted for
      franking (machine marking of a stamp on an envelope) and dispatch.

(3)   Dispatch of mail


(1)   A member may submit her/his ordinary official letters to the Chief
      Service Officer for franking and dispatch.

(2)   Parliamentary envelopes containing greeting cards may not be
      submitted for franking and dispatch.

(3)   During a parliamentary session a member will in urgent cases be
      permitted to dispatch letters by express, certified or registered
      mail, and printed matter by airmail, at the discretion of the
      Secretary.

(4)   Letter boxes


(1)   A member is provided with a letterbox in which all internal notices,
      etc addressed to a member personally is deposited.


(2)   Under no circumstances will a member's letters be given to
      unauthorised persons.

(3)   Parcels addressed to members, if too large to be deposited in the
      letterboxes, are retained in the office of the Chief Service Officer
      and a notification of their arrival is deposited in the letterbox of
      the member concerned.

(5)   Dispatch of papers


(1)   Papers required by a member during any recess including a
      constituency period, and not railed in trunks, may be dispatched as
      parcel post, for the account of the Secretary, but the number of such
      parcels must be limited as far as possible.

(2)   In order to facilitate the dispatch of papers, members may not have
      parcels made up which exceed 50 kg in weight.
(3)   Members may once per financial year carry papers with them as excess
      weight on an aircraft up to a maximum weight of 50kg for the account
      of the Secretary.  Members must pay for the cost of the excess weight
      and claim from the Finance Section on production of proof of payment.

20.   ELECTRONIC VERSION OF STATUTES

      The Secretary will provide each party with access to an electronic
      version of the complete set of statutes.

21.   PERSONAL ACCIDENT INSURANCE

      The Secretary takes out a personal accident insurance policy in
      respect of all members, which provides cover in the event of─

      (a)   death;
      (b)   permanent disability; and
      (c)   bodily injury or permanent total loss of, or permanent total
           loss of the use of, limbs or certain sensory organs caused by
           violent, accidental, external and visible means.

22.   DECEASED MEMBER, SPOUSE/COMPANION, DEPENDANTS AND PARENTS/PARENTS-IN
      LAW

(1)   If a member dies whilst away from home, but in the RSA, the Secretary
      will provide two persons, who must as far as possible be next-of-kin
      of the deceased member, with a return air ticket each between their
      home base in the RSA and Cape Town or the place where the death
      occurred as well as with two nights reasonable accommodation at the
      place concerned, to take care of the usual arrangements that are
      required in the case of death.

(2)   The Secretary will further pay for the conveying of one motor vehicle
      belonging to the deceased member from Cape Town or the place where the
      death occurred, to her/his home base.

(3)   The Secretary will further pay for the cost of a mini-container to
      transport the belongings of the deceased member to her/his home base.

(4)   In the event of a registered spouse/companion, dependant, parent or
      parent-in-law or child dying whilst away from home but in the RSA, the
      Secretary will provide assistance in accordance with guidelines to be
      determined by the Presiding Officers.

(5)   In the event of the death of a member the Secretary will:

        a) Contribute an amount of R30 000 (thirty thousand) towards the
           funeral expenses.
        b) Pay the cost of air transport, ground transport and
           accommodation for 15 members to attend the funeral service.

23.   APPLICATION OF DIRECTIVES

      The Secretary may apply these directives in such a way that they cover
      particular circumstances or eventualities that are not specifically
      provided for, but which, in the opinion of the Secretary, fall within
      the context of the directives. If there is any disagreement between
      the Secretary and a member about the application of this paragraph,
      the Secretary must refer the matter for decision to the Speaker: NA or
      the Chairperson: NCOP, as may be appropriate.








B MBETE, MP M J MAHLANGU, MP
SPEAKER : NATIONAL ASSEMBLY  CHAIRPERSON : NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

COMMITTEE REPORTS


NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES


1.    REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON PETITIONS AND MEMBERS’ LEGISLATIVE
   PROPOSALS ON THE FACT FINDING MISSION TO NEW EERSTERUS, HAMMANSKRAAL ON
   29 NOVEMBER 2007

     1. BACKGROUND:

      The Select Committee on Petitions and Members’ Legislative Proposals
      received a petition on water service delivery from the residents of
      Block 2 and Block 4 extension in New Eersterus, Hammanskraal, which
      had been submitted to the office of the Speaker of Parliament on 06
      August 2007.


     2. OBJECTIIVES:

      The committee decided that a delegation of the Committee will go to
      Gauteng and meet with the officials of Tshwane Metropolitan Council,
      who are responsible for delivery of municipal (water) services to the
      area and a delegation of the residents.  The purpose was to gather all
      the facts on the problems as raised by the residents.


     3. COMPOSITION:


      The composition of the delegation was as follows:


        1. Mr F Adams (ANC) - Chairperson of Committee and Leader of
           Delegation
        2. Mr M A Mzizi (IFP)
        3. Mr A Watson (DA)
        4. Ms T M Sepanya (Committee Secretary)
        5. Ms N Nqcaba (Committee Researcher)

     4. FINDINGS:

Meeting with City Council Officials at the Tshwane
                 Metro-council offices:


                 The meeting was chaired by Mr Pillay the chairperson of the
                 Mayoral Committee on Municipal Services.
                 Mr Pillay indicated that, the area in question was
                 previously administered by the North-west provincial
                 government and that Tshwane Metropolitan Council, Gauteng
                 Province took over in 2001.  The area in question is not a
                 proclaimed area and that this will happen in
                 January/February 2008.  Residents of the area were
                 originally from Mamelodi, Eesterus and neighbouring suburbs
                 like Mabopane hence the name New Eersterus.  They initially
                 illegally occupied the land.


                 He explained that the area does not have bulk water.  The
                 council is busy with water connections and will complete
                 this around July 2008.


                 The process has been delayed because the area is still
                 being developed.  There are about 5 000 stands in the
                 residential area.  The installation of the sanitation
                 system will be completed sometime in 2010.


                 He indicated that, they had received complaints about the
                 quality of the water and had assigned the SABS to test this
                 and it was found to be of good quality.  It was discovered
                 that, whatever strange particles, e.g. dead cats had been
                 deliberately put there by the residents themselves as they
                 did not want the tankers that had been installed.


                 The ward councillor Mr Solly Moima explained that the
                 council had a meeting with the community in July 2007.  He
                 has been giving the residents feedback on the progress of
                 water provision.  He explained that, there are 11 boreholes
                 and 5 trucks which will be increased to 8.  The
                 construction of the Phase I water reticulation network
                 started on 01 October 2007.  The council, however, has
                 temporary yard connections.  Phase II will start in January
                 and will make provision for all the other services.


                 The labour for this project is sourced from the local
                 community.  This is a very labour intensive project.


Meeting with the community of New Eesterus:

                 The chairperson outlined the purpose of the visit, that the
                 meeting would only be deal with the matters raised by the
                 community in the petition to Parliament.  This was water
                 provision.


                 The community was led by Ms Hilda Monkwe.  She indicated
                 that they had various meetings with all the relevant
                 structures within the council about their plight and did
                 not get any assistance hence they resorted to petitioning
                 Parliament as they believed that they have exhausted all
                 avenues available.  She believed that it was the role of
                 Parliament to “deepen democracy” so the committee would
                 then help in getting this achieved.   She mentioned that
                 all the construction projects do not benefit the local
                 community.


                 It became clear during the meeting that, the concerns of
                 the community were not the provision of the water in
                 particular but they were unhappy about the way the council
                 was dealing with the development of the area.


                 Mr Joseph Mogale, a member of the delegation complained
                 about the fact that there was no proper consultation about
                 matters affecting them e.g. the tender process on the
                 project that was being undertaken.  He indicated that there
                 was a strong feeling that the policies of the Extended
                 Public Works Projects are not implemented on the council’s
                 projects.


                 The Council appointed a steering committee.  A work
                 committee was elected and they believed that members of
                 this committee should not be compensated for performing
                 this function as all of them have a stake in the
                 construction company.  Mr Brian Makhubedu, mentioned that,
                 since water was a measure of service delivery, they
                 petitioned on it but that the real issue was the
                 “reconstruction and development” of the area.


                 Mr Danie Swart, Manager for infrastructure provision in
                 response outlined the project.  He explained that the
                 council had designed a basic network of water supply.  The
                 council would provide full water supply service to be
                 linked to Phase II which would be completed by June 2009.
                 Phase II would start in the last week of November 2008.


                 A project steering committee was set up for each project
                 the council was involved in.  A community liaison officer
                 appointed by the council also participated in the site
                 meetings.


                 The sub-contractor, Mr Abraham Mashilo started this project
                 in October 2007 and it is due for completion in June 2008.
                 The leader of the community delegation Ms Hilda Monkwe was
                 concerned that the locals do not benefit from the projects.
                  She insisted that only certain members of the ruling party
                 benefit as prospective employees are asked to produce their
                 ANC membership cards before they could be employed.


                 The delegation also visited the site where the project was
                 conducted from.

     5. RECOMMENDATIONS:

           The Committee recommends, in terms of rule 235 of the NCOP
           Rules, that the matter be referred to the Select Committee on
           Local Government and Administration and the relevant Committee
           in the Gauteng legislature.


        6. CONCLUSION

           The Committee would undertake a follow-up meeting in six months
           to find out if matters raised so far have been dealt with.

Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs
    on a joint oversight visit to Pollsmoor prison to consider the position
    of awaiting-trial prisoners, dated 21 November 2007.

   1. Aim of the visit
On 23 October 2007, the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
Development, Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services, and the Select
Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs undertook a joint
oversight visit to the Pollsmoor Correctional Facility. The aim was to
consider overcrowding in our prisons, particularly the position of awaiting-
trial prisoners. Representatives from the Magistracy, the National
Prosecuting Authority and the Judicial Inspectorate of Prisons were also
present.

   2. Participants

The following members of the Portfolio Committees on Correctional Services,
and Justice and Constitutional Development, and the Select Committee on
Security and
Constitutional Affairs visited the Pollsmoor Correctional Centre:

Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services: Mr D Bloem [Chairperson], Ms
LS Chikunga (ANC),Mr S Mahote (ANC),Mr E Xolo (ANC),Ms W Ngwenya (ANC), Mr
J Selfe (DA) and Mr H Cupido (ACDP)

Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development: Mr G
Magwanishe [Acting Chairperson], Mr J Sibanyoni (ANC) ,Ms M Meruti (ANC)
and Ms C Johnson (ANC)

Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs: Kgoshi L M Mokoena
[Chairperson] – Limpopo, Ms F Nyanda (ANC) – Mpumalanga and Mr L H Fielding
(DA) – Northern Cape.

The Committees were accompanied by the following parliamentary support
staff:
Ms R Lawrence (Personal Assistant to the Chairperson of the Portfolio
Committee on Correctional Services) and Ms G Dinizulu (Committee Secretary
to the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs), Ms C Balie
(Committee Secretary to the Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services),
Ms N Skaka (Committee Assistant) and Ms C Silkstone (Researcher to the
Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development)

Pollsmoor Correctional Facility was represented by: Mr Mkabela (Area
Commissioner), Mr Nthombeni (Regional Commissioner: Corporate Services), Mr
Modisadife (Head: Admission Centre),   Ms Dayimani (Head: Medium B Centre),

Mr Molefe (Head: Medium C Centre), Mr Scholtz (Acting Head: Medium A Youth
Centre) and Ms Claassen (Head: Female Section)

The Department of Justice was represented by the following members of the
Judiciary:   Ms M van Eeden ( Acting Senior Magistrate, Wynberg)   Mr M
Dimbaza  (Chief Magistrate, Wynberg), Mr H Swart (Acting Chief Magistrate,
Cape Town) and Mr Zantsi  (Senior Public Prosecutor, Athlone)

The Judicial Inspectorate of Prisons was represented by: Ms Pritima Osman
(Acting Director: Functional Services),   Mr T Titus (Visitor’s Committee
Co-ordinator)

   3. Overview of proceedings

The Department of Correctional Services gave a short briefing to the
Committees on the Pollsmoor Management Area, which was followed by
extensive discussion. MPs then spoke with a number of awaiting-trial
prisoners, especially pregnant women, juveniles and children.

   4. Briefing on the Pollsmoor Management Area

   1. Pollsmoor is overcrowded. The present occupancy rate is 168%.While
      Pollsmoor is designed to accommodate 4 252 offenders, at present the
      facility accommodates 7 296 offenders in total. Of these, 4 823
      (66.8%) are awaiting-trial prisoners. At the Female Centre, which MPs
      visited, there are 397 offenders, of which 47% are awaiting trial. The
      occupancy rate is 162%.

      The Department provided the Committees with the breakdown in the table
      below of awaiting-trial prisoners, who had either not been granted
      bail or had been granted bail but could not afford to pay. Sentenced
      juvenile offenders as well as awaiting-trial juveniles (18-21) are
      housed in the Medium A section.

4.2

|               |Admission Centre  |Medium A          |Female          |
|No bail        |2 531             |877               |152             |
|Less than R    |851               |242               |40              |
|1000           |                  |                  |                |
|Above R 1000   |124               |60                |10              |


   The Department also provided the information, which is set out in the
   table below, on the number of successful conversions to correctional
   supervision in terms of sections 62 (f), 71 and 72 of the Criminal
   Procedure Act 51 of 1977 from 1 March 2007 – 30 September 2007. Section
   62(f) of the Criminal Procedure Act 51 of 1977 empowers the court to
   release an accused on bail under the supervision of a probation officer
   or a correctional official. Section 71 of the Criminal Procedure Act
   provides that awaiting-trial juveniles may be placed in a place of safety
   or under supervision, instead of release on bail or detention in custody,
   while section 72 refers to release of an accused on warning.

|Month    |Admission             |Medium A              |Female              |
|         |Submitted |Successful|Submitted |Successful|Submitted|Successfu|
|         |          |          |          |          |         |l        |
|March    |69        |48 (69.5%)|59        |47 (79.7%)|0        |0        |
|April    |75        |32 (42.7%)|29        |14 (48.3%)|0        |0        |
|May      |48        |32 (66.7%)|23        |19 (82.6%)|1        |0        |
|June     |48        |38 (79.2%)|15        |12 (80%)  |0        |0        |
|July     |43        |43 (100%) |44        |28 (63.6%)|8        |8 (100%) |
|August   |104       |21 (20.2%)|90        |48 (53.3%)|5        |2 (40%)  |
|September|96        |56 (58.3%)|225       |129(57.3%)|14       |10       |
|         |          |          |          |          |         |(71.4%)  |

4.3   Interventions to address overcrowding at Pollsmoor include:

     • The appointment of four additional court officials (now a total of
       seven) to assist with the reduced bail applications and alternative
       placements for awaiting-trial prisoners.
     • A list of section 62(f) and 63 applications is submitted weekly by
       the court officials to the various courts.
     • Heads of centres attend monthly case-flow meetings to address the
       management of overcrowding.
     • A list of awaiting-trail children is provided to various courts and
       at case flow meetings on a monthly basis.
     • The names of awaiting-trial children are given to the Department of
       Social Development each Friday.
     • There is constant interaction between the in-house social workers
       and the Department of Social Development for available bed space at
       places of safety.

   5. Issues Arising

   1. Applications in terms of section 62(f) of the Criminal Procedure Act

In response to queries about the granting of applications to place an
accused under the supervision of a correctional or probation officer in
terms of section 62 (f) of the Criminal Procedure Act of 1977,
representatives from the Magistracy expressed doubt that the Department of
Correctional Services has sufficient capacity to monitor those released in
terms of this section. It was said that magistrates are unable to simply
release persons awaiting-trial without the assurance that there are
arrangements in place to ensure that they will return to court. MPs also
heard that a common concern is that the majority of juveniles are being
held for ‘aggressive’ offences. Their parents do not always want them at
home for reasons that include being unable to guarantee that they will be
able to bring their children to court on the appointed dates. There are
also not enough places of safety and secure care facilities.

   2. Conditions of Bail

Pollsmoor officials explained that there were many awaiting-trial prisoners
who could not afford bail, even if it was below R1000, as shown in the
Table in paragraph 3.2. above. However, they could not provide the
Committees with a breakdown of the bail amounts under R1000, nor could they
tell the Committees precise details of the alleged crimes committed.

It emerged that the factors involved in granting bail are complex: bail is
intended to ensure that an accused returns to court on the appointed date,
and is meant to take into account the affordability of the accused. Where
the bail amount is small, it does not necessarily mean that the offence is
not serious. Magistrates also take into account the seriousness of the
offence, the strength of the case against the accused and the personal
circumstances of the accused. The number of previous convictions is also
taken into account.

Amendments to the Criminal Procedure Act were designed to make it more
difficult to get bail: Schedules 5 and 6 to the Act state that bail may not
be granted for the offences listed in these Schedules, unless there are
exceptional circumstances.

   3. Lack of information on the committal warrant

Awaiting-trial prisoners are not assessed when first brought to Pollsmoor.
The committal warrants that accompany awaiting-trial prisoners do not
provide sufficient details of the crime for which the accused is being
detained. Typically, the committal warrant will simply state in broad terms
the crime for which the accused is being held.

This makes it difficult for prison officials to establish whether a
particular awaiting-trial prisoner’s case should be brought to the
attention of the authorities. The lack of information means that awaiting-
trial prisoners can spend unnecessary time in prison. Prison officials need
access to the court file in order to properly understand why an awaiting-
trial prisoner is being held.


   4. Legal facilities available to awaiting trial detainees

Correctional Services officials said that there are facilities available to
awaiting-trial prisoners to meet with their legal representatives. The
Committees were informed that the Legal Aid Board visits the facility on
Tuesdays, Thursdays and Fridays. Officials from the Department of Justice
have also visited to explain plea bargaining.

However, through further engagement with the officials, MPs established
that the Legal Aid Board does not always visit the facility and that
consultations between attorneys and their clients tend to take place at
court. The representative from the Office of the Inspecting Judge was of
the view that if the Legal Aid Board visited the facility more regularly
there would be far more applications for reduction of bail. The Legal Aid
Board, however, has a shortage of available practitioners, which impacts on
its ability to conduct prison visits.

It was also alleged that awaiting-trial prisoners, who are children or
juveniles, are often not given a chance to contact their parents when first
arriving at Pollsmoor.

   5. Co-operation and liaison between Departments of Correctional Services
      and Justice and Constitutional Development.

The Committees heard that there are inter-sectoral structures in place to
streamline or facilitate the processing of awaiting-trial prisoners. These
structures meet monthly. The Committees heard that awaiting-trial prisoners
are considered to be a priority for magistrates, and that magistrates are
well versed on issues such as juveniles in custody and the granting of bail
of relatively small amounts.

   6. Visits from Magistrates

While magistrates used to visit offenders in prisons, this is no longer
common practice. With the creation of the Office of the Inspecting Judge,
magistrates no longer feel that this is part of their function, and only
visit when invited.

   7. Caseload Backlogs

Although there are systems in place, the enormous in-flow of cases creates
backlogs. The Committees were informed that the Department of Justice has
once again, from September, instituted backlog courts to reduce this
problem.

   8. Interventions to reduce the number of Children Awaiting Trial at
      Pollsmoor

There are interventions to reduce the number of awaiting-trial children in
Pollsmoor. Every month a list of names is provided to courts and to the
case flow meetings. Every Friday, Pollsmoor provides the Department of
Social Development with a list of sentenced and awaiting-trial children.
Pollsmoor is also provided with information on the number of places
available at places of safety and at secure care facilities. There is
constant networking taking place between the in-house Social Workers
regarding diversion, as well as available bed-space at places of safety.
This has seen a reduction in the number of male children incarcerated from
the end of August 2007 from 195 to 140 in late October 2007.

6.    Committees’ Recommendations

   1. In different forms, several of the observations and recommendations in
      this section have been made before. They are not particularly novel or
      exceptional and can even be seen as predictable. The difference
      however is in the current approach of the Committees. We are
      determined to follow up on these recommendations and actively monitor
      progress in regard to them. We are acutely aware of the challenges the
      relevant departments and other role-players face, but we believe that
      incremental improvements are possible and certainly necessary – and it
      is these modest, incremental improvements that our Committees are
      seeking to pursue. We are also aware of our own limitations, with our
      “over-loaded” programmes and inadequate research, technical and other
      support, and so we would not be too ambitious in setting our own
      oversight targets. We need to be strategic and selective in our
      oversight targets. In this respect, our main aim is to see incremental
      improvements in the position of awaiting-trial prisoners in Pollsmoor
      and put appropriate pressure, consistent with our oversight role, on
      the relevant departments and other role-players for incremental
      improvements in the position of awaiting trial prisoners in other
      correctional facilities. The Correctional Services Portfolio Committee
      will, of course, focus more on the general conditions at correctional
      facilities and further advance its oversight role in this regard.
      However, our two Committees will work closer together to follow
      through on the recommendations set out below. This will mean working
      both jointly and, in a complementary way, in our own respective
      portfolios to monitor progress in respect of the recommendations. We
      might also work with other relevant portfolio and select committees to
      follow through on the recommendations below.

   2. As part of the monitoring process, this report will be referred to the
      Departments of Justice and Constitutional Development and Correctional
      Services for an initial written response within two months of the date
      of its adoption. The aim of the response would be to provide
      information to the Committees, convey the initial views of the
      departments on the recommendations below, and set the basis for the
      briefing referred to in 5.3 below. The report will also be referred to
      the Pollsmoor management and other relevant stakeholders.

   3. The Committees will also convene a joint meeting of the relevant
      Departments, the Pollsmoor management and other stakeholders within
      six months to monitor progress in regard to the issues raised in this
      report and take matters further.

   4. While the Committees appreciate the challenges, we feel that for
      awaiting-trial offenders to constitute 66.8% of the Pollsmoor offender
      population is altogether unacceptable. The Committees require a more
      comprehensive explanation than we got during our visit on why this is
      the case and what is being done to improve the situation, even if
      gradually over time. The Committees are keen to get a better sense of
      how Pollsmoor fares compared to other correctional facilities.

   5. The Pollsmoor officials explained their approach to dealing with the
      high number of awaiting-trial prisoners, especially children. However,
      the Committees are not clear that this approach is being implemented
      effectively – and will engage further on this at the briefing referred
      to in 5.3 above. The Committees welcome the reduction in the number of
      male children incarcerated, from 195 to 140, between the end of August
      and late October this year.

   6. The Committees are concerned about the number of awaiting-trial
      prisoners who are being detained in prison simply because they are
      unable to meet bail, especially when the bail is below R1000. It is
      not cost-effective to accommodate awaiting-trial prisoners where the
      bail amounts are small. The Committees note that the Department of
      Justice and Constitutional Development’s 2006/07 Annual Report refers
      to section 63(A) of the Criminal Procedure Act that allows for the
      release of awaiting trial prisoners, who have been granted bail, but
      are unable to pay the bail. The Committees note that the Department of
      Correctional Services was requested by the Criminal Justice System
      Review Project to prioritise the release of such prisoners, and to
      submit a report by end of May 2007, indicating progress. The
      Committees are interested in what progress there has been in this
      regard.

   7. Prison should be for The Committees feel that the judiciary should,
      where possible, make use of alternative sentencing so as to ensure
      that those who have committed petty offences are not sent to the
      already overcrowded prisons. Prison should be for serious offenders.

   8. The Committees are concerned that Legal Aid Board practitioners do not
      regularly visit Pollsmoor, except when they are informed that an
      accused does not have legal representation. More immediate access to a
      legal representative will result in more applications for reduction of
      bail, and a decrease in the number of awaiting-trial prisoners.
      However, the Committees are aware that there was no representative
      from the Legal Aid Board present during the oversight visit. The
      Committees are also aware of the capacity constraints that face the
      Legal Aid Board. The Committees will refer this report to the Legal
      Aid Board and request a report, within two months, on the Board’s
      visits to Pollsmoor and other correctional facilities and the
      challenges it faces in this regard.

   9. The Committees feel that when an awaiting-trial prisoner is committed
      to a correctional facility, adequate information of the crime, in
      respect of which the accused has been charged, has to be contained in
      the accompanying documentation. This information is usually contained
      in the case docket or court file. If the information is made
      available, stakeholders will be better able to ensure that awaiting-
      trial prisoners do not spend unnecessary time in prison. The
      Committees request the Department of Justice and Constitutional
      Development to report on the feasibility of providing the Department
      of Correctional Services with such information.

  10. The Committees feels that, within their constraints, magistrates
      should seek to visit correctional facilities, particularly in respect
      of awaiting-trial prisoners. The Committees are keen to understand
      what the difficulties are in regard to this and how they might be
      addressed. The Committees will also raise this with the Magistrates
      Commission. and also confer with the Judicial Inspectorate of Prison.

  11. While it is clear that there are structures in place that provide for
      intersectoral engagement, it is not clear to what extent these
      structures are effective. The Committees will engage on this further
      at the briefing referred to in 6.3 above.

  12. The Committees feel that there should be greater collaboration between
      all role players around ensuring better conditions for and the speedy
      sentencing of awaiting trial detainees – co-operation between the
      Departments of Justice, Social Development, Safety and Security and
      Correctional Services should be ongoing.

  13. The Committees note that while sentenced children and juveniles take
      part in education, sport and developmental programmes in Pollsmoor,
      awaiting-trial children and juveniles are not allowed to take part.
      This is apparently because the latter category “fall under justice,
      not correctional services”. The Committees are clear that this “silo”
      approach is not acceptable and inconsistent with the notion of an
      integrated justice system, and feel that all children and juveniles,
      both those sentenced and those awaiting-trial, should be allowed to
      take part in the above-mentioned programmes. Some of the awaiting-
      trial juveniles have been awaiting trial for long periods, some as
      long as three years.

  14. The Committees note the interventions to address overcrowding in
      Pollsmoor. There is obviously a need for more places of safety as
      children and juveniles released from prison cannot always go back to
      their homes; sometimes there are not even contact details of the
      families of those released, especially if their families are in rural
      areas or provinces other than the Western Cape. The Committees note
      that the Department of Social Development also serves on the
      intersectoral task team, referred to in 6.11 above, and are interested
      to receive more information on the availability of places of safety.
      The matter will also be raised with the Social Development Portfolio
      Committee and, if necessary, the Department of Social Development will
      also be asked to attend the briefing referred to in 6.3 above.

  15. The Committees welcome the use of “backlog courts” and are interested
      in progress in this regard.

  16. The Committees agree that more should be done to ensure that pregnant
      women, who have committed petty crimes, are not detained in prison but
      are diverted to community corrections or to other appropriate
      intervention programmes.

  17. The Committees will follow through on the recommendations set out
      above and are keen to see progress in regard to them. We do not
      believe that we should simply carry out oversight visits and write
      reports for the sake of doing so; there have to be material outcomes.
      The responsibility for this does not reside solely with the executive.
      Parliament also has a major responsibility - and, consistent with our
      oversight role, we commit ourselves to working with the relevant
      departments and other stakeholders to achieve progress in regard to
      the above recommendations.

7.    Acknowledgements


   The Committees express their appreciation to the Department of
   Correctional Services, the Pollsmoor management and other stakeholders
   for their co-operation in ensuring that the study visit was productive.
   The Committees acknowledge the assistance of Ms Christine Silkstone of
   the Parliamentary Research and Information Unit in the preparation of
   this report.


Report to be considered.

                            TUESDAY, 3 JUNE 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.          Introduction of Bills

     (1)    The Minister of Safety and Security


         a) South African Police Service Amendment Bill [B 30 – 2008]
            (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of
            Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
            Government Gazette No 31016 of 9 May 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Safety
             and Security of the National Assembly (the Committee to confer
             with the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
             Development), as well as referral to the Joint Tagging
             Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)    Intelligence Services Amendment Bill, 2008, submitted by the
         Minister for Intelligence.

    (2)    National Strategic Intelligence Amendment Bill, 2008, submitted
         by the Minister for Intelligence.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

      (a)   The Strategic Plan for the Third Parliament for 2004-2009
        reviewed for 2008-09 [RP 98-2008].

2.    The Presidency
      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the Accelerated and Shared
        Growth Initiative for South Africa (ASGISA) for 2007.

      (b)   Joint Initiative on Priority Skills Acquisition (JIPSA) – Report
        on Activities in 2007, April 2008.

 3. The Minister for Provincial and Local Government

     a) The Business Plan for the Department of Provincial and Local
        Government for 2008-09.


     b) Municipal Performance Report for 2005-2006, tabled in terms of
        section 48 of the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000
        (Act No 32 of 2000).

     c) Report on the Implementation of the Intergovernmental Relations
        Framework Act for 2005-2006 and 2006-2007, tabled in terms of
        section 46 of the Intergovernmental Relations Framework Act, 2005
        (Act No 13 of 2005).

     d) Report of the National Disaster Management Centre for 2006-2007,
        tabled in terms of section 24 of the Disaster Management Act, 2002
        (Act No 57 of 2002).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

CREDA INSERT REPORTS- T080603e-insert1 – PAGES – 905-987


