---
title: 'National Assembly - 19 June 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2008-06-19
---

THURSDAY, 19 JUNE 2008
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 15:37.

House Chairperson Mr K O Bapela took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Mr G R MORGAN: Chairperson, on behalf of the DA, I give notice that I shall
move:

   That the House debates measures to minimise the effects of extreme
   weather events on all communities while noting the likelihood that
   extreme weather events will increase under advancing climate change and
   that such events are likely to affect vulnerable communities the worst.

    CONGRATULATIONS TO PROTEAS FASTBOWLER DALE STEYN ON HIS ACHIEVEMENTS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr H P MALULEKA: Chairperson, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the Majority
Party, I move without notice:


  That the House –

    1) notes that on Tuesday, 17 June 2008, the Proteas fastbowler Dale
       Steyn won the Mutual and Federal South African Cricketer of the Year
       award;

    2) further notes that in addition to the Cricketer of the Year award,
       Steyn was also named the Castle Test Cricketer of the Year, the
       SuperSport Fans Cricketer of the Year and the much-sought after
       Players’ Player of the Year;

    3) believes that the fastbowler serves as an inspiration to his peers
       and to young people in general; and

   4) congratulates Dale Steyn on winning these awards and wishes him well
      in his future endeavours.

Agreed to.

                              WORLD REFUGEE DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J ELLIS: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the House –

   (1)      notes that Friday, 20 June 2008, is World Refugee Day;


      2) further notes that this day provides a formal opportunity for
         governments across the world to re-affirm the values upon which
         international agreements of refugee protection are based;

      3) acknowledges the plight of refugees who have been driven from
         their homes by fear, conflict and persecution and now face many
         uncertainties in foreign countries;

      4) recognises that this day provides an opportunity for all South
         Africans to honour those who have been so deeply affected by recent
         xenophobic attacks across the country; and

      5) calls on all South Africans to stand together to ensure that
         communities are protected from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
         cleansing and crimes against humanity and that they are afforded
         the dignity and respect they so justly deserve.

Agreed to.

                          FLOODING IN KWAZULU-NATAL

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the House –


   (1)      notes the terrible rains that have flooded the areas of Umzinto,
        Umkomaas, the small towns of the South Coast of KZN and the rural
        areas of Malangeni, Mistake Farm, Ama-shongwe and Amandawe;


   (2)      further notes the serious damage and critical situation that
        have displaced hundreds of     residents of these areas, informal
        settlements and low-cost housing to relief stations;


   (3)      further notes that the situation has resulted in collapsed
        houses, businesses, schools and roads;


   (4)      conveys its condolences to the families who lost their loved
        ones, children and adults, in these floods and to all the victims
        displaced from their homes;


   (5)      believes that the MEC of Provincial and Local Government, the
        Mayor of Durban, MPs, councillors and community leaders, have acted
        fast and worked rapidly to bring relief to flood victims;


   (6)      calls on all spheres of government, members and communities to
        visit these areas and offer assistance in whichever way possible;
        and


   (7)      further calls on the task team to join us in evaluating the
        damage and deciding on a recovery mechanism.


Agreed to.

            THIRD ANNIVERSARY OF WORLD ELDER ABUSE AWARENESS DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs M M MADUMISE: Chairperson, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the Majority
Party, I move without notice:

   That the House –

     1) notes that last Sunday, 15 June 2008, was the third anniversary of
        World Elder Abuse Awareness Day;

     2) further notes that the elderly are vulnerable to all forms of abuse
        and neglect, and are taken advantage of by family members,
        relatives and even public servants, and usually when such abuse
        happens, the elderly do not know how, where and to whom to report
        them;

     3) recognises that all of us have to work together to raise awareness
        and ensure that perpetrators of this crime are brought to book;

     4) recognises must love, protect and care for our elderly, that we and
        appreciate that they play a critical role in our communities and
        that many orphans and vulnerable children in our country are cared
        for by grandparents, who continue to be the backbone of many
        families, giving children a sound beginning in life, and also
        continue to contribute to the economic development of our country
        and remain economically active;

     5) recognises that there is a need to encourage closer and positive
        contact between generations and to foster positive attitudes
        towards elders and believes that the social isolation and neglect
        of elders needs to be broken; and

     6) urges the youth during this Youth Month to look after the elderly
        in general and their grandparents in particular.
Agreed to.

              WORLD DAY TO COMBACT DESERTIFICATION AND DROUGHT

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs J CHALMERS: Chairperson, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the Majority
Party, I hereby move without notice:

   That the House –

     1) notes that Tuesday, 17 June 2008, was the World Day to Combat
        Desertification and Drought;


     2) further notes that the day is meant to deepen awareness amongst
        South Africans and the world community on the impact of drought and
        desertification;

     3) recalls that desertification occurs in arid, semi-arid and sub-
        humid areas, where the soils are especially fragile, vegetation is
        sparse and the climate is particularly unforgiving and that these
        areas are inhabited by one fifth of the world’s population;

     4) further recalls that one third of the earth’s land surface (4
        billion hectares) is threatened by desertification and over 250
        million people are directly affected by desertification, that 24
        billion tons of fertile soil disappear annually and that from 1991
        to 2000 alone, droughts have been responsible for over 280,000
        deaths and that these accounted for 11% of the total number of
        water-related disasters;

     5) acknowledges that climate change is a new threat on a global scale
        and poses a challenge to South Africans and Africans as a whole,
        because we are most vulnerable to the effects of climate change and
        the risks to the poor are particularly severe;

     6) remembers that our vision of the future includes a sustainable
        economy where all South Africans, including present and future
        generations, will realise their right to an environment not harmful
        to their health and well-being; and

     7) commends the work done by the United Nations, some governments,
        environmental organisations and many individuals in their efforts
        to combat desertification and raise awareness amongst the people.

Agreed to.

        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF TASK TEAM OF MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT
              PROBING VIOLENCE AND ATTACKS ON FOREIGN NATIONALS

There was no debate.

Mr S K LOUW: Chairperson, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the Majority
Party, I hereby move:


   That the report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

  SOLIDARITY WITH AND SYMPATHY EXPRESSED FOR VICTIMS OF XENOPHOBIC ATTACKS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr S K LOUW: Chairperson, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the Majority
Party, I hereby move without notice:

   That the House, noting that the spate of violence which broke out  on  11
   May 2008 in Alexandra township in  Gauteng  and  later  spread  to  other
   provinces, mostly affected nationals from other  African  countries,  but
   also claimed South Africans amongst its  victims,  recalls  that  in  the
   preamble to our Constitution we honour those who suffered for justice and
   freedom in our land, we respect  those  who  have  worked  to  build  and
   develop our country and believe that South Africa belongs to all who live
   in it, united in our diversity, therefore resolves to –


      1) thank  the  governments  and  people  of  the  continent  for  the
         solidarity  and  support  shown  during   the   struggle   against
         apartheid;


      2) express its appreciation for the contribution of the continent and
         the region in helping to build the economy of South Africa;


      3) reaffirm its commitment to African solidarity and  integration  of
         the region and continent;


      4) assure  Africa  and  the  world  that  these  incidents  were  not
         indicative of the views, nor the conduct of the majority of  South
         African citizens;


      5) acknowledge  the  sterling  work  done  by  government,  political
         parties, civil society, non-governmental organisations,  community
         organisations and individual South  African  citizens  to  provide
         humanitarian relief to displaced persons;


      6) convey the remorse of the  Parliament  of  South  Africa,  as  the
         representatives of the people of South Africa, to all parliaments,
         governments and peoples on the African continent; and


      7) express its sincere sympathy with  the  persons  affected  by  the
         violent attacks.


Agreed to.

  REVIVAL OF CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
             CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT — HEARINGS CONDUCTED BY
         COMMITTEE ON OCCASION OF REVIEW BY PARLIAMENT ON ASPECTS OF
                    EQUALITY IN SOCIETY, 16 OCTOBER 2006

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr S K LOUW: Chairperson, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the Majority
Party, I hereby move without notice:

   That the following item, which was on the Order Paper and that lapsed  at
   the end of the 2007 annual session, be revived for consideration  by  the
   National Assembly:


     Consideration  of  Report  of  Portfolio  Committee  on   Justice   and
     Constitutional  Development  (Announcements,  Tablings  and   Committee
     Reports, 12 April 2007,  p  650  Hearings  conducted  by  Committee  on
     occasion of review by Parliament on aspects of equality in  society  16
     October 2006).

Agreed to.

      SUSPENSION OF RULE 253(1)(b) AND SUSPENSION OF JOINT RULE 154(2)

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr S K LOUW: Chairperson, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the Majority
Party, I hereby move without notice:

   That the House -

     1) suspends Rule 253(1)(b), which  provides  that  the  debate  on  the
        Second Reading of a Bill that has not been referred to  a  committee
        may not commence before at least three  working  days  have  elapsed
        since the Bill was introduced, for the purposes  of  conducting  the
        Second Reading debate on the Repeal of the Black Administration  Act
        and Amendment of Certain Laws Amendment Bill [B 50 – 2008] (National
        Assembly – proposed sec 75) today; and


     2) subject to the concurrence of the  National  Council  of  Provinces,
        suspends Joint Rule 154(2), which provides that  the  Joint  Tagging
        Mechanism may not classify a Bill before the expiry  of  the  period
        stated in the Announcements,  Tablings  and  Committee  Reports,  in
        respect of the  Bill  (see  Announcements,  Tablings  and  Committee
        Reports, 17 June 2008, p 1199).

Agreed to.

  EXTENSION OF MANDATE OF AND DATE BY WHICH AD HOC COMMITTEE MUST CONSIDER
        AND REPORT ON NATIONAL STRATEGIC INTELLIGENCE AMENDMENT BILL

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr S K LOUW: Chairperson, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the Majority
Party, I hereby move without notice:

   That the House, noting its decision of 13 May 2008,  establishing  an  Ad
   Hoc committee on Intelligence Legislation to consider and report  on  the
   Protection of Information Bill [B28–2008] (National Assembly – sec 75) -


     1) extends the mandate of the Ad Hoc Committee to consider  and  report
        on the Intelligence Services Amendment Bill  [B37–  2008]  (National
        Assembly – sec 75) and the National Strategic Intelligence Amendment
        Bill [B38– 2008] (National Assembly – proposed sec 75); and
     2) extends the date by which the Ad Hoc committee must  report  on  all
        three Bills to 29 August 2008.

[Interjections.] Agreed to.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon Mike Ellis, raise it outside
with him! [Laughter.]

                         ISSUES AROUND GENDER PARITY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs F MAHOMED (ANC): Chairperson, the discussion at the World Economic
Forum has rightly acknowledged the global gender gap in almost all
economies of the world.

It needs to be noted that the world has a huge resource capital potential
in terms of women, and I am glad to admit that South Africa is poised to
take up this challenge head-on by our 50% quota of women in politics. Our
skills development also points towards the same objective by giving trade
incentives to women-owned businesses, so that they are able to grow
existing businesses or start new enterprises. Further, our Employment
Equity Bill also aims to ensure that women are given a fair chance to
compete in order to occupy the higher echelons of employment.
The ANC, at its last conference, adopted a policy of gender parity in all
structures of the movement. This has served to deepen our efforts to
confront sexism, gender inequality and discrimination. Thank you.
[Applause.]

                 ZIMBABWE ELECTIONS AND DEMOCRACY IN AFRICA

                            (Member’s Statement)

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (DA): Chairperson, we do not believe that the
establishment of a government of national unity, as reportedly proposed by
President Mbeki to President Mugabe, is an appropriate response to the
situation in Zimbabwe at this point.

The establishment of a, Government of National Unity, GNU, will only be
helpful if it is done after a successful election and ... [Interjections]
... is called by the winning party, not if it is forced upon the people to
accommodate Zanu-PF’s wish to cling to a vestige of power.

It sends out a message that Africa cannot cope with democracy, that
presidents need only incite violence to escape the prospect of having to
relinquish power which they lost through the ballot box. Kenya has set a
dangerous precedent in this regard.

In Africa, as with democracies elsewhere, power must change hands through
the ballot box. It is the duty of the region, through the Southern African
Development Community, SADC, and the African Union, AU, to ensure that this
happens. Regimes that do not comply with SADC and AU guidelines should be
expelled.

Instead of pushing for a premature government of national unity, President
Mbeki should use all diplomatic avenues still available to him to convince
President Mugabe to allow peacekeeping forces into Zimbabwe to help ensure
that the electoral process on 27 June is free and fair. [Applause.]

      OPPOSITION TO CALL TO ESTABLISH STREET COMMITTEES TO FIGHT CRIME

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M B SKOSANA (IFP): Chairperson, Sidney Anglo, in his essay "The anatomy
of political and military decadence", interprets Prince Niccolo
Machiavelli's warnings of the signs preceding a potential national
predicament. Among others he warns of the advancement of evil men,
irreligiousness, lasciviousness, lack of unity, desire for empty honours,
in-fighting and the pursuit of party interests at the expense of the
greater commonwealth.

The persistent call to establish wholesale street committees to help fight
crime presents the country with extremely frightening prospects. This will
in practice prove to be an unintentional invitation to widespread
lawlessness and eventual anarchy, when political no-go-areas are re-
established, antagonistic party political armies or militia are formed,
lives are lost and properties destroyed. And criminal gangs will obviously
find umbrage in the ensuing chaos. In the idiom of Chinua Achebe, "Things
fall apart; the centre cannot hold, mere anarchy is loosed upon the world."

The IFP appeals to this House and the leadership of the ANC to reconsider
this potentially harrowing social engineering at a time when our democracy
is in its most fragile state. Moreover, this resolution is an inappropriate
admission to the nation and the world as a whole that the law enforcement
agencies of this country are failing to combat crime, that churches and
religious leaders are failing to reverse the tide of moral degeneration,
and that schools, communities and families are failing to instil in their
members, young and old, the hallowed values of Ubuntu/Botho. 

This is not the message we want to send. Such a situation cannot be
conducive to foreign investment and social development. Let us strive for
the legitimate reinforcement of the existing law enforcement agencies,
including reorganising, if necessary, restructuring and resourcing them
adequately to deal with all manner of crimes. Thank you.

                        LIVING CONDITIONS IN VRYGROND

                            (Member’s Statement)

Prof B TUROK (ANC): Chairperson, the House notes that local government has
failed to improve the living conditions of the poor people of Vrygrond in
Cape Town. I am the MP for the area and I am frequently embarrassed by the
deficiencies in that area.

Eight years ago, the Vrygrond Development Trust, led by Mr Jonathan
Schrire, forced the City of Cape Town to create a Reconstruction and
Development Programme, RDP housing scheme of 1 800 houses. Since then, the
same Schrire has raised private funds to build a primary school. During the
same period, local government has done nothing substantial for the people
of that area. Instead, public funds have gone into supporting a luxury
village at West Lake and maintaining a luxury commercial park.

We have heard the speech of the hon Motlanthe earlier this afternoon.
Clearly, we must pay attention and pay heed to the lives of the poor. The
inequality in allocating public funds in the City of Cape Town is
staggering, yet the poor and the rich are equal members of our society and
we must pay heed to their needs.

                   PUBLIC PARTICIPATION AND NUCLEAR ENERGY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs C DUDLEY (ACDP): Chairperson, the ACDP notes that government, in a
recent briefing, has finally come clean about its commitment to nuclear
energy for South Africa. However, the ACDP regards it as outrageous that
government has made this commitment without public participation.

The ACDP submitted a question to the Minister of Minerals and Energy asking
when a decision was made by Cabinet to commit South Africa to nuclear power
as the major component of its energy, and whether government intends
meaningful public participation on the implementation of its nuclear energy
plans. These questions were due to be answered in Parliament this week, but
the Minister was overseas.

After causing havoc and danger to life, in mines and factories and millions
of homes, Eskom then halted power outages altogether and the increased
demands at the start of the winter’s cold weather have not necessitated new
cuts. This has only increased the suspicion that outages never did have
anything to do with supply. Allegations that cuts were part of an
elaborate, if clumsy, plan to manipulate the nation into accepting nuclear
power without questioning its deadly dangers in terms of toxic waste and
huge expense, are still a cause for great concern.

The ACDP and concerned members of the public have called for public
participation to take place its, and for government to reveal plans for
toxic waste. The White Paper on Energy promised public participation, but
then a Nuclear Summit in 2004 was cancelled at the last minute by
government after delegates had already arrived in the city.

It is the public who will pay for this industrialisation, which has been
said by Minister Erwin on Carte Blanche to be an investment largely for
massive opportunities, meaning to sell pebble-bed reactors to other
countries.

Apart from toxic waste, the question is: Is it possible we have a
“Nucleargate” pending? [Time expired.]

       CONDITIONS IN ZIMBABWE NOT CONDUCIVE TO FREE AND FAIR ELECTIONS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs P DE LILLE (ID): Chairperson, I visited Zimbabwe yesterday and I was
able to secure a meeting with the MDC and the crisis coalition in Zimbabwe,
but I was not able to meet and secure an appointment with Zanu-PF. While I
had hoped that there was something that could be done to salvage a
democratic process in Zimbabwe, I am very sad to say that the conditions
are not at all conducive for free and fair elections. There is absolutely
no free political activity. Zanu-PF’s election campaign has been run by the
military and the police, and young militias are criss-crossing the country
on a daily basis with the sole aim of intimidation and brutality.

In my meeting with Morgan Tsvangirai yesterday, he raised the following
issue, namely that the outcome of the election is not the problem anymore.
It is a transition from one government to the next which is the greatest
challenge.

Mugabe will refuse to hand over power, whatever the outcome of the
elections. He said: ``Only a negotiated settlement before 27 June 2008 can
stop the crisis in Zimbabwe.’’

I hereby make an appeal to all SADC leaders to assist our president,
President Mbeki, to find a peaceful and amicable solution in Zimbabwe.

                    REMARKS BY LEADER OF IFP ON ELECTIONS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M J J MATSOMELA (ANC): Chair, during the Inkatha Youth Brigade’s 16 June
celebrations in KwaMashu on Monday, the leader of the IFP said:


  Since 1994, when our freedom dawned, there has not been a single election
  in which some rigging and fraud has not taken place. It may not have
  happened on as large a scale as we have seen in some of our African
  countries, such as Nigeria, Kenya or Zimbabwe. All you can guarantee is
  that such shenanigans do not continue to take place during our own
  election next year.

This is a reckless and irresponsible statement to be made by a member of
this House. It casts aspersions on the credibility of the Independent
Electoral Commission and the people who lead it.

The ANC believes that there is a need for members of this House, first and
foremost, and the public in general to respect and defend the institutions
of the democratic state, especially those entrusted with supporting and
defending our democracy.

                VIOLENCE AGAINST AND ABUSE OF ELDERLY PEOPLE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S RAJBALLY (MF): Chairperson, the fight against violence and abuse of
women and children has had a great impact on decreasing the incidence of
crimes of this nature and giving victims of these abuses a voice. We are,
however, concerned about the violence against and abuse of the elderly,
especially pensioners who are victims of similar abuse. It is reported that
in Pretoria alone, 15 cases are reported every month. I believe if we were
to do a countrywide investigation into the abuse of violence against the
elderly, we would be shocked by the statistics.

I call on the House to unite against violence against and abuse of women,
children and the elderly. We need to create awareness of abuse of elders
and mobilise communities against it. We call on the executive to denounce
all forms of violence against and abuse of the elderly.

                      AFRICA MUST PUNISH ITS OWN PEOPLE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr S E M PHEKO (PAC): Chairman, African leaders who have the propensity for
dictatorship and tyranny and commit gross violations of human rights must
be punished in Africa through the appropriate judicial institutions of the
AU. This is not meant to cast aspersions on the integrity of the
International Criminal Court.

It cannot be disputed, however, that sophisticated guns that kill Africans
in civil wars in Africa come from outside Africa. The AU must be careful
that it does not compromise the sovereignty of its member states in an
international political game which is not clean and whose credo is: Might
is Right!

The PAC observes that there is still a great deal of selective morality and
legality in international politics. For instance, America and Britain
occupied Iraq and killed thousands of Iraqi women and children under the
false cover that Iraq had weapons of mass destruction, but President Bush
and former Prime Minister Blair have not been summoned before the ICC.
Countries such as America have not even signed the statute of the ICC.

Meanwhile, former Liberian president, Charles Taylor, who claims to have
been initially supported by the American government in Liberia and Sierra
Leone, has been hauled before the ICC. Now recently, another African leader
has been summoned before the ICC. Sooner rather than later the ICC will be
full of violators of human rights from Africa, but none from Europe or
America.

             COMPLAINT AGAINST CAPE JUDGE PRESIDENT JOHN HLOPHE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs S M CAMERER (DA): Thank you, Chairperson. As a member of the Judicial
Services Commission and on behalf of the DA, I would like to express our
deep concern about the revelations reported in today’s media relating to
the Constitutional Court’s complaint against Judge President John Hlophe,
presently before the JSC.

This concerns the allegation by the court that Hlophe had approached
Constitutional Court judge, Bess Nkabinde, about a note on the issue of
privilege in relation to the Thint-Zuma cases recently heard by the court,
which she was drafting for the Chief Justice. A surprised Nkabinde was
allegedly told by Hlophe that he knew she was drafting the note because,
among other things, he was connected to members of the National
Intelligence Agency.

The implications of this are extremely grave, namely that our
Constitutional Court judges are being spied on by our National Intelligence
Agency. If this is true, then the white-anting of the institutional
framework of our democracy is even worse than we suspected.

Indeed, as DA leader Helen Zille has said, our entire constitutional order
is under threat. We have already seen how we are reaping the whirlwind of
the ANC’s policy of cadre redeployment, as cadres from one ANC faction
undermine and, lately, threaten and even attempt to kill, cadres from
another.

We had hoped that our judiciary was immune from such shenanigans, but this
no longer seems to be the case. If intelligence services have been abused
to the extent of spying on judges, the damage inflicted by Polokwane has
reached a new low.

The DA demands that the Minister for Intelligence, Mr Ronnie Kasrils,
immediately engages with the JSC and the Constitutional Court to launch a
full investigation into this apparent appalling abuse of the security
services. Thank you. [Applause.]

                           DEATH OF MOSES MAGONGWA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr P A GERBER (ANC): Huisvoorsitter, Moses Magongwa is tragies oorlede ’n
week voordat hy in die Lephalale Landbouforum se Plaaswerker van die Jaar
kompetisie, die prys vir die tweede plek ontvang het. Die organiseerders
het besluit om die prys postuum aan sy familie te oorhandig.

Sy werkgewer, mnr Willie Motsamai Vos, het ’n emosiebelaaide huldeblyk,
volledig in Setswana, oor Moses gelewer. Hy het, onder andere, gesê: “Vir
my vrou en myself was hy soos die seun wat op die plaas gebly het om na sy
bejaarde ouers om te sien. Nou sal ek na sy vrou, Francina, en sy twee
klein kindertjies omsien. Hulle is nou my kinders, my verantwoordelikheid
en ek sal sorg dat, solank ek lewe, hulle niks sal tekortkom nie.”

Die pragtige verhouding tussen hierdie boer, mnr Willie Motsamai Vos, en sy
plaaswerkers, spruit uit die filosofie dat die boer en sy werkers se
welstand vervleg is met mekaar, soos die twee kante van dieselfde muntstuk.

Die ANC doen ’n beroep op boere en plaaswerkers om, gesamentlik, ’n kultuur
van wedersydse respek, vertroue en omgee te bou, soos wat die geval was
tussen mnr Willie Vos en ... (Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement
follows.)

[Mr P A GERBER (ANC): Chairperson of the House, Moses Magongwa died
tragically a week before he was to receive the second prize in the
Lephalale Agricultural Forum’s Farmworker of the Year competition. The
organisers decided to hand over the prize to his family posthumously.

His employer, Mr Willie Motsamai Vos, delivered an emotional eulogy to
Moses, entirely in Setswana. He said, amongst other things: “To my wife and
I he was like the son who remained on the farm to care for his elderly
parents. Now I’ll take care of his wife, Francina, and his two little
children. They are now my children, my responsibility and I will see to it
that for as long as I live they will lack for nothing”.

This wonderful relationship between this farmer, Mr Willie Motsamai Vos,
and his farm workers, arises from the philosophy that the wellbeing of the
farmer and his workers are intertwined, like the two sides of the same
coin.
The ANC appeals to farmers and farmworkers, collectively, to build a
culture of mutual respect, trust and caring, like in the case of Mr Willie
Vos and ...]

... Moses Magongwa, who passed away a week before the award ceremony of the
Lephalale Agricultural Forum’s Farmworker of the Year competition, in which
he was the runner-up. The organisers decided to honour his memory and
handed over his prize to his family.

His employer, Mr Willie Vos delivered the eulogy in Setswana, which
demonstrated the kind of a relationship he had with the deceased. Amongst
other things he said,

  To my wife and I he was like a son who lived on the farm to take care of
  his aging parents. Now, I’ll take care of his wife, Francina, and his two
  little children. They’re my children now, my responsibility and I will see
  to it that they will lack for nothing as long as I live.

The relationship the farmer has with his farmworkers arises from the
understanding that his fortunes are intimately linked with the fortunes of
the workers. Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

            CHINESE PEOPLE INCLUDED IN DEFINITION OF BLACK PEOPLE

                            (Member’s Statement)
Prof E S CHANG (IFP): Chairperson, the IFP welcomes the ruling by the High
Court that Chinese South Africans will be included in the definition of
black people in legislation which is intended to benefit previously
disadvantaged groups.

This will mean that Chinese people are eligible for the benefits reserved
for those who were discriminated against during apartheid. Under the
apartheid regime, Chinese people, who were classified as Coloured, also
suffered the discrimination, humiliation and abuse that were meted out to
nonwhites.

The Chinese community is proud to be part of this great country. It was
therefore really disheartening that we were, once again, marginalised after
the elections in 1994, by not being included in the definition of black
people in terms of the Broad-based Black Economic Empowerment Act and the
Employment Equity Act.

The ruling is the result of a lot of hard work, as Chinese South Africans
had been struggling for many years to obtain clarity on this important
issue. We hope that the necessary amendments will be made to relevant Acts
as soon as possible.

Now that the High Court has made its ruling, I believe that the Chinese
community will be able to make an even greater contribution to the growth
of the economy and the creation of jobs in South Africa. Thank you.
             HOUSES IN POORTJIE BUILT BY LEEUKOP PRISON INMATES

                            (Member’s Statement)


Mr G D SCHNEEMANN (ANC): Chairperson, on Friday, 30 May 2008, the City of
Johannesburg’s housing department and workers from its municipal-owned
entities, the Department of Correctional Services at the Leeuwkop Prison,
and members of the community and sponsors came together to build 10 houses
in Poortjie.

Forming part of the team of builders were 30 inmates from the Leeuwkop
Correctional Services facility. They worked together with members of the
community and the Department of Housing to improve the living conditions of
10 families.

We agree with the Deputy Minister of Correctional Services that the housing
project will go a long way in providing shelter and warmth to their new
owners, and that it showcases best practices in terms of co-operative
governance, restorative justice, giving back and demonstrating that hands
that hurt should also be hands that heal. This project also helped the
department to promote correction, rehabilitation, reconciliation and
forgiveness between criminals and victims of crime and violence.

We applaud the initiative by the various stakeholders as one among many
efforts that South Africans are engaged in, in pursuance of the goal of a
better life for all. I thank you.

       OVERPRESCRIPTION OF STIMULANTS AND ANTIDEPRESSANTS TO CHILDREN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs S V KALYAN (DA): Chairperson, drugs destroy millions of lives every
year and the increase in the incidence of drug abuse among children and
teenagers is indeed quite alarming.

While there may be many factors contributing to the increased drug use,
including social and moral decay, one of the main reasons for drug abuse
can be attributed to the overprescription of stimulants and antidepressants
to children as young as five years. There is enough evidence to confirm
that the use of so-called ``gateway drugs’’ from an early age can lead to
dependence on harder drugs like cocaine. Quite often it is a case of
misdiagnosis that leads to the initial prescription.

The DA calls on the Minister of Health to provide statistics using the
International Classification of Diseases, 10th revision, to determine how
many children have been prescribed antidepressants and stimulants and to
enforce stricter legislation around the prescription of narcotic drugs for
children.

             ROOTING OUT CORRUPTION IN MTHONJANENI MUNICIPALITY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnu B J MNYANDU (ANC): Ngiyabonga Sihlalo. UKhongolose ulishayela ihlombe
igalelo likaNgqongqoshe wesifundazwe woMnyango Wezenhlalakahle
Nokuthuthukiswa Komphakathi, uNgqongqoshe uMeshack Radebe, lokulwa
nenkohlakalo ebhokile kulo Mnyango eMelmoth, eMthonjaneni Municipality.
Bese kunemoto esuka nabantu eThekwini imbala ikhukhuse nabo ibanga
elingamakhulu amabili amakhilomitha idlula amadolobha namadolobhanyana
kuyiwa eMthonjaneni lapho bezimbiwe khona yintsele yazishiya.

Abantu bendawo bona abangakwazi ukugwaza bebetshelwa ukuthi amafomu
aphelile. Abanye bebesuswa ngabomu kwikhompiyutha ukuze babuye bezoncenga,
ngakho phela ukugwaza. Nabantu abaphunyelwa izimali zabo bebethola ucingo
ngasese betshelwa ukuthi abakhokhe nxa seyiphumile le mali kapoyinande
phela. Ngaphandle kwaleli hhovisi bese kunendoda elokhu izulazula nohlu
olunamagama abantu nomazisi babo bezobhaliswa lapha emuva kokuchama phela.

Lo mkhankaso wokulwa nobugebengu emahhovisi ezenhlalakahle ne-SA Social
Security Agency, i-Sassa, uthathe elinye igxathu lapho izigilamkhuba
zidubule zabulala inhloko yentsha ebiyisishoshovu sokulwa nobugebengu kulo
Mnyango. Kuso lesi sifunda sasenyakatho neKwaZulu-Natali, eNgwelezane,
emasontweni amabili edlule inezinsuku ezimbili vo iqalile kulo msebenzi.
Emndenini kaMnu Dlamini oshonile elwa nalokhu kuxhashazwa kwemali
yezibonelelo sithi: “Dudu.” Iqhawe liwile lasala empini lilwa namasela.
Kubabulali sithi: “Ingalo yomthetho yinde futhi kayisoze yakhathala
zingakavalelwa izigebengu.” Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu
member’s statement follows.)

[Mr B J MNYANDU (ANC): Thank you, Chairperson. The ANC commends the role
played by the provincial Minister of the Department of Social Welfare and
Population Development, the hon Meshack Radebe, for fighting corruption,
which is rife in this department, in Melmoth, in the Mthonjaneni
Municipality. A car which used to carry people from Durban and travelled a
distance of about two hundred kilometres passed through towns and villages
heading to Mthonjaneni, where everyone did as they pleased.

Local people who couldn’t pay bribes were told that there were no more
forms, whilst other people’s names were deliberately deleted from the
system so that they could come back and ask for help through bribery. And
people who were receiving social grants, were secretly contacted and told
that they should pay a share to these officials. Outside this office, a man
was walking up and down with a list of the names of people and their
Identity Documents to be registered there after they had paid the bribes,
of course.

This campaign of fighting corruption in the offices of the Department of
Social Welfare and Population Development and the South African Social
Security Agency, Sassa, had taken a new dimension when the criminals shot
and killed the youth leader who was the activist in fighting corruption in
this department. It happened here, two weeks ago in the same region of
Northern KwaZulu-Natal, in Ngwelezane, and he only worked for two days.

To the family of Mr Dlamini, who passed away fighting the squandering of
the state’s grants, we extend our condolences. A hero has fallen while
fighting thieves. And to the killers we say: The arm of the law is long and
it will not rest until the culprits are caught and locked up. Thank you.
[Applause.]]

                           DEATH OF MOSES MAGONGWA

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Chairperson, may I start with the statement made by
the hon member Gerber about the farmer. Luckily, this confirms what I have
been saying but nobody seemed to have been listening. Not all farmers are
bad. You can therefore not paint all farmers with the same brush. There are
many good farmers. I have seen plenty of them and I have visited a number
of them. They are very good and treat their workers very well.

Yes, there are bad farmers, but we always want to use the good farmer to be
an example to the bad one. We always preach to the sinner but it is
important for those who do not sin to show the good course to those who are
bad. How I wish this farmer looked after the kids, the wife and the entire
family of this worker before he died!

In elk geval, ek is baie, baie dankbaar dat die boer dit gedoen het. [In
any case, I am very, very thankful that the farmer did that.]

He was looking after his workers and loved them like his own sons and
daughters. In particular, the paragraph that says:

  To other people in a place that they visited together, this might have
  seemed strange to stay together in one bungalow, a boss and his worker
  eating together, sharing accommodation, but Moses and I were just two
  friends working side by side.


That is exactly the type of labour market regime that the ANC has
promulgated in this country to make sure that there is stability and peace.
Workers and their employers must work side by side.

According to the information I have just received from my lawyers in the
department, nothing will change in the employment equity legislation. If
the judge says you as a Chinese are black, then that is what the law says.
Black means the following: If you were classified as Coloured in the past,
the law covers you because there are South African Swazis, there are South
African Basotho, and there are South African Batswana. I hope they all
understand the complications of what they have done. There is no problem
with the employment equity legislation, hon member. Do not give yourself
much hope. [Time expired.]

      OPPOSITION TO CALL TO ESTABLISH STREET COMMITTEES TO FIGHT CRIME
              COMPLAINT AGAINST CAPE JUDGE PRESIDENT JOHN HLOPE

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Thank you very much, Chairperson. It
is going to be difficult for me to respond to the issue you are raising,
given that you are now in the Chair. But I would assume that it is being
raised by your party, and so, I am going to be addressing your party. I am
so surprised that there are still public representatives here who do not
understand the concept of “community policing”. I am very surprised, but I
am going to ask those who are involved in such a concept to give lessons to
those who do not understand it.

One of them is the hon Patricia de Lille. She, together with a number of
people where she lives, have grouped themselves into units who are working
with the police. That’s community policing. Here in the Western Cape, all
the townships - Gugulethu, Khayelitsha and so on - have what they have
called the Bambanani Campaign. That is community policing.

I am not going to talk about what the ANC is doing but let me indicate that
as a consequence of community policing in those areas where a number of our
people have joined the police to work together, the crime levels have gone
down. I am not going further. There are people here who can give lessons on
that concept of community policing.

The last point that I want to make relates to what the hon Sheila Camerer
has said about, firstly, her membership of the Judicial Services Commission
and some of the work they will do there. Hon member, I think you have
disqualified yourself from further participation; at least with respect to
this particular case. How can you formulate a strategy that talks to issues
which will come before that commission and right away you are saying that
this matter has to do with the ANC? You have disqualified yourself and I do
not believe that in your position you should serve on the commission to
discuss this particular matter. You can sit on other commissions. You have
preconceived ideas about the issue that is going to go under investigation.
You have disqualified yourself. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon Minister, I think I am also
shackled by the Chair not to correct you.
             HOUSES IN POORTJIE BUILT BY LEEUKOP PRISON INMATES

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, I would like to thank the
hon G D Schneemann for his statement. What the statement clearly indicates
is that where there is an integrated approach the beneficiaries - the
women, the children and the disabled – indeed benefit from these efforts.
Therefore, we would to like to thank the Department of Housing, the
Department of Correctional Services as well as the City of Johannesburg for
their integrated approach. We fully subscribe to the adage that the hand
that harms can indeed become the hand that heals. indeed, we think this
step by the Department of Correctional Services has contributed in a very
meaningful way to the quality of life of our people, and we say that this
is an indication of the fact that it is business unusual where government
departments and spheres of government unite in an effort to ensure that
there is service delivery. Then a difference can be made in the lives of
the poorest of the poor and the vulnerable. Thank you.

    REPEAL OF THE BLACK ADMINISTRATION ACT AND AMENDMENT OF CERTAIN LAWS
                               AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

Mr J B SIBANYONI: Chairperson, hon members of the House, accept my
apologies. The Black Administration Act started as the Native
Administration Act. It was later amended by the previous government as the
Bantu Affairs Administration Act and, finally, as the Black Administration
Act. The major portions of the Act were repealed in 2005, and it was
crucial that some of the provisions were retained for the following
reasons, and I quote:

   Some of the provisions of the Black Administration Act dealt with the
   African value system, which has evolved over time and is seen as vital in
   attaining the goal of access to justice.


The process of passing alternative legislation, namely the Traditional
Courts Bill, is still underway. This Bill that I’m talking about has as its
aim to ensure the effectiveness and efficiency of the traditional court
system in the administration of justice, and to harmonise the traditional
justice system with the Constitution.

Gadesi ngifuna ukukhuluma ngalokho esele kwenziwe malungana nomthetho
namasiko wesikhethu. UmThethomlingwa lo i-Traditional Court Bill, sele
uthuliwe ngaphambi kwePalamende, begodu wagadangiswa nephephandabeni
lombuso.

Ukukhulumisana nokufaka iimphakamiso sele kuthomile. A makhosi wendabuko
neenhlangano zomphakathi ziyikhambele imihlangano ebizwa yi Komiti
yezoBulungiswa nokuThuthukiswa komThethosisekelo ngePalamende.

Kubonakele bonyana isikhathi angeze sanela sokubana kuqedwe ukukhulumisana
begodu kuphasiswe umthetho lo kungakapheli sigaba somnyaka lesi esikiso,
ngombana soke siyazi bona umnyaka ozako kuyiwa emakhethweni. Begodu kunengi
ekusafanele kukhulunyiswane ngomthetho lo, Nendlu yesibili yesiBethamthetho
kufanele ithole nesikhathi esaneleko soku wukhulumisa umtheththo lo
ngokulandela isahluko 76 somThethosisekelo.

UmNyango wezoBulungiswa nokuThuthukiswa komThethosisekelo begodu neKomiti
le, bakhulumisene namakhosi wendabuko kwavunyelwana ngo “ngelethu”.
Sikuthokozela khulu kwamambala lokho. Azange kube khona ukurarana namkha
kube nomraro.

Kuvunyelwene ngokubana kube khona isiqhema namkha ihlangano efaka nezinye
iinhlangano ngaphakathi esiyibiza ngokuthi yi-Multi Party Committee.
Ikomiti le inamalunga amahlanu ahloniphekileko wePalamende, ibe namalunga
amahlanu ajamele iNdlu yamaKhosi, kubekhona iinhlangano ezingekho ngaphasi
kombuso ezinamalunga amahlanu, ngikhuluma ngeenhlangano ezifana ne-Cosatu
begodu neKomitjhini yamaLungelo woBuntu, abantu beNgubo nebeMbaji.

Ikomiti le izokuqalisisa beyithole lokho ekufanele kukhulunyiswane ngakho
ukuze bebabonisane ngalokho ekutholileko. Izakuvumelana bonyana
kuzokuthiwani ngalokho, nokuthi ngiziphi ezinye godu okufanele bonyana
zilungiswe. Siqale bonyana imikhulumiswano iragele phambili njenganje ukuze
sikghone ukuvumelana kungakapheli inyanga kaRhoboyi.

Ikomiti le izakunikelwa ithuba elinengi lokukhulumisana nokubonisana
nabantu begodu neenhlangano ezijamele umphakathi. Sinethemba kwamanikelela
bonyana kuzakuba netjhebiswano nokuvumelana emaswapheleni.

Ngithokoza khulu amakhosi wendabuko ngokukghona kwabo ukubonisana nathi.
Siyazi bonyana amakhosi wendabuko abavikeli bamasiko nemithetho yesikhethu.


Ngithanda ukuthatha ithubeli ngithokoze bakaPhunga nomaGeba, nakini
bakaMantantisi, nakini bakaSikhukhune. Angifuni ukutjhiya ngaphandle
namunye umuntu begodu nabunye ubukhosi obujanyelweko eSewula Afrika. Ngabe
ngiyatjhapha nangeze ngathokoza nesizukulwana sikaMusi noMhlanga. Kuwe kosi
yakwaBaloyi, iLunga elihloniphekileko lePalamende, umhlonitjwa uShilubana,
njengabavikeli bamasiko nomthetho wesikhethu, ngithi endabeni le yomthetho
wamakhotho, siyathokoza ukubambisana kwenu nathi. Ngithi Ndabezitha!
Ngithokoze Sihlalo. (Translation of isiNdebele paragraphs follows.)

[Now I would like to talk about the progress made concerning the
Traditional Courts Bill. This Bill has been tabled before Parliament, and
published in the Government Gazette.

Discussions that include the public have already started. Traditional
leaders and community structures have attended the public hearings called
by Parliament’s Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
Development.

It seems that there will not be enough time to complete the public hearings
or to pass this Bill before the end of the current session, since we all
know that next year we are going to have an election. There is still a lot
to be discussed in respect of this Bill, and the second House of Parliament
also needs enough time to discuss the Bill as per section 76 of the
Constitution.

The Department of Justice and Constitutional Development and this committee
have held discussions with the traditional leaders and have reached a
unanimous decision. We appreciate that. There were no misunderstandings or
problems.

The agreement was that there should be a team or an organisation that would
comprise of other organisations that we would call the Multi Party
Committee. This committee will consist of five Members of Parliament, five
members representing the House of Traditional Leaders, and five members
from the non-governmental organisations. Here I am talking about
organisations like Cosatu, the Human Rights Commission, women and men.

This committee will look at and find out what needs to be discussed and
share ideas about their findings. It will agree on what is to be said and
what areas need fixing. We are looking forward to seeing those discussions
proceeding from now so that we can agree before the end of August.

This committee will be given enough time to hold discussions and share
ideas with the people and organisations that represent communities. We are
hopeful that there will be co-operation and understanding at the end.

I thank the traditional leaders for engaging in sharing ideas with us. We
know that traditional leaders are custodians of our culture and traditional
laws.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank those from Phunga and
Mageba, those from Mantantisi and also those from Sikhukhune. I don’t want
to leave out even one chieftaincy that is represented in South Africa. I
will be making a mistake if I do not thank the grandchildren of Musi and
Mhlanga. To you, Chief of Baloyi, the hon Member of Parliament, hon
Shilubana, as custodians of our culture and traditional laws, I say on this
issue of the Traditional Courts Bill, thank you for co-operating with us. I
say: Hail to the King! Thank you Chairperson.]

There was no debate.

Bill read a second time.

                NATIONAL PROSECUTING AUTHORITY AMENDMENT BILL
                 SOUTH AFRICAN POLICE SERVICE AMENDMENT BILL

                           (First Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Hon Chairperson and hon members of the
House, the Bills that are before this House today are a culmination of
various discussions that have been taking place at government level, and in
other instances, within the ruling African National Congress. Dominating
all of those discussions was the matter of crime in South Africa,
generally, and organised crime, specifically, and how to prevent and combat
this scourge.

I would like to suggest, Madam Speaker, that representatives of the ANC, in
this or other debates in future, talk about such engagements in the past,
leading up to the ANC's policy conference, as well as the Polokwane
National Conference in December last year. As an ANC member, I know about
the earlier discussions. And those of us who were, for instance, at the
Stellenbosch Conference in 2002, know that the matter was suggested at that
conference. I have participated, also at government level, in a number of
instances where crime was analysed and strategies and tactics were
developed to deal with the matter.

The crux of the discussions was that we needed to evaluate the organs of
state that deal with crime and, where weaknesses existed, rectify the
problem through various interventions. The interventions included the
allocation to law enforcement agencies of better resources, human and
material, better training of personnel, and the restructuring and
realignment of the relevant units.

One of the matters that came under focused attention at Cabinet level was
organised crime, which impacts negatively on the psyche of our nation,
given its violent nature and the increased circulation of illegal drugs
that are a generator of serious and violent crime.

State institutions that play a crucial role in the fight against organised
crime include the South African Police Service’s Organised Crime Unit and
Commercial Branch, the Directorate of Special Operations or Scorpions,
Special Investigative and Asset Forfeiture Units that fall under Justice,
the Department of Home Affairs’ National Immigration Branch, the Department
of Finance, South African Revenue Service and Customs and Excise.

Also critical to the fight against organised crime is the intelligence
community, which is comprised of the National Intelligence Agency, the
South African Secret Service and the National Communication Centre, that
fall under the Ministry for Intelligence Services, Crime and Defence
Intelligence and the Financial Intelligence Centre.

Cabinet decided that our response to the strategic and tactical questions
that were being thrown up by the changing face of crime and criminality in
our country had to be exhaustive and cover, therefore, the entire criminal
justice system. The Justice, Crime Prevention and Security cluster of
Cabinet was instructed to articulate a strategy to establish a new,
modernised, efficient, effective and transformed criminal justice system.

We defined our mandate as a cluster as a project to establish a modernised
criminal justice system that would include the adoption of a single vision
and mission, leading to a single set of objectives, priorities and
performance measurement targets, as well as the adaptation and realignment
of the operations of relevant departments and agencies to eliminate all
manifest weaknesses in the system, including conflict and contradictions.

The implementation of some aspects of the modernisation of the criminal
justice system has started. The Deputy Minister of Justice, the hon Johnny
de Lange, was appointed by the President to convene the co-ordinating and
management structure, which will lead the initiatives that will change the
entire system for the better.

The desire to achieve effectiveness and efficiency pervaded discussions
about the state institutions that we have and brought to the fore some of
the weaknesses we have to address.

One of the consequences of the strategies we were formulating was the
appointment by the President of the Khampepe Commission, which I shall get
back to later in my input.

The two Bills before this House today, the South African Police Service
Amendment Bill and the National Prosecuting Authority Amendment Bill, are
part of our response to organised crime.

The South African Police Service Amendment Bill seeks to enhance the
investigative capacity of the SA Police Service with respect to organised
and serious crime by establishing a Directorate for Priority Crime
Investigation to combat such crimes. It seeks to bring together the units
that exist in the police and in the Directorate of Special Operations that
are responsible for the investigation of those crimes.

The National Prosecuting Authority Amendment Bill creates the conditions
that will allow for the relocation of the special investigators of the DSO
to the SA Police Service to allow for the creation of the new Directorate
for Priority Crime Investigation.

The intention behind the creation of the new organised crime fighting unit
is to ensure that we deal effectively with such crime, using the best
investigators and crime fighters that are available in the various units.

The Khampepe Commission, dealing with organised crime in its report, made
the following observation:

   Despite indications that crime levels are dropping, it is my considered
   view that organised crime still presents a threat that needs to be
   addressed through a comprehensive strategy.

   At the relevant point in time, the body of the information and evidence
   strongly suggested a need by the government to have in place a coherent,
   effective strategy in the fight against organised crime. Foreign
   jurisdictions that I visited in the course of the commission's work also
   indicate a global trend towards creating instruments of a specialised
   nature in addressing and combating or mitigating the effects of organised
   crime.

Justice Khampepe also reported that a new agency would be established in
the United Kingdom called the Serious Organised Crime Agency, which would
bring together the National Crime Squad, the National Criminal Intelligence
Service, the Home Office's organised immigration crime sectors and the
investigation and intelligence responsibilities of Her Majesty’s Customs
and Excise, whose core objective would be "to reduce the harm caused to the
United Kingdom by organised crime, including the trafficking of drugs and
people".

The sentiment expressed by the Khampepe Commission is embraced in what we
are doing. In our view, though, it is better to relocate the special
investigators of the DSO to the police for better and effective command and
control.

The Bills before this House are the vehicles we need to strengthen and
consolidate the fight against organised crime. We require support as we
pilot them through Parliament.

I want to reiterate, of course, the fact that those who will be transferred
to the SAPS from the DSO are not going to lose any of the benefits they
have.

The South African Police Service Amendment Bill also talks to the matter of
investigations that are ongoing and/or before the court that the DSO is
handling. Those matters will not be affected by the relocation. They will
continue until finalisation in keeping with our law.

I move, therefore, hon Chairperson, that the Bills be read for the first
time. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L K JOUBERT: Chairperson, I have a press release here that was issued on
1 September 1999. It says: “Welcome the Scorpions! The sting is going to
get you.” Then it goes on to say: “The new pride of South Africa has
arrived.” It did, indeed, become the pride of South Africa and everybody
knows how successful they were in fighting crime. Now we want to dismantle
it.

We all know that this Bill is the result of a resolution taken at Polokwane
last year, but in his inaugural speech at Polokwane, the new president of
the ANC identified crime as a counter-revolutionary force and a threat to
economic growth and social stability. Maybe the delegates did not listen to
him, because shortly afterwards the resolution calling for the dissolution
of the Scorpions was adopted.

There is a serious contradiction here. How can one recognise crime as a
threat and at the same time kill the only successful crime fighting unit we
have? Let us look at the resolution adopted at Polokwane. The relevant part
reads:

  ... the constitutional imperative that there should be a single police
  service should be implemented. The Directorate of Special Operations
  should therefore be dissolved.

It seems that nobody at Polokwane, or thereafter, had read the Khampepe
Report or our Constitutional Court judgement. Judge Khampepe clearly stated
in her report that the establishment of the Scorpions was not in
contravention of the Constitution. While the Constitution states that there
should be only one defence force and one police service, it does not
prohibit the establishment of a complementary or supplementary law
enforcement agency, as was also made clear by the Constitutional Court in a
judgement of 2002. In other words, the whole premise on which the decision
was taken to dissolve the Scorpions was a false one, but we know the real
reason, and so does everybody out there. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, the issue of the future of the Scorpions is
about crime and accountability. It is about crime inasmuch as it has to do
with the right of all South Africans to go about their lives in the secure
knowledge that the law enforcement agencies will take reasonable measures
to protect them from the scourge of crime. It is about accountability
inasmuch as it has to do with the fiduciary obligation of this state to act
in the best interests of all its citizens.

The ACDP believes that the government has breached this obligation by
reversing its decision on the Khampepe Commission’s report to further the
narrow interests of the ruling party. By doing so, we believe, the
government has sacrificed the wellbeing of all South Africans on the altar
of political expediency. The executive and Parliament have constitutional
constraints.

The hon Motlanthe referred to the rule of law earlier today; the rule of
law is a foundational value of the Constitution. All law that is
inconsistent with the principle of legality is liable to be set aside. It
is a component of the principle of legality that government conduct must
not be arbitrary. In other words, all government conduct must be rationally
connected to a legitimate government purpose, failing which it will be
arbitrary, and hence, unconstitutional and liable to be struck down.

It was common cause amongst all the parties in the Glenister application,
including the government, that the Scorpions had been extremely successful
in the fight against crime. Indeed, I don’t think anyone can dispute that
fact. The ANC’s decision to disband the Scorpions was not motivated by the
fact that the Scorpions have been unsuccessful, but was rather motivated by
the fact that the Scorpions have been too successful, particularly in their
investigations of high-profile ANC members.

I wish to repeat my appeal to members of the ruling party. Let’s talk about
the issue of relocating the Scorpions. Let’s consider real concerns, such
as: Does the SAPS have the capacity to accommodate the Scorpions? By what
stretch of the imagination would the SAPS be able to retain and attract
accountants and lawyers required for this unit? And how can the principle
of constant prosecutorial oversight in investigations, which is the
cornerstone of the Scorpions and its success, be maintained if the
Scorpions are incorporated into the SAPS?

The Khampepe Report stated categorically in its conclusion that it is
conceivable that the legislature will see fit to repeal the provisions of
the NPA Act that relate to the activities and location of the DSO. We
appear to be embarking on this inconceivable path. I thank you.

Ms M M SOTYU: Chairperson, organised crime is a challenge that affects
South Africa at all levels. It creates fear in the community and
contributes to economic instability. One can therefore not deny that it is
the state’s responsibility to put in place and further strengthen measures
to protect South Africa and its citizens from the effects of organised
crime.

The 8 January Statement of the ANC says, and I quote:

   We cannot allow criminality and lawlessness to undermine our hard-won
   freedoms and hinder the progress of our nation. We must act now and we
   must act together.

During his state of the nation address in 2008, President Thabo Mbeki
indicated the need for government to overhaul the criminal justice system,
in order to improve its effectiveness in dealing with crime in general and
organised crime in particular, as highlighted by the Minister of Safety and
Security.

These statements were preceded by the Khampepe Commission that found,
amongst other things, that organised crime still continued to present a
threat to the country’s young democracy, and that a comprehensive strategy
to address that problem had to be found. The commission further suggested a
need for government to have in place a coherent, effective strategy in the
fight against organised crime.

In line with the recommendation by the Khampepe Commission, the President’s
state of the nation address and the ANC’s 8 January Statement, this Bill
aims to establish the Directorate for Priority Crime Investigation that
would fight corruption and organised crime comprehensively.

This Bill provides an opportunity for the South African community to
interact with Parliament on serious issues of crime. The committees
responsible for this Bill will call for public hearings soon. We intend to
reach out to communities throughout the country and we will conduct public
hearings, not only in Cape Town and Parliament, but also in the provinces
in order to ensure the broadest possible opportunity for citizens to
participate.

Ayikho into yokuba singathi singurhulumente okhokelwa yi-ANC, sihlale apha
ePalamente silinde oongxowa-nkulu ukuba ibe ngabo abezayo ukuza kumamela
okanye bazise izimvo zabo. Siza kuhamba siye eluntwini sifumane izimvo zalo
kumaphondo onke. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[There is no way that, as the ANC-led government, we can sit around in this
Parliament and wait for big business to come and listen to our debates or
to make submissions. We are going to conduct public hearings in all
provinces so that we can interact with people and hear their views.]

We urge all communities to make use of this opportunity. Come to these
hearings and inform us about your views on the Bill. We further request
that in our interaction with this Bill, we aim as a nation to find
solutions and not merely be citizens without alternative suggestions. Let
your voice be heard.

Yizani nize kuthetha, bantu bakuthi. Siza kuphuma siyiPalamente siye kuva
izimvo zabantu. [Come and make submissions, countrymen. As Parliament, we
will go out and conduct public hearings so that we can hear the views of
our people.]

Crime is our common enemy. It affects our lives even if we are not directly
the victims in a crime committed. It strangles development and progress,
and it is the working class and the poor who are the main victims of crime.
As the ANC, we are committed to fighting crime and corruption effectively
in order to achieve the goals of our revolution: a free, just, safe and
equal South Africa belonging to all of us and its citizens. I thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Thank you, hon member. The hon L T
Landers.

Mr J B SIBANYONI: Chairperson, I am J B Sibanyoni. I pressed the button at
Mr Landers’s seat by mistake because I wanted to move closer to the
microphone.

Ngithanda ukwethula ikulumo le ngelimi lesikhethu, khona kuzakuzwa nabantu
abadinywa amathuba wokufunda ngesikhathi esigadungileko. Ikulumo le iqalene
nemiThethomlingwa emibili, yona ngile: Yi-National Prosecuting Authority
Amendment Bill ne-South African Police Service Amendment Bill.

Umnqopho omkhulu womthetho lo kutjhidisa, namkha - to relocate -
ngesikhuwa, aboFezela basuke hlangana nabatjhutjhisi bayokufakwa
esipholiseni, ekhabo lakhona. Abatjhutjhisi bangaphasi komNyango
wezoBulungiswa nokuThuthukiswa komThethosisekelo ngombana basebenza
ngamakhotho. AboFezela bamapholisa, basebenza ukwenza irhubhululo begodu
banjalo nje bayabopha, lowo msebenzi wesipholisa. Idokhethi bayinikela
umtjhutjhisi bese kuzakuba nguye othatha isiqunto sokubana uyatjhutjhisa
namkha awa.

Amapholisa angaphasi kwakaKomitjhinara wesipholisa, naboFezela kufanele
babesekhabo, ngaphasi kwesipholisa. Kufanele baye ngamakoro ngamakoro,
ekhabo lakhona. Indaba le yindala. Siyihlangano ye-ANC sayikhuluma
eMafikeng begodu sayikhuluma ne-Stellenbosch, esiFundeni seTjhingalanga
Kapa. UKhampepe, iJaji elihloniphekileko, naye khewayiqala indaba le
ngombana wabekelwa umsebenzi wokubanyana ayiqale.
Isiqunto se-ANC sathi isipholisa kufanele sibe sinye ngenarhenapha.
Njenganje kunemihlobo emibili yesipholisa: BoFezela nesipholisa
esijayekileko. IKomitjhini kaKhampepe yathi kufanele kube namano
aqakathekileko, comprehensive strategies, wokuthatha amagadango wokulwisana
nobulelesi ephasinapha.

Alo-ke indaba yaboFezela ayikathomi ePolokwane, eLimpopo, ngeyakade.
Kuyindaba endala kwamambala, sele ingaphezulu kweminyaka elisumi seloko
iphophothwa.

Siyisibethamthetho, sitjhugulula ihlelo lobulungiswa, i-criminal justice
system, siyihlalisa kuhle. Sakha i-Directorate of Priority Crime
Investigation, i-DPCI. Igameli umphakathi uzabe ulijwayele njengegama lama-
Scorpions. Abasebenza ku-Directorate of Special Operations, ama-Scorpions
ngelinye ibizo, angeze balahlekelwa msebenzi wabo, bazokuthathwa basiwe ku-
DPCI ngemva kokutjhejwa, into okutjhiwa yi-vetting ngesikhuwa namkha
ukuhlengwa. NeKomitjhini kaKhampempe yakhe yalikhuluma igameli lokuhlenga.
Imirholo yabo angeze yehla, imilandu ebayiphetheko angeze yaphela,
izokuragela phambili begodu umuntu ofuna ukuthokoza umsebenzi
uzazithokozela yena ngokwakhe. Njengehlangano ye-ANC ... (Translation of
isiNdebele paragraphs follows.)

[I would like to deliver this speech in my home language, so that those who
were deprived of educational opportunities during the apartheid era will be
able to understand. This speech focuses on two Bills, which are the
National Prosecuting Authority Amendment Bill and the South African Police
Service Amendment Bill.

The purpose of this Bill is to relocate the Scorpions from the National
Prosecuting Authority to the South African Police Service where they
belong. Prosecutors are under the Department of Justice and Constitutional
Development because they deal with issues of the courts. Scorpions are
police officers. They deal with investigations and arrests; that is their
job. The docket is handed over to the prosecutor who decides whether or not
to prosecute.

The Police Service falls under the South African Police Service
Commissioner and the Scorpions deserve to be there, under the Police
Service. Actually, they are supposed to be placed where they belong. This
matter has been in discussion for quite some time. As the ANC we discussed
this matter at Mafikeng and Stellenbosch in the Western Cape. Justice
Khampepe also looked at this matter extensively because she was tasked to
look at it.

The decision of the ANC was that the Police Service in this country should
be one. Now there are two types of police service: the Scorpions and the
normal police. The Khampempe Commission said: There should be a very
comprehensive strategy to fight crime in this country.

So the matter of the Scorpions did not start in Polokwane, Limpopo. This
issue has been under discussion for quite some time. It is an old matter;
it has been under discussion for more than 10 years.

We are a legislature, we restructure the criminal justice system, and we
are putting it in its place. We have created the Directorate of Priority
Crime Investigation, DPCI. The community will get used to this name like
they did with the Scorpions. Those who work at the Directorate of Special
Operations, the Scorpions, will not lose their jobs; they will be deployed
within the DPCI after vetting. Even the Khampepe Commission mentioned
vetting. Their salaries will not be reduced, and the cases they are working
on will not be taken from them. They will continue with those cases and the
persons who want to resign will do so of their own accord. The ANC is an
organisation ...]

... which lives and leads. We’ll also lead the fight against organised
crime. [Time expired.]

Mr Y I CARRIM: Chairperson, comrades and friends, who more than the ANC
stands to lose out if crime, including organised crime and corruption,
persists? After all, it is our constituency, largely the working class, the
poor and the marginalised, who are the main victims of crime. Moreover, it
is the ANC that is leading a major national democratic revolutionary
project, which requires safety and security as a key principle to be
ensured. Otherwise, how can you transform society as a whole?

On the other hand, precisely by addressing issues of organised crime and
corruption, we are able to advance and deepen the democratic transformation
to which we have been committed over centuries. In fact, this year the ANC
declared as its slogan, “the year of mass mobilisation for a caring
society”.

When we talk about a caring society what are we talking about if not safety
and security for all our people, which no doubt means that we must address
crime and corruption in general, but particularly organised crime. Again,
who are the main beneficiaries of organised crime if not the elite, and who
are its main victims if not the poor?

We want to stress, though, that we in the Portfolio Committee on Justice
are very clear that we cannot look at the issue of the Directorate of
Special Operations and its future without looking at the overhaul of the
criminal justice system, which Cabinet has been working on together with
Business Against Crime. Up until now, the public has not had a say on the
working progress of the government.

We were very pleased to hear yesterday that, indeed, the Ministries of
Justice and Safety and Security are, by Monday morning, to present an
overview, at least, of the new integrated criminal justice system that they
have been working on, for public comment. So, we are especially happy that
we are not just going to have public hearings on the two Bills that we are
speaking about, but indeed also on the basic and broad principles, as well
as an overview, of the new integrated criminal justice system.

In short, yes, we must look at the future of the Scorpions but no, we
should not look purely at the Scorpions, at the DSO, we should look at it
as part of the overall system, and it’s, indeed, that to which the public
hearings will be directed.

May I also point out that people can whinge and whine, but the final issue
is, people must come to the public hearings to express their point of view.
If they are opposed to the disbanding of the Scorpions, fine, this is their
Parliament. They must come and express that, but as committees for safety
and security and justice, we are committed to saying, fine.

What would you do as a member of the public if you were to incorporate the
Scorpions into the SA Police Service to ensure that it happens in a way
that advances and does not undermine the fight against organised crime and
corruption? Let’s use this as an opportunity not just to organise ourselves
better, both state and civil society, to deal with organised crime and
corruption, but to do it as part of a desperately needed, as we all agree,
new criminal justice system.
So, here is an opportunity. We want to have, as my colleague Comrade Maggie
Sotyu has said, massive public hearings. Not just here in Cape Town, where
the elite can gather, but throughout the length and breadth of our country.
Let’s use this and talk about organised crime and corruption, but also as
part of the struggle against crime and corruption in general, which is,
ultimately, what concerns the average person on ... [Time expired.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, crime in South Africa has been one of our
greatest challenges, second to poverty. They say that when a country
becomes democratic it may either end up in rebellion or sinking into
serious crime; and we are experiencing serious crime. It is not to say that
crime was not rife during the apartheid regime, but we just had less of it
and much of it was allowed.

We are pleased about the efforts to smoke out organised crime and the focus
it is being given. We respect the challenges the Directorate of Special
Operations had to face and the reasons for amending these Bills and
incorporating the DSO into the SA Police Service.

The major concern, however, is that the SAPS is seized with own challenges
of corrupt officials and the possibility of the specialised unit being
prevented from exercising lengthy investigations. This may be a threat.

However, we are certain that, given time, this may actually turn around the
situation of the SAPS and actually deliver on seriously addressing the
crime challenges and restructuring the SAPS with specialised and trained
members of the force.

If working together can curb and reduce crime, then the MF is pleased by
the amending Bill with its provisions and amendments. Thank you.

Mr L W GREYLING: Chair, these two Bills are aimed solely at destroying the
Directorate of Special Operations and establishing a new unit under the
control of the South African Police Service.

The ID is strongly opposed to these Bills as they will serve to weaken our
country’s crime fighting abilities, which are already under enormous
strain. The ID maintains that the continued existence of the Scorpions in
its current form, with prosecutorial powers, is an essential component in
the fight against crime – a position that has been reinforced by the
Khampepe Commission report.

When the Scorpions were first established 10 years ago, it was greeted with
widespread approval from all sectors of our society and was seen as a
measure of reviving public confidence in the country’s crime-combating
agents. The ID maintains that all of the initial reasons behind the setting
up of the Scorpions still exist today. It is clear that the specialised
work that the Scorpions undertake cannot simply be done by the existing
structures of the SAPS and a vacuum will once again arise if they are
simply disbanded.

The question can rightfully be asked as to who would have investigated the
Police Commissioner, Jackie Selebi, if the Scorpions did not exist or if
they were under the police? The public can justifiably feel suspicious that
this latest move to incorporate the Scorpions is due to their success in
investigating and prosecuting, amongst others, high-level ANC members.

It is of great concern to the ID that all the different organs of our
security apparatus have been used in some way or another to fight political
battles for factions of the ANC. If government is serious about fighting
crime, it is imperative that politics should be removed from the equation
and that all sections of the security apparatus should be allowed to pursue
criminal elements in our society, no matter what office they hold, without
fear or favour.

The ID will, therefore, closely monitor the passage of these Bills and
ensure that full public participation takes place, so that the views of the
public can be heard on this issue. We will not allow the ANC to simply ride
roughshod over the constitutional rights of the South African people, while
crime and corruption continue to plague our country. I thank you.

Mr H J BEKKER: Chairperson, let us call a spade a spade. The aim of this
legislation is to kill the Scorpions. Therefore, the choice before us today
is a simple one: Do we accept a recommendation by a High Court Commission
or do we accept the dubious and sinister Polokwane political
intervention? That lies at the heart of this matter - a choice between the
High Court and political manipulation. 

We in the IFP have faith and confidence in Judge Sisi Khampepe. We do not
have confidence in the manner in which the ANC is manipulating this
controversial matter. One can, of course, ask what lies at the heart of
this killing of the Scorpions and there is clearly but one answer: the
Scorpions have wandered into unwelcome territory. They have exercised their
right of independence to investigate anyone, irrespective of position. That
was their sin. For that they are to be assassinated. The ANC itself is
clearly scarred by recent events: Pikoli, Selebi, and now the Scorpions.

After Polokwane the ANC could no longer be the same. The ANC cannot expect
of us to support this proposal. We cannot rescue you from yourself. I thank
you.

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Chairperson, the hon Minister just said that the
decision was actually taken to better the position of the Scorpions. Hon
Minister, with great respect, in what way are the Scorpions going to be
better? You know very well, hon Minister, that this is a political decision
and not a decision based on facts or on merit.

Hoekom sê ek dit, Voorsitter? Wat is die kern van die Skerpioene se sukses?
Die kern daarvan is dat dit ’n vervolgingsgerigte ondersoeker was. Dit was
vervolgingsgerig juis omdat daar ’n samevoeging was van die Nasionale
Vervolgingsgesag aan die een kant, en die ondersoekers aan die ander kant,
om sodoende te verseker dat daar sukses is met, spesifiek, die bekamping
van georganiseerde misdaad.

Georganiseerde misdaad is hoogs gesofistikeerd. Dit is mense wat al die
middele tot hulle beskikking het, wat die geld het om van die beste
tegnologie gebruik te maak, maar nou kom die regering van die dag en hy
ontbind ’n suksesvolle eenheid en gaan die kernelement van hulle sukses net
eenvoudig uit die stelsel verwyder.

Dis ’n politieke besluit en ek wil sê... (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Why do I say that, Chairperson? What is the essence of the Scorpions’
success? The essence of it is that it was an investigator aiming to
prosecute. It was directed at prosecution precisely because there was a
union of the National Prosecuting Authority on the one hand, and the
investigators on the other hand, in order to ensure that there was success,
specifically, in combating organised crime.

Organised crime is highly sophisticated. They are people with all the means
at their disposal, who have the money to make use of the best technology,
but now the government of the day comes along and disbands a successful
unit and will simply remove the core element of their success from the
system.

This is a political decision and I want to say ...]

... hon Minister, a couple of political decisions have been taken by you,
as the Minister of Safety and Security, and they have all been mistakes.
This one is going to be your biggest mistake. I warn you on this. Thank
you.

Dr S E M PHEKO: Chairperson, because of the limited time that I have, I
simply want to say that we should be careful as a nation not to destroy
institutions of state, particularly with reference to those of national
security. The institutions must be reviewed and adjusted where necessary.
Under no circumstances should our institutions be interfered with for the
sake of parochial objectives.

Our institutions must serve the broader public interests. Much has been
said about the Scorpions. Rightly or wrongly, the subject has reached fever
pitch emotionally. There are those who have argued that the purpose of this
Bill is to protect certain leaders from being charged for criminal offences
such as corruption. Indeed, if this were to be the case, it would be
despicable.

This past year, we saw the SA Police Service arresting members of the
Directorate of Special Operations, and members of this directorate
arresting members of the SAPS. Surely, this warfare between two national
security structures compromises the national security of this nation? They
are supposed to co-operate with each other, not to indulge in power
struggles.

If this Bill transforms the Scorpions into Mambas, it will have served a
splendid national purpose, but if it is politically motivated, this will
shatter national confidence in the effectiveness and professional integrity
of our security forces. State institutions serve, not the interest of
governments, but of nations.

True democracy and the rule of law cannot exist without sound, permanent
state institutions which do not rise or fall with the ups and downs of
national politics.

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: I stand to support
that Parliament proceed with processing these two Bills. I think a lot of
anxiety will come to pass when serious engagement in Parliament begins
around the Bills. I would like to tell of my experience in office, in the
context of what my colleague Comrade Charles has just said.

We held our first section-31 Ministers’ Committee meeting in late 2004.
Before us was the issue of making the criminal justice system work, in
particular, because that committee, in terms of the law, sits to consider
matters of policy around the Directorate of Special Operations. The matter
before us was the working relationship operationally between the DSO and
other Justice, Crime Prevention and Security cluster members, namely, other
units.

It was clear that there was operational tension and poor co-ordination.
This is the reality and this is what my colleague was referring to - that
in considering tactical and strategic approaches to crime fighting, and in
the context of the bigger thrust, which was an activity that happened
starting in 2005, namely the consideration for review of the criminal
justice system, not that the idea had been there all along, but in terms of
actual work being done.

It was clear that something had to be done to refocus. In other words, our
criminal justice units have to fight organised crimes in a coherent and co-
ordinated way. The result was the Khampepe Commission, which made
recommendations. By the way, I’m not sure whether it follows all the time
that if recommendations are made the President has to, without using his
discretion, follow to the letter recommendations that are put before him.
However, we must also understand that it happened, simultaneously, when
there was a review of the criminal justice system.

I think, colleagues, that I have to repeat this: I want to single out two
very important areas because these are pertinent to how our crime-fighting
agencies were working, especially in delicate areas like organised crime.
What came out was clear, and this was a recommendation adopted by Cabinet,
that we should have a single vision and mission leading to the adoption of
a single set of objectives, priorities and performance measurement targets
for the cluster and for criminal justice as a whole. That’s very important.

We couldn’t, tactically and strategically, not recognise that this was a
very good recommendation; that, in fact, we needed to have this kind of
coherence within the system for it to function properly. I like the other
objective - there are seven of them, but I want to mention this one -
modernise in an integrated and holistic manner all aspects of the systems
and equipment of the criminal justice system, including the fast-tracking
of the implementation of present projects and modernisation initiatives.
Surely, you can’t have that kind of thing if you don’t have the kind of co-
ordination and coherence that was required, especially at operational
level.

And I dare say that, in fact, if we were to say that we don’t have that
kind of co-ordination, we’d also be admitting that we are vulnerable as a
state. The move to revive and strengthen and upscale - not downscale - our
capacity to fight crime is one that compelled us to amend the Bills, to
have the Bills we are putting before you.

I want to quote what the President said, and this is what President Mbeki
said on 8 February ...

Mr P J GROENEWALD: This year?

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Yes.
I quote:

  Informed by the imperative to intensify the offensive against organised
  crime as well as the recommendations of the Khampepe Judicial Commission
  on the functioning and location of the Directorate of Special Operations
  and continuing reflections on this matter, including the reform of the
  criminal justice system, we shall, by the end of March, interact with
  Parliament on legislation and other decisive measures required further to
  enhance our capacity to fight organised crime.

And this is what we’ve brought before Parliament. We are late; it’s not
March, but this is what we are putting before you.

Let us have a festival of ideas around how we effectively fight crime.
Let’s hear the ID, the PAC, the DA. Let’s have it here, let’s have it in
our areas where there will be hearings.

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Will you listen to it?

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: No, I am saying
...

Mr M WATERS: [Inaudible.]

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: I am saying ours –
and that’s the focus – is to fight organised crime and corruption.

This is an objective of our party and we have been seized with this matter
from Mandela’s Presidency to the one we have today and as the ANC - if the
ANC comes in, as it should - in the next administration, we will focus on
fighting crime.

We do need, though, to remove uncertainties and this is the commitment I
want to make. I’m saying we will do what is required by the practice of
good governance as we transfer the detectives into the new elite crime
fighting unit. It will have adequate resources; it will have the best
personnel; it will have capacities that it ought to have in order to fight
crime. If need be, the best will be drawn from the best that we have in the
area of crime fighting. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

      AFRICAN PEER REVIEW MECHANISM REPORT (COUNTRY REVIEW REPORT NO 5)

                                  (Debate)

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, hon
members, in July last year, South Africa became the fifth country on the
continent to be reviewed by the African Peer Review Forum of Heads of State
and Government. This was an achievement for us as a country and
particularly a boost for the values of good governance.

Under the leadership of President Thabo Mbeki South Africa has long
championed the peer review process. As a matter of fact, South Africa was
one of the five founding countries that actually germinated the idea and
hence, our full participation in the country review bodes well, and also
bodes well for the promotion and maintenance of democracy and socioeconomic
development in our country.

In the words of Prime Minister Meles Zenawi, the chairperson of the African
Peer Review Forum:
   The African Peer Review Mechanism, APRM, is a bold and unique African-
   owned initiative designed to ensure that the policies and practices of
   participating countries conform to the agreed political, economic, and
   corporate governance values, codes, and standards contained in the Nepad
   declaration on democracy, political, economic, and corporate governance.


   It aims to set in motion a strategic reorientation towards the validation
   of universal, as well as African, values of governance and to accelerate
   the process of national growth and development of intra-African co-
   operation and integration. The APRM is becoming a prime mover of the
   African Renaissance, and the centrepiece of the Nepad process for the
   socioeconomic development of Africa.


He went on to say:

   As an instrument for peer learning and experience sharing, the APRM
   should not be construed as a scorecard of a pass-or-fail nature, or as a
   new conditionality for donor assistance. It should rather be viewed as an
   instrument for improving governance and building consensus amongst all
   stakeholders for development within a state, while sharing best practice
   and problem-solving techniques across states.


We know that there is a panel of eminent persons appointed by the APRM
Secretariat that oversees its implementation throughout Africa. We know
that the process has a number of stages, and I am not going to go into them
or spell them out today.


South Africa’s process officially began in September 2005 when President
Mbeki officially launched the African Peer Review Mechanism in South Africa
at the first national conference in Midrand and we embarked on an exciting
journey of inclusive participation and sober introspection in developing
our Country Self-Assessment Report. A National Governing Council was
established, comprising of government and civil society representatives.
Provincial governing councils were also established.


This House, and Parliament as a whole, played a significant role in the
popular participation process. I am sure this may be further referred to
during the course of this debate. I would like to take this opportunity to
thank hon members of this House for their participation, which added
considerable value to our Country Self-Assessment Report.


We had a validation process of our Country Self-Assessment, which took
place at the second national conference held in Kliptown on 4 and 5 May
2006. After the conference, the draft Country Self-Assessment Report was
revised, based on the inputs received at that conference. We also conducted
workshops in all nine provinces and the revised Country Self-Assessment
Report and preliminary programme of action were also placed before Cabinet.
The National Governing Council gave unanimous approval to the report.


Following the submission of the Country Self-Assessment Report, we were
honoured to host the Country Review Mission, headed by Prof Adebayo
Adedeji, during the second half of 2006. He travelled across our country,
interviewed stakeholders ranging from parliamentarians to members of
political parties, rural villagers and so on. The purpose of the visits was
for the Country Review Mission to see and hear for themselves, to solicit
different and differing views from the people of South Africa.


They made their draft country review available to me as a focal point at
the end of 2006 and, as required in the base document, government was given
an opportunity to respond to the report. There were numerous engagements
between us and the Country Review Team in the first half of 2007 and many
of the issues and concerns we raised were addressed by the team. In May we
submitted our final response, which can be found in appendix 2 of the
Country Review Report document.


The issues South Africa raised in response to the panel were not simply
editorial. They were methodological issues around the use of data and
causality. In addition, there appeared to have been an underestimation of
the overriding legacy left by three and a half centuries of colonialism,
racism, oppression, and apartheid.
Of equal concern was the apparent underestimation of the full extent to
which the developmental state in South Africa had in fact moved swiftly and
decisively to improve the quality of life of the majority of citizens in a
relatively short period of 12 years. We would not argue that we fully
achieved a developmental state, but we are moving in that direction.

On 1 July 2007 in Accra, Ghana, President Thabo Mbeki welcomed the African
Peer Review Panel’s Country Review Report on South Africa and presented
South Africa’s response to the Report in the true spirit of peer review.

He commended members of the African Peer Review panel for their hard work
and dedication to the process. The report on South Africa was viewed as a
positive report that acknowledges the huge strides made by South Africa in
transforming the country into a vibrant democracy with one of the most
progressive constitutions in the world.

Furthermore, in his foreword to the report Prime Minister Meles Zenawi,
chairperson the APRM, commented:

   The transformation that South Africa has undergone since its democratic
   transition in 1994 is nothing short of a miracle. The democratically
   elected governments, led by the African National Congress, have managed
   to create a stable and peaceful political regime with an exemplary record
   of civil liberties and political freedoms.


The report identified the following strengths which characterise South
Africa: We have, as I stated earlier, one of the most progressive
constitutions in the world, which guarantees both civil and socioeconomic
rights; the existence of a political environment conducive to political
debate, dialogue, and contestation; significant progress made in signing,
ratifying, and implementing international standards and codes; first world
economic and physical infrastructure; the largest and most sophisticated
economy in Africa; sound, transparent, and predictable economic policies; a
strong public financial management system; well-positioned technology to be
able to compete in the global market; ranking amongst the best performers
in corporate governance in emerging markets; a robust legal system that
ensures lawful protection of property rights and intellectual property
rights; an adequate regulatory framework for economic activity in the
country supported by a wide variety of regulatory institutions; a good
framework for the protection of human rights and labour rights; the
existence of credible institutions such as the public investment
corporation; and the industrial development corporation as well as a number
of well-known multinational institutions and world class universities; self-
sufficiency in development financing; and strong representation of women in
the public sector.

Chairperson, hon members, both the country report and South Africa’s Self-
Assessment Report point to the need for us to continually engage with
issues around forms of democracy and accountability of elected officials in
order to maintain the momentum of postapartheid reconstruction,
development, and economic growth. Confronting these challenges requires
attention and national effort, not only by government, but by society as a
whole. The solutions do not lie exclusively in report writing and problem
identification. Effective partnership to speedily improve the material and
social conditions of all South Africans and to improve social cohesion and
inclusion are critical.

The country report commended South Africa for its flexible and innovative
implementation of the APRM. Innovations included the shortening of the
questionnaire and its translation into all languages; inviting research
institutions to participate as partners; the validation process of the
second national conference; involvement of civil society through the South
African Economic and Social Council, Ecosoc; the establishment of
provincial governing councils; the role of the community development
workers in enhancing popular participation in the APRM process and the use
of outside broadcasts; the APRM song that was composed by Babsy Mlangeni;
and blitzes at taxi ranks and on major street corners to popularise the
APRM process.

A further innovative approach utilised by South Africa was the deployment
of a gender, disability, children, and youth sensitive lens in undertaking
the country review. The APRM review member states strongly endorse the
process we undertook as a country in completing the Country Self-Assessment
Report and agreed that the South African process was inclusive,
participatory, and innovative.

The report identified 18 South African best practices worthy of emulation.
I don’t have time to touch on all of them now, but I will mention two. They
include co-operative governance, popular participatory governance practices
and Batho Pele, amongst others.

They also identified 11 crosscutting issues that we must focus on as a
country going forward: unemployment, capacity constraints and pockets of
poor service delivery, poverty and inequality, land reform, violence
against women, violence against children, HIV and Aids, corruption, crime,
racism and xenophobia, and the management of diversity.

Deputy President of the ANC, it is against this kind of background that you
raised this question; that is precisely the kind of approach we should use
as we confront, and deal with, this challenge that is there.

The report further argues that South Africa needs to transform its economic
base and the structure of society to maximise its strengths and that it
should take the necessary corrective measures to remove or ameliorate its
weaknesses. This will create an environment in which the majority of the
people will participate fully in development and benefit correspondingly
and equitably from the dividends of development. The report urges all
stakeholders to work together in implementing the recommendations of the
National Programme of Action, arguing that in this way we will truly emerge
as a rainbow nation.

As the National Governing Council, we have embraced the report and its
recommendations. South Africa profoundly supports the APRM and is
absolutely committed to its sustained success in order to promote good
governance, democracy, accountability, and transparency. For us, the spirit
of peer review is one of frank debate and dialogue in order to strengthen
both governance within a country and the APRM.

I think I could state, at this point, that subsequent to our review in July
last year, we were given the opportunity to share with other member
countries the lessons that we had learnt during the implementation of the
African Peer Review process, including some of the aspects of the process
that must be reconsidered and strengthened. Our positive lessons included
the importance of having a representative and engaged National Governing
Council to simplify and revise the questionnaires I have mentioned earlier
and taking great care with its application, and of course, securing
agreement on the research methodology, including the relative weights of
qualitative and quantitative research.

Hon members, I would like to say that there is a need for every member -
not only of the National Assembly and National Council of Provinces, but
all the legislatures across the country, for all of us – to read the
Country Review Report and to study it. I thank you, Chairperson.

Mr M R BALOYI: Mutshami wa Xitulu, Deputy President ya ANC, Yindlu leyo
hlawuleka. I nhlekani. [Chairperson, Deputy President of the ANC, this
august House, good afternoon.]

Our participation in the African Peer Review Mechanism is a voluntary move
for us to open ourselves to scrutiny by our peers who are fellow member
states of the African Union. We entered into that voluntary engagement with
due consideration that what is at the centre of co-operative sovereign
states is mutual respect, accompanied by a desire to complement one another
through experience-sharing, regional co-operation and offering constructive
criticism and advice, all for regional peace, stability and development.

We know that the only way to achieve this peacefully is to avoid the
temptation to be fooled by the notion of adopting a stance that will see us
flex our muscles and revere our strength against our neighbours and fellow
African states, as if to position ourselves as a messenger of those who
would want to use us in a disguised and false sense of being a special
superpower in Africa.

The country review report that we are debating today is a product of a
process of self-assessment that we, as the citizens of this country,
embarked upon to mirror ourselves against the objectives set out in terms
of the memorandum of understanding guiding the voluntary instrument called
the African Peer Review Mechanism.

The report reflects the views of the people of this country on democracy
and political governance, economic governance and management, corporate
governance as well as socioeconomic development.

As the ANC, we accept this report and say that the people have spoken. We
urge all the people of this country to accept this report, appreciating
that this is the first time that our country has participated in a public
process of self-evaluation, and that there is room for improvement.

We also commend the role that various institutions have played in making
the assessment process a success. This includes the facilitation role
played by Parliament and our provincial legislatures, broader civil society
and the supportive stance of our democratic government. Importantly, we
commend, and we want to thank, Minister Fraser-Moleketi for her role.

We give an unqualified commitment to ensuring to the full implementation of
the programme of action identified in the report. Participating on the
occasion of the consideration of this report of the APRM gives us an
opportunity to debate some of the issues raised in the report. I want to
reflect on issues of democracy and political governance.

One of the major key fundamental achievements in a democratic South Africa
is the Constitution that we have developed for ourselves, at a pace we set
for ourselves, and informed by the real factors that define who we are as
South Africans.

As people reflected on the report that we are debating today and commented
on the home-made Constitution of South Africa, they said the following, and
I quote:

   The South African Constitution is more of a contract among parties who in
   the past had little trust in one another, rather than a covenant born
   from shared experience. This negotiated contract literally becomes a sole
   document that binds multiple and diverse communities together and is the
   basis for the legitimacy of their quest to evolve as a nation. Therefore,
   the South African Constitution is not only the most important document in
   the construction of the state, but the most crucial instrument in forging
   a nation.

The Constitution defines and provides the basis for our democracy and how
that democracy finds expression as we relate to one another as citizens,
further also to sharpen our interactions with the entire continent of
Africa and the world. This Constitution confirms the position of the
Freedom Charter, that, “South Africa belongs to all who live in it, black
and white”.

This Constitution that the APRM report acknowledges as placing a
responsibility on all South Africans to celebrate, cements the view that
the leadership of the ANC has been expressing from generation to generation
and continues to express today, that the freedom of South Africa is the
freedom of all the people in South Africa, in Africa and in the world.

To cite a few examples, when urging the United Nations to take action to
destroy apartheid, O R Tambo said in a statement at the meeting of the
special political committee of the United Nations’ General Assembly on 29
October 1963, that, “South Africa’s freedom  is freedom for all”. He
further referred to statements made by other South African leaders. To this
end, he quoted Chief Albert Luthuli as saying, and I quote:

   The main issue is that the government and the people should be democratic
   to the core. It is relatively unimportant who is in the government. I am
   not opposed to the present government because it is white. I am opposed
   to it because it is undemocratic and repressive. My idea is a nonracial
   government chosen on the basis of merit, rather than colour. Appeals to
   racialism at elections should be a legal offence in law.

O R Tambo also quoted Nelson Mandela, who said at his trial, and I quote:

   I am no racialist and I detest racialism because I regard it as a
   barbaric thing, whether it comes from black man or white man.


He also quoted Walter Sisulu, who was amongst those facing trial at the
time, when he said the following, and I quote:

   The fundamental principle in our struggle is equal rights for all in our
   country and that all people who have made South Africa their home, by
   birth or adoption, irrespective of colour or creed, are entitled to these
   rights.

Today, the words of these great heroes of our liberation struggle find
practical expression and meaning from the articulations of the people of
South Africa, who participated in the African Peer Review Mechanism.

Through the APRM, we are sharing with African Union member states as to how
to develop and seek to sustain the democracy project. The people proclaimed
that South Africa is a democratic country characterised by respect for
human rights, the rule of law, the separation of powers as well as an
effective and responsive public service, all entrenched to ensure
sustainable development and a peaceful and stable society.

A democratic country is also one where there are consistent, peaceful, free
and fair elections. Since 1994, our country has witnessed free and fair
elections, even with our very first elections in 1994.

We have an Independent Electoral Commission that runs elections from time
to time, according to the programme of elections in the local, provincial
and national spheres of our government. It is on record that since then, we
have a clean record.

The independent Municipal Demarcation Board complements the work of the
IEC. We have already had three local government elections declared free and
fair, and three provincial and national elections declared free and fair.
We are preparing for the fourth provincial and national elections to be
held next year, and we are confident that they will be free and fair. We
want to say that it is our responsibility - all of us present here and
outside - to contribute towards that at all times during elections.
We always open ourselves to international observer missions and it is only
out of choice that some will decide not to come as, to some of them,
sending an observer mission would only seek to confirm how well we run our
elections. They do not see it as a priority.

A case in point in this regard is that the European Union, the Commonwealth
and the United Nations did not send observers for the 2004 provincial and
national elections. They said that they were confident that South Africa’s
ability to run free and fair elections is unquestionable. This is according
to the IEC report on the 2000 elections accordingly submitted to this
Parliament. I believe that members of this House made an effort to read
that report.

It is important to note that political parties participate freely in the
election process, even those parties that only exist during elections, such
as the “so-called” Pro-Death Penalty Party that contested elections in
Gauteng in 2004, and many others that keep on falling as they attempt to
rise during elections.

This is democracy at its best, and it can only be to the shame of those
advocates of doom and gloom whose agenda it is to project our elections as
badly run, simply to introduce such foreign, wrong and dangerous
assumptions that there is some foul play in our electoral processes. They
are bad losers, enemies of democracy and messengers of disorder.

A simple trace of their history will tell you that they are actually
sharing their own experience of what they are capable of doing; not the
ANC; not our government; and not our country. Thank you. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Mr W J SEREMANE: Chairperson, hon Speaker and hon members, it can never be
enough to tackle the critical challenges facing us in South Africa post-
1994. Therefore, let me not get into the web of self-justification through
the smokescreen of statistics and archaic rhetoric. Let’s cut to the chase;
and cut the frills out. There are issues that face us directly.

Last year, the government committed itself to addressing racism, xenophobia
and managing diversity better in the African Peer Review Mechanism in
country report no 5, which I also dwelt on, Minister. I am sure that you
also saw how important it is. Since the birth of our fragile democracy,
there has been some progress in tackling racism, but the disgusting
behaviour of the Reitz students shows that we still have a long way to
travel. Indeed, the APRM is a sound vision and principle; nobody is against
it, but it is time to tackle the problems that face us, depending on the
outcome.

We need to do a little introspection, which is sometimes unpalatable. The
outbreak of the xenophobic attacks that have ravaged the country in the
past month indicates that we have not done enough as a society to deal with
the discrimination and bad treatment of foreign nationals, for lack of a
better term.

While, during apartheid, state-sponsored violence divided the country along
racial lines, in the last few weeks, we have seen South Africans take the
lives of our brothers and sisters from all over the continent. Is that the
perfect imprint of apartheid–racism that has been left on our minds and
psyche? If so, then we are still a defeated people, slaves in fur-lined
iron shackles for as long as we indulge in such things.

These unjustified acts that have also claimed the lives of innocent South
Africans are a shame and blot on the country‘s nation-building initiatives.
Any claim that we are truly a rainbow nation has been seriously challenged
by the violence against the foreign nationals in question, because who is
really a foreigner? Does being a foreigner make one less human? That is the
question. If I don’t belong to the clan, am I less human? If I don’t belong
to the party, am I less human? If I don’t belong within the boundaries, am
I less human? That is the big question. And the APRM seems to be searching
for these answers.

The hostile treatment of foreign nationals in the country reflects the
inadequacy of government interventions to raise awareness about the
importance of tolerance. Xenophobia has been taking place for some time but
it was never dealt with, despite various warnings that it was a ticking
time bomb. For many years, foreign nationals have been treated badly in
public hospitals, Home Affairs offices and other institutions in our
society.

A classic illustration of this is evident at the Lindela Repatriation
Centre, which has a reputation for human rights violations against foreign
nationals. A UN working group that visited the centre in 2005 found that
South Africa is contravening international human rights regulations by
detaining foreign nationals at the venue. Even today, foreign nationals are
still treated unfairly compared to locals. I sometimes wonder whether we
listen to Bra Hugh Masekela. It has been over seven years that he has been
singing this song ... wena MaNgobese musa ukubiza abanye ukuthi
ngamakirimane nabo ngabantu. [... you, MaNgobese, stop calling foreign
people derogatory names – they are, after all, also human beings.]

It seems as though he is joking, but it is the truth. We can also listen to
his second song related to the APRM findings, ``Everything must change’’.
Despots must go when it is time to go, and he lists the names. You know the
song - ``Everything must change’’.

The hatred of foreign nationals has extended to South Africans taking on
fellow South Africans along ethnic lines. There have been incidents were
Tsonga and Venda people have been subjected to violence because, according
to their attackers, the darkness of their complexion makes them less South
African.

Ke makwerekwere; ke makwenyaponi; ke matebele; ke magrigamba. [They are
referred to as makwerekwere; makwenyaponi; matebele and magrigamba.]

Where are we going to? How deep will we take these lessons from the APRM?
[Time expired.] Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr A M MPOTSHANE: Mhlonishwa, Sihlalo ... [Hon Chairperson ...]...
colleagues, I am standing in for my colleague hon Seaton who suddenly took
ill.

What follows therefore is an extract from her main speech, which she was
going to use in this debate this afternoon. Not being my field of
operation, I will therefore avoid going into issues which are debatable
like, for instance, the issue of the freeness and fairness of previous
elections. I will not go into those matters. Just a warning, hon Minister,
there are technical terms in this speech and as it is not my field of
operation, my tongue may not be used to some of these technical terms, but
I have tried to internalise some of these.
The African Peer Review Mechanism is a unique self-assessment tool to
ensure that the policies and practices of participating countries conform
to the agreed New Partnership on Africa’s Development’s Declaration on
Democracy, Political, Economic and Corporate Governance. It can be termed a
commonly agreed upon instrument for self-monitoring.

The APRM is open to all countries. From amongst a number of things, I could
only remember or extract three of these from her speech. Firstly, it is an
undertaking to submit periodic peer reviews; secondly, it is a commitment
to implement the National Programme of Action that arises from the peer
review; and, thirdly, it is a commitment to improve on governance. South
Africa was one of the first states to accede to this process in 2003. Our
Parliament formed part of the self-assessment process under the APRM, and
we established a joint co-ordinating committee on the APRM to formulate our
input.

Government and Parliament both found the APRM process an excellent tool and
opportunity for introspection and critical self-assessment. The JCC input
is as follows, and I quote:

   The self-assessment process of the African Peer Review Mechanism is
   indeed a useful tool to assist our nation to conduct an honest,
   analytical reflection on our progress as a developing
   democracy. Parliament takes this opportunity to applaud the architects of
   this African initiative.

A very important outcome of the review process was to re-emphasise
Parliament’s role of overseeing the executive and in particular the agreed
upon programme of action. Our participation in the APRM process threw new
light on its own weaknesses and shortcomings as well as underlying
strengths. In a certain sense, it focused our minds on Parliament's core
mission and vision in relation to oversight and accountability. This
critical self-assessment process pointed out internal and structural
weaknesses in oversight and accountability that have since been taken on
board to improve our Parliament's performance.

But, of course, there were also a number of criticisms made by our
Parliament of the APRM process. The JCC put it as follows:

   The section of the questionnaire on democracy and good political
   governance required an assessment of Parliament.  The Joint Co-ordinating
   Committee considered it most appropriate that an independent panel
   conduct such assessment.  Unfortunately, due to time constraints and the
   unavailability of identified panelists at short notice, this assessment
   was not possible for the purpose of Parliament's APRM process.

Other limitations that were identified included tight timeframes,
compromised public participation and unavailability of stakeholders. Thank
you. [Time expired.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chairperson, it is expected that the country’s efforts will
be strengthened by the African Peer Review Mechanism process and that after
the first review, countries will sustain their efforts to achieve the
shared objectives identified in the APRM. This will require the updating of
programmes of action on a regular basis, based on self-monitoring of
progress and lessons learned from sharing with other countries. This, we
expect, will be facilitated actively by the APRM.

Several crosscutting issues were identified which have a wider impact on
the quality of governance, including unemployment, capacity constraints and
poor service delivery, poverty and inequality, land reform, violence
against women, violence against children, the HIV/Aids pandemic,
corruption, crime, racism, xenophobia and managing diversity.

The ACDP will briefly highlight just one aspect of the report due to time
constraints. Chapter 7 records that:


  It is welcome news that appropriate steps are being taken to bring about
  a change in the response to HIV/Aids prevention and treatment in South
  Africa.
  Government in partnership with civil society has begun to send out
  uniform messages concerning the proper treatment of the disease.
  No one now denies that HIV/Aids deserves a higher national priority and
  needs to be tackled with more high level commitment and adequate
  resources. This shift will no doubt reassure, not only South Africans
  generally, but also the international community. The APRM welcomes this
  development.

South Africa is the fifth APRM country to undergo the peer review process
and will be expected to report annually. The ACDP commends all efforts in
this regard and believes it will eventually leave its mark in Africa.

Ms B A HOGAN: Chairperson, in difficult times when we don’t know the way
ahead and when we become confused, we seek the advice of our elders. We
look to them to give their experience and to advise us on how we can go
forward. Equally, in good times, when we are prospering, when we have a
focus, when we have a vision that unites us, we also seek the advice of our
elders because they can warn and tell us what might lie ahead that we do
not notice. That is why I believe that the APRM is an extraordinarily
important process for our continent and our country.

If you look at the panel that compiled the report, it is a panel of eminent
Africans, with high reputations and people with considerable experience in
governance and long experience on issues confronting Africa. It would only
be a fool who would ignore the counsel, advice and findings of such a body.
And, indeed, we, as a country, have embraced what they have said. We have
welcomed their assessment of us and we need to examine, in detail, what
they have to say.

Perhaps in hindsight it is also important for us to look at and understand
why, even when they pointed certain things out, we were not open to that.
Why, for instance, in the official government’s response to the APRM, when
the APRM noted that there is a high incidence of xenophobia in the country,
did we say that is just a populist’s view. It is simply not true, as we
said.

In addition, when they named crime as a major issue, we responded and said
that is just a populist’s view. When they said that floor-crossing was an
issue that South Africans were concerned with, we responded and said that
is just an issue for the opposition; it’s not for us. What we have learned
since we have responded in that way is that all these issues are, yes, the
very issues that affect South Africans.

Perhaps it is a salutary lesson that when we do not listen to counsel and
advice, when we tend to just set it aside, these things come back to bite
us. Of course, the panel itself made some crucial mistakes. For instance,
they talk about Eskom operating very well, when we all know that it is
simply not the case. And that is how it is with assessments. Assessments
always try to grasp the truth, but the truth is elusive. But somewhere we
need to gain an intuition of what is true, and not simply dismiss things
when we feel that we are been criticised or simply dismiss things because
we feel that they are, in fact, unfounded. We need to be wise enough to
listen to the wisdom of the elders.

Let me reflect on the process. I think it’s been a remarkable process. I
think our Minister headed a panel and managed a process that was quite
extraordinary. We need to reflect on how we try to reach out to the
stakeholders in our country; how we try to reach consensus. It was an
ambitious programme. We did not succeed in many respects, but it is the
start of a programme of involving civil society.

One of the most remarkable aspects of this process was the way that the NGO
community in particular would seize the opportunity and engage in it. It
was remarkably stimulating to sit in discussions, to have NGOs and people
from civil society talking, speaking, engaging, arguing and putting forward
their points of view, because this happens so seldom in NGO forums. This is
part of a gift that can be given to us by an APRM process. It is a vigorous
engagement.

We need to understand why the trade union movement like Cosatu, for
instance, was not particularly active. Perhaps we have too many processes.
Perhaps it is difficult to reach consensus. When we plan for our next
review I think it is critical that we reflect on the significant
achievements that we have accomplished and how they can be improved on.

It was clear from the outset that we were going to have an overload of
information and I think it is to the credit of the editing teams,
government and the panel that they were able to bring together the huge
volumes of information into a coherent report. The questionnaires and the
questions definitely need review and I cannot agree more with the Minister
about that.

The role of Parliament is still unclear and I think the Minister and all of
us agree that that was a very vital part of the process, but we, as
Parliament, need to understand that we were not assessed in this process.
That is still something that is not being done. We have not been critical
about ourselves and how we have performed as an institution. That surely
should be something, even if it is not a peer review process, that we need
to address.

Similarly, on the question of Parliament’s powers, the panel raised the
issue of Parliament being able to amend money Bills. How proactive are we
on this issue? So many Parliaments in Africa look to our Parliament for
insight on how we are conducting our affairs. We need to be proactive.

The programme of action is interesting and it covers a wide range of
issues. The issue is: What role is Parliament going to play in monitoring
this programme of action? It is extraordinarily ambitious. We, as portfolio
committees, cannot sit down and start breaking down. We have at least a
year’s work just in monitoring what needs to be done. I think we need to
take it seriously. This is not just another government report that must
gather dust on the shelves.

This is a report of people who have spent time and effort and a great deal
of energy in giving back to us a perception of what our country has
achieved and they have certainly congratulated us on some extraordinary
achievements, and we need to repay that by taking the issues seriously.

Quite often what we don’t hear and see is picked up by others who watch
from an objective distance. If we listen to the truth, we and the people of
this country would certainly benefit. So, I would like to congratulate
everyone who was involved in this process. I think it is a process that has
given enormous value to our country. It has been one of the processes that
other countries in Africa can learn an enormous amount from, and certainly
we in this country owe a debt of gratitude to the people who spent so much
time on this project. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, the MF proudly notes that South Africa has been
one of the first countries to receive the African Peer Review Mechanism in
March 2003. It is so important that countries of Africa unite and create a
sense of responsibility and transparency to each other so that we may grow
and help seal the losses of our history.

South Africa, like many of our African brothers and sisters, has been
wounded severely by colonialism and then undemocratic governance, such as
that by the apartheid government. The review is a definite way, not only to
evaluate our past and present, but our created sense of unity and
responsibility to democracy on the continent and the preservation of human
rights and dignity.

When we look at our political, economic and social development as of 1996,
we are proud to acknowledge that we have been one of the fastest developing
nations, noting the imbalance we had come from. We certainly do acknowledge
that South Africa has many challenges and that poverty on the continent has
placed its roots all over Africa.

What is crucial to our progress is that we need to instil in our people a
loyalty to all of Africa and its people. We need to identify ourselves as
part of the larger continent. It is African solidarity that will assist us
in advancing our continent and utilising our local resources to strengthen
ourselves as global competitors.

The review of South Africa needs to be commended and we are confident of
the benefits this review will reap for South Africans. Not only, then, do
we serve as a case study for other countries, but we also stand to receive
from other member states. The MF applauds the APRM country review report.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Chair, with my limited time, let me simply say that the
African Peer Review Mechanism report on our country is an accurate weather
barometer. Some of the issues it is dealing with are: Unemployment;
capacity constraints and poor service delivery; poverty and inequality;
violence against women; the HIV and Aids pandemic; corruption; crime;
racism and xenophobia; and of course land reform.

The PAC agrees with the APRM panel of eminent persons on the land question
in South Africa. Among other things, the report says land is crucial to the
pursuit of the development strategy in Africa. It can play a major role in
addressing issues of unemployment and poverty. They also say that the
single most important factors are social, political and economic
empowerment – that is the land. Above all, it has a central role to play in
wealth and income distribution. Insufficient land to live on and cultivate,
as well as insecure access or rights over land, are well-recognised factors
in sustaining poverty and destabilising democracy.

The PAC has made the land question its consistent platform, because the
poverty of the majority in our country was created through land
dispossession. There will never be eradication of poverty, economic
liberation of the poor majority, until there is equitable distribution of
land and its riches. This means that section 25 of the Constitution must be
revisited in order that the foundation of economic dispossession of the
majority of our people can be reversed when we look at the Native Land Act
of 1913. “Izwelethu.” [Our country.] [Time expired.]

Mrs S V KALYAN: Chairperson, I was fortunate enough to be part of one of
Parliament’s subcommittees on the African Peer Review Mechanism and I must
say that I found the whole process very rewarding.

As the hon Hogan spoke, I identified wholeheartedly with everything she had
to say. However, I wish to dwell on one aspect. The APRM report confirms
that South Africa is experiencing a crisis in respect of HIV and Aids and
that South Africa has the second highest number of people infected with HIV
in the world after India. It also states that the statistics in respect of
the mortality rate due to the pandemic are very confusing and further
emphasise that treatment is a key issue in managing the pandemic.

The Deputy President assured the Country Reporting Mechanism, CRM, that
drugs will constitute the centrepiece of government’s response to HIV and
Aids and that government planned to put 382 000 people on Antiretrovirals,
ARVs,, by 2005-06. Regrettably only half this number has had access to the
medication.

The National Strategic Plan of the Department of Health told the CRM that
it aims to reduce the rate of mother-to-child transmission to 5% by 2011,
but the recent Unicef report states that South Africa is among the ten
worst countries in achieving Millennium Development Goals 4, 5 and 6 and
that South Africa is one of nine countries in the world where child
mortality is increasing, rather than decreasing.

In view of this one cannot help but be cynical about government’s willpower
in carrying out the much lauded time-based National Strategic Plan of the
Department of Health. The reality is that, despite the commitments and the
assurances by both the Deputy President and the Ministry of Health to the
APRM, the gap between proven prevention strategies and the National Health
Department’s implementation remains frighteningly large.

Government must stop playing games and accelerate the speed of dual therapy
rollout, boost staff levels and strengthen the state health care
infrastructure in general. In doing so, South Africa will show that it is
taking the recommendations of the APRM report seriously and that the whole
exercise was not merely a window-dressing exercise. Thank you. [Applause.]
Mr V G SMITH: Chairperson, comrades and hon members, when we declared the
21st century to be an African century, we were underlining our
determination to take our rightful place as full world citizens and worthy
members within the family of nations. We were declaring our commitment to
removing all challenges and hindrances in our path that defer maximum
economic growth and we were pledging our promise to find African solutions
to African problems.

The African Peer Review Mechanism, as envisaged by the architects of Nepad,
was not an end in and of itself, but rather a means to achieving the set
goals. The focus area of democracy and good political governance included
nine subthemes, and we will reflect on some of these themes as well as the
findings and recommendations needed to accelerate our journey as a country
towards a better life for all South Africans and a better Africa.

From the outset let us acknowledge that the exercise could have been
somewhat compromised as a result of tight timeframes, limited public
participation and the fact that not all stakeholders could be reached in
time to have their views considered for inclusion in the report. Country
Review Report No 5 basically confirms that, with regard to international
codes and standards, South Africa is generally compliant as we have signed
or ratified most of the relevant international instruments.

However, we want to point out that we are of the view that the role played
by Parliament in this regard can be improved. The tendency currently is for
Parliament to get involved at the end, and it is then expected to ratify
the international codes and standards without the benefit of fully
understanding the contents. Parliament has a responsibility to correct this
situation with the maximum urgency.

Moving on to the subject of good political governance and democracy, we can
all agree that South Africa is indeed a constitutional democracy. Elections
in this country are free and fair, and are supervised and managed by an
independent body. Multiparty democracy is encouraged and is under no threat
whatsoever. The doctrine of the separation of powers between the judiciary,
the legislature and the executive is fully entrenched and protected by the
Constitution.

South Africa can be proud of the initiative of establishing institutions
geared towards protecting our democracy. Here we can make reference to
Chapter 9 institutions and many, many more. None would dare challenge my
assertion that this country is a constitutional democracy with a fairly
developed culture of recognition of the rule of law.

The challenges that remain are for Parliament, the executive and South
Africans generally to popularise the existence of these governance organs,
as well as to educate as many of our people as possible on the role and
importance of these institutions, including those charged with the
protection of women, children and the vulnerable. Much needs to be done in
this regard, including stepping up our efforts with regard to education on
the protection of refugees and internally displaced persons.

In reviewing areas of accountability, efficiency and effective public
office holders and civil servants, we can draw comfort from the fact that
the necessary legislation has been passed. Examples of such are the
Promotion of Access to Information Act, the Proceeds of Crime Act, the
Public Finance Management Act, and many more.

Laws on the Statute Book that are not implemented are as useful as no laws
at all. Let’s agree that the means of ensuring accountability are in place,
but let’s also agree that the enforcement of these laws at times leaves a
lot to be desired. Unless this worrying state of affairs is addressed, we
will create a fertile environment for rampant corruption and mismanagement
of resources, thereby threatening our democracy.

There can be no doubt that the level of corruption in the public and
private sectors is just unacceptable. This state of affairs is unacceptable
because corruption and maladministration are inconsistent with the rule of
law and the fundamental values of the Constitution. Corruption and
maladministration are the exact opposite of our values of open, accountable
and democratic governance. If allowed to go unchecked and unpunished, they
will pose a direct and serious threat to our democratic state.

White-collar crime costs the South African economy between R50 and R150
billion per annum. The tragedy is that funds squandered by
maladministration and corruption are desperately needed to ensure that no
African child has to attend school under a tree, that no patient is turned
away from a hospital because of a shortage of beds or medication, and that
no workers’ hard-earned savings, meant to assist them after retirement, are
abused for self-enrichment by dodgy financial practitioners.

If there is any blot in this Country Review Report, it is the
acknowledgement of the scourge of corruption and maladministration within
our society. Elected representatives, as well as South Africans in general,
must do much, much more to correct this practice.

With regard to the macroeconomic policy, it is important to start by saying
that prior to 1994 the economy was characterised by negative growth.
Apartheid systematically excluded black South Africans from meaningful
participation in the economy. This government’s priorities of addressing
poverty and reducing the levels of unemployment cannot be challenged.
Asgisa, Broad-based Black Economic Empowerment and the Expanded Public
Works Programme are examples of the commitment to redress the evils of the
apartheid economic policy.

The debate on both the extent of the budget deficit as a percentage of GDP
and the policy of inflation targeting will remain a talking point as far as
the macroeconomic and monetary policy we concerned. Hard choices need to be
made by all as to the future direction of economic policy. We must guard
against making choices today that will haunt future generations. We must
deepen this debate.

The issue of trade relations and trade liberation within SADC deserves to
be mentioned. This year approximately 85% of SADC trade will be duty free.
By 2012 the target is 100% free trade within the region. The importance of
this matter, amongst others, is that South Africa cannot find itself as an
island of prosperity within a sea of poverty. The consequence of such a
state of affairs will be that the number of economic migrants to this
country will grow at a rate faster than infrastructure can handle. It is in
our interest to ensure a more equitable economic growth pattern throughout
the SADC region.

The intention of reducing poverty in South Africa and Africa as a whole is
there. The basic tools to succeed are available. What is required so as to
realise the African century is for government, the private sector and every
individual South African to make a contribution towards achieving a better
country. South Africa is a land of opportunity. It cannot be business as
usual if we are to take our place as worthy members of a prosperous and
democratic world.

In closing, let us agree with the assessment of the chairperson of the
African Peer Review Forum when he states:

  It is noteworthy that Africa’s position today is quite different from
  that of the past decade. There is an encouraging economic turnaround,
  with progress in macroeconomic stabilisation in many countries. This
  reflects the implementation of sound economic policies, a move towards
  rules-based institutions and participatory forms of government that
  foster consensus between the state and civil society.

The African Peer Review Report showcases our successes and also highlights
our failures and challenges. This exercise has assisted us in charting a
programme aimed at pushing back the frontiers of poverty and we must
welcome and accept this report. Aluta continua!

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson and hon
members of the House, I would like to start out by thanking everyone who
participated in this debate and I again want to thank all the
parliamentarians who have served in the various subcommittees to ensure
that we could contribute to a rich country self-assessment report that has,
in part, informed the review report. I would like, in responding to the
points made, to remind us all of the words of Mahatma Gandhi:


  It is unwise to be too sure of one’s wisdom and it is healthy to be
  reminded that the strongest may weaken and the wisest may err.

Having said that, I want to move forward and actually remind us all that
this country review report is not a report for government only. It is a
report for the South African society. It is a report that we should ensure
is implemented as government, civil society, the private sector, organised
labour and all stakeholders. So, there is no group that can actually say:
Well, I am going to oversee you and watch how you are doing as government.
I am a bit concerned that there was a little bit of a sense of that which
came through and we need to guard against the fact that we take that
approach, because the country’s self-assessment process was one that
involved representatives from all sectors of society.

Yes, one would agree that the timeframes were tight, but that is stipulated
in the base document and I do want to venture to say that, even if we had
four years, we would still say, that the time lines are tight.

Deputy President of the ANC, I would want to argue, through you,
Chairperson, that when we look at the period of the formulation of the
Freedom Charter, if I am not mistaken, it was just over a period of about
12 months when the calls for volunteers were made and the ANC was able to
mobilise 50 000 volunteers across the country to reach all corners, all
sectors. What makes it different now? What makes us imagine that when we
have much more resources, that we need more time rather than saying: Let’s
optimise the kind of resource base that we have and utilise that
appropriately.

Having concluded our review, we are, as I said earlier, at the stage where
the focus is on the implementation of the National Programme of Action and
this requires co-ordinated action from government, business and civil
society. Already, we have made great strides in ensuring that the programme
of action is implemented jointly between government and civil society.

Civil society has presented a strategy from their side to ensure the
strengthening of their participation in the African Peer Review Mechanism,
APRM, through the National Governing Council. I believe that provides a
positive way forward for government and civil society to work together in
realising some of the objectives in the programme of action.

I would further want to agree that there is a need for Parliament to look
at its role. There may be a need for the South African Parliament, along
with the Pan-African Parliament, to look at what this specific role should
be in reviewing the various country review reports. I think there is a very
necessary process there that could actually contribute to the enhancement
of the process itself.

Earlier hon Baloyi took us through the context of the process itself and I
want to agree that it has indeed been a first in South Africa to engage in
the peer review process in such a manner through our country’s self-
assessment. I am sure there is room for improvement. There is a lot that
can be done because we have a benchmark. We have done it once, we are
engaging in the programme of action. So anything that happens in the future
will definitely improve on what is there and clearly we will have lessons
to learn from it.

What was further raised as well was the fact that within the policies, the
values, the principles of the ANC, there has also been a clear foundation
that could and has contributed to the way in which we approach the
democracy and political governance thematic area, but those principles and
values have come through the country’s Constitution in any event. We have
seen the way in which the Constitution of the country has been acknowledged
and our own critique on how we should ensure the realisation of that
Constitution, including the socioeconomic rights that are there.

There have also been various concerns raised that maybe we have not
listened to the wise as we should have. I think hon Seremane and hon Hogan
have pointed to the fact that we may not have adequately confronted the
challenge and the warning of xenophobia. But I would want us to look at the
response. I don’t want to be seen as being defensive in this regard, but I
would want to call on us to look at page 360 and the paragraphs that deal
with xenophobia and racism.

In paragraph 105 it is stated, and I quote:

  South Africa shares the view that more needs to be done to fight
  xenophobia. The South African government is committed to fighting and
  educating society against all forms of discrimination and prejudice.

I think what we should note, however, is that this is not a matter that can
only be dealt with by government. It is a matter that each and every one of
us in society should engage ourselves with. We have heard in the debate and
discussion earlier today on xenophobia and intra-communal violence that we
need to bear in mind that there are various factors that result in the
emergence of this violence. I want to make it very clear that none of us
could have predicted that the pockets of violence would have taken the form
that they did.

What we should do now is to look at what programmes we should engage in,
not only as government, but as all players in society, as political parties
and otherwise. What should we do in order to strengthen and deepen social
cohesion? How do we share the principles and values of solidarity and
ensure that we enforce principles in our Constitution that talk about the
equality and human dignity of all?

We should bear in mind the points that have been raised by hon Seremane as
well as the fact that this violence has not just been directed against
others, as in foreigners, but also against South Africans in terms of
taking on an ethnic aspect as well. What do we all do? Here we need to
revisit and look at the Programme of Action again and ask what kinds of
interventions we need to take this forward. We need to bear in mind the
message that came from the President of the ANC, from this podium in this
House, when he said: “Let us look carefully at how we evaluate this and see
that we take it forward in an appropriate manner.”

Furthermore, we also want to say that regarding specifics such as those
that have been raised around HIV/Aids by hon Kalyan there is a response on
this from paragraphs 124 to 132, considering the importance of what has
been raised and it has been stated in paragraph 127 that the provision of
antiretroviral treatment is an important element of our response. It needs
to be emphasised that the comprehensive response will only be sustainable
if there is a decline in the rate of HIV infections.

South Africa needs to systemically address all the drivers of the pandemic.
We know that through the South African Netherlands Chamber of Commerce,
Sanec, there has been the adoption and implementation of a policy that
involves all players in society, and other stakeholders as well, to take it
forward. We need to look at how we ensure that we actually support the
various programmes and processes that are there.

Again, I want to say that this report is not a report that points to
government only, but it is a report that we should take on as a country in
order to ensure our responsiveness. Parliament should ensure that it indeed
oversees government and the executive to take forward those aspects of the
implementation that it should. It should also oversee civil society to
ensure that it plays its own role and that it implements what is required
in the Programme of Action. It should also ensure that political parties do
what is required in order to ensure the success of the outcome of this
process.

I agree with the hon Hogan that Parliament also has the challenge to
respond to the issues raised in the report that pertains to Parliament,
because there is no part of society that has really been overlooked in this
process. It has actually galvanised us all to respond to the call to action
and to do it in a manner that, as we go towards reporting - and we will do
so later this year on the Programme of Action - we should be able to
reflect quite honestly on the role and inputs of all stakeholders in
society in responding to this peer review report.

Once again, I would like to reflect my appreciation as the focal point to
the participation of everyone in this process. I do want to say that, even
where there have been differences, those differences have been instructive
in ensuring that we have the kind of report that we could be proud of. I
thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): I am sure you will be pleased to
know that Parliament is undertaking an assessment and the panel has been
set up and they are well into their work. I am sure the report will be
ready by the end of this year. The assessment on Parliament will add value
to the points raised by yourself and the hon Hogan.

Debate concluded.

      CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT OF AGREEMENT
 ESTABLISHING THE AFRICA INSTITUTE FOR THE ENVIRONMENTALLY SOUND MANAGEMENT
       OF HAZARDOUS AND OTHER WASTES IN TERMS OF SECTION 231(2) OF THE
                                CONSTITUTION

Mr D K MALULEKE: Chair, the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs
and Tourism wishes to request Parliament to approve the ratification of the
agreement establishing the Africa Institute for the Environmentally Sound
Management of Hazardous and Other Wastes. The request is made in terms of
section 231 of the Constitution, which reads as follows:
      An international agreement binds the Republic only after it has been
      approved by resolution in both the National Assembly and the National
      Council of Provinces, unless it is an agreement referred to in
      subsection 3. An international agreement of a technical,
      administrative or executive nature, or an agreement which does not
      require either ratification or accession, entered into by the National
      Executive, binds the Republic without approval by the National
      Assembly and the National Council of Provinces, but must be tabled in
      the Assembly and the Council within a reasonable time.

The request will give practical expression to and emphasise the political
will to approve the Basel Convention on the transboundary movement of
hazardous substances and their disposal, which is a global agreement to
address the problems and challenges posed by the transportation of
hazardous waste across boundaries. Some of the objectives of the convention
are: To minimise the generation of hazardous waste in terms of quantity and
the degree of hazardousness, to promote the disposal of hazardous waste as
close to the source of generation as possible and to reduce the movement of
hazardous waste, in particular, across internal boundaries.

Article 14 of the Basel Convention provides for the establishment of
regional centres and the role of the centres is to assist developing
companies, within their region, to fulfil the objectives of the convention
through capacity-building, technology transfer and research and exchange of
information.

South Africa has been identified as the host of the regional centres for
the African English-speaking countries, hence the request for approval of
the agreement to set up an Africa Institute for the Environmentally Sound
Management of Hazardous and Other Wastes, which has already been ratified
by eleven other countries. A hosting centre in our country will enable
South Africa to play a significant role in engaging with international
environmental management agreements. I thank you.

There was no debate.

Agreement establishing the Africa Institute for the Environmentally Sound
Management of Hazardous and Other Wastes approved.

The House adjourned at 18:32.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a section 75 Bill:

          a) Repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment of
             Certain Matters Amendment Bill [B 50 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).
2.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Public Works


          a) Built Environment Professions Bill [B 53 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
             prior notice of its introduction published in Government
             Gazette No 31093 of 30 May 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Public
             Works of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
             Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
             Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

     (2)    The Minister of Minerals and Energy


          a) Mine Health and Safety Amendment Bill [B 54 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
             prior notice of its introduction published in Government
             Gazette No 31063 of 16 May 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Minerals and Energy of the National Assembly, as well as
             referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
             classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

3.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)    Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 19 June 2008:


          a) Appropriation Bill [B 3 – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 77).


          b) Social Assistance Amendment Bill [B 17 – 2008 (Reprint)]
             (National Assembly – sec 76).


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly


CREDA INSERT REPORTS - T080619e–insert1 – PAGES 1291-1325.


