---
title: 'National Assembly - 25 June 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2008-06-25
---

WEDNESDAY, 25 JUNE 2008
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:05.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                            SANCA AWARENESS WEEK

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: First of all, before I move the motion
without notice, I would really like to compliment you on your stunning
outfit, it really is quite excellent.

Madam Speaker, I hereby move without notice:

   That the House –

      1) notes that Monday, 24 June, marked the beginning of the South
         African Council for Drug Dependence and Alcoholism (SANCA) drug
         awareness week and that Thursday, 26 June 2008, is International
         Day against Drug Abuse and Illicit Drug Trafficking;


      2) notes that this week aims to raise awareness regarding the
         prevention and treatment of alcohol and other drug dependence;


      3) recognizes that there is a massive and growing substance abuse
         problem in South Africa that affects the most vulnerable of
         communities including children, women and the disadvantaged leading
         to many lives being ruined on a daily basis;


      4) acknowledges the selfless role played by stakeholders in civil
         society and in local communities in increasing public awareness of
         this problem and by providing treatment for alcohol and other drug
         dependants and their families; and

      5) calls on all South Africans to stand together in fighting this
         pandemic currently plaguing our communities so that the self-
         respect and dignity of all those affected by drug abuse can be
         restored.

Agreed to.
                       PROCEDURE TO AMEND MONEY BILLS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:


   That  the  House,  noting  the  provision  of  section   77(3)   of   the
   Constitution, instructs the Portfolio Committee on Finance to –

   (1)      consider a procedure to amend money Bills before Parliament with
       a view to introducing a Bill dealing with the matter;

   (2)      take into account the work already done by the Task Team on
       Oversight and Accountability on this matter, which was reported to
       the Joint Rules Committee on 19 March 2008;

    3) report to the House by no later than 15 August 2008.

Agreed to.

                          STABBING OF MR M SKWATSHA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr O E MONARENG (ANC): Madam Speaker, following the stabbing of the Western
Cape provincial secretary, Comrade Mcebisi Skwatsha by a certain Ndikho
Tyawana while addressing an ANC meeting in Worcester, a provincial
disciplinary committee was convened to consider the matter. The accused and
his colleague have been found to have violated the Constitution of the
African National Congress and as a result they have been expelled from the
organisation with immediate effect. When an individual joins the African
National Congress he or she makes the following declaration: “I, Oupa
Monareng, solemnly declare that I will abide by the aims and objectives of
the African National Congress as set out in the Constitution, the Freedom
Charter and other duly adopted policy positions, that I am joining the
organisation voluntarily and without motives of material advantage or
personal gain, that I agree to respect the Constitution and the structures
and to work as a loyal member of the organisation, that I will place my
energies and skills at the disposal of the organisation and carry out tasks
given to me, that I will work towards making the ANC an even more effective
instrument of liberation in the hands of the people, and that I will defend
the unity and integrity of the organisation and its principles, and combat
any tendency towards disruption and factionalism.”

The African National Congress found Mr Tyawana and his colleague to have
violated the Constitution ...

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, I am not quite sure what
this has to do with Parliament as opposed to an internal ANC matter?

Mr O E MONARENG: We, the ANC and not the DA, welcome the decisions made by
the disciplinary hearing. I thank you.

                         CORRUPTION IN SOUTH AFRICA

                            (Member’s Statement)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: A recent survey shows that 90% of South
Africans feel that corruption has become a way of life in the country and a
further 85% believe that a lot of corruption takes place in senior levels
of government. It is not surprising that South Africans think that
corruption is endemic given the number of senior ANC members involved in
corruption cases such as Travelgate, Oilgate and the arms deal. The fact
that the leader of the governing party is still facing criminal charges for
corruption reflects the shrinking moral fibre of the government in the ANC.


Access to state positions is abused by many in the ruling party for
personal enrichment at the expense of the interests of the poor. The
government is too lenient in curbing corruption in state institutions;
instead of punishing and convicting corrupt government officials. All too
often these individuals are moved from one government department to
another. The government needs to refine its moral compass and take the lead
to rooting out corruption from society. For its part the DA remains
committed to a vision ...

Prof B TUROK: Madam Speaker, are these matters not before the courts and,
therefore, sub judice? Is it correct that these matters should be raised
here under the protection of the Rules of the House?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: For its part the DA remains committed to
a vision of a society in which there is zero tolerance to corruption as its
record in the City of Cape Town and other municipalities throughout South
Africa reflects.

             Vulnerability of women and children in rural areas

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms C N Z ZIKALALA (IFP): Madam Speaker, a report by the Presidential
Working Group on Women has highlighted huge shortfalls in the provision of
water and sanitation and the failure to end violence against women and
children in our poorest provinces.

Despite all the achievements, and immense contributions of women in our
country, the women in rural and poor areas, together with children, remain
the most vulnerable members of our society.

The fact that women are so well-represented here in Parliament and in
government should mean that gender issues become more prominent and take on
an increased importance, and that more resources are allocated to the
plight of the many women and children who are suffering in the rural and
poor areas.

This, however, is unfortunately not the case as the suffering and
vulnerability of women and children continues. We are failing these
vulnerable groups. [Interjections.] Thula wena! [You shut up!] [Laughter.]

There is no doubting the strength of South African women and I believe that
we, here in Parliament, can, and must, take the lead with this important
issue and put a stop to the suffering of our many sisters and children who
have no voice. All women in positions of power and authority must use the
resources at their disposal to mainstream gender issues so that they
receive the attention that they deserve. We owe this to the many women and
children of South Africa who are trapped in suffering and misery and who
are still abused every day. Awuthule wena! [You must shut up!]

                 ANC PROVINCIAL CONFERENCE IN KWAZULU-NATAL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnu D M GUMEDE (ANC): Kusukela ngomhla zingama-20 kuya mhla zingama-22
kuJuni 2008 uMbutho Wenkululeko, i-ANC, ubukade ubambe ingqungquthela
yesifundazwe KwaZulu-Natali eMgungund lovu. Injongo enkulu ye-ANC ukwakha
iNingizimu Afrika engenalubandlululo ngokwebala, ngokobulili nangokobuzwe.
Silwela ukwakha iNingizimu Afrika ebumbene nesebenza ngokulandela imigomo
yentando yeningi lapho zonke izakhamuzi ziyophila impilo enhle nenokuthula.


Ingqungquthela yesifundazwe KwaZulu-Natali iwuqhubele phambili umzabalazo
wethu ngokuthi iyalele amagatsha kanye nawo onke amalungu ukuthi sisebenze
singakhathali, ukuze siqiniseke ukuthi zonke izinqumo zengqungquthela
eyayisePolokwane ziyafezeka.

Ingqungquthela ibuye yazibophelela ukuqhuba umzabalazo wokulwa nobuphofu
kanye nokweseleka kwezinto eziyizidingo zokuphila njengamanzi, izindlu,
imisebenzi, ezemfundo kanye nezempilo. Siyayihalalisela i-ANC ngokuba
nengqungquthela eyimpumelelo enkulu. Halala kwi-ANC KwaZulu-Natali! Halala!
(Translation of isiZulu member’s statement follows.)

[Mr D M GUMEDE (ANC): The African National Congress in KwaZulu-Natal held a
provincial conference in Pietermaritzburg. The conference started on the
20th and ended on the 22nd of June 2008. The main focus of the ANC is to
build a South Africa that is free from discrimination on the basis of race,
gender and nationality. We strive to build a South Africa that is united
and that works in accordance with the democratic values where all citizens
live better and peaceful lives.

The KwaZulu-Natal provincial conference responded to our call by mandating
all branches and their members to work tirelessly, to ensure that all
Polokwane resolutions are met.

The conference also resolved to continue the fight against poverty and to
deal with the lack of basic services such as the provision of water,
housing, employment, education and health care. We congratulate the ANC for
holding a very successful conference. Bravo to the ANC in KwaZulu-Natal!
Bravo!]

                NEED FOR transitional government in Zimbabwe

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs C DUDLEY (ACDP): Madam Speaker, the Movement for Democratic Change’s
decision to pull out of the 27 June elections in Zimbabwe speaks of a
people and a party committed to a democratic outcome against all odds! They
said:

   Elections are our game. We do not want to take to the streets or to pick
   up weapons to make our point; we are democrats.

When the MDC won the 29 March elections, 73% of the population voted
against Mugabe. It was quite unbelievable that SADC states stood by -
seemingly helpless.

The hon Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs, Susan van der Merwe, promised
in this House that the South African government would watch closely for
signs of violence and abuse and would respond if necessary. Hon Minister,
do you know how many deaths, abductions and other horrors like chopping off
of hands and feet, may have been averted if the South African government
had taken its head out of the sand?

Calls for the Security Council to meet urgently to discuss Zimbabwe and the
UN Secretary-General being more vocal on the situation; the new consensus
emerging within SADC as Angola, Swaziland and the ANC if not government,
become new critics, and today’s SADC meeting on Zimbabwe is promising and
we hope will bring some action.

The intensified nationwide campaign of violence and intimidation in
Zimbabwe have totally put paid to any possibility of a free or fair
election.

The obvious need now is for the formation of a transitional government that
will include all parties to take the country through a period of
stabilisation and recovery before holding new elections. This can, however,
hold no place for Mugabe who has shown himself to be the cruel enemy of his
people and has disqualified himself in every possible way.

                  Continuation of Prosecution of Arms deal

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs P DE LILLE (ID): Madam Speaker, just because the German prosecution
authorities have stopped their investigation into German citizens and
companies involved in the arms deal, does not mean the case is over, or
that anybody in South Africa is off the hook.

The only reason that they have decided to stop the investigation is because
they have been frustrated by the lack of co-operation by the South African
authorities.

The responsibility for investigating and prosecuting South Africans
involved in the arms deal rests with the National Prosecuting Authority and
the NPA's reluctance to co-operate with the Germans is an indictment on
this government.

The NPA has subpoenaed me twice over the past nine years and I have handed
over all the documents relating to the German investigation. But, because
of political interference, the NPA has failed hopelessly to investigate and
prosecute the crooks in our midst because, and I have said this before and
I will say it again, corruption steals from the poor.

The ID will continue to fight for the truth in the arms deal and for an end
to corruption in our country. It is only useful idiots that want to stop
this investigation.

                        PROBLEMS AFFECTING EDUCATION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr I S MFUNDISI (UCDP): Madam Speaker, education in the country is beset by
many problems, such as a poor or no culture of teaching and learning; a
lack of discipline among teachers and pupils alike; a shortage of teachers
and a lack of facilities in some instances.
This may perhaps be traced back to the failure by government post-1994 to
seek a philosophy for education, as did countries such as Botswana with
their education for Kagisano and Tanzania with Julius Nyerere’s Ujamaa or
education for self-reliance.

After accepting 20 or so education departments, all that the new government
did was to impose a new curriculum which was not well-researched and has
come to be a bone of contention in the schooling system, because it was not
internalised by the practitioners and the communities.

That almost all MECs for education in the provinces lament the poor
training of teachers, the class sizes in most schools exceed the policy
norms and teachers nowadays leave teaching in their droves is cause for
concern.

The Department of Education will have to double their efforts to make
teaching attractive and a career of choice. While efforts are being made to
make education accessible through the no-fees schools, the problem is that
schools go for months without amenities because of the bureaucracy that
goes with the release of funds.

Another problem in this case could be that those who run the schools are
not certain how to requisition for the funds. Interventions aimed at
assisting schools in poor communities seem to bear no fruit as the schools
do not own their terms to improve their performances. The UCDP calls on the
department to assist the provincial departments much more.

             MINISTER OF LABOUR’S REMARKS HAVE RACIAL UNDERTONES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms A M DREYER (DA): Madam Speaker, the Minister of Labour recently made
rather bizarre statements about the recent High Court ruling that, for the
purposes of the Employment Equity Act, Chinese people are regarded as
black.
If the Minister does not accept the ruling, he can appeal against it.
Alternatively, he should respect the judgement and keep quiet about it. One
would hope that as South Africans, we have put the race classification
behind us. That Act was already scrapped in 1991, that is 17 years ago, but
now it seems race classification is back with a vengeance; however, this
time without any legal basis.

While the Minister is obsessed with dividing people into various race
boxes, millions of South Africans are fighting for survival, confronted
with real problems such as unemployment, poverty, crime and Aids. The
Minister would serve South Africa’s people better if he welcomed the fact
that many South African Chinese people have brought with them skills,
entrepreneurship and a work ethic, and have created thousands of jobs.

                     MORITI PROJECT LAUNCHED AT MADIBENG

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G J SELAU (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC takes this opportunity to
congratulate the Madibeng Local Municipality in the area of Brits, in the
North West province of South Africa, for adopting a project called the
Moriti project in the office of the executive mayor. In terms of this
project, they identify orphans and child-headed households within their
jurisdiction and assist them by way of education, food and shelter, through
fundraising and requesting donations from supportive and sympathetic
communities and individuals around the municipal areas and beyond.

This is informed by our history of ubuntu, in terms of which, for instance,
if a child had no parents, the nearest relative would take the
responsibility of taking care of that child as part of the family; where a
family was without a child, the nearest relative would avail a child to be
part of the family; and where there was no food in one family, the next
family would provide.

The ANC’s national democratic revolution struggle aimed at building a
nonracial, nonsexist, democratic, prosperous and caring nation is derived
from the values mentioned in this statement, among other things.

The ANC calls on municipalities, government departments, traditional
leaders and their communities, all formations and institutions of society
to take this example and play an active role in changing the lives of South
Africans for the better, irrespective of where they are.

The social development grants alone cannot be enough. The people shall
share in the country’s wealth. Thank you.

                        PROVINCIAL CONFERENCE OF IFP

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnu A M MPONTSHANE (IFP): Somlomo, iNkatha Yenkululeko izobamba
ingqungquthela yesifundazwe ezoqala mhla zingama-27 kuya mhla zingama-29
kule nyanga kaJuni eNyuvesi yaKwaZulu-Natali eMgungundlovu. Le
ngqungquthela ibaluleke kakhulu ngoba ilungiselela futhi yendlalela ukhetho
oluzayo. Ngakho-ke sifisela zonke izithunywa ezizobe zihambele le
ngqungquthela impumelelo. Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu
member’s statement follows.)

[Mr A M MPONTSHANE (IFP): Speaker, the Inkatha Freedom Party will hold a
provincial conference at the University of KwaZulu-Natal in
Pietermaritzburg from the 27th to the 29th of June 2008. This conference is
very important because it is in preparation of the next general elections.
We, therefore, wish all the delegates who will be attending this conference
all the best. Thank you. [Applause.]]

                     REINTEGRATION OF XENOPHOBIC VICTIMS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mna R J MASHIGO (ANC): Ke a leboga, Spikara Batho ba go tšwa dinageng tše
dingwe tša Afrika ka porofenseng ya Limpopo, Groblersdal, bao ba ilego ba
hlaselwa ka lebaka la dikhuduego tša go sepelelana le lehloyo la batšwantle
ba boletše ka molomo o tee gore bjalo ba ka bitša Afrika-Borwa legae gape.
Seemo kua Mohlaletsi se kaonafetše morago ga gore mokete wo o ikgethilego
wo o bego o swere ka la 8 June ka nepo ya go bušetša batšwasehlabelo bao
setšhabeng. Yo mongwe wa batšwasehlabelo e lego Mna Freeman Nyanisi o rile:
Tšohle di boetše sekeng. Ga go sa na ditšhošetšo. Ebile maphodisa a re
etela ka dinako tšohle go dira bonnete bja gore re bolokegile.

Moketeng wo wa la 8 June, Molekgotlaphethiši wa Thuto e lego Ngaka
Motswaledi, Kgošikgolo ya Bapedi ya motšwaoswere e lego Sekhukhune le Mna
Masemola ba ile ba gatelela ntlha ye bohlokwa ya gore mengwageng ye e
fetilego, balwela tokologo ba rena ba ile ba fiwa madulo ke dinaga tša ka
ntle. Ba bangwe ba balwela tokologo ye, e be e le Mna Lawrence Phokanoka le
Mna Flag Boshielo bao ba tswaletšwego profenseng ya Limpopo ka moka ga
bona.

Bjalo ka ANC, re rata go leboga maitapišo a batho ka moka ba Mohlaletsi ka
go dira bonnete bja gore khutšo le tšhireletšo di ba gona setšabeng.
Thobela. (Translation of Sepedi member’s statement follows.)

[Mr R J MASHIGO (ANC): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Those people who reside in
the Limpopo province, in Groblersdal, who come from other states in Africa
and who have experienced xenophobic attacks voiced that they can again call
South Africa home. After a special celebration held on 18 June, with the
intention of reintegrating the xenophobic victims into society, the
situation became better. One of the victims, Mr Freeman Nyanisi said:
“Everything is back to normal. The threats are nonexistent. The police even
patrol at all times to make sure that we are protected”.

During that celebration of 8 June, Dr Motswaledi, the MEC for Education,
Sekhukhune, the acting Paramount Chief of the Bapedi and Mr Masemola
stressed the point that our freedom fighters in the previous years were
accommodated in other countries. Freedom fighters, who fought for this
liberation, such as Mr Lawrence Phokanoka and Flag Boshielo, were both born
and bred in Limpopo the province.

As the ANC, we would like to thank all the people in Mohlaletsi for their
efforts in making it possible that peace and security reign in society.
Thank you.]

                  BICYCLES AS SOLUTION TO TRANSPORT PROBLEM

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr J SCHWARTZ (DA): Madam Speaker, there is a well-known song called, There
are 9 million bicycles in Beijing, sung by Katie Melua. She obviously has a
very great fan in the Department of Transport who convinced the department
to set aside money from the budget to buy a million bicycles which could be
dished out to children in rural areas who cannot access public transport.
This is a very noble idea but if there had been proper planning before the
time, he would have found out that there are bicycle manufacturers in South
Africa in the first instance, and secondly, that there is no manufacturer
at all that can supply the million budgeted for immediately.

The result of all this is that the remaining R31 million will be unspent on
a capital budget for which the Minister of Finance had to make income
provision. The lack of planning by way of properly thought through business
plans crops up in all departments and it is particularly true with regard
to the provisions made for the appointment of staff.

We call on government to commit to proper planning when compiling the
annual budgets so as to ensure that budget provisions are made only where
necessary and with emphasis on poverty alleviation. Provisions made for
funds that are unlikely to be spent place an unnecessary burden on the
taxpayers. Thank you.

                         ENERGY EFFICIENCY PROGRAMME

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M M NTULI (ANC): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Indalo Yethu
Environmental Scholarship Fund has ensured that 50 students will have an
opportunity to study environmental science at higher education institutions
next year.

The programme is part of the South African Environmental Campaign which was
launched in 2006 by the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism.
The department in partnership with the Umsobomvu Youth Fund and the Old
Mutual Foundation will also contribute to the training of 10 000 young
people who would be trained as energy savers. The campaign is meant to
stimulate conversation about energy efficiency and environmental issues.

This will contribute to efforts to raise public awareness about energy
saving. Energy safety reduces both greenhouse gases and the need to build
new power plans. The African National Congress commends the Department of
Environmental Affairs and Tourism, the Umsobomvu Youth Fund and the Old
Mutual Foundation on their efforts to improve awareness about energy and
environmental issues. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

          COMPUTER SKILLS FOR CHIEFS IN GREATER LETABA MUNICIPALITY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mna B L MASHILE (ANC): Magoši ka moka ao a welago ka fase ga Mmasepala wa
Letaba kua porofenseng ya Limpopo a filwe thuto ya go sepedišana le
tšhomišo ya dikhomphuta. Ramotse wa Mmasepala wa Letaba, Mna Joshua Matlou,
o re: “Re ile ra tšea sephetho sa gore re akaretše baetapele ba setšo mo
lenaneong la rena la thuto la go šomiša dikhomphutha ka ge e le bona ba
etilego ditirelo tša mmušo pele mo dinagang-magaeng.”

Maloko a setšhaba le bašomedi ba mmasepala bao ba ka lekanago makgolo a
mabedi le bona ba tšeere karolo mo lenaneong leo la go rulagantšhwa ke
mmasepala. Re le mokgatlo wa ANC, re tshepha gore bjalo ka naga, gore re
tle re kgone go fihlelela dikenywa tša tokologo, re swanetše go ema ka
maoto re rute setšhaba gomme re tsošološe setšo sa go hlankela setšhaba. Go
kaonafatša thuto le bokgoni mo setšhabeng ke seo re se hlokago go fihlelela
ditoro tša rena tša go phethagatša bophelo bjo bokaone go batho bohle ba
Afrika –Borwa. Mošate. [Legoswi.] (Translation of Sepedi member’s statement
follows.)

[Mr B L MASHILE (ANC): All the Chiefs under the Letaba Municipality in the
Limpopo province have been equipped with computer skills. The Mayor of
Letaba Municipality, Mr Joshua Matlou, says: “We took a decision to include
traditional leaders in our computer skills programme as they are the
leaders of government services in the rural areas.”

About two hundred members of the community and municipality officials also
took part in this programme that was organised by the municipality. As ANC
members, we believe that for us to be able to attain the fruits of freedom
as a country, we must strive to teach the nation and revive the tradition
of working for the people. To educate people and equip them with skills are
what we need to do, to reach our dream of a better life for all South
Africans. Thank you. [Applause.]]

             MINISTER OF LABOUR’S REMARKS HAVE RACIAL UNDERTONES

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Madam Speaker, the ANC has never been a racist
organisation. [Interjections.] The ANC is very proud of its history; very
proud of its struggles and battles against racism. The ANC is also very
confident of the future, the future of a country that will be free of
racism, a country and a society that will be nonracist, nonsexist and
democratic.

The hon member, together with the one who is barking, remember that the
court document says the following - if you have read it:

  Having read the counsel of the applicants, and by agreement between the
  parties, it is hereby ordered as follows:


  It is declared that South African Chinese people fall within the ambit of
  the definition of black people in section 1 of the Employment Equity Act,
  55 of 1998.

There has been much comment and, with respect, also distortion of facts and
legal issues surrounding the application made by the Chinese Association of
South Africa against this Ministry. The true facts are as follows:

The Chinese Association of South Africa sought an order in the main
declaring South African Chinese people as falling within the ambit of the
definition of black people. Therefore, there is absolutely no need for
anyone to amend the Employment Equity Act. In essence, that is what I was
communicating to journalists: Please read the court documents. It is very
simple; there are only two or three sentences in it. Even a Sub A child can
read it.

If you are racist, don’t rub it off on me. I have never been a racist and I
will never be a racist. It came by three boats, the Drommedaris, Reijger
and others, to South Africa. [Laughter.] They found me here, and I was not
a racist. That is why I joined the ANC. [Applause.]

          COMPUTER SKILLS FOR CHIEFS IN GREATER LETABA MUNICIPALITY

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Madam Speaker, I would like to take this
opportunity to thank the hon Mashile for bringing to our attention the
inclusion of traditional leaders in the skills development programmes
around the ICT sector. This is an important move. Many have accused this
ANC government of not attending to those who are in rural areas,
particularly in the traditional sectors.

We thank the Greater Letaba Municipality for including the traditional
leaders in their development programme. They sit as traditional leaders on
our Intergovernmental Relations Forum because they have their
representatives there. We recognise the need for them to understand the
importance of ICTs in our national development, a development that is not
meant only for urban areas but also for rural areas, particularly also for
our traditional areas. We have also set up e-co-operatives that are
established in all provinces to assist municipalities and their citizens.

We, as a government and as the ANC party, have said ICTs must in fact be
expanded to include all of our people. If it did not happen in the first
few years it is certainly beginning to happen and these municipalities are
showing us that it is possible to make ICTs part of our socioeconomic
development. We thank them for having taken this direction and also thank
Members of Parliament for bringing this to our attention.

Re a leboga. Re re le kamoso. [Legofi.] [Thank you. Keep it up and well
done. [Applause.]]

                         ENERGY EFFICIENCY PROGRAMME

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Madam Speaker, I would
like to respond to the member’s statement on environmental issues. We
appreciate the sentiments expressed. The initiative, along with our
partners in the NGO sector and the private sector, is to take environmental
education to a new level.

I would also like to respond to the second part of the statement, namely to
the reduction of greenhouse gases and the building of new power plants -
three issues. The first issue is that recently we made public the result of
the long-term mitigation scenario study which is the first effort by our
government to agree on a framework to deal with this issue in future.

The second issue deals with the last power plant that we gave a green light
to on environmental grounds. There was a specific requirement for that
power plant to be carbon-capture storage ready and that is something that
we will in future look into very seriously to ensure that we align
ourselves with the international best practice.

The third issue is that I am quite aware that there is a parliamentary
delegation on its way to the Kobe meeting in Japan to precede the G8 plus 5
meetings. We would like to wish them luck and in the same vein say that we
have taken note that both the American and Japanese governments have said
that they want to put pressure on us - South Africa and the other four
developing countries - to agree on the target of cutting emissions 50% by
2050. Our message to them is quite straightforward: We will never agree to
the developed world passing on their responsibilities to developing
countries and expecting from us to start subsidising their ambitions and
their lifestyles. We will only agree to that if the developed countries
agree to clear midterm targets. And on that issue we are not going to
compromise. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

 COMPUTER SKILLS FOR CHIEFS IN GREATER LETABA MUNICIPALITY REINTERGRATION OF
                             XENOPHOBIC VICTIMS
                        PROBLEMS AFFECTING EDUCATION

                            (Minister’s Response)

TONA YA THUTO: Modulasetulo, o itse fa ke le motho yo o tlotlang bagolo,
jaanong fa rre wa lekoko la UCDP a bua jaaka a buile ke iphitlhela ke
idima, ke sa itse gore ke tla mo tlotla jang. O a itse gore dilo tse a di
buileng motho a ka se re ke nnete. E sale ke bua ke kopa gore re se dire
dilo tsa thuto dilo tsa polotiki ka gore ga gona motho yo o ka itumelang fa
bana ba sa rutiwe.

O itse sentle gore re ntse re dira dilo di le dintsi. E ka sere fa re ema
fa re bua gore bana ba tsene sekolo ba sa duele madi go bo go twe ga se
selo se se siameng. Re a se dira. Mo dikolong di feta 5 000 bana ba tsena
sekolo ba sa duele madi. Go a direga.

Dikolo di le dintsi di bone madi a a fetang a ba kileng ba a bona fa ba re
bana ba tlise R25,00 kgotsa R30,00 kwa sekolong. A re dumeleng gore se ke
selo se sentle, re tla netefatsa gore se dire botoka ka gonne re a itse
gore go ntse go na le mathata. A re eleng tlhoko gore fa re bua re se bue
jaaka e kete ga re batle dilo tseo di direga.

Sabobedi, ga se nnete gore dilo tse re di dirang ga di thuse; di a thusa.
Re tsentse dibuka mo diphaposing, re aga dilaeborari, re aga dikolo. Le mo
o nnang teng o a di bona dikolo di teng. Fa re bua ka barutabana, bana ba
rutiwa ke barutabana ba bantsi go feta ba ba neng ba le teng ka 1993 fa o
le kwa Bophuthatswana. O a itse le wena gore re ba okeditse, ba bantsi
jaanong. Diphaposi ga di sa tlhole di na le bana ba ba ntsi jaaka maloba. A
re amogeleng dilo tse, re bue nnete ka tsona. Go ne go sena dibasari; bana
ba ne ba sa tsene mo diyunibesiting; re ne re sena dibasari tsa diFET; dilo
tseo tsotlhe di tlile ka rona. Di amogele rra ka gonne re di baya mo
diatleng tsa gago. [Legofi.] (Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, you know very well that I have
respect for the elderly, but if someone speaks in this manner like this
gentleman from the UCDP, I find it very difficult to show my respect for
him. I would also like to note that all the things he said were not true. I
have requested that we should not use educational matters for political
gains, because there is no one who would be happy if children are not
taught.

It should be acknowledged that a lot has been done. The introduction of the
nonpayment of school fees in more than 5000 schools is a reality and people
should accept that it is happening and it is the right thing to do.

A lot of schools have received more funds than they ever had in the period
when learners were asked to pay R25,00 or R30,00. We need to acknowledge
that it is indeed a good idea, and we will ensure that it is done properly
although there have been problems around this. We should be careful not to
speak as if we are against anything which is being introduced.

Secondly, it is not true that we do not benefit from what is done. We
provided books and built libraries and more schools. There are even schools
where you come from. There are more educators now in our schools to teach
learners than there were during the Bophuthatswana era. You know very well
that we have employed more teachers now. Classrooms are no longer
overcrowded like they used to be in the past. May we acknowledge that and
be honest about it. There were no bursaries and even for the FET band, all
these have been introduced by us. You must learn to come to terms with them
sir, because we are offering that to you. [Applause.]]

Secondly, I really would like to congratulate all those Members of
Parliament who made reference to work that is being done in the various
municipalities, with respect to delivery of social services. In particular,
I must express my great appreciation for the work done in the Letaba
Municipality to provide Information, Communication and Technology training
to traditional leaders and municipal workers.

As the House would know, it is our view that traditional leaders can indeed
play a very important role in advancing development in their communities
and in our country as a whole. Therefore, ensuring that they have the
skills to advance the work of development that we anticipate they would is
a welcome development indeed.

I would also say that I’m very grateful that the hon member made reference
to the open welcome of foreign nationals back into their communities in the
Limpopo province. I think this is a very positive development. But it comes
along with a need for us to acknowledge that in the majority of communities
in our country there was no attack on and violence perpetrated against
foreign nationals. It was a minority of people who behaved in this way. The
majority of South Africans have opened their arms, have been kind and have
given wholeheartedly. It is these South Africans who reflect the true
spirit of our democracy, and we believe we must thank them for their
commitment to making South Africa belong to all who live in it. Thank you.

                         ENERGY EFFICIENCY PROGRAMME

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: I just want to respond to the
statement made on energy efficiency. I want to join the hon member in
commending all those people who are contributing to making sure that this
campaign is a success, but would also like to say that the list is not
exhaustive. We have seen provincial governments launching their own energy
efficiency campaigns. Gauteng led in this regard with Western Cape
following and I think that a number of other provinces - even if that has
not been brought to my attention - are doing something.

Also, the African National Congress has led by example. Its pamphlets have
already been distributed at some institutions. My own appeal would be that,
in order for this campaign to be successful, we should all lead by example
in this House; from our houses into our constituencies. It’s only when we
work together that this campaign will be a success. I thank you.

                NEED FOR TRANSITIONAL GOVERNMENT IN ZIMBABWE
                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Ms S C Van der Merwe): I would like
to respond to the hon Dudley, the hon member from the ACDP. I think we
should really not be disingenuous about this matter. The South African
government, as the hon member and this House know, has condemned in no
uncertain terms the violence committed in Zimbabwe. Earlier this week the
South African government has also supported the United Nations Security
Council Presidential Statement which begins with the condemnation of
violence in that country.

What we have always done, and continue to do, is to work with our SADC
neighbours, the African Union and the United Nations to find a solution to
the current state of affairs in Zimbabwe. Even as we meet here today, our
people are engaged in Zimbabwe as observers in the SADC Observer Mission.
There are also members of the opposition in that team who are in our
embassy in Harare. Through the SADC-mandated Facilitation Team they will
work to bring that country to a peaceful resolution to their problems.

Once again, our interest is in a solution to the problem; not to further
exacerbate a tense and volatile situation. We join the SADC region and the
broader international community in urging Zimbabwean parties to co-operate
fully with all efforts aimed at finding a peaceful way forward, including
the possibility of a transitional arrangement. We will continue to do this
until a solution is found. I thank you.

  SUSPENSION OF RULE 253(1) FOR PURPOSE OF CONDUCTING SECOND READING DEBATE
                            ON CHILD JUSTICE BILL

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move the draft
resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:

   That Rule 253(1), which provides inter alia that the debate on the Second
   Reading of a Bill may not commence before at least three working days
   have elapsed since the committee’s report was tabled, be suspended for
   the purposes of conducting the Second Reading debate today on the Child
   Justice Bill [B 49B — 2002] (National Assembly - sec 75).

Agreed to.

           ZIMBABWE PRESIDENTIAL RUN-OFF ELECTION ON 27 JUNE 2008

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move the draft
resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:
   That the House, noting that Zimbabwe is holding a Presidential run-off
   election on 27 June 2008 and in pursuance of the request from the
   Ministry of Foreign Affairs, subject to the concurrence of the National
   Council of Provinces, resolves that –

   (1)      a twenty-member  multiparty  delegation  of  the  South  African
       Parliament observe these elections;


   (2)      the delegation forms part of the SADC observer mission;


   (3)      the delegation observes  the  campaign  in  the  run-up  to  the
       elections, the casting of votes and subsequently the counting of the
       votes; and


   (4)      the delegation presents the mission’s report  to  Parliament  on
       its return.

Agreed to.

        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
              CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT ON CHILD JUSTICE BILL

Order disposed of without debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move:

 That the Report be noted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly noted.

                             CHILD JUSTICE BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Madam Speaker, hon
members, it is with great pleasure that I introduce the second reading
debate on the Child Justice Bill, particularly during this month of June.
This month our country celebrates and commemorates the role played by the
youth in liberating our country.

We are celebrating this month by creating a criminal justice system that
gives children who find themselves in conflict with the law an opportunity
to be treated in a manner that takes into account their vulnerability and
socioeconomic problems created by the racial divide of the past and also to
promote the spirit of ubuntu.

We are aware that this Bill has its origins not only within the context of
international obligations but also through ANC policy that has always put
children at the forefront in the reconstruction and development of our
country.
Thus section 28 of the Constitution regards every person under the age of
18 as a child and among others gives every child the right not to be
detained except as a measure of last resort. What is important is that our
Constitution advances progressive childcare and child development.

We have also ratified the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the
Child. We ratified this convention in 1995. The convention requires state
parties to promote the establishment of laws, procedures, authorities and
institutions specifically applicable to children as well as children in
conflict with the law.

State parties are also required to establish a minimum age below which
children shall be presumed not to have the capacity to infringe penal law.
Following the ratification of the convention, my predecessor the late
Dullah Omar in 1997 approached the Law Reform Commission to investigate an
appropriate child justice system. The investigation was consultative and
involved discussions with all role-players, and I mean all members of the
Justice, Crime Prevention and Security cluster, even in the broader sense
of including social workers, academics, the judiciary – both the high and
the lower courts; that is the judges and magistrates.

As indicated in the long title, the preamble and the clause setting out the
objects of the proposed legislation, the Bill aims to create the criminal
justice system for children in accordance with the values underpinning our
Constitution. I am not going to go into the details of the Bill. I am,
though, going to refer to aspects of the Bill in order to highlight
important innovative policy areas that are in this Bill.

The Bill amends the common law relating to the minimum age of criminal
capacity; it sets the minimum age of criminal capacity at 10 years with the
possibility of review in the next few years. The Bill further provides for
a mechanism to deal with children who lack criminal capacity.

The approval of this Bill by the National Assembly today will indeed be an
historic event. The Bill is divided into various chapters, each dealing
with the relevant stage of the criminal process. I must mention at the
outset that although the Bill creates a new system for children, the system
is not completely removed from the existing criminal justice system.  In
other words, it coheres very well with the current broad criminal justice
system.

The Bill still reverts to the provision of the Criminal Procedure Act of
1977 to deal with certain matters such as bail. Chapters 3 and 4 of the
Bill contain provisions regarding methods of securing the attendance of
children at proceedings and the release or detention and placement of
children.

I would also like to refer to an area which I think is of importance and
also indicates the innovative approach that our Parliament has taken. The
preliminary inquiry for these young offenders is one of the innovations
created by the proposed legislation. The preliminary inquiry, although
regarded as the child’s first appearance in court, is an informal pre-trial
procedure which is inquisitorial in nature. One of the main objectives of
the preliminary inquiry is to establish whether the matter can be diverted.
Diversion is a big part of this legislation and what I like most is that
there is quality assurance because diversion programmes must be accredited
and service providers, because government can’t do it alone, must be
properly registered. I think that is a great innovation.

I must also point out that the Bill includes a wide range of sentencing
options such as nonresidential or community-based sentences; sentences
involving restorative justice concepts such as restitution and compensation
to the victim, correctional supervision and finally sentences involving a
residential element, that is detention in a child and youth care centre
referred to in the Children’s Act of 2005.

There is also an attempt to bring what exists together. I think what is
also worth mentioning as an important strength of this Bill is the
promotion of co-operative governance. This Bill requires various
departments to work together to address services for children processed
through the criminal justice system in a co-ordinated and holistic manner.

The Bill requires the alignment of policies, practices and intersectoral
planning of the agencies of the criminal justice department. Also of
importance is that the offences are actually placed in schedules. There are
five schedules and they are determined in accordance with the seriousness
of the offence. Once more I am hoping that my colleagues will elaborate,
especially those who worked very hard in Parliament expanding on the policy
informing the legislation. I must, at this stage, urge us all in this House
without reservation to – and I am told that this is a possibility – support
this Bill.

At this point I want to thank the chairperson of the portfolio committee,
Comrade Yunis Carrim, for his excellent work, and the long hours he spent
in discussion with all parties represented in that portfolio committee.

I also want to thank my Deputy Minister. From the very onset of this
legislation many years back until the last discussions between the
executive and the portfolio committee – I won’t tell you when that was -
you have sterlingly contributed to the substance that is the essence of
this Bill.

I must thank the subdirectorate in the court services, vulnerable groups,
and many people do not know that South Africa can boast with having some of
the finest drafters of legislation. And I want to thank, in my department,
the very hardworking officials who worked tirelessly to produce the drafts
that we, in Justice, present to this House. I do know that you have been
complemented, even by the chairperson of the portfolio committee in private
– ooh, I am divulging secrets here – but you have done very well and thank
you very much. [Time expired.]

Mr Y I CARRIM: Madam Speaker, comrades and friends, the quality of a
democracy and the prospects of its future are, in no small measure,
reflected in the way it treats its children. And what better a test of this
than the child justice system it opts for? So, this Bill tells more about
us as a country and people and about where we come from and where we are
going to than we might acknowledge. Which is why it is so important to get
this Bill right and which is why, too, if it is important to pass Bills
that are pragmatic, practicable and doable, it is also important not to
abandon identity, principle, values and goals. If this Bill is about many
balances, it is fundamentally a balance between the real and the ideal,
between capacity and fulfilment, between now and then. In short, the Bill
is both pragmatic and aspirational within the framework of an overall
implementation strategy.

It is, in fact, a highly civilised Bill. Which is why, though issues of
crime persistently divide this House, all the major parties, I understand,
are supporting this Bill. How easy it would have been, with elections
looming, to over politicise the issues of the Bill, but nobody succumbed,
quite simply because all of us recognise the value of children in our
society.

I’ll deal with the committee’s overall approach to the Bill and draw from
our report published in today’s Announcements, Tablings and Committee
Reports. Other members will deal with specific aspects of the Bill. The
approach of the committee in processing the Bill this year was similar to
that of the 2002 committee, which revolved around two principal
considerations; firstly, the need to balance the constitutional rights of
the child and the rights of the victims of crime and the community to
safety and security - there are glitches here in my typing - secondly, the
need to ensure that the state has the capacity to effectively implement the
new child justice system.

We are excruciatingly aware of the high levels of crime in our country and
the capacity of children, no less, to commit crime. We are aware too of the
public perception that the state is failing to curb crime. It’s precisely,
indeed, because of these concerns that the Bill took the form it has. Of
course, it’s important to be tough on crime, including crime committed by
children, but this has to be part of a process of preventing and reducing
crime over time, and ensuring that children don’t constantly re-offend,
becoming part of an endless cycle of crime. What future has the country
otherwise? Clearly, there need to be short, medium and long-term
programmes, measures and targets as part of an overall sustainable long-
term strategy to reduce crime by children as part of a broader approach to
reduce crime generally.

There are, of course, many complex objective and subjective reasons for
crime committed by children. A significant part of crime has fundamental
material and structural roots, and unless we adequately address these
systemic issues and develop a child justice system that is effectively
based on both preventing and combating crime, we will not be able to reduce
crime levels significantly. This is not to be reductionist, in other words,
understanding crime simply as an outcome of the social structure, nor is
it, indeed, to ignore the subjective choices children make to commit crime
for which they must be held accountable. It is about finding a balance
between the objective and subjective dimensions of crime committed by
children.

We should not be romantic about children in our country or ignore the
extent to which children, especially older children, subjectively choose to
commit crime and must be held accountable. Nor should we downplay the
state’s responsibility to ensure the safety and security of both the
potential victims of crime and society. But we have to avoid an
exceptionalism that borders on suggesting that South African children,
basically African children, are inherently worse than other children
universally and are incapable of being rescued from a predilection to
committing crime; which borders, in effect, on neo-racist theories. It is
in striking a path between these two extremes that the portfolio
committee’s approach was directed.

The committee processed this Bill in a somewhat different context this year
from 2002. Of course, public anxieties and frustrations about the levels of
crime and the perceptions of the state’s failure have heightened. These are
very understandable feelings and views and the committee is entirely
empathetic. But we cannot shape legislation on a new sustainable model of
child justice with both immediate and long-term goals surely on the basis
of public emotion, as legitimate as these are, and as accountable as
Parliament is to the public. The committee was careful to avoid being
populist and short-term, whilst recognising the need to act in the here and
now to reduce crime.

But there have been other changes too since 1992: Firstly, the significant
advances in restorative justice since 2002 in South Africa. And what is
restorative justice if not quintessentially African? And who should be
better at it than us? Secondly, government departments and other state
structures and NGOs have developed greater capacity to implement the Bill,
and are already doing so. Its key aspects are being implemented, as the
Minister and Deputy Minister know, on assessments and diversion. In a
sense, the Bill is lagging behind current practice and serves little more
than to provide a legislative framework for ad hoc practices that have
emerged.

Thirdly, indeed there are about 18 000 children being diverted already.
Fourthly, there are now more probation offices and more secure care
facilities. Fifthly, there are progressive changes to other legislation
that impacted on the way we processed ours, especially the Children’s Act.

While the state has obvious obligations towards children, it cannot
substitute for the role of parents, who have the primary responsibility.
This principle is expressed in the concept of parental rights and
responsibilities in the Children’s Act. Clearly, unless we can re-establish
functional families, we cannot solve all the problems of crime committed by
children.

The committee is acutely aware of the capacity and other constraints of the
state to implement the Bill. Various provisions in the Bill deal precisely
with this. The Bill’s preamble, indeed, acknowledges:

  There are capacity, resource and other constraints on the state, which
  may require a pragmatic and incremental strategy to implement the new
  criminal justice system for children.

We engaged rigorously with the departments and other state structures on
their capacity to implement the Bill. Indeed, we spent about 20 hours; 12
hours in closed workshops and eight hours in the committee. We also put
formal questions in writing and got a 43-page reply in writing from the
department.

We undertook study visits, indeed, without pre-warning to the One-Stop
Child Justice Centres and diversion service providers in Mangaung and Port
Elizabeth. May I, by the way, welcome magistrates Schoeman and Goosen who
are in the gallery today. Minister, you will be interested to know that I
heard today that the Mangaung One-Stop Child Justice Centre has been
identified by the United Nations, if I’m right, as a role model for such
one-stop centres throughout the world, and I think we should congratulate
them for that. [Applause.]

Overall, we feel that while co-ordination among departments responsible for
implementation has improved recently, there is still some way to go, but we
are utterly clear that the departments and other state structures certainly
have the potential to implement the Bill. Of course, it will be
challenging, but what else can we expect? Our point is that the Bill is
only going to be implemented on 1 April 2010 and it gives the department
plenty of time to prepare.

Obviously, there are aspects of the Bill that only the state structure
should implement, but there are other aspects that the NGOs could assist
with, and are keen to do so. It is important, however, not to conflate the
roles of the state and the NGOs. Clearly, there is a need for greater co-
operation between them, and the committee effected various amendments to
the Bill to ensure this, and we shall seek to monitor it.

I want to, before I conclude, acknowledge, and the Minister has done so,
the extremely valuable contribution of the department’s team which include
Advocate Shireen Said, Mr Laurence Basset, Ms Thandazile Skhozana, Ms
Corlia Kok and Mr Hennie Potgieter. Mr Basset, Minister, the key drafter,
as you noticed, in particular, worked incredibly hard and with considerable
patience and is the quiet hero of this Bill, I must insist. [Applause.] Ms
Christine Silkstone, of the parliamentary Research Unit – a quiet person
too – Minister, you don’t know her, also brought her formidable
intellectual strengths and passion to bear on this Bill.

May I mention that last week when we were sitting in the committee at about
11 o’clock one night, her two-and-half-year old boy rang and said: “Comrade
Carrim, I am from the toddler league of the ANC.” He asked: “Is this not a
Bill about child justice?” I said yes. And he said: “If this is a Bill
about child justice why do you have my mom sitting in committee meetings at
11 o’clock at night?”

Moreover, you will be interested to know that he said, when his mother
reads to him at night, she’s now reading to him things like victim-offender-
mediation. She is talking to him about family group conferencing. And when
she sings in the kitchen while cooking with her partner she actually sings
about things like that, so he wanted to know whether this is not
victimising him as a child. The President, Deputy Minister and heads, I
must tell you, historical materialism doesn’t always provide the answers
for you. So, there we are! [Laughter.]

We also owe a huge debt of gratitude to Dr Ann Skelton, whom I gather is in
the gallery, Dr Jacqui Gallinetti and Ms Dhaksha Kassan from the Child
Justice Alliance for their technical support and their unremitting passion
for and commitment to children. You’ll have to accept that on clause 2163,
subsection 133(g)(iv), subsection 6, I still don’t agree with you about the
comma, but you are free to go to the NCOP to present it to them.
[Laughter.]

I also want to thank researcher Tumisang Bojabotshena, who was great, as
was Mr Neil Bell. Last night at 22h30, he was sitting with me as I went
through the draft of the ATC document, so Mr Neil Bell is outstanding.

We are grateful to our committee secretaries, I hope they are here, Vhonani
Ramaano and Lolly Phumelele Sibisi - I should have mentioned Lolly first,
she will get upset - and Vatiswa and the Department of Social Development.
I want to thank in particular, Conny Nxumalo and others.

In our committee, Bills are co-chaired and Mr John Jeffery, as a co-chair
brought his considerable political and technical skills, not to mention his
work ethic, to bear on the Bill. Some of his more innovative ideas,
Minister, you’ll understand, I suspect come from his partner, Professor P J
Schwikkard and possibly his 16-year old son, David. We are very pleased
that JJ derives his genes from his son because we benefited from them.

I must also thank Mr Steve Swart - he’s been superb. In fact, it was very
hard, Comrade Deputy President and the ANC, to believe that he is not our
comrade, because of the way in which he acted in the meeting - I hope his
party leader is not listening - as if he was an ANC comrade. Although, I
must tell him that it’s a bit late for floor-crossing. It is about to end,
mercifully.

But I must also thank Mr Len Joubert, wherever he is, because he was
extremely patient, understanding and kind. Lastly, to the DA, in
particular, I want to say, what strikes us at the end of the day is that we
can have a national interest though we have some differences on this Bill.
Eventually we all say, children matter, our future matters. [Applause.]

Finally, while the committee regrets the delay in finalising the Bill, we’d
like to think it served ultimately to produce a better Bill. Certainly, the
Bill is the outcome of considerable negotiations among a range of
stakeholders and there is now substantial consensus on its content between
Parliament, the executive, the NGOs, academic and other experts. The
challenge now, I must stress, is for all of us to work together to
implement the Bill effectively. The committee feels we owe this to the
children of our country and we certainly need to do this to consolidate and
advance our democracy. I reserve my nine seconds, thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L K JOUBERT: Madam Speaker, this Bill has been in Parliament for six
years and its passing is long overdue but, as stated in the portfolio
committee report, the delay served to produce, ultimately we think, a
better Bill.

However, notwithstanding its long tenure in Parliament, it is still not a
perfect Bill. However, the DA will support this Bill nevertheless, because
we believe in the principle that children need to be treated as children in
our justice system and children are not to be seen in prisons. An imperfect
Bill protecting our children is 100% better than no Bill at all.

The interesting fact of this Bill is how all the political parties
concerned, and that is the ruling party, the DA and the ACDP, worked
together, I dare to say in a spirit of ubuntu, with a common interest and
that is to improve the lot of our children. After all, they are the future;
tomorrow belongs to them, but we have the power to determine their tomorrow
to a great extent. To me it showed again that if you have a common
interest, the ruling party and the opposition can work together in the
interest of our country and our people.

Before I address the Bill as such, I would like to make certain
acknowledgements. Firstly, I want to also express my appreciation to Mr
Lawrence Bassett and his team of law drafters. Lawrence, I confirm what I
wrote to you on Sunday: We owe you. Having said that, I want to give you a
piece of advice. When I did my articles, I once had to drew up a will for a
client. I took the draft to my principal and he asked me why I included
certain clauses in the will. My reply was that the client wanted it like
that. Then he taught me an important lesson. He said: Remember you are a
lawyer, not a scribe. And I address this to all our legal draftsmen: Always
remember that you are lawyers, not scribes and you don’t have to be
diplomats either.

I also wish to express a special word of thanks to our two chairpersons.
This Bill, as you heard, was chaired by both the hon Carrim and the hon J H
Jeffery. The opposition was at a great disadvantage during the final stages
of this Bill as I had a medical condition and my senior counsel, Dr
Delport, was also on sick leave for most of the time. Nevertheless, they –
these two chairpersons - did everything in their power to keep me on board
and I want to note my appreciation for their professional approach in this
regard.

Those who know me will have realised that all these nice words were to lay
the table for something else. That something else concerns the preamble to
this Bill. Before coming to the point, I want to express my appreciation
for the efforts to accommodate my concerns in this regard, which are
contained in the committee’s report. Without wishing to create the
impression that I am ungrateful for these concessions, I want to avail
myself of this opportunity to explain the sensitivity we have in this
regard.

This Bill, as Mr Carrim said, will only come into effect in 2010. That is
20 years after apartheid was abolished, which means that no person born
during the apartheid era will be affected by this Bill. However, the
preamble refers to the position before 1994 and although I am keenly aware
of the wrongs of the past, it belongs to the past. As a South African whose
family tree goes back more than three hundred years in this country, I
obviously also have scars. The oldest scar is that of my forefathers who
came to this country as religious refugees and had to abandon everything
they had and flee for their lives, leaving pots on the stove. They again
lost everything during the Anglo Boer War. We paid a further price because
my family did not support the National Party.

I have reconciled all this because I believe that if you keep looking at
the past you have your back to the future. Why then refer to the past in a
Bill that concerns our children? When will today and tomorrow become more
important than yesterday?
More importantly, if we really want to make this wonderful country work, we
must only take from the past that that will make the future better for all.
Let us leave the history out of legislation and leave it to the historians.
Let us lawmakers learn from the past but rather concern ourselves with the
future. I thank you.

Mrs S A SEATON: Madam Speaker, today's debate on the Child Justice Bill
represents a milestone in the development of the South African criminal
justice system as it, for the first time, provides specific legislation for
procedures to deal with children who have come into conflict with the law.

The underlying principles to the Bill are found in section 28 of the
Constitution which states, inter alia, that “a child's best interests are
of paramount importance in every matter concerning the child’’ and, more
specifically, that children should only be detained as a measure of last
resort and then separate from prisoners older than 18.

The Child Justice Bill provides the legislative framework for the special
protection of children who have come into conflict with the law. The Bill
also gives effect to the requirement that South Africa's accession to the
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, and the African
Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child, must be taken up in our
domestic law.

Madam Speaker, the Bill has been in the making – I disagree with Mr
Joubert, it is actually been in the making for some ten years, with the
first steps taken as far back as May 1997. Although it has taken a long
time, the IFP shared the view of a leading criminologist who said: It is
better to have a Bill, than no Bill at all.

The main objective of the Bill is to provide alternatives to the
incarceration of the children who committed less serious criminal offences.
The Bill sets the age of 10 as the minimum age for prosecution, while
retaining the common law presumption of incapacity for children under the
age of 14.

Some of the alternative sentences envisaged by the Bill include: community-
based sentences, including rehabilitative diversion; restorative justice
sentences; correctional supervision; residential requirement sentences; and
residential facility sentences.

I would like to concentrate on two of these alternatives - diversion and
restorative justice. According to the Child Justice Alliance, diversion is
the practice of referring a child away from formal court procedures at any
stage in the criminal justice process. It is not a soft option, but seeks
to change the child's pattern of behaviour so that he or she understands
the impact of their crime on the community.

Restorative justice is not a new concept in South Africa, and can be
described as uniquely African as it encapsulates some of the principles of
ubuntu. These include actions such as an apology, restitution and
reparation. Overall, the main objective of restorative justice is to allow
the offender to rejoin the community and to prevent them from reoffending.

The IFP supports the Child Justice Bill. It provides legal certainty for
dealing with children who have come into conflict with the law, and
provides them with a second chance in life, while at the same time enabling
them to take responsibility for their actions without having been
incarcerated and exposed to hardened criminals which sometimes can lead to
a life of crime and not rehabilitation. As Mr Carrim, the hon Carrim, said,
the importance of the child is the most important thing. We all believe
that our children are important – to ourselves, to South Africa – and this
is a step in the right direction. I thank you.

Mnr I E JENNER: Agb Speaker, die OD bring vandag hulde aan die menigte
kinderslagoffers wat  gesterf het as gevolg van gruwelike moorde,
verkragtings en ontvoerings, en dit ten aanskoue van familie, vriende en
kennisse. Sommiges se dood is steeds onbeantwoord en dit het ’n ewige
letsel op baie gemeenskappe gelaat.

Die langverwagte wetsontwerp oor kindergeregtigheid bring vandag troos in
die harte van die menigtes wat deur hierdie gruweldade en misdadige
vergrype teenoor kinders geraak is.

Hierdie deeglike wetgewing het egter ’n baie groot uitdaging, naamlik die
effektiewe inwerkingstelling daarvan. Die uiters gebalanseerde wetgewing
vereis ook kollektiewe verantwoordelikheid om sukses te bewerkstellig.

In my eie ervaring as ’n korrektiewe beampte en projekbestuurder by ’n
jeugsentrum het ek gesien hoe baie jeugoortreders misbruik word in plekke
van aanhouding, maar ook hoe hulle ontaard in die gehardste misdadigers wat
in die meeste gevalle onverskillig en vreesloos opereer.

Die feit dat die konsep van “restorative justice” as ’n fundamentele aspek
van die herstel, deurlopend in die wetsontwerp manifesteer, bring nuwe hoop
en verdiep ons swaarverdiende demokrasie. “Restorative justice” poog om die
oortreder en sy onmiddellike familie, die slagoffer en sy onmiddellike
familie, asook die gemeenskap medeverantwoordelik en verantwoordbaar te
maak vir die herstel, versoening en hertoelating ná vonnisoplegging.

Vir die eerste keer is daar ’n meganisme wat verhoed dat kinder- en
jeugoortreders blootgestel word aan ’n omgewing belaai met kriminaliteit en
die wreedheid wat daarmee gepaard gaan.
Die wetsontwerp bring ook ’n einde aan die praktyk om jeugdiges te misbruik
by misdaadpleging in die wete dat hulle ’n ligter straf sal ontvang. Die
geskiedenis word vandag herskryf omdat hierdie wetgewing in Jeugmaand
goedgekeur word, want dit bevestig dat ’n gesonde jeug ’n gesonde
samelewing tot gevolg kan hê.
Die OD steun die wetgewing en bedank alle rolspelers, ministeries,
departemente, die portefeuljekomitee, nie-regeringsorganisasies asook die
openbare samelewing wat ’n bydrae gelewer het tot die samestelling van die
wetgewing.

Suid-Afrika kan dus die droom van wyle Ingrid Jonker laat voortleef, “Die
kind wat net in die son wou speel ... die kind is nie dood nie”. Ek dank u.
(Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr I E JENNER: Hon Speaker, the ID today salutes the many child victims
who have died as a result of brutal murders, rapes and abductions, and that
in the presence of family, friends and acquaintances. Some of these murders
are still unsolved and it has left a permanent scar on many communities.

The long-awaited Bill on child justice today brings comfort to the hearts
of the many who were affected by these abominable deeds and criminal
transgressions against children.

This thorough piece of legislation, however, faces a major challenge,
namely the effective implementation thereof. In addition, this extremely
balanced legislation requires collective responsibility to achieve success.

In my experience as a correctional services officer and project manager at
a youth centre, I have not only witnessed the abuse of many juveniles in
places of detention, but also how they degenerated into the most hardened
criminals who, in most cases, operate with indifference and fearlessness.

The fact that the concept of restorative justice, as a fundamental aspect
of the rehabilitation, manifests itself throughout the Bill brings new hope
and deepens our hard-earned democracy. Restorative justice strives to make
the offender and his immediate family, the victim and his immediate family
as well as the community, co-responsible and answerable for the
rehabilitation, reconciliation and readmission after sentencing.

For the first time there is now a mechanism that prevents child offenders
and juvenile delinquents from being exposed to an environment fraught with
criminality and the brutality that goes with it.

The Bill also brings to an end the practice of using juveniles to commit
criminal deeds knowing that they would receive a lighter sentence. History
is being rewritten today as this legislation is being passed in Youth
Month, thereby affirming that a healthy youth could lead to a healthy
society.

The ID supports the legislation and would like to thank all the role-
players, ministries, departments, the portfolio committee, non-governmental
organisations as well as the public who made a contribution in the
composition of the legislation.

South Africa can, therefore, let the dream of the late Ingrid Jonker be
remembered, “Die kind wat net in die son wou speel ... die kind is nie dood
nie”. I thank you.]

Mr J B SIBANYONI: Madam Speaker, hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers, hon
Members of Parliament, I would like to start off by joining the committee’s
chairperson in welcoming the magistrate of Bloemfontein in Mangaung, Mr
Schoeman, as well as the magistrate of Port Elizabeth, Mr Goosen.
[Applause.]

When our committee was initially debating this Bill or talking about it,
there were some doubts as to whether there is capacity on the ground to
implement it, if passed. However, after visiting these two one-stop justice
centres, our committee has confidence that in fact, there is hope. We also
want to congratulate Mangaung on winning a prize.

The debate takes place not only during the Youth Month, but also on Youth
Parliament day, an event during which the youth of this country gathers
here at Parliament to debate issues affecting them.

We are debating a piece of legislation that brings major changes in the
criminal judicial system concerning children in conflict with the law. It
is a piece of legislation that embraces the values of ubuntu, which is
similar to, but a little bit wider than humanity.

Kunesitjho sesikhethu esithi ‘umuntu mumuntu ngabantu’. Lesi sitjho
sisithola eentjhabeni ezinengi zange-Africa. Abanye bathi ‘motho ke motho
ka batho’. Abanye ubezwe besithi ‘umntu ngumntu ngabantu’. UmThethomlingwa
lo uletha indlela yokuba abantwana abatjhayisana nomthetho bangasegiswa
ngendlela ekusegiswa ngayo abantu abadala namkha iinlelesi zakadeni –
sithoma ngokubotjhwa komntwana.

UmThethomlingwa lo uthi akukafanele bonyana umntwana nakabotjhwako athuthwe
ngesikhwelo sinye nabantu abadala ngambana bazamtlhorisa ngeendlela
ezinengi, njengokuthi umntwana lo angenziwa umalokazana. Nangaphandle
kwalokho, bazamfundisa ubulelesi obuphala namkha obudlula lobu abotjhelwe
bona. Alo-ke umThethomlingwa lo uthi abantwana kufanele bavikeleke
bangavezwa ezintweni ezingabona ukuyaphambili. (Translation of isiNdebele
paragraphs follows.)

[We have a saying that says: a person is a person because of other people.
This saying is also used by many African nations. Some say ‘motho ke motho
ka batho’. You will hear others saying: ‘umntu ngumntu ngabantu’. This Bill
seeks to provide that children who are in conflict with the law should not
be prosecuted the same way as adults or older criminals – starting with the
arrest of a child.

This Bill states that it is not correct for a child who has been arrested
to be transported in the same vehicle as old offenders, because they can
abuse him in many ways, for example sexual abuse. Apart from that, they
will teach him other ways of committing crime that is more serious than
what he has been arrested for. Therefore, this Bill states that children
should be protected and not be exposed to things that can destroy them
further.]

Some people might think that treating child offenders more humanely than
adult offenders is an indication of being soft on crime; but that is not
so.

Kunesinye godu isitjho esithi ‘umntwana wami muntwana wakho nomntwana wakho
muntwana wami’. [Again there is another saying that says: My child is your
child and your child is my child.]

In the traditional African way of life, parents and the community at large
co-operate in bringing up children, which includes their discipline, hence
the saying: “Your child is my child; my child is your child.” As a member
of the community, you are expected to reprimand any child you come across
doing something wrong. In the past, it included reasonable chastisement.

The Bill, as it stands, has elements of restorative justice. For instance,
if a child is arrested for assaulting another child, the offender’s parents
and the victims’ will be invited to take part in discussions aimed at
resolving the matter, if it can be resolved. Thus the views of the victims
would be considered in diversion and sentencing. The offending child may be
persuaded to apologise or make good the wrong he or she has done.

When a person has done something wrong and some action needs to be taken
against that person, in isiZulu it is said: Uqondiswa izigwegwe [correcting
the wrong]; it is not punishment or discipline the way we understand it,
but rather to correct that person. We are going back to our roots in terms
of this Bill.

The ANC national conference in Stellenbosch declared that the ANC should be
a champion for the rights of children, especially the girl-child. The
conference further committed to strengthening the criminal justice system
to protect children and prevent abuse.

The Child Justice Bill strikes a balance between protecting children in
conflict with the law and protecting the victims of crime committed by
children. The Bill also balances the interest of the child with the
interest of justice.

The Bill has provisions to deal with child offenders in such a way that the
child offender accepts that he or she has done wrong. This will prevent any
possibility of reoffending. The ANC supports this Bill. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Madam Speaker, I firstly want to thank the Justice Portfolio
Committee chairperson and the Whip for the extra time and also for your
kind words. My thanks also go to all the officials involved led by Lawrence
Basset and the nongovernmental organisations who helped us, led by Dr Ann
Skelton and others, who assisted us during the drafting process.

Back in the year 2000, I was proud enough to represent our country in
addressing an ancillary meeting of the United Nations Crime Conference in
Vienna on the notion of restorative justice and the Child Justice Bill. It
is thus quite emotional to address this House and to participate in this
debate today. The Bill at that stage was undoubtedly pioneering worldwide
in criminal justice reform. Regrettably, it has taken a number of years to
finalise it and, in a certain sense, practice has bypassed us with the
restorative justice principle being applied in practice and some 18 000
children already being diverted annually. Members will recall that I have
raised the issue of the outstanding Child Justice Bill in numerous debates
and during Budget Votes and that I regret the delay. However, I do believe
that we now have a much improved Bill.

It is also quite emotional as we are all aware of the appalling conditions
in our prisons. Hon Deputy Minister, you will remember that when we went to
Port Elizabeth and we visited the juvenile section, there was that
youngster who was about 14 years of age and he said to us, “die kinders was
stout met my” [the children were naughty with me], obviously indicating
that he had been sexually abused or raped in that prison. And we need to
state this categorically, that, as far as possible and bearing in mind the
safety of communities in society, children should not be kept in prisons
where they will in all likelihood be abused and sodomised into a lifetime
of crime in what has been referred to as the universities of crime.

The restorative justice and diversion approach for children in conflict
with the law seeks to avoid this whilst ensuring that community safety is
not compromised. This is an important aspect and the Bill recognises the
present reality of high crime rates and adopts a proactive approach to
crime prevention by placing increased emphasis on the effective
rehabilitation and integration of children. This is to be achieved by
encouraging child offenders to accept responsibility for the crime
committed and to make amends for the harm caused, and this is the essence
of the restorative justice approach. Diversion, we believe, would minimise
the potential for re-offending and break the cycle of crime. It balances
the interests of children on one hand and those of society with due regard
to the rights of victims.

With the high crime rate, what may seem to be a desire for retribution is
often actually a concern for public safety. We believe that, at the very
least, this Child Justice Bill will potentially deliver at least as much
public safety as the present system. Therein lies the appeal to us as
lawmakers grappling with the demands of society for safer streets. The Bill
provides special treatment for children in conflict with the law in a
system that is designed to break the cycle of crime. It will thus
contribute to safer communities and encourage children to become law-
abiding and productive adults. The diversion programmes presently offered
by the National Institute for Crime Prevention and Reintegration of
Offenders and other NGOs have a remarkable success rate with a very low
rate of re-offending. Whilst the high crime rate does understandably result
in a cry for retribution, the point about a retributive system is that you
deal with a state and, at the end of the day, the victim is left angry and
bitter, maybe with some feelings of vengeance satisfied whilst the child
offender goes off to prison to learn new tricks.

Restorative justice is a victim-directed approach to crime prevention and
the Bill seeks to include victims in crime diversion processes by means of
restitution, consultation on diversion programmes, victim-impact statements
as well as in victim-offender mediation. So, the appeal of this model is
the acceptance of blame by the offender and the recognition of the need to
address the harm caused.
Unfortunately, this has not been the traditional approach where, in our
criminal justice system, the offender seeks to evade accountability and the
legal system has, to a large degree, degenerated into a contest between the
state and defence lawyers to establish guilt or to obtain acquittal.
Retributive justice is a form of criminal justice based on the response to
crime primarily by punishing offenders, yet virtually, as I indicated,
ignores the victims and communities hurt by crime.

Now, a well-known judge from New Zealand who has pioneered restorative
justice holds the view that restorative justice offers to the world the
healing power of repentance and forgiveness, of justice with mercy, of
God’s love for all people. These are ideals, he says, in which all people
can share. If there is to be true accountability in the community, it is
time we breathe the spirit of justice.

We as the ACDP have no delusions about the magnitude of the task facing us
in the light of the high crime rate, but submit that restorative justice
will play a fundamental role in providing opportunities for active personal
participation by the victim, the offender and their communities in
responding to crime. We wish to make it very clear that adults who think
that they can use children to commit offences, hoping that such children
will be diverted, will be prosecuted under section 9 of this Bill read with
the provisions of the Children’s Act.

In conclusion, it would be apposite to conclude by referring to the Prophet
Micah who asked, “What is it that God desired of His people?” He said, “He
has showed you, oh man, what is good. And what does the Lord require of
you? To act justly, to love mercy and to walk humbly with your God.” And we
as the ACDP respectfully submit that restorative justice satisfies this
injunction. The key to success for this Bill is that the public feels safe
from child offenders. The victim is involved and possibly compensated and
the child offender has a change of heart, leading to a new life. The ACDP
will support this Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Deputy Speaker, one of the most highlighted concerns
since the turn to democracy in 1996 has been the protection of women and
children. Our democracy brought to the fore a number of serious abuses and
the reality of the children of South Africa and it was bleak.

The national Constitution and the Bill of Rights introduced rights that
will certainly shape up human living, dignity and equality. However, it is
the long awaited Child Justice Bill that will deal with and address the
needs of our children. The courts of South Africa have always upheld that,
in all matters pertaining to children, it is the best interests of the
child that is the court’s primary concern and interest. It insists that all
shall persuade the court’s decision. The Child Justice Bill serves to bring
so much more stability to and fill so many loopholes regarding the
wellbeing of the child.

In the overpopulated province of KwaZulu-Natal, poverty is one of the
greatest challenges and there are many child-headed households which means
that children are being deprived of education and there are many
unfortunate reports of children in rural areas who are being made to labour
under harsh conditions.

The awareness of children’s rights needs to be taken to the end of the
earth, and our communities need to be educated on how to rear and develop
the children of our country without infringing on the rights and the
dignity of the child. We need to intensify the responsibility of parents
towards their children. Neglect and abuse are too common and the rights of
children are being exploited.

The MF hopes that the Child Justice Bill will not only create a greater
awareness of the rights of children but also instil a greater sense of
responsibility in parents, guardians and communities towards the children
of South Africa. Let us all protect all our children, even if they are not
ours. As we can remember, hon Sibanyoni just said, “Your child is my child;
my child is your child.”

Ingane yakho ingane yami, ingane yami ingane yakho. Masikukhumbule lokhu.
Siyabonga. [Your child is my child, my child is your child. We must
remember this. Thank you.]

The MF supports the Child Justice Bill. Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker.
[Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of order. It has nothing to
do with the previous speaker; it has to do with a certain hon member,
Martin Stephens of the DA, who finds himself remarkably comfortable on the
ANC benches.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon member. Please take your seat.

Mr M J ELLIS: I was rather hoping, Madam Deputy Speaker, that you would
tell him to come back to the DA where he belongs.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I didn’t take him there in the first place!

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy, this is a very serious point of order.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: From where you are seated, you have a problem, but
don’t make your problem my problem.

Mr M J ELLIS: Look how comfortable he looks.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is your problem, sir. Will you please sit down? I
am asking you for the last time and very seriously so. Sit down or take the
afternoon off.

Ms C B JOHNSON: Madam Deputy Speaker and hon Ellis, it is very comfortable
in the ANC benches.

The justice committee has processed many important pieces of legislation
during this third term and this third democratic Parliament, but I would
argue that this Bill before the House today is, possibly, one of the most
important and difficult pieces of legislation that we have had to deal
with. It raised many issues which we really had to grapple with and we had
to take some really tough decisions.

The aim of the Bill is to prevent children who are in conflict with the law
from growing up and becoming adults in conflict with the law. It brings
about many important changes in the way children in conflict with the law
are to be treated. We need to remember that when we deal with these
children, they are after all still children. Before they are sentenced by a
competent court, they are innocent until proven guilty. Therefore, we need
to put measures in place when we deal with children.

The Bill contains new and innovative developments, the first being
assessment. The assessment process is where a probation officer will assess
each and every child for the purpose of establishing whether the child is
in need of care and protection; will estimate the age of the child if the
age is uncertain, and will make recommendations as to whether the child
should be released or be detained in custody while awaiting trial, and also
establish the possibility of diversion. Diversion is something that the hon
Jeffery will deal with more fully. All children who will have to attend a
preliminary inquiry will be assessed.

The second new development is the preliminary inquiry, which is an informal
pre-trial procedure. It aims to look at the child holistically, at his or
her personal circumstances, at the offence that he or she was alleged to
have committed, and to place all of this before a court. Usually, these
preliminary inquiries are attended by the child, the child’s parents, the
prosecutor and the probation officer to get a sense of the specific
circumstances surrounding that child.

The third important change we’ve made is that we’ve raised the minimum age
of criminal capacity from the age of seven to the age of ten. This means
that a child who commits an offence under the age of ten will not have
criminal capacity and, therefore, can never be prosecuted for that offence.
There was a lot of debate in the committee about this issue. People felt
very strongly about it; some argued for ten years and others for the age of
12. The tough question that we had to face was: At what age are children
able to appreciate the difference between right and wrong, and act
accordingly?

Many of the submissions suggested the age of 12, but the committee felt
that we should first increase it to the age of ten. We then inserted a
clause to say that the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development
must, within five years, review the age of criminal capacity with a view to
whether or not it should be raised to 12 years or remain at ten years.

When the police, therefore, have reason to believe that a child under the
age of ten has committed a crime, they may not arrest that child but have
to take the child and immediately hand the child over to the parent or an
appropriate adult or, if the parent cannot be found or if indeed it is the
parent who is neglecting or abusing the child, hand the child over to a
child and youth care centre because the child may very well be in need of
care.

With regards to children between 10 and 14 years, they are presumed to lack
criminal capacity until the state can prove beyond a reasonable doubt that
the child could appreciate the difference between right and wrong and could
act in accordance therewith.

Finally, the Bill puts important measures in place to deal with the release
or detention of children awaiting trial. Time does not permit me to go into
detail but, as a general principle, where a decision is made that the child
must be detained awaiting trial, then preference must be given to the least
restrictive option in the circumstances. In other words, one would rather
place a child in a suitable youth and child care centre before placing a
child in prison or a police cell.

Where a child is held in detention, the child must be kept separate from
adults and must be treated in a way that takes account of the child’s age
and special needs. And adequate food, water, blankets and bedding must be
provided and when there has been an injury or illness or trauma, then
immediate health care must be provided to the child.

The hon Bloem has raised with this House, not once but many times, the
issue of children awaiting trial who are in custody where either the
parents cannot be found or are simply too poor to pay the bail. Hon Bloem,
we’ve taken care of that for you in the Bill. We’ve looked at the matter.
[Applause.]

To conclude, with regards to the detention, a lot depends on the secure
care centres that we have in the country at the moment. These centres are
crucial to the long-term success of this Bill. At the ANC’s 52nd National
Conference, the resolutions state that, with regard to children in conflict
with the law, the secure care centres must be capacitated and the
establishment of additional such centres must be accelerated. The committee
was, therefore, pleased to note that the Department of Social Development
has already established 30 of these centres across the country, and has
budgeted and planned for a further 20.

There is a saying that we worry so much about what a child will become
tomorrow that we forget that he or she is someone today. I do believe that
this Bill acknowledges that if we act in the best interests of our children
today, then hopefully they will become responsible and law-abiding adults
tomorrow.

I want to express my sincere gratitude to everybody who took part in the
processing of this Bill. It is, really, a very good Bill. I am pleased and
privileged to support this Bill on behalf of the ANC. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Deputy Speaker, the Child Justice Bill is a very
important piece of legislation for our nation. The children of our country
are our future. They are the foundation for our continued existence as a
nation. They are an indispensable national resource. The success of this
nation will depend on how we care for our children in terms of their
health, and their education to make them knowledgeable and skilled citizens
who can make a rich contribution to the national development of our country
and advancement.

These days, we see much juvenile delinquency caused by drugs and other
influences. It is important to come up with a Child Justice Bill such as
this one. Many children have certainly found themselves in conflict with
the law and consequently in prison. Many prisons that one visits these days
are crowded with young people. I have personally visited many such prisons.
In one prison, I was struck by the choirs. When these youngsters sing
hymns, you can’t believe that you are in prison. You would think that you
are in a church engaged in a very deep spiritual revival.

This Bill, among other things, provides for the minimum age of the criminal
capacity of children. It deals with children who lack criminal capacity
outside the criminal justice system. It has special provisions for securing
attendance in courts and the release from detention and the placement of
children. Due to the lack of such a law, many children have not been
properly placed, and they have sometimes been mixed with hardened
criminals. This is despite the fact that the Constitution is based on
democratic values, social and economic justice, equality and fundamental
human rights to improve the quality of life of all its people, and to free
the potential of every person for all possible things.

The Bill is supported by the PAC. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Deputy Speaker, hon Minister and members, it is of benefit to
our society that children of crime have laws that afford them the
opportunity to embark on a process towards full restoration.

The Child Justice Bill spells out the just procedures best suited for a
child criminal. The Bill aims to distinguish between child and adult
criminals and to achieve the right balance of treatment so that the child
is not treated more severely than its adult counterpart.

A key object of the Bill is to break the cycle of crime amongst our youth.
The FD endorses the provision that the de facto minimum age for a child to
presume to lack criminal capacity is established under the age of 10. The
procedures are provided for and the obligation is placed upon the state to
prove criminal capacity of the child over the age of 10 but less than 14
years old.

Society has an obligation, as far as possible, to protect the child’s
growth. Although being exposed to a bad world, they must not be unduly
influenced or forced to engage in criminal practices. We live in an
imperfect world, but children need not be grouped with those who have the
capacity to account for their actions. As such, the provisions spelling out
procedures around diversion create just treatment to the child offender.
Ours is still a traditional society that needs education about the impact
of diversion on social institutes. Society will need to be educated that
children can mend their ways given the right frames of reference and
resources.
The legislation, to be effective, must operate within a caring society, and
unless we have reached that stage, restorative justice of the child is
likely to be challenged. However, the FD believes that the legislation sets
the right principles and standards to call society to help in the
rehabilitation of the child. Therefore, the FD wholeheartedly supports this
Bill. I thank you.

Mr J H JEFFERY: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, it goes without saying
that we have a problem of crime in South Africa, but who are these
criminals and where do they come from? Are they members of an alien race,
either from a distant land or even a distant planet, who have come to live
among us, but are completely dissimilar from us, having an entirely
different origin, background, likes and dislikes? No, they are from among
us, from among our communities. We know many of them, or at least their
mothers and fathers, brothers and sisters, cousins, etc. Where did they
come from? They probably started as petty criminals when they were much
younger, as pick-pockets, housebreakers, bag snatchers and then graduated
to more serious crimes such as armed robbery, car hijacking and murder.

One of the issues that we need to address is that most of the criminals
committing serious crimes today were probably child offenders once and that
many of the child offenders sitting in our prisons will end up becoming
serious criminals. What do we do with the child offenders? Do we simply
lock them up and throw away the key so they can’t come back and victimise
anyone ever again?
The facts are that South Africa has one of the largest prison populations
in the world; the sixth largest in fact. According to the Judicial
Inspectorate of Prisons, we have 348 prisoners for every 100 000 people.
This is one of the highest in the world. Researchers say that South Africa
relies on prison as a penalty far more uniformly than other democracies,
but a further problem with stays in prison, according to researchers, is
that they increase rather than decrease the chances of a person returning
once released. This even applies to short stays. The figures are that
approximately 60% to 70% of prisoners commit offences again. So, the fact
that we throw our criminals into prison doesn’t seem to have an impact on
crime. What the Child Justice Bill is endeavouring to do is to focus on the
rehabilitation of the child offender, turning them into responsible adults
who will not reoffend, as opposed to simply locking them up and throwing
away the key.

Diversion, as other members have mentioned, is, therefore, an essential
element of the Bill. Diversion is basically saying to a child: If you admit
that you did it, and that you were wrong, instead of being prosecuted and
appearing in court and having all the evidence heard at the trial, you can
go on a programme aimed at rehabilitating you. And if you complete this
programme you won’t be prosecuted and you won’t have a criminal record. You
will be given a second chance.

Some of the objectives of diversion are, and these are contained in clause
51 of the Bill: To encourage the child to be accountable for the harm
caused; to promote the reintegration of the child into his or her family or
community; to provide those affected by the harm an opportunity to express
their views on its impact on them; to encourage the rendering to the victim
of some symbolic benefit or the delivery of some object as compensation; to
promote the dignity and wellbeing of the child and the development of his
or her self-worth and ability to contribute to society.

Diversion has been around for some time. Research shows that the percentage
of reoffending of children who have completed these diversion programmes is
low. According to the National Institute for Crime Prevention and
Rehabilitation of Offenders, Nicro, who run most of the diversion
programmes, of the 60 791 children accommodated in diversion programmes
from April 2004 to December 2007, only 7% of children had records of
previously being diverted for other criminal charges.

This Bill provides a legislative framework for diversion and as it is new,
it is something that we will need to review after it has been implemented
for a while. One of the big debates during our deliberations on the Bill
was whether all offenders, even the serious cases, should be considered for
diversion. At the moment any case can be considered for diversion in terms
of guidelines set by the National Director of Public Prosecutions. After
considerable deliberations we felt that this should continue.

We, however, felt that serious cases should not be diverted, but there may
be circumstances where you are unlikely to succeed as a trial and where
diverting the accused may be something that is appropriate. We, however,
set more stringent criteria. With regards to the serious cases, only the
Provincial Director of Public Prosecutions can indicate that a case may be
considered for diversion and only for exceptional cases and only after
consulting the police investigating officers to hear their views and then
there is also provision for listening to the views of the victim.

This doesn’t mean that all cases should be diverted. It is an option that
can be considered. With regard to minor cases, the decision on diversion
would be taken by the prosecutor and for the more serious ones the decision
would be taken by the preliminary inquiry magistrate after considering a
number of factors. When it comes to sentencing, in other words where the
child is found guilty and needs to be punished, the Bill does not follow
the approach of “lock them up and throw away the key”. The object of
sentencing, and these are contained in clause 69 of the Bill, are to
encourage the child to understand the implications of and be accountable
for the harm caused; to promote an individualised response, which strikes a
balance between the circumstances of the child, the nature of the offence
and the interests of society; to promote the reintegration of the child
into the family and community; and to use imprisonment as a measure of last
resort and only for the shortest appropriate period of time.

Before deciding on the punishment a court can consider a victim impact
statement, which is a statement by the victim which indicates the
consequences of the crime on them. This gives the court and the child
offender an opportunity to hear from the victim themselves. For the more
serious offences a pre-sentencing report must be submitted, which is a
report on the child and the types of sentences that would be appropriate
for him or her, prepared by a probation officer.

The Bill then outlines a range of possible sentences. They can include
community-based sentences, which are sentences that involve a child
remaining in the community, and undergoing a programme in that community.
There are restorative justice sentences, involving participation of the
victim. And then, for the more serious cases, there are sentences of
compulsory residence in a child and youth care centre or a reform school,
or ultimately there is still imprisonment in prison.

The Bill does not encourage fines as a punishment, because invariably it
will be the parents who pay and not the child. Instead it may look at
symbolic restitution where the child, instead of a fine, provides a service
or benefit or payment of compensation. We have specifically banned children
under 14 years of age from being sentenced to imprisonment, because we did
not feel that prison is an appropriate place for a child under 14. Someone
once put it, “What chance does an under-14-year-old have if they are
sentenced to prison?” The answer is probably: No chance. And they will be a
danger to society for the rest of their lives, which, if they had to live
to 70, would be another 57 years. This doesn’t mean that children under 14
walk free. They can serve a sentence in a child and youth care facility, as
I already mentioned, and we have provided that if the case is very serious
they can be sentenced to serve time in prison when they are a bit older,
but a court will have to look at how they performed in the child and youth
care centre and we will revisit the sentence of imprisonment if necessary.

We have limited it to children under 14 at the time of sentencing, not the
time of commission of the offence, because our intention is clearly that
prison is not a place that a child under 14 is equipped or able to handle.
In the case where the trial of an under-14-year-old is being delayed so
that the child is now over 14 and would have been under 14 at the time of
sentencing if it had gone faster, I am sure the presiding officer will take
into account that the child could not have been sentenced to jail had the
trial been completed earlier.

We are saying no under-14-year-olds in prison, we are not saying over 14
year olds automatically go to prison. This is an area that, I am sure, was
discussed a lot and it is an area that can be further debated. Children
over the age of 14 can be sentenced to imprisonment, but the Bill limits it
to very serious cases.

There are then two additional points I want to make in closing. The Bill is
quite detailed. Some would feel too detailed as far as the steps that
officials - and that is police officers, prosecutors, magistrates and
judges - must take. This is because, while you have a number of officials
in our justice system who are committed to the interest of justice, while
at the same time considering the child as a human being, there are
unfortunately a few others who simply are just not able to think. These are
the people who order a child to be held in prison for stealing a loaf of
bread on the one hand, and on the other hand releasing dangerous criminals
on bail when there are strong cases against them. For these officials,
unfortunately, we’ve had to spell things out.

The other point I want to make is an appeal to us here and to society at
large that the dangerous criminals in our society, those who rob and kill
and rape, are not aliens from a distant land or planet but are from among
us. They are some mother’s son or daughter, as the case may be, and they
were once children, whether in trouble with the law or just generally
troubled.

Two hon members have made reference to a saying “Umntana wakho ngumntana
wam; umntana wam ngumntana wakho.” Your child is my child; my child is your
child. [Applause.] Let’s take this saying to heart. Let us mentor our
youth, let us give them guidance, let us be there for them when they make
mistakes, as all humans do, and children should be able to make more
mistakes. Let us show them the right path.

The hon chair of the committee, the hon Y I Carrim, has thanked all the
officials for their hard work on this Bill - I don’t really have time to
repeat it – and the representatives of the nongovernmental organisations
who also participated. I think what he left out was himself and I’d like to
thank him. [Applause.] That is, the hon Mr Y I Carrim, for his commitment
to the task at hand, his energy, his inclusivity and his innovation. I
think he is a prime example of parliamentary best practice when it comes to
chairing committees. I thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson of the
portfolio committee, I would want you to consider taking me to lunch
because I’m the one who influenced the hon member who has just spoken. I
actually wrote that part for him. [Laughter.] Mine is a simple task now. At
the time I was introducing the Bill, I was extending my thanks also to the
previous chairperson of our portfolio committee, the hon Fatima Chohan,
because she also contributed to the discussions around the Bill at the time
that she was chairing.  But I also want to say thank you to the Child
Justice Alliance.

I must salute some of the members in particular of the NGO community, whom
I recall working with in the early 1990s and we were discussing the very
concept of the Child Justice Bill. I here would like to just single out Dr
Ann Skelton. By the way, I got intermittent briefings about the robust
discussions that were happening at the portfolio committee. I think mine is
simply to say: Keep up the good work. This is just the beginning. Once the
Bill is passed into law, we should make sure that it is implemented, not
only implementable. I do think that the challenge does remain. On our part,
as the executive, we commit ourselves to putting this as a priority of the
JCPS cluster because, indeed, government is mindful of the importance of
child care and development. In fact, I would venture to say that this Bill
completes the policy circle - the circle of a comprehensive policy on child
care and development. We thus commit to making sure that all of us,
Parliament, the executive and the NGOs are in partnership for the good of
the child so that we make this a reality. To those committees that have to
be set up within government, we have to consider how that can be
effectively done – not tomorrow but today. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT ON STUDY TOUR
                          TO LONDON AND MANCHESTER
         CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT
                        ON OVERSIGHT VISIT TO TSHWANE

Mr J P CRONIN: Deputy Speaker, the focus of the oversight work of the
Portfolio Committee on Transport over the last year and a half has largely
been on public transport preparations for the year 2010. I think members
will be well aware that Cabinet has set up the key legacy that we want to
derive from hosting the 2010 event and that is a decent legacy of public
transport. I think we all recognise that public transport in South Africa
is neither good nor effective.

Now, if we are to get this legacy right - in other words if we are to
derive a public transport legacy from hosting 2010 - then the planning at
city level, in terms of the host cities, needs to be completed already. The
funding flow needs to be moving very effectively, and indeed we need to see
the beginnings of significant implementation. It should also be noted that
the President of the country in two state of the nation addresses in recent
years, has mentioned bus transit systems as key elements of this public
transport legacy that we want to see in South Africa.

The Minister of Finance has also indicated the commitment of the Treasury
to seeing effective integrated multinodal systems in our major cities, and
so it is in this context that the portfolio committee has been conducting
oversight visits to all of the host cities. We visited all of them last
year, except for Tshwane which we visited in February this year. We met
with Tshwane transport officials for an entire day and listened to their
plans. They are talking about Metrorail improvements, the upgrade of
stations, the introduction of some new stations and also are planning - we
hope they are still planning - a bus rapid transit system.

However, they raised a number of concerns with us. The SA Rail Commuter
Corporation is planning a big Moloto rail extension from Tshwane, Pretoria,
to Moloto but they’ve not consulted the city effectively. And so where they
are planning to end up in Tshwane is not very suitable for the spatial
planning and public transport planning that Tshwane is looking at.

We also had the impression that there wasn’t a very clear vision, frankly,
coming from Tshwane officials around their preparations for 2010 transport.
This might have been the result of the fact that there are two MMCs,
members of the mayoral executive committee, involved in public transport;
one is involved with roads and infrastructure and the other with public
transport. And the reports we didn’t quite add up to a clear integrated
perspective. There are also serious problems with regards to the bulk of
the funding that they want for their 2010 public transport planning. The
bulk of the funding is only earmarked for 2010-11, which is clearly too
late to put in place the transport in time for 2010.

There are also problems with the Gautrain planning; often not connecting
effectively with the Pretoria plan. Now, having listened to this and other
host cities which we visited as well, the committee asked itself: “What’s
going wrong?” Because we are quite concerned, to be honest, about what is
going wrong, by way of preparation for public transport for 2010 and,
especially for the legacy that we want to put in place beyond 2010. It was
in that context that we motivated with Parliament to allow us to have a
look at some international best practice, and we asked to go to the United
Kingdom and in particular selected London and Manchester.

We selected London because right at the moment, as we speak, they are
planning for the 2012 Olympic Games and we wanted to interact with their
transport officials and related institutions to see what they are doing, by
way of preparation for 2012. We also selected Manchester because Manchester
hosted the Commonwealth Games in 2002. Now, in going to these two cities,
we were well aware that there are many differences, obviously, and one
couldn’t just transpose experiences from the United Kingdom to South
Africa. First of all, both Commonwealth Games and Olympics Games are
essentially one city type event as opposed to the nine city event reality
that 2010 would be.

Also, if you are talking about Manchester or London, you are talking about
cities with very effective public transport systems already in place, which
is not the case in our situation. However, that could be exaggerated as we
learned when we were there, because both our counterparts in Manchester and
in London underlined to us what a devastating impact the massive
privatisation and deregulation of the public transport system had caused,
that was pushed through by Margaret Thatcher in the 1970s and 1980s, and
there was a great deal of disruption and undermining of the coherence of
public transport systems; both in Manchester, London and elsewhere in the
UK.

However, there’s been a significant turnaround in both of these cities and
particularly in London. The turnaround has been powered by the fact that in
both the cities there are very strong effective city-level transport
authorities. In the case of London, it’s called Transport for London, which
was established by Ken Livingstone, the former Mayor. It’s a powerful
entity which is dedicated to city-wide public transport integration. It
employs something like 17 000 employees and the turnaround that they’ve
seen in the last civil years has been based on a bus system - getting their
bus system to work very well and also having a congestion charging scheme.
As they roll out good public transport, they also make it more and more
costly for you to bring a car into the centre of the city. You can’t do
that, unless you also obviously supply decent public transport for someone
like myself who briefly lived in exile in London in the late 1980s.

London has changed its public transport perspective. It’s a much more user-
friendly place. There are many more pedestrian malls and its much easier to
walk around in London. You also see many people riding on bikes in the
centre of London – something that was impossible, or near impossible, a few
years ago. Their buses carry 1,8 billion passengers per year. It’s an
incredible achievement, and very important. They said to us that the
success of their planning and preparations for the 2012 Olympic Games, from
a transport perspective, has had a lot to do with the fact that they got
their funding upfront and very fast.

Once London had secured the bid for the Olympic Games, the National
Treasury basically transferred the money upfront and very quickly to them.
That’s one of the problems we are battling with now in South Africa; cities
are planning nicely, very often, and sometimes not so effectively, for
their public transport rollout for 2010 but the money doesn’t flow in. The
Treasury agrees that it looks good, but is then not convinced that the
business plan is effective and so on. The problem is then that the
deadlines are pushed back and, frankly, we are running out of time if we
are going to get a decent public transport legacy before 2010.

In Manchester, it is a similar story. They have a very effective transport
authority. Manchester actually does not have a metro municipal council, it
just has 10 different districts but they realised that one has to integrate
one’s public transport and, therefore, they have established a Greater
Manchester Public Transport Authority, and an executive which employs 550
people who are just dedicated to planning, funding, rolling out and
regulating the public transport in Greater Manchester.

So, in conclusion, these two reports which we are tabling before the House
this afternoon are trying to reflect on: Firstly, our experience in Tshwane
and our concerns about Tshwane; secondly, some of the best practices that
we think we can learn from elsewhere; and the imperative of getting this
right as quickly as possible. We are, quite frankly, concerned – across
political parties I should say - in the committee that we are losing time.
We’ve no doubt that we will provide transport for visitors coming in 2010.
We will more or less get that right, you know. We will fly by the seat of
our pants perhaps, but we will get that right. Unless we move now much more
effectively, which means decentralising appropriately to the city level so
that we can align planning, spatial planning and transport planning, much
more effectively. Unless we do that, we are not going to succeed in the
important objective that Cabinet has set for us, namely, to derive from the
hosting of 2010 not just a lovely event, but a decent legacy of public
transport for all South Africans after 2010. The time has shortened. The
portfolio committee really wants to underline that fact. Thank you.
[Applause.]

MRS L MALONEY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move on behalf of the Chief Whip of
the Majority Party:

   That the Reports be noted.

Motion agreed to.

Reports accordingly noted.

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION ON OVERSIGHT
                  VISIT TO THE UNIVERSITY OF THE FREE STATE

Prof S M MAYATULA: Madam Deputy Speaker, on 17 March 2008, following the
infamous racist video taken by four students of the Reitz Hostel at the
University of the Free State, the Portfolio Committee on Education visited
the university and had open and frank discussions with the management, the
labour unions and student organisations. The report is contained in the ATC
dated 19 June 2008.

The management informed the committee that the racist video was actually
made in September 2007, but only surfaced on 26 February 2008.

We are going to share just a summary of events as reflected by Anton Fisher
from the university. He said:


  This was triggered by the council’s decision to integrate residences of
  University of the Free State. And an implementation task team was made
  up. Unfortunately for this integration there was resistance.

And to our surprise, according to Anton Fisher, the main opponents of this
were the Freedom Front Plus. Not only were they opposed to this
integration, they even tried to take the university to court, saying there
was not enough consultation.

According to Anton Fisher, there were protest marches addressed by the
Freedom Front Plus leadership, nationally and provincially, against this
integration.

Ixhala ke kukuba ingaba iFreedom Front ibiyintoni ingxaki yayo. Amaxesha
amaninzi ... [The concern, therefore, would be that, I honestly do not know
what the problem with the Freedom Front Plus is. Most of the time ...]

... in this House we profess to be nonracist but many a time this is just
as good as you are going to keep a distance from me if you are not like me.
Let me choose a practical example. I am not going to mention names, but I
asked a member who was in my committee who happened to be white – let me
use that term – since we are buddies working together: “What would you say
if my son were to propose marriage to your daughter?” He said: ``I don’t
want to lie. I would never ever allow that to happen’’.

This is the reality that we need to accept. There are some people who would
accept nonracialism as long as it does not affect them directly. Let us
pronounce and shout but keep our distance.
Therefore, when you have those different hostels, one being for whites and
one being for blacks and you put them together, chances are that they are
going to get to know each other. Once they get to know each other, they are
going to do what the old apartheid regime didn’t want: These different
people will be getting married and become one, one culture, one human
element.

Sometimes I am proud of being a member of the ANC, because in the ANC we
don’t talk about some of these things. We leave them out.

Kwi-ANC ufumana amakomanisi, abahedeni, sitshata wonke umntu, kwaye senza
yonke into. [In the ANC, there are communists, heathens, and we marry
everybody and we also do everything.]

Why? Because we declare ourselves human beings made in the image of God,
irrespective of where you come from. [Applause.]

Xa sihleli neemanyano zabasebenzi zithi enye yeengxaki zazo kukuba iiklasi
zaseFree State ziqhutywa ngohlobo lweparallel mode of instruction,
zesesiBhulu nesiNgesi. Loo nto yenza ukuba bonke abathetha isiBhulu baye
kungena kwiklasi yesiBhulu, abanye bonke baye kungena kule klasi yesiNgesi,
batsho ke bahlukane. Bathi into abayicingayo ke bona kukuba endaweni yokuba
umhlohli afundise abantu abahlukeneyo into enye, kutheni bengadityaniswa
nje. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[When we met with the labour unions, we were told that the problem with the
University of the Free State was the parallel mode of instruction. In this
system Afrikaans–speaking students attend classes taught in Afrikaans and
then the rest attend classes taught in English – which is the thing that
divides them. The labour unions submitted that instead of the lecturer
teaching the same thing to separate groups, they could teach the two groups
at the same time.]

A lecturer must speak the language he understands but must be interpreted
so that everybody else is able to understand him or her. That forces people
together.

Ngethamsanqa kwiKomiti yeMicimbi yeSebe ebesinayo izolo iNqununu
yeYunivesiti yaseMntla Ntshona ithe yile nto kanye bona bayenzayo ngoku.
[Luckily enough, in the meeting of the portfolio committee that we had
yesterday, the rector of the North West University said this was exactly
what they were doing.]

And this is what we are proposing in our recommendation.

Enye yeenkxalabo yeemanyano zabasebenzi kunye nabafundi kukuba iKhansile
yeyunivesiti imhlophe. Xa sisithi kutheni iKhansile imhlophe nje, bathi
abantu unobuhlanga kutheni ujonga ibala. Baphinde bathi akuboni na ukuba
ngabantu aba. Libala ngombala. Njengokuba siza kuthi masingathethi ngebala
nje, ngoku liyangena ibala xa kufuneka behleli bodwa eReitz. Kodwa xa
behleli kwiKhansile masingababoni ukuba bahleli bodwa; abakwazi ukucingela
ukuba abanye abantu bathini ngale nto bayithethayo. Sithi ke iyunivesiti
mayizame ukuyijonga naleyo into. Kanti neyunivesiti masiyithethe into
yokuba emveni kokuba kwenzeke le nto ... (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph
follows.)

[One of the concerns of the labour unions and the students was that the
council of the university is still white. When we ask why the council is
still white, people would obviously intervene and call us racist and ask
why we are looking at skin colour. They also ask whether you cannot see
that these are people. While we are called upon not to focus on colour,
colour begins to matter when they want to be put alone at Reitz. And yet
when they are sitting on the university council, we should turn a blind eye
to the fact that they are sitting alone; they are not concerned about how
the other people feel about what they are discussing. We are, therefore,
saying the university must look into this matter. However, we must also
mention that the university itself, after this incident ...]

Let me share what they did. They got this information on 26 February 2008.
On 27 February 2008, the very following day, two students were barred from
the campus.

Besikade sisabela ukuba kutheni aba bafundi bebabini nje. Le nto yenzeke
ngo-2007, aba babini abafundi khange babuye ababini babuya. Ngaba babini ke
abaye bagxothwa ngomhla wama-27 kweyoMdumba?
Inqununu yaya kuthetha naba bantu. Khawufane ucinge! Ngoomama bane notata,
bamnyama thsu; ndiyeke ndisebenzise loo mbala. Ngabafundi bamhlophe baya
kwibala lemidlalo. Aba bafundi bamhlophe bathi kwaba bantu badala balingana
nabazali babo mababaleke bakhuphisane. Babaleke abantu abadala besenza le
nto kuthiwa mabayenze, kuba aba bantu bakhulu kubo. Ndiye ndabuza komnye
umfundi ukuba, ukuba ibingumzali wakhe lo wenziwe le nto ebeya kuthini.
Wathi lo mfundi ebengekhe ayithande.

Kukho umahluko omkhulu phakathi kwabafundi abamhlophe nabamnyama kulaa
yunivesiti. Kuthi umfundi omnyama akuthetha le nto, omhlophe athethe leya.
Bathe bakuthi abamnyama mayivalwe iReitz bathi abamhlophe mayingavalwa.
Bathe abamhlophe, kuquka kubo inkokeli yombutho wabafundi beFreedom Front,
kutheni siyenza nzima nje le nto. Ngabafundi nje abane abenze le nto ngoku
nithi makuvalwe yonke le ndawo yokuhlala; masingayivali akukho nto
yenzekileyo.

Sithi sakuthi abantu abamnyama mabancediswe kwizinto ebebengazifumani
izolo, kuthiwe sinobuhlanga. Bade bathi abanye abantu, aba bantwana bezelwe
ngo-1994 nje, kutheni usithi mababonelelwe. Ndithi buyela kuthi kwiAfrican
National Congress. Sithi ngoku abantu abangoomama mababe kumyinge ka-50%.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[We wanted to know why the university dealt only with these two students.
The incident happened in 2007, two students returned but the other two did
not come back, and it is only these two students who came back who were
expelled from campus on 27 February 2008.

The rector spoke to the victims of this incident. Can you imagine! The
victims are four pitch black women and one man, yes let me use this colour.
And the incident in short, is that white students were seen on a rugby
field. And these white students say to these women – who are old enough to
be their mothers – that they should run and play on the rugby field and
compete with them. And these poor old women did as they were instructed
since they regarded these students as superior to them. I asked one of the
students if he would have liked the same to happen to his parents and he
said no.

There is a huge difference between white and black students at that
university. A black student pulls the other way and the white students pull
to a different direction. The black students demanded that the Reitz hostel
be shut down, but the white students refused. The white students, including
the leader of the Freedom Front Plus student representative council, asked
why we are making this matter very difficult.

They said that it was only four students who had done this and now there
was a demand that the entire Reitz hostel be shut down. These students said
the Reitz hostel should not be shut down because, nothing had happened
anyway.

When we request that the previously oppressed people must be helped, we
were soon told that we were racists. Other people complained that these
children were born in 1994, and why do we, therefore, say they should be
helped. I am saying you should come back to the African National Congress.
Now we are saying women should at least get 50%.]

Why are we saying that? Is it because these women were not with us in 1994?
In reality they were with us, ...

... kodwa ibisithi madoda abathatha zonke ezi zikhundla.[... but it was us
men, who took all these positions.]

It has nothing to do with race. It has to do with catching up. We are
saying that you are human beings too; you can think; you can lead. Let us
accommodate you; let us not pretend as if we are at the same starting
block; you are far behind.

Yizani sibaleke kunye. Nokuba umntwana umhlophe, xa sisithi khawuvumele
umntwana ... ayinanto yakwenza neminyaka. Inento yokwenza neenkcukacha
zamanani namhlanje. Nokuba ungajonga kwicandelo leeAccountants, bonke aba
bantu balawula eli lizwe bamhlophe. Ayenzekanga ngempazamo ke loo nto, koko
yenziwe kukuba abantu bethu bebebotshelelwe bengakwazi ukuyenza le nto.
Abanakuyenza emva kweminyaka emithathu. Abanye mabakhe balinde side sifike
ngoba khange siqale kunye. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[Come and let us run together. Whether a child is white, when we say admit
the child ... that has nothing to do with years. It has to do with the
details of figures today. If you look at accountants in this country, you
will realise that they are all white. And this is not by accident, because
even though our people could do it they were restricted. They cannot do it
in just three years. Others must wait till we come because we did not start
together anyway.]

It cannot be fair, and there is nothing racist about it. It is levelling
the playing field. [Applause.]

Siyacela ke ukuba le ngxelo mayamkelwe ngoba sifuna ukuba ezi zinto
zisicebisayo apha ... [We, therefore, request that this report be adopted,
because we want the recommendations we have made here ...]

... to be implemented. Thank you. [Applause.]

MR O E MONARENG: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move on behalf of the Chief Whip
of the Majority Party that this report be noted.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! The motion is that the report be noted.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, may I ask why we are not going to adopt
it rather than just note it?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, the decision of the Chief Whip of the Majority
Party is that it be noted. I am sure there are reasons for that.

Mr M J ELLIS: We will be quite happy to adopt it, Madam Deputy Speaker.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: But then there is no motion for adoption.

Mr M J ELLIS: Can I propose a motion for adoption?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you can’t, unfortunately. It’s the prerogative of
the Chief Whip of the Majority Party and he says the report should be
noted.

Mr M J ELLIS: That doesn’t look like it is the Chief Whip of the Majority
Party. [Laughter.]

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly noted.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ON
 OVERSIGHT VISIT TO INDIGENOUS KNOWLEDGE SYSTEMS LEAD (HEALTH) PROGRAMME AT
                        THE MEDICAL RESEARCH COUNCIL

Mr G G OLIPHANT: Deputy Speaker, Deputy President and colleagues, we are
talking about a report that was published in the ATC, Announcements,
Tablings and Committee Reports, on 18 June 2008, on our visit to IKS,
Indigenous Knowledge Systems - a lead project that is based here in the
Western Cape.

Abanye bathi ezi zinto zezamagqirha, ngoko ke kuza kufuneka nivume xa
ndinivumisa ndikule ndawo ndikuyo. [Others say that these are matters
related to sangomas, and therefore, you should respond in the affirmative
by saying, “siyavuma” when I call upon you to do so from here.]

The Indigenous Knowledge Systems is an area of scientific competitive
advantage located at the Medical Research Council and funded by the
Department of Science and Technology, DST, through the National Indigenous
Knowledge Systems office called NIKSO.

Our visit to this project, which is located in Parow Valley in the Western
Cape, was essentially to enhance our understanding of this programme and to
measure its output against national priorities. Our assessment is that the
IKS is still marginalised, sidelined and not adequately funded in order to
realise its full potential.

On the other hand, indigenous knowledge holders and communities from which
such knowledge is derived do not benefit. For instance, Hoodia - some of
you know it very well - is a very popular medicinal plant used within the
international health system across the world. The generators of this
knowledge and the communities from where this plant is harvested remain
poor and outside the formal economy.

We have 24 000 plant species in South Africa, as stated in the report. A
total of 4 000 are used to manufacture medicines and 20 000 tons of
medicinal plants are exported each year. We still have to investigate this
matter to establish who the beneficiaries of these economic activities are
and what are the fault lines relating to the nonincorporation of indigenous
communities into this knowledge economy. Key to our mandate is the
improvement of the quality of life for all our people, not only some.

The portfolio committee also visited a laboratory in Delft, also in the
Western Cape, where we were shown how plants are processed and converted
into tablets or capsules. They showed us a very interesting and impressive
demonstration of excellence, only about 10 minutes’ drive from Parliament.

What was even more remarkable was the packaging and labelling of these
capsules on site - some of them you see at the chemist across the road. The
knowledge that our people possess on plants and herbs and their respective
medicinal properties, represent enormous wealth that has not yet been
exploited to its maximum potential.

One of their flagship projects at the laboratory is the patenting of the
malaria strain. We hope that they succeed in their venture. The Department
of Science and Technology has a programme called Farmer-to-Pharmacy, which
means from the farmer to the pharmacist. This is what this project is
trying to achieve.

People with money have over the years appropriated knowledge and registered
intellectual property rights to themselves, to the total exclusion of the
poor. This matter needs to be corrected. Funding from the Department of
Science and Technology has not increased from what it was in previous
years; it has remained the same. We have raised this matter with the
department for its consideration and correction.

Other recommendations, which I am not going to repeat, are in the report
and are being processed, and we need to follow up on some of these matters.
When we return in the next session, we will be processing a piece of
legislation called the intellectual property rights for publicly funded
research. Basically, this is to avoid a situation where the state funds
research and at an advanced stage their capitalist ventures buy some of the
technology or appropriate some of the technology to themselves, patent it
and from there start exporting it overseas and make money. Therefore,
people who came with these technologies and with this knowledge do not
benefit from them.

We need to correct this, and this law that we will be passing in the next
term is precisely to try and address this situation. I thank you very much.
[Applause.]

MR O E MONARENG: Deputy Speaker, I move on behalf of the Chief Whip of the
Majority Party, that the report be noted.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, may I ask why the report has not been
adopted. I would like to propose an adoption. I am so sad.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is that the report be noted.

Mr M J ELLIS: I would like to propose that the report be adopted. I am so
sad.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are there any objections? Are you objecting, Mr Ellis?
If not, take your seat. I promise you that you have worked hard to get a
half-day and I am not going to give it to you. You are going to be here
until adjournment. If you think I am going to ask you to leave, I won’t be
doing that. [Laughter.]

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly noted.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF JOINT MONITORING COMMITTEE ON IMPROVEMENT OF
     QUALITY OF LIFE AND STATUS OF CHILDREN, YOUTH AND DISABLED PERSONS

Mrs W S NEWHOUDT-DRUCHEN: Deputy Speaker, the functions of the Joint
Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of
Children, Youth and Disabled Persons are to monitor and evaluate progress
with regard to the improvement in the quality of life and the status of
children, youth and disabled persons in South Africa with special reference
to government’s commitment in respect of any applicable international
instruments and to duties and responsibilities in respect of any applicable
legislation.

Prior to the workshop that we had as a JMC, I, as the chairperson, met with
the facilitators to set up the objectives of this workshop, and the
objectives were as follows: To review and evaluate the work done by the JMC
since 2005, which included identifying its strengths and weaknesses in
relation to its co-functions; identifying challenges to complete activities
in the work plan; critically assessing the operational structures of the
JMC and proposing alternative methods of working.

The objectives also try to help members understand the functions of the JMC
in relation to South Africa’s international obligations and a deeper
understanding of the tools available to Members of Parliament. They work
with various sectors that the JMC also work with, namely children, youth
and disabled persons.

We wanted to draft a programme that could be achievable and which include a
range of activities that cater for all three sectors that we see to, and
cover the five functions as well, namely legislation, oversight, public
participation, co-operative governance and international participation.

At our strategic workshop the NA Table staff and the South African Human
Rights Commission briefed us on the private member’s motion as well as
international instruments. As the JMC we are responsible for the oversight
work in relation to children, youth and disabled people, and we oversee the
Offices on the Rights of the Child, the Office on the Status of Disabled
Persons, the Umsobomvu Youth Fund as well as the National Youth Commission.


At our strategic workshop we in small groups, and made presentations, held
discussions and looked at plans and programmes and the activities that
could be reflected in our plans for 2008. Out of our group discussions we
had an activity plan where we had 18 priorities. Members can go through
that in the report.

In conclusion, it has been agreed that the JMC should co-ordinate the work
better. Members are responsible to mainstream the work of the JMC with
other portfolio committees. That is very important to us. We also seriously
need to look at the meeting times of the JMC which are held on Fridays as
it is very difficult to have a quorum on a Friday. The existing support
base for us as a committee was not good this year; we only managed to get a
researcher two months ago and our committee is functioning properly now.

Parliament needs to look at the functioning of the JMC, and as I have
mentioned, we only managed to get a researcher this term and she has helped
a lot with our committee work. The JMC needs to continue to work with the
three sectors, namely the youth, children and the disabled sector, and we
need to have a better understanding of their work. This report was adopted
by the committee and we need to improve the relationship with the three
sectors that we are working with. We also ask that this House adopt our
report. Thank you. [Applause.]

MR O E MONARENG: Madam Deputy Speaker, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the
Majority Party I move:

   That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

The House adjourned at 16:44.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)    Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 25 June 2008:


          a) Cross-Border Road Transport Amendment Bill [B 51B – 2007]
             (National Assembly – sec 75)


          b) Financial Intelligence Centre Amendment Bill [B 18B - 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 75)


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government
    on the Local Government Laws Amendment Bill [B 28B – 2007] (National
    Assembly – sec 75), dated 24 June 2008.

    The Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government, having
    considered the Local Government Laws Amendment Bill [B 28B – 2007] and
    proposed amendments of the National Council of Provinces
    (Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 25 March 2008, p 515),
    referred to the Committee, reports the Bill with amendments [B 28C –
    2007].


2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Communications on the filling of
    vacancies on the Council of the Independent Communications Authority of
    South Africa, dated 25 June 2008.

    In its report to the National Assembly on 10 June 2008, the Committee
    recommended that the House submits to the Minister a suitable list of
    candidates at least one and a half times the number of councillors to
    be appointed on the Council of the Independent Communications Authority
    of South Africa.


    After consideration of the list of candidates, the Minister recommended
    that, in terms of section 5(1B) of the Independent Communications
    Authority of South Africa Act, Act No 13 of 2000, as amended, the
    National Assembly approves that the following persons be appointed to
    serve on the Council:

    Mr F K Sibanda, Ms N Batyi and Mr T Makhakhe.

    Having considered the Minister’s recommendation referred to it, the
    Committee recommends that the National Assembly approves the
    appointment of the above – mentioned persons.
    Report to be considered.

3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
    Development on the Judicial Service Commission Amendment Bill [B 50 -
    2007], dated 24 June 2008.

    The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development,
    having considered the Judicial Service Commission Amendment Bill [B 50
    - 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75) and the proposed amendments of the
    National Council of Provinces (Announcements, Tablings and Committee
    Reports, 7 May 2008, p 594), referred to the committee, reports the
    Bill with amendments [B50A – 2007].

4.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
    Development on the South African Judicial Education  Institute Bill [B
    4B - 2007], dated 25 June 2008:

    The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development,
    having considered the South African Judicial Education Institute Bill
    [B 4B - 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75) and the proposed amendments
    of the National Council of Provinces (Announcements, Tablings and
    Committee Reports, 7 May 2008, p 595), referred to the Committee,
    reports the Bill with amendments [B 4C – 2007].

5.    Report of the Portfolio Committee of Agriculture and Land Affairs on
    the Liquor Products Amendment Bill [B 22 - 2008] (National Assembly –
    sec 75), dated 24 June 2008:


    The Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs, having
    considered the subject of the Liquor Products Amendment Bill [B 22 -
    2008] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it, and classified by
    the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with
    amendments [B 22A - 2008].

6.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology on the
    Human Sciences Research Council Bill [B 16B – 2007] (National Assembly
    – sec 75) and the President’s reservations about the constitutionality
    of the Bill, dated 24 June 2008:

    The Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology, having reconsidered
    section 5(3) of the Human Sciences Research Council Bill [B 16B – 2007]
    and the President’s reservations on the constitutionality of section
    5(3) of the Bill (Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 8 May
    2008, p 599), recommends that the President’s reservations be
    accommodated, and presents an amended Bill [B 16C – 2007].

    Report to be considered.


7.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology on the
    South African National Space Agency Bill [B 20 - 2008] (National
    Assembly – sec 75), dated 24 June 2008:

    The Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology, having considered
    the subject of the South African National Space Agency Bill [B 20 -
    2008] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and classified by
    the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with
    amendments [B 20A - 2008].


8.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Protocol amending
    the Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
    and the Government of Australia for the avoidance of double taxation
    and the prevention of fiscal evasion with respect to taxes on income,
    dated 17 June 2008:


    The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the request for
    approval by Parliament of the Protocol amending the Agreement between
    the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
    Australia for the avoidance of double taxation and the prevention of
    fiscal evasion with respect to taxes on income, recommends that the
    House, in terms of section 231 (2) of the Constitution, approve the
    said Protocol.


    Request to be considered.


9.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Agreement between
    the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
    the Republic of Sudan for the avoidance of double taxation and the
    prevention of fiscal evasion with respect to taxes on income, dated 17
    June 2008:


    The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the request for
    approval by Parliament of the Agreement between the Government of the
    Republic of South Africa and the Government of Republic of Sudan for
    the avoidance of double taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion
    with respect to taxes on income, recommends that the House, in terms of
    section 231 (2) of the Constitution, approve the said Agreement


    Request to be considered.



