---
title: 'National Assembly - 13 May 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2008-05-13
---

                            TUESDAY, 13 MAY 2008
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:00.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Dr S M VAN DYK: Madam Speaker, on behalf of the DA, I will move:


  That the House debates the continued existence of aluminium smelters in
  South Africa given that their electricity consumption is equivalent to
  the required national electricity saving.


Ms J A SEMPLE: Madam Speaker, on behalf of the DA, I will move:


   That the House debates the rising rates of xenophobic attacks against
   refugees entering the country and the government’s response to the
   problem.
                EARTHQUAKE IN THE PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mulangadzulo, ndi a livhuwa.
[Madam Speaker, I thank you.]

Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House -

     1) notes that on Monday, 12 May 2008, a  powerful  earthquake  hit  the
        People’s Republic of China. More than 8 000 people are  reported  to
        have died and thousands more are trapped under the rubble;

     2) further notes that the earthquake,  measuring  7.8  on  the  Richter
        Scale, flattened schools, factories and houses and damaged roads and
        railway lines, further hampering rescue efforts; and

     3) conveys its condolences to the government and people of the People’s
        Republic of China.

Agreed to.

             VIOLENCE AGAINST PEOPLE FROM OTHER PARTS OF AFRICA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House -

     1) notes with deep concern the violence that has been perpetrated by
        our people against Africans from other parts of Africa recently,
        namely those from Mozambique, Malawi and Zimbabwe;

     2) requests that some Members of Parliament speedily be sent to the
        affected areas to observe this problem on the spot and to speak to
        both the citizens of our country and those refugees and others who
        have been victimised;


     3) is disturbed about the alleged xenophobia that tarnishes the image
        of our country internationally and the harm that ill-treatment of
        our brothers and sisters does to the vision of Pan-Africanism and
        the work of the African Union; and

     4)     appeals for a thorough investigation into the real causes of
        this savage violence and a solution thereof to avoid a repetition of
        it.

Agreed to.

The SPEAKER: I hope hon members have applied their minds to the content and
the actual proposal. But I guess there’s no objection in principle.

                          INTERNATIONAL NURSES DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –

     1) notes that Monday, 12 May 2008, was International Nurses Day and
        that it marked the end of National Nurses Week that ran from 6 to
        12 May;


      2) recognises that this day provides recognition to nurses for their
         contributions and commitment to quality health care;

      3) acknowledges the selfless role South African nurses play in
         providing care and comfort to those who are in poor health
         especially to children and the aged; and

      4) extends its gratitude to all nurses for their hard work and for the
         dedication they show to serving their fellow beings on a daily
         basis.

Agreed to.

               WINNING OF ITALIAN OPEN BY SOUTH AFRICAN GOLFER

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House -

     1) notes that South African golfer Hennie Otto won the Italian Open on
        Sunday, 11 May 2008;


     2) further  notes  that  this  is  thirty-one-year-old  Otto’s  maiden
        European Tour victory;

     3) recognises that Otto’s win follows victories by compatriots Richard
        Sterne,  who  took  the  co-sanctioned  Johannesburg  Open  on  the
        European Tour in January and Trevor  Immelman,  winner  of  the  US
        Masters last month;

     4) acknowledges that these golfers have taken South African golf to  a
        new level internationally and have attracted many young golfers  to
        the game due to their inspiring performances; and

     5) congratulates Hennie Otto on his victory and wishes him well in his
        golfing career.

Agreed to.

      FREEDOM OF THE CITY OF TSHWANE TO FORMER PRESIDENT NELSON MANDELA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs M A A NJOBE (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC commends the initiative taken
by the Tshwane Metropolitan Council to offer its highest and greatest
honour, the freedom of the city, to former President Nelson Mandela.

This award has been conferred by the Mayor of Tshwane, Gwen Ramokgopa, on
Madiba in Tshwane this morning at 11:00. This calls on the giant of South
Africa to continue to stride the globe, and to inspire millions in the
world today who value peace, human dignity and freedom. This takes place
two months before his 90th birthday. This award couldn’t have come at a
more appropriate time.

The ANC calls on all South Africans and the citizens of Tshwane, in
particular, to use this occasion to rededicate themselves to the democratic
ideas that Madiba has dedicated his life to and continues to live for, so
that current and future generations will emulate his life of honour. Thank
you. [Applause.]

                  XENOPHOBIC ATTACKS IN ALEXANDRA TOWNSHIP

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs S M CAMERER (DA): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the Democratic Alliance
and its public representatives involved with the Alexandra Township,
including Councillors Peggy Chauke, Carol Blamyre, Alan Fuchs, David Quail,
a Member of the Provincial Legislature, and Mr Shadrack Mkhonto, I would
like to register our deep concern and outrage over the attacks against,
mostly, Zimbabweans in the past couple of days in Alex. These attacks were
allegedly as a result of xenophobia against perceived illegal aliens.

We make an earnest appeal to all concerned for calm and to restore peace in
Alex. While the Democratic Alliance condemns xenophobia, it must be
acknowledged that the reasons for this boiling over of resentment are more
complicated. The large majority of the residents of the Alexandra Township
live in appalling socioeconomic conditions and social services have all but
collapsed.
To address the slum conditions after the similar unrest in 2001, President
Mbeki announced with great fanfare the Alexandra renewal project. Seven
years later, despite promises of fundamentally changed living conditions,
very little has been done and the dynamics of Alex have not changed as so
often there has been a failure of implementation, coupled with
inflexibility and inertia on the part of government.

In its National Action Plan for the provision and protection of human
rights published nearly ten years ago, government acknowledged that we had
a problem of between 2,5 and 8 million undocumented aliens - the
terminology used in that plan - as well as the need to do something about
it. Well, ten years on, the problem has got worse and very little has been
done. In the meantime, the Democratic Alliance’s local government team in
Alex is very much on the spot, hands-on and attempting to assist victims
and restore calm. Thank you. [Applause.]

                           SABC MANAGEMENT SCANDAL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr V B NDLOVU (IFP): Madam Speaker, the Inkatha Freedom Party agrees that
there are serious political problems with regard to the governance and
management of the SABC.

These problems can, however, be blamed on the alliance which has taken
power since 1994, which has consistently politically manipulated
appointments to both the boards and management of the SABC and abused the
public broadcaster to boost their own image. The fact that the ANC alliance
is now calling for a vote of no confidence in its own decision-making, is
wrong and an abuse of Parliament.

The IFP, therefore, gives notice that it supports calls for this House to
consider amending legislation to be enacted to ensure that in future
independent, skilled representatives, SABC board members and managers are
appointed beyond party-political control, and that the public broadcaster
is not abused by any political party. Thank you. [Applause.]

                 ANC, SACP, COSATU AND SANCO ALLIANCE SUMMIT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms T V TOBIAS (ANC): Madam Speaker, the African National Congress, the
South African Communist Party, the Congress of South African Trade Unions,
together with the South African National Civic Organisation, met at a
highly successful Alliance Summit at Gallagher Estate, from 9 to 10 May
last week. The summit agreed that the alliance remains on course to play
its historic role as the leader of South African society, if the effort to
realise our liberation goes on to build a better life for all.

We welcome the summit’s collective commitment to work together on a number
of key areas, including the food and fuel price rise, unemployment,
poverty, inequality, electricity and the 2009 elections in Zimbabwe.

The alliance has entered a new era of unity and commitment to the struggle
to transform the lives of our people. Therefore, the ANC calls on all South
Africans to join us as we work together to realise the noble aspirations of
a truly democratic, nonracial, nonsexist, prosperous and united South
Africa. Thank you. [Applause.]

                             ATTACK ON REFUGEES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Rev K R J MESHOE (ACDP): Madam Speaker, the ACDP is shocked by the
senseless xenophobic attacks on foreigners in our country. We want to
remind our communities that during the struggle against apartheid thousands
of South Africans were given refuge all over the world, particularly on the
African continent. They were given job opportunities and access to schools
and universities. What has been happening in Alexandra Township is totally
unacceptable and must be condemned in the strongest possible terms.

Hooligans who rape, loot homes and rob people, irrespective of whether they
are foreigners or locals, must face the full might of the law. We believe
most foreigners in our country are law-abiding people, just as most South
Africans are. But there are a few dishonest foreigners just as there are
dishonest South Africans who have no regard for the law and the rights of
others, and as a result are involved in criminal activities.

The ACDP appeals to church leaders to get involved as peacemakers in order
to bring about reconciliation between foreigners and locals and encourage
members of communities to extend kindness to foreigners. Thank you.

                      INEFFICIENCY AT LICENSING CENTRES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr I E JENNER (ID): Madam Speaker, government’s R400 million-plus eNatis
traffic system still continues to present millions of South Africans with
long queues, overworked and demotivated public servants and frustratingly
long delays in licensing centres around our country. The high levels of
frustration at many of these licensing centres, coupled with a severe lack
of resources, presents a looming crisis.

Police officials have been called in on several occasions to calm angry
applicants in various licensing centres around South Africa. Many people
are forced to queue for hours and are also forced to take more than a day’s
leave because they failed to get service on their first visit.

The ID calls on the government to adopt urgent corrective strategies and
reinvest the millions of rands raised for licence renewals into better
infrastructure and proper and more accountable management at all licensing
centres around our country. If we are truly serious about putting people
first, then we must instil values in our public servants so that they treat
our people as priority customers. Thank you.

                        ATTACKS ON FOREIGN NATIONALS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S J NJIKELANA (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC is deeply disturbed by the
recent attacks on foreign nationals in Alexandra, north of Johannesburg. We
condemn such xenophobic acts unreservedly and call on all South Africans to
take a firm stand against such violent acts.
These acts are not only an assault on foreign nationals but are also an
assault on the values of our democratic society. Such acts can only take
our society backwards and open the wounds of racism and intolerance against
which so many of our people fought. We call on all South Africans to spare
no effort in speaking out against acts of xenophobia in any form.

We believe that through the recognition of the crucial role played by the
international community in South Africa’s liberation, all South Africans
will work together to ensure that we build a better world where all shall
live in peace and harmony. Ndiyabulela. [Thank you.]

                          PUBLIC SERVICE VACANCIES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S SIMMONS (NA): Madam Speaker, two weeks ago it was reported in the
media that the hon Minister for the Public Service and Administration had
stated that any person, irrespective of race, must apply for the vacant
posts in the Public Service. The sad truth is that people of all races are
applying for these posts but are hindered by government’s employment equity
policy. This call by the hon Minister is most certainly an acknowledgement
that employment equity, as it is currently applied, is counterproductive
and a failure.
The National Alliance has today formally requested the hon Minister to
suspend the current employment equity policy in favour of a nonracial
recruitment policy, in order to improve the quality of service delivery
throughout the Public Service to the benefit of all South Africans. Thank
you.

                        SUSPENSION OF SABC OFFICIALS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Adv P S SWART (DA): Madam Speaker, our airwaves are filled with
speculations concerning the suspension of and proposed inquiries into Dr
Snuki Zikalala and CEO Dali Mpofu of the SABC.

The atmosphere at the SABC is thick with conspiracy and political purges,
worse than the plotlines of the very same soapies they air. Is this driven
by the SACP with Mr Blade Nzimande leaping to the defence of CEO Dali Mpofu
after a memorandum from the Chair of the SABC Board was leaked to the
Sunday Times? Who is driving the ANC MPs who are so desperately trying to
get rid of the new SABC Board?

We agree with Mr Kgalema Motlanthe who, referring to policies and
procedures, suggested that the ANC MPs were effectively passing a motion of
no confidence in themselves since they voted the three board members
imposed on them into office.

Did Dr Zikalala’s suspension result from him trying to prevent the
reappointment by Advocate Mpofu of dismissed Mr Hlaudi Motsoaneng of the
Free State radio station Lesedi FM on the instructions of the Minister of
Communications herself? Motsoaneng’s close ties with the Zuma camp are
allegedly well known.

Is Advocate Mpofu now seemingly implicating Minister Pahad in coercion by
the SABC Board to get rid of him, whilst the executive management of the
SABC, inclusive of Mrs Mpulele Ntombela Nzimande, wife of the same Mr Blade
Nzimande of the SACP, demanded his immediate reinstatement in a letter?

The Minister of Communications owes Parliament the details of, and the
reasons for, the latest circus acts at our public broadcaster. [Applause.]

                         FIGHTING CRIME IN ETHEKWINI

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms J E SOSIBO (ANC): Madam Speaker, the eThekwini Metropolitan Council has
set aside more than R432 million for the development of crime-fighting
strategies. An amount of R23 million of the budget has been set aside for
the recruitment of new staff in the police force.

The city is aware that crime fighting is not the preserve of the law-
enforcement agencies alone, but that communities have a pivotal role to
play in ensuring safe streets and neighbourhoods for the people. The fight
against crime is a central part of the priorities of the ANC that define
the programme to better the life of all our people. Since the democratic
government came into being we have consistently tackled issues of crime and
criminality.

The people should remain at the centre of any crime-fighting project as no
police force, however strong, would succeed in its work if it does not
enjoy the support and active participation of the people in the fight
against crime.

The ANC commends the eThekwini Metropolitan Council on its effort to fight
crime. I thank you. [Applause.]

                             RISE IN FOOD PRICES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr N SINGH (IFP): Madam Speaker, for more than a year now food price
inflation has outstripped headline inflation by a significant margin,
leading to all food products becoming much more expensive and out of reach
of the public. Hon members of this House will know what effect high food
prices have had on the poor as we witness it every day in our
constituencies.
The poor are suffering the most and the IFP therefore welcomes government
initiatives such as food vouchers to alleviate their plight. But, the IFP
feels that much more can be done. In our reaction to the 2008 Budget we
made our disappointment clear that the Minister of Finance, when looking at
tax, did not heed our call to zero rate more food items, such as chicken
for instance. The Minister definitely missed an opportunity to help the
poor in that respect. But, it seems all is not lost. Just this past weekend
the ANC also called on the Minister to scrap VAT on a wide range of food
items.

The IFP welcomes the thinking in the ANC for finally seeing the light and
for supporting the IFP’s policy on zero rating more food items. The IFP has
been propagating this move for some time and while the ANC was a bit tardy
in accepting our recommendations at least they have now done so.

The IFP therefore again calls on the Minister of Finance to immediately
scrap VAT on more food items. We do not accept the argument that the VAT
regime can only be changed in next year‘s Budget. The VAT Act is a law of
Parliament and as such can be amended at any time, if there is sufficient
political will to do so. We call on Minister Manuel to show that political
will now, for the benefit of the country’s poorest citizens. I thank you.

                              DONATING OF BLOOD
                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr Y WANG (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC wishes to commend our fellow South
Africans for their selfless sacrifices to save life through donating blood.
The use of nucleic technology as an amplification technology has
successively reduced the window period to 5 days during which infection
cannot be detected. The technology has the ability to trace genetic
materials of HIV, hepatitis B and hepatitis C viruses in the blood and
thereby ensure the safety of the recipients of our blood transfusions.

Due to this method of screening blood we have seen a significant increase
in donors of all races throughout South Africa. The South African National
Blood Transfusion Services is to be commended for encouraging people of all
races to come forward to donate blood and save lives.

This is one more example that can serve towards South Africans building the
kind of caring society that we desire. We should donate blood where we can.
Thank you.

                       CALL FOR A FULL REVIEW OF JIPSA

                            (Member’s Statement)

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (DA): Madam Speaker, the DA reiterates its
call for a full review of Jipsa. When we made the call earlier this year,
Deputy President Mlambo-Ngcuka suggested that the DA had no understanding
of Jipsa’s mandate. The inconvenient truth is that the Deputy President was
trying to obscure the fact that two years into its three-year mandate,
Jipsa had failed to meet any of the expectations created by the government.
From the 2007 Jipsa annual report, it is apparent that this initiative will
fail to bring about the skills revolution that was promised at its launch.

In turn, the DA welcomes the belated announcement that the ANC Secretary-
General Gwede Mantashe relinquished his position as Jipsa Technical Working
Group Chairperson at the end of December 2007. Under Mantashe’s guidance,
Jipsa achieved little notable success.

However, the stated time of his departure does leave us somewhat confused.
The Deputy President still fiercely defended Mantashe’s involvement in
Jipsa after the DA called for him to be dismissed in mid-January 2008. The
DA will be asking parliamentary questions about this anomaly, trusting that
the answer will not add further credence to the contention that Jipsa is in
fact little more than a PR exercise. [Applause.]

                           SAFETY IN THE WORKPLACE

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr S A MSHUDULU (ANC): Hon Speaker, the province of KwaZulu-Natal hosted
the workers’ parliament on Tuesday, 6 May 2008. The purpose of the
gathering was to highlight the rights of workers. Workers were urged to be
actively involved in their safety, by electing health and safety
representatives and forming committees to analyse, monitor and voice their
concerns about safety conditions at work with their employers.

Inspectors from the Department of Labour were urged not to hesitate to
recommend prosecution should an employer be found to have blatantly
disregarded the obligation of providing a healthy and safe working
environment.

Health and safety legislation introduced by the ANC-led government over the
past 14 years gives workers the right to monitor health and safety in
workplaces through joint committees with the employers.

Unions have the power to monitor occupationed safety and workers can refuse
to work in dangerous conditions. The ANC-led government has also ensured
that all workers have equitable access to compensation funds for injuries
suffered at work.

The ANC urges all employers to adhere to the Occupational Health and Safety
Act, which requires employers to bring about and maintain a reasonable,
practicable work environment that is safe and without risk to the health of
workers. I thank you.
                     CONDOLENCES TO THE KHARIVHE FAMILY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Muf T J TSHIVHASE (ANC): Mulangadzulo, dzangano la ANC li tama u swikisa
ndiliso dzalo kha muta wa ha Kharivhe. Hu pfi munna wa minwaha ya 35, ane a
vha murado wa mmbi ya vhupileli ya Afurika Tshipembe, Vho Meshach Kharivhe,
vho vhulaha muta wavho wa vhathu vhana nga ndila ya tshituhu, nga Mugivhela
wa 12 Lambamai 2008.

ANC i a zwi sasaladza zwa vhukuma zwithu zwi fanaho na izwi.  Fhedzi-ha,
hezwi zwi kona uri sumbedza mutsiko une vhathu vha tsireledzo vha tangana
nawo. Tshiwo itshi tshi sumbedza nndwa ya khakhathi dza mitani dzine shango
lashu la khou lwa nadzo. Hezwi zwi a vhanga khombo kha vhafumakadzi, vhana
na vhasidzana vhane vha sa kone u di tsireledza.

Mutheo wa Mulayotewa wa Afurika Tshipembe u nekedza mudzulapo munwe na
munwe  pfanelo dza vhutshilo; na u ri sumbedza uri pfanelo iyi i tea u
tsireledzwa na u thonifhiwa sa tshipida tsha u lwa na khakhathi dzine dza
itelwa vhana na vhafumakadzi. Muvhuso washu wo ta duvha la 25 Lara sa la
mashangodavha la u lwa na dzikhakhathi dzine dza itelwa vhafumakadzi, ngeno
la dzi 16, lone lo tetshelwa u dzhenelela kha khakhathi dzine dza itelwa
vhana na vhafumakadzi.

Nwaha wo fhiraho, Mufarisa Phuresidennde, Vho Pumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, vho
thoma mbekanyamushumo ya maduvha a 365 a Maano a Lushaka a u Dzhia Vhukando
[National Action Plan], u itela u fhedza dzikhakhathi dzine dza itelwa
vhana na vhafumakadzi. Vhanna na vhafumakadzi vha Afurika Tshipembe vha tea
u farisana kha nndwa ya u lwela uri vhafumakadzi vha vhe na nyandano ya
vhudzulapo, u itela u swikelele u tsireledzwa nga muvhuso na tshitshavha.

Zwe nda vha ndi tshi khou amba ngazwo ndi hezwi zwine vha khou zwi vhona
hafha kha heli bammbiri. Vhana vhothe vho vhulaiwaho nga munna muthihi – wa
lisole, ndi havha. O fhedza havha vhana vhothe, na mme avho. Zwi a pfisa
vhutungu musi ri tshi zwi lavhelesa. Sa vhafumakadzi, zwi a ri vhavha. Ri
khou ita khuwelelo ya uri vhathu vha vhanna vha ri fune ngauri na rine ri a
vha funa. Ndi a livhuwa. [U Vhanda Zwanda.] (Translation of Tshivenda
member’s statement follows.)

[Mrs T J TSHIVHASE (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC wishes to extend its
heartfelt condolences to the Kharivhe family. It is alleged that Mr Meshack
Kharivhe, who was a member of the SA National Defence Force, has murdered
his family of four members in a brutal way on Saturday, 12 April 2008.

The ANC strongly condemns acts of this nature. However, this enables us to
see the pressure experienced by people in the Defence Force. This incident
shows the fight against family violence that our country has embarked on.
This causes danger to women, children and girls who cannot defend
themselves.

The basic provision in the South African Constitution gives every citizen
the right to life; and it also shows that this right should be protected
and respected as part of the fight against violence against children and
women. Our government has set a day, 25 November, as an international day
to fight violence against women, while 16 November is set aside for
intervention in violence against children and women.

Last year the Deputy President, Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, launched the 365-
day National Action Plan to curb violence against children and women. South
African men and women should assist each other in this fight so that women
could enjoy harmonious citizenship, and protection by the government and
society.

What I was talking about is what you see here on this paper. These are all
the children who have been killed by one man - a soldier. He wiped out all
these children and their mother. It is painful to look at. As women it
hurts us. We are appealing to men to love us because we also love them.
Thank you. [Applause.]]

                           SAFETY IN THE WORKPLACE
                          PUBLIC SERVICE VACANCIES

                            (Minister’s Response)

UMPHATHISWA WEZEMISEBENZI: Somlomo, okokuqala, mandimbulele okaMshudulu
ngokwazisa le Ndlu ukuba i-ANC ayisayi kuze ivume ukuba abasebenzi
baxhatshazwe, bangcungcuthekiswe, babulawe, balinyazwe okanye benzakaliswe
xa besiya emisebenzini, ngoba abayelanga kwenzakala nakufa emisebenzini,
koko bayele ukuya kuxelengela iintsapho zabo. Ngoko ke bonke abaqeshi
abangawusanga so lo Mthetho ngabo abaya kungcikivwa, ikwangabo nabaya
kutshutshiswa. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Speaker, firstly, let me thank the hon Mshudulu
for informing this House that the ANC will not allow workers to be
exploited, abused, killed, harmed or injured when they go to work, because
they do not go to work to be injured or to die, but to work for their
families. Therefore, all employers who disregard this Act will be the ones
to be taken to task and prosecuted.]

Madam Speaker, the Employment Equity Act is an Act of this Parliament. It
was passed by this House, and by the hon members sitting in this House. Our
duty as the Department of Labour is to implement and enforce the law. Any
employer, be it government or a private employer or even those hon members
- in particular the member who was raising this matter - must realise that
we will be strengthening the enforcement mechanisms of the law. Therefore,
any company or employer that does not comply with the law will be dragged
to the Labour Court screaming and shouting.

The ANC fought against racism. We never fought against people as human
beings, and therefore my brother, I want to indicate to you that the
Employment Equity Act is an enabling piece of legislation. It is enabling
us to implement what is in the Constitution of the Republic of South
Africa. I do not see the ANC retreating in this regard, instead you will
see greater enforcement of the law. So go and plead with your colleagues on
whose behalf you are talking to comply with the law. Unless this Parliament
decides to repeal the law for now I am very sorry, my brother...akuhlanga
lungehlanga, lala ngenxeba [... I empathise with you, but you should accept
the situation].

                  XENOPHOBIC ATTACKS IN ALEXANDRA TOWNSHOPS

                            (Minister’s Response)

UMPHATHISWA WEMICIMBI YEZEKHAYA: Sihlalo, amalungu amaninzi kule Ndlu
namhlanje aphawule ngengxaki yocalu-calulo ngokobuzwe, okanye ixenophobia.
Ndifuna ukuthi phantse yonke imibutho ibe igxile kwisehlo saseAlexandra
sokubethwa kwabantu. Masiyithethe into yokuba owona mngeni wolu calulo
bubuhlanga bawo, ngoba kunqabile ukubona lujoliswe kubantu abangekho
mnyama. Ixesha elininzi lona luthande ukujolisa umnwe kubantu abamnyama
nabangabalapha eAfrika.

Ndicinga ukuba iluxanduva lwethu sonke into yokuba siyigxeke singaMalungu
ePalamemnte kunye nabanye abantu ekuhlaleni. (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Madam Speaker, most members in this House
today have commented about the problem of xenophobia. I want to say almost
all parties have repeatedly made reference to the incidents in Alexandra.
Let us face it, the real challenge of this xenophobia is its racist nature,
because it is seldom directed at people who are not black. It is mostly
directed at black people who are Africans.

I think it is our responsibility as Members of Parliament and some members
of the community to condemn this behaviour.]

The problem is that it also erodes the moral fibre of our society, and not
only that, but it also undermines Ubuntu, which is one of our principles
that we as South Africans cherish.

Somlomo, sithe kwezi nyanga ziphelileyo xa kusenzeka oku sathi siza kubiza
Indaba esiza kuyilungiselela ukuba ibe phaya ekupheleni kukaJulayi, apho
thina singurhulumente kunye noluntu, abahlali kunye nabantu bamanye amazwe,
siza kuthi sihlale khona, sixoxe, sibonisane, ngoba eyona ngxaki inkulu
nesinayo eMzantsi Afrika ngabantu beli abathi ngesiquphe ngoku baphose
iingxaki zabo kwabanye, besithi ziza nabantu basemzini, kanti ubuninzi bazo
zimayela nokuziswa kwenkonzo eluntwini. Enkosi. (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraph follows.)

[Speaker, in the past few months when this started we decided that we were
going to call an indaba to be held at the end of July, where we, as
government, the community and people of other countries, are going to meet
and engage in discussions, because the main problem which we have in South
Africa is the people of this country who suddenly blame their problems on
other people, as they believe that their problems are caused by people from
neighbouring countries.  On the contrary, most of their problems are
related to service delivery. Thank you.]

                           SABC MANAGEMENT SCANDAL

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Madam Speaker, I just want to
respond to the two hon members who made comments with respect to the SABC –
the public broadcaster. Let me firstly refer to the address by the hon
member from the IFP. I think it is completely incorrect for the hon member
to contend that the difficulties in the SABC lie at the door – as he blames
the members - of the alliance. It is completely incorrect to do that. The
difficulties are certainly centred on the internal issues pertaining to
internal management within the board.

The ANC has repeatedly called for a credible public broadcaster that must
undertake its work and fulfil its mandate on a completely nonpartisan
basis. Time and again the ruling party has consistently indicated that this
is its position on the public broadcaster. The hon member does in fact say
in his closing remarks that it would be necessary to consider a review of
the legislation. I think that in the light of the current developments we
could have some sympathy with that particular sentiment.

Secondly, the hon member from the DA is a member of the Portfolio Committee
on Communications, and being a member of that particular committee I think
he is well aware of all the developments that have taken place in the
portfolio committee, which have resulted in a report that is to be
presented to the NA for discussion some time later on.

My response to your comments - as you did say that the Minister ought to be
called upon to give a report to Parliament on developments within the SABC
– is that I think the Minister has indicated very clearly that she would be
making a statement to Parliament in the near future. She has also issued
statements in the media to explain very clearly our focus in this
particular matter.

Our focus in the Ministry is to ensure that there is stability and
effective governance within the SABC in the midst of all the difficulties
that the board and its management are presently faced with. Our central
concern in the midst of all of this is to ensure that the public
broadcaster executes its particular mandate.

We have three particular issues which we want to plead that all of us who
have the interests of this particular national asset at heart, should
support. These are: Firstly, to focus on supporting its mission to ensure
that technologically we can make certain that the digital migration process
that we have a responsibility to execute, is not interfered with; secondly,
to ensure and guarantee our delivery on the 2010 preparations; and,
thirdly, to ensure that South Africa and its public broadcaster play their
rightful role in the upcoming national general elections.

So, for all of that to be discharged properly we need an effective and
stable broadcaster and we want to call upon all forces that are external to
the broadcaster to play their role in ensuring that stability remains
within the broadcaster, and that they remain focused on delivering on this
particular mission. I also want to appeal to all members of the House that
we should act accordingly and in that spirit. I thank you.

                         FIGHTING CRIME IN ETHEKWINI
                     CONDOLENCES TO THE KHARIVHE FAMILY
                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Madam Speaker, the SA Police
Service would like to welcome the effort made by the eThekwini Metro in
fighting crime. Any effort which intends to form partnerships in our
country in fighting crime is welcome. I must say that this is not the first
time we are having this particular effort with eThekwini Metro. We’ve had
this for the past three years and now, as this partnership has been
strengthened, we are once more saying that we are ready and, at all times,
we will make sure that we strengthen any partnerships which happen in our
country.

As far as the issue of violence committed against women and families in our
country is concerned, may I say that this government has a clear policy,
which condemns any form of abuse and violence against women and children.
In this particular instance, I want to say that this poses a much bigger
challenge to all of us as South Africans if at this point in time we still
have men who believe that, for whatever reason, they’ve got to vent their
anger on women and children. It’s just unacceptable.

As the law-enforcement agencies, we will make sure that we take all the
necessary steps, we support the programme of the 365 days of activism and
make sure that it is realised in our country. However, that can only happen
if real men can stand up and make sure – like the hon Mluleki George – that
they rally and work together in making sure that those few men who are
refusing to change and transform are able to be part of this new democracy.
We cannot continue to have men who brutalise women and children.

With regard to the last issue, I would also like to say that we need both
men and women in our country to fight violence against women, and not only
that but also to protect men and women and treat them as equals. We can’t
continue to have a society and a community that sees women as minors or
individuals who can be abused and be expected to do as the men wish. Women
have rights and, as we all know, women’s right are also human rights. I
thank you. [Applause.]

               HOURS OF SITTING OF EXTENDED PUBLIC COMMITTEES

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY  PARTY:  Speaker,  on  behalf  of  the
Chief Whip of the Majority Party, I move the motion printed in his  name  on
the Order Paper, as follows:

   That, notwithstanding the hours of sitting of the House as  provided  for
   in Rule 23(2), the Extended Public Committees may sit as agreed to by the
   National Assembly Programme Committee.
Agreed to.

   APPOINTMENT OF AD HOC COMMITTEE TO CONSIDER AND REPORT ON PROTECTION OF
                              INFORMATION BILL

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY  PARTY:  Speaker,  on  behalf  of  the
Chief Whip of the Majority Party, I move the motion printed in his  name  on
the Order Paper, as follows:

   That the House appoints an ad hoc committee to consider and report on the
   Protection of Information Bill when introduced, the committee to –

   (1)      consist of 13 members as follows: ANC 8; DA 2;IFP 1; and other
        parties 2;


   (2)      perform the functions listed in Rule 201(1)(a) and have all the
        powers listed in Rule 138;


     3) confer with the relevant Council committee; and


     4) report by 20 June 2008.

Agreed to.

The House adjourned at 14:48.

