---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 23 September 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2008-09-23
---

TUESDAY, 23 SEPTEMBER 2008
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:16.

The Acting Chairperson, (Ms P M Hollander) took the Chair and requested
members to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr D A WORTH: Deputy Chairperson, I wish to move the following motion:

   That this Council –

   (1)      congratulates the South African Paralympic team on their
         magnificent achievements in Beijing, China;


   (2)      notes that the paralympic team won 30 medals, 21 of them gold;
   (3)      further notes that the South African contingent consisted of
         only 61 athletes, whilst most countries had over one hundred, and
         yet South Africa ended in sixth place out of all the competing
         nations;


     4) affirms what our superstar Oscar Pistorius, said, “You’re not
        disabled by the disabilities you have, you are abled by the
        abilities you have”; and


     5) reiterates to all the dedicated athletes that took part in the 2008
        Paralympic Games that they are truly an inspiration to us all.


Mr V V Z WINDVOЁL: Chair, I rise on a point of order because I couldn’t
hear the other part of the motion due to the ugly tone of the hon member
next to me. He should just apologise to the House. [Laughter.]

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Please switch off
all cellphones. Hon Windvoël, that is not a point of order. You may
continue, hon Worth.

Mr D A WORTH: Thank you, Chair. Once again, to all the dedicated athletes
that took part in the 2008 Paralympic Games: You are truly an inspiration
to us all.

Mr M A MZIZI: Thank you, Chairperson. I hereby give notice that at the next
sitting of the NCOP, I shall move on behalf of the IFP:

   That the Council –


     1) notes with sadness that 13 members of a family were found dead in
        their Dingleton home on the KwaZulu-Natal South Coast;


     2) further notes that it is alleged that one of the family members, who
        was a traditional healer, gave them some herbal medicine which is
        suspected to be the cause of the death of the family members;

     3) calls for a thorough investigation into the cause of the deaths,
        including an analysis of the medicine that was consumed; and

     4) sends its heartfelt condolences to the family and friends of the
        deceased.


Me H LAMOELA: Agb Voorsitter, by die volgende sitting van die Huis sal ek
voorstel:

   Dat die Raad -


   (1)      kennis neem dat die plaaswerkers van die Breërivier,
        Witzenbergstreek, bevoorreg was om fondse ter waarde van R27 000 vir
        die opgradering van hul selfgemaakte rugbyveld te Breërivier te
        bekom;


   (2)      verder kennis neem dat dié skenking van R27 000 deur
        landbouboere van Breërivier self gemaak is;


   (3)      kennis neem en baie dankbaar is vir so ’n mooi gebaar, veral
        omdat die Departement van Sport se begroting relatief klein is en
        baie min aan plattelandse gemeenskappe se sportgeriewe bestee word;
        en


     4) verder dank betoon dat die plaasboere van Breërivier so mildelik in
        hul werkerskorps belê.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Ms H LAMOELA: Hon Chairperson, at the next sitting of the House I shall
move:

   That the Council –

     1) takes note that the farmworkers of the Breede River, Witzenberg
        region, were privileged to acquire funding to the value of R27 000
        with which to upgrade of their self-made rugby field at Breede
        River;
     2) further notes that this donation of R27 000 was made by agricultural
        farmers of Breede River themselves;


     3) has taken note of and is very grateful for such a wonderful gesture,
        particularly because the budget of the Department of Sport is
        relatively small and very little is spent on the sports facilities
        of rural communities; and


     4) further pays tribute to the farmers of Breede River for investing so
        generously in their labour corps.]

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Are there any other
notices of motion? None. Before I proceed, I would like to welcome the
Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development. You are welcome, hon
Mabandla.

                         CELEBRATION OF HERITAGE DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms D ROBINSON: Chairperson, I hereby move without notice:

   That the Council –


     1) notes that South Africans celebrate  national  Heritage  Day  on  24
        September each year and that, in many cases, citizens are unaware of
        our national symbols and do not understand their symbolism;


     2) further notes that it is partly the responsibility of the Parliament
        of the Republic of South Africa to ensure that  all  South  Africans
        are responsible citizens who engage in civic  affairs  and  take  an
        interest in their nation;


     3) calls on all members to take up  this  responsibility  to  encourage
        activism, educate people about the role of the citizen and to inform
        South Africans about the  diversity  of  our  national  symbols  and
        heritage; and


     4) affirms that Heritage Day  is  an  important  opportunity  for  such
        educational initiatives.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                           FRAUDULENT ID DOCUMENTS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms B L NTEMBE: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council –

     1) notes that a complaint was received by the Independent Democrats
        regarding a fraudulent identity document and that the document was
        ready but not yet dispatched;


     2) further notes that the document was used outside of the offices of
        the Department of Home Affairs, not by the rightful owner, to open
        accounts with chain stores and to make bank loans without being
        dispatched out by Home Affairs;


     3) expresses dismay at such occurrence at an office working with
        sensitive documents of people, thereby causing Mr Shehzad of
        Pretoria to be in a predicament; and


     4) conveys its disappointment in the actions of negligence and/or
        corruption or whatever the reason may be for this occurrence.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                SUPPORT TO PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES IN SPORT

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnu D D GAMEDE: Sihlalo ngiphakamisa ngaphandle kwesaziso:

   Ukuthi lo Mkhandlu –

   (1)      ucabanga ukuthi lesi siphakamiso noma sisondelene nalesi esike
        saphakanyiswa kodwa akusona;


   (2)       uhalalisela  bonke   abamaqembu   kwezemidlalo   abakhubazekile
        ngokubuyisa isithunzi sezwe, nokuvala ihlazo kwezemidlalo  ngokuqoqa
        kwabo  ubuthaphuthaphu   izindondo   zegolide   nesiliva   nezethusi
        eBeinjing;


   (3)      ucabanga ukuthi lokhu kufakazela ukuthi ngempela abantu
        abakhubazekile bafana nabo bonke abantu, futhi uma benikwe ithuba
        nokusekelwa imvamisa benza kangcono kakhulu kunabanye.


   (4)      ubona ukuthi izinhlangano zemidlalo ezinjengo-SAFA ne-SARFU nazo
        mazinike phela abakhubazekile amathuba futhi baveze ukuthi
        basebenzise amathalente kanye nengqondo yabo.


   (5)      ukholwa ukuthi ngempela iNingizimu Afrika ngeyabo  bonke  abantu
        futhi ezemidlalo kufanele zingabandlululwa. Ngiyophakamisa kanjalo.
(Translation of isiZulu draft resolution follows.)


[Mr D D GAMEDE: Chairperson, I move without notice:


   That the Council-

     1) believes that even though this  motion  is  closely  linked  to  the
        previously moved motion, it is not the same as that one;


     2) congratulates the Paralympians for bringing back the dignity of  the
        country and also for lifting the flag of the country in sports  high
        by collecting many gold and silver medals in Beijing;


     3) believes that this truly shows that  people  with  disabilities  are
        like all other people, and if they are given a chance  and  support,
        they usually do better than the able-bodied;


     4) feels that sports organisations like the  SA  Football  Association,
        Safa, and the SA Rugby Union, Saru, should also give the opportunity
        to people with disabilities to participate in sport; and


     5) believes that South Africa truly belongs  to  all  people  and  that
        there should be no discrimination in sport.]


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                   CONTEMPTIBLE TREATMENT OF NCOP MEMBERS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, I move without notice:
   That the Council –


     1) notes with shock and disbelief that even after all  the  assurances,
        honourable members of the Council are still undermined  and  treated
        unfairly by some officials in this institution;


     2) notes that its members  were  promised  that  from  July  this  year
        onwards, subsistence and travel,  S  &  T  and  other  benefits  for
        members would be improved;


     3) further notes with shock that members of  the  Select  Committee  on
        Local Government and Administration who undertook an oversight visit
        to the Free State from 8 to 12 September 2008,  in  compliance  with
        section 139 of the Constitution to deal  with  intervention  in  two
        municipalities, were each paid R215 for the five days that they were
        away, i.e. R43 per day;


   (4)            realises that, upon enquiry, members were  told  that  one
        official decided to deduct money from the S & T and use  it  to  pay
        for meals for members of the committee;


   (5)            calls on its leadership  to  investigate  the  matter  and
        report back to the Council within 30 days; and


   (6)            urges some of those officials to stop treating members  of
        the Council with contempt.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

  SUSPENSION OF JOINT RULE 15(3) AND RULE 86(2) FOR PURPOSES OF DISPOSAL OF
   FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT OF PARLIAMENT BILL AND DRAFT MONEY BILL AMENDMENT
                     PROCEDURE AND RELATED MATTERS BILL

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, I move the motion printed in the name of the
Chief Whip of the Council on the Order Paper, as follows:

   That, for the  purposes  of  disposal  of  the  Financial  Management  of
   Parliament Bill and the Draft Money Bill Amendment Procedure and  Related
   Matters Bill, the Council -


     1) subject to the concurrence of the National Assembly, suspends Joint
        Rule 15(3), which provides that if a proposal to establish a joint
        committee is contained in draft legislation before a portfolio
        committee, a select committee or a joint committee referred to in
        Joint Rule 111, that committee must first refer the proposal to the
        Joint Rules Committee for a report and recommendation before that
        committee considers the proposal; and
     2) suspends Rule 86(2), which provides that if a proposal to establish
        a committee or other Council structure is contained in draft
        legislation before a select committee, the select committee must
        first refer the proposal to the Rules Committee for a report and
        recommendation before it considers the proposal.


Question put: That the motion be agreed to.

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): As there is no
speakers list, I would like to inform hon members that only delegation
heads or members authorised to vote on behalf of their provinces will
participate in the voting.

IN FAVOUR:  Eastern  Cape,  Free  State,  Gauteng,  KwaZulu-Natal,  Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

REGULATION OF INTERCEPTION OF COMMUNICATIONS AND PROVISION OF COMMUNICATION-
                     RELATED INFORMATION AMENDMENT BILL

               (Consideration of Bill and of Reports thereon)

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Deputy
Chairperson, hon members, comrades and friends, we are faced on a daily
basis with the reality that crime syndicates, international drug smugglers
and even common criminals make use of electronic communications systems,
such as the Internet and cellular phones, to plan, facilitate and execute
serious crimes. Therefore, it is our responsibility to implement measures
to stop them.

In 2002, the principal Act, which is now to be amended, replaced the
outdated Interception and Monitoring Prohibition Act of 1992 in order to
put in place appropriate legislative measures to deal with advances in
communication technology. The Act protects private communications by
prohibiting the interception of all forms of communications.

Due to the prevalence of serious crime, the Act, however, makes provision
for the interception and monitoring of communications in certain
circumstances. The Act provides for checks and balances, by allowing for
the interception of communications in respect of serious offences, but only
after a judicial officer, a judge of the High Court who has been designated
for this purpose, is satisfied that other investigative procedures have
been applied and have failed to produce the required evidence, or
reasonably appear to be unlikely to succeed if applied, or are likely to be
too dangerous to apply in order to obtain the required evidence.

In short, what the Act does is to strike a balance between the right to
freedom and security of all persons, which necessarily requires steps to
combat crime, among others, and the right to privacy, which like most
rights, could be infringed in very circumscribed circumstances. The
measures provided for in the Act are intended to assist the law enforcement
agencies in detecting, investigating and combating serious crimes.

The Bill is intended to assist the law enforcement agencies to intercept
mobile cellular communications of suspected serious criminals.
[Interjections.]

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: On a point of order: Deputy Chairperson, I would just
like to know whether it is parliamentary for a member to read a newspaper
while the Minister is speaking.

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Who is reading the
newspaper? [Interjections.] Would you stop disturbing the Minister? Thank
you. Hon Minister, you may continue.

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Deputy Chair, let
me continue. This is a very serious piece of legislation and I would like
all comrades to support us. This intention can only achieve its full
potential if there is a system in place in terms of which these criminals
can be traced and identified. What is therefore required is a registration
process to ensure that all sim cards and cellular phones can be traced back
to a specific registered owner, who must be able to account for the use of
the cellphone.

The ability to intercept communications and the importance of having in
place appropriate measures and systems to do so are well illustrated by a
recent Australian case which is referred to as Australia’s biggest
terrorism trial. In this case a conviction was secured on the strength of
evidence which included intercepted communications.

While the Act now provides for a paper-based registration process, the Bill
envisages an electronic registration process which would make it easier for
law enforcement agencies to obtain the information as it would be recorded
and stored centrally and would also be more readily available. It is
important to remember that the Bill originated from a request made by the
three mobile cellular operators, namely Cell C, Vodacom and MTN.

They requested government not to proceed with the implementation of
sections 40 and 62(6) of the Act in terms of which persons who sell
cellular phones or sim cards are required to record and store certain
information of their customers. While the Bill also requires the recording
and storing of information, similar to what is required in the Act now, it
does so by making use of an electronic solution. The Bill has been debated
at length, in and outside Parliament.
The law enforcement agencies, the Department of Communications, and the
mobile cellular operators have been involved in this process. The Justice
Portfolio Committee and the select committee have adapted the Bill in
numerous respects. The nature of the Act, and therefore also the Bill,
dealing with the interception of information transmitted through electronic
communications systems, calls for detailed and technical provisions, as is
evident in the principal Act and the Bill.

As I have already indicated, the Bill is aimed mainly at the registration
and verification of certain particulars of owners of cellular phones and
sim cards. Failure to register will result in customers not having access
to cellular phone services. In an attempt to ensure that access to cellular
phone services is not affected negatively, the Bill contains a number of
new definitions in clause 1. These are intended to cater for  poor persons
who live in outlying areas and who rely on cellular phone services for
access to numerous basic services; for instance, to obtain information
about pension payouts, child maintenance and cellular phone banking,
amongst others.

Allow me to highlight three significant amendments made by the select
committee, or perhaps I should actually leave this to the select committee
to introduce. I would like to say that I am here to endorse the amendments
that have been proposed by the select committee. Let me just say that I
have been assured that given the inputs that were made by all stakeholders,
which led to the refined amendments that we have before us, and the fact
that they relied on good information, the amendments would be feasible. In
other words, at implementation, the Act would be feasible.

Let me say though that in the context of the current review of the criminal
justice system, the Justice, Crime Prevention and Security, JCPS, cluster
should consider establishing mechanisms for the monitoring of the practical
application of the Act by the law enforcement agencies. Colleagues, we
simply cannot afford to have a flaw in this legislation which could be used
by criminals with gay abandon. Should the need arise, we may have to
revisit this issue.


I realise the importance of preparing properly for the implementation of
the Bill, and hence I have noted with appreciation the report of the select
committee which states that, every six months, after the implementation of
the Bill, the following must be monitored: Progress made regarding the
implementation; challenges encountered in this regard; and possible
solutions for challenges experienced.

Let me then conclude by saying that my plea to all stakeholders today is to
facilitate the expeditious enactment of this Bill. We need to use all
measures at our disposal to fight crime, and every day that this Bill is
delayed is an extra day for criminals to use the gaps in the Act to their
advantage when planning and executing crimes. We must not allow that. Let
us all commit to ensuring that we facilitate the ratification and passing
of this Bill in this House.

I would like to express my appreciation to Kgoshi Mokoena, the chairperson
of the select committee, and the committee members for their in-depth
deliberations on the Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, finally we have the Regulation of
Interception of Communications and Provision of Communication-related
Information Amendment Bill before this House. The committee would like to
thank the hon Minister for her support and co-operation with the committee
during the processing of this Bill.

There were times when the committee did not comprehend some of the policy
issues in the Bill. When approached, the Minister was not only willing to
assist and advise us, but also showed a willingness to be persuaded to
understand the views of the committee. That is the kind of leadership we
are enjoying in this Parliament and in our movement.

There were times when the Bill was nearly thrown into the dustbin, but
because of the kind of cadre we have in the Minister, the Bill was brought
back and reached the stage in which it is now. Thanks to you, Comrade Bri,
hon Minister.

The committee effected amendments to provisions of this Bill dealing with
roaming, after extensive consultation with the departmental officials and
relevant stakeholders. Amongst the many reasons for not including a
provision on international roaming in this Bill is that it would have a
negative impact on the tourism industry and the fact that roaming is only
possible on a contract cellular phone. This would make it impossible to
implement the provision and the nature of roaming, in our view, was going
to add to the burden of our police officers who are expected to monitor the
implementation thereof.

The hon Minister has already explained what this Bill is all about. I am
glad that the hon Minister, as well, understood why the committee had to
bring some of these amendments to this Bill. I am happy to say that all the
amendments, as proposed by this committee, were canvassed to our colleagues
in the National Assembly, and they were excited and happy to receive and
endorse them.

As you have heard, this Bill aims to amend the Regulation of Interception
of Communications and Provision of Communication-related Information Act,
Act 70 of 2002, in order to regulate the electronic capturing of certain
personal information of persons that are in possession of cellular phones
and even sim cards.

The Bill also provides for offences, penalties and other sanctions in the
event of noncompliance. Members will remember that another reason for these
amendments is to move away from paper-based registration to the electronic
registration, as was rightly captured by the hon Minister.

In other words, all of us who own cellphones would have to register our
cellular phones immediately when this Bill becomes an Act. In the original
Bill it was expected that you register your cellular phones, handset,
serial number and all those other things.

But the committee felt this would be more of a burden than one would
imagine and that would present serious challenges to our poor people out
there, and would be an unnecessary burden to the police officers who would
be expected to monitor whether all subscribers are complying with all
requirements. The SA Police Service was also concerned about these
requirements and they agreed with the committee’s amendments or views.

The hon Moseki will deal with issues related to law enforcement in this
Bill. Therefore, let me avoid those issues because he is better placed as a
legal guru, as a bush lawyer, in our committee to deal with it.

With this Bill, we are also stopping all law enforcement agencies who are
intercepting communication and related information illegally.

The other questions that we as a committee had to deal with were: What’s
going to happen to child-headed families who own cellular phones that were
left behind by their late parents? Will they be expected to go through all
the requirements in order to register their cellular phones and other
gadgets? What about those poor women in rural areas who are staying far
from towns? How are they going to register?

Again, our expert on this topic is none other than hon Ntuli, who is not
just a cadre and an activist in fighting for poor people, but also an
expert in ensuring that people are not just being compromised for the sake
of it. He is in a better position to deal with this topic.

Service providers are given 18 months to register all their subscribers.
The department, as already said by the hon Minister, together with the
service providers will report to Parliament on progress made or on whatever
challenges they might be facing.

One other issue that took much of our time, as I’ve said earlier on, is the
question of roaming. When the Bill was originally presented to the
committee, it had included provisions around the registration of roaming
cellular phones. But, as the committee, we felt that these requirements
were too onerous on foreign tourists or even on our own citizens who are
living abroad.

One of the reasons why the committee rejected the registration of roaming
cellular phones was that the police were uncomfortable with the impact of
such a provision, and Parliament – you will agree with me – cannot
legislate on matters that the police would not be able to monitor or
police.

A major concern was the impact that such a provision would have on visitors
to our country, especially with the advent of the Soccer World Cup in 2010.
We felt that foreign visitors, once within the borders of our country, are
required to be cleared when they pass through our customs, a process that
can be lengthy and time-consuming. To then require these visitors to
undergo a similar registration process in order for them to roam on their
cellular phones, would be unfair on them and would have a negative impact
on us as a friendly country.

In most countries the practice is to allow visitors the freedom of roaming
on their cellular phones and South Africa should not differ from this if we
want to be regarded as a tourist-friendly country.

After a long discussion, I am happy to say, the departments and the
committee are singing from the same hymn book. Thanks once more, hon
Minister, for assisting us in all respects. Let me thank your officials,
hon Minister, who were so prepared, dedicated and willing to assist the
committee, and in this way helped us to gain a better understanding of this
Bill. Hon Minister, I am talking about dedicated officials who are ready
and prepared to go the extra mile. Those officials, Minister, are none
other than Sarel, Ina and Lawrence. Hon Minister, if there are vacancies in
which you can place them, don’t be ashamed or hesitate to promote them to
higher positions.

Thanks to you, committee members, for showing an interest and being
dedicated to the work at all the times in order to better the lives of our
people. I have got a team that I am very proud of.

I want to appeal to the House to please do us a favour and make us smile by
supporting this Bill once the debate has been concluded. [Applause.]

Mr Z C NTULI: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Members of Parliament, Your
Excellencies, comrades and friends, allow me to note that this Bill
enhances the registration of citizens of our country. It reduces the burden
on informal distribution centres and places the burden on the
telecommunication service providers. However, this is done in a manner that
is fair and just.

The Bill provides that a handset or a sim card would not be activated
unless specific details of the subscriber have been obtained and stored.
This means that when a person buys a handset or a sim card, such a person
would be required to have the item or items registered before it can be
used.
With regard to a person who already has a handset or a sim card, his or her
items would have to be registered at the registration centres within 12
months from the date of commencement of this legislation, failing which the
owner of the handset and or the sim card would risk discontinuation of
services.

While the initial version of this Bill provided for revoking of licences in
the event of noncompliance, the final version doesn’t contain this
provision. This provision was taken out because of uncertainty as to
whether the Minister or the Independent Communications Authority of South
Africa was vested with the power to revoke a licence.

This Bill has improved a lot in the area of registration compared to its
initial stages. Despite this, section 56 of the Bill makes provision for
specific sanctions in the event of noncompliance. There is no doubt that
this Bill requires community awareness to educate people, and this requires
that a significant amount of resources be made available.

It is noticeable that globalisation has created massive technological forms
of communications. We would not have had this Bill today was it not for
global technological advancement. Some people want these developments to
favour the rich and the powerful, and therefore, technically, this Bill
would be in the interests of big service providers. However, it should be
noted that the Bill recognises the rapid growth of informal cellphone
businesses and this sector seems to consist of community members.

Clause 2 of the Bill and its provisions require service providers to record
their items in a manner that is conducive to their needs. This takes into
account the conditions in which small business owners find themselves. It
appears to acknowledge the conditions in informal settlements. It further
recognises people’s relationships at family level. This Bill should
therefore not constrain the developmental progress of our country. This is
the road that must be accelerated to ensure that communication services are
running smoothly and without hindrance.

There is no doubt that this Bill seeks to contribute to the development of
poor communities. It further regulates street markets, bringing it in line
with law and order.

The ANC’s Polokwane resolution emphasises that the plight of informal
businesses needs a concerted support system and solidarity. The January 8
Statement and strategy and tactics make certain commitments in respect of
building a caring society – this is a society that will allow all people to
share the economic wealth. These goals will not be achieved without
implementing a Bill of this nature. It should be implemented to ensure that
communication services are regulated in a flexible manner that promotes
consistency in policy. It should be done in line with our law and
international instruments. It should be user-friendly.

In this regard, we rejected provisions in the Bill that appeared to limit
individual rights to privacy and dignity. We also rejected provisions that
appeared to promote rigidity and bureaucracy. No one should fear this Bill
as it seeks to amend the weaknesses of the principal Act.

Communities and individuals involved in this area should be supportive of
the effort by this House to ensure the implementation of this Bill. I
request that the House supports the Bill.

Mr J W LE ROUX: Chairperson, hon Minister, when the clock struck 14:20 and
you were not here, I thought maybe we had lost another Minister.
[Laughter]. I was glad to see you, Minister.

Very few members in this Chamber will remember the speech the British Prime
Minister Macmillan made in 1960 about “The wind of change”. I can promise
you, the hurricane that is on its way now is going to change many things in
South Africa.

The Bill before us was debated vigorously by our committee and was
initially rejected in total. The stance the committee took on the Bill
certainly set the cat amongst the pigeons. The chairperson and the
committee must take full credit for applying their minds diligently and
improving the Bill substantially. In this case, the committee was certainly
no rubber stamp at all, and we must really thank our chairperson, Kgoshi
Mokoena, for that.

The main object of the Bill is to assist law enforcement agencies to combat
crime. Obviously, the committee was in full support of the main objects of
the Bill. We all know what crime has done to our country, and any piece of
legislation that can help to fight crime must be supported.

The main objections to the Bill in its original form, and the reasons why
we rejected it and made the amendments, were first of all that it was
virtually impossible for large service providers to comply with the
requirements of the Bill. Small service providers would not have been able
to comply at all.

Secondly, the question of roaming services was debated and was a serious
problem. Visitors entering the country would have been greatly
inconvenienced. The registration of cellphones at our ports of entry would
have caused great delays and frustration. Our tourism industry would
certainly have suffered as a result. Minister, we must thank you for a
letter you wrote on 30 October 2007 in which you said – and which greatly
assisted us - and I quote:

   It is respectfully submitted that the envisaged registration process at
   ports of entry may not only be a source of great inconvenience for
   visitors to South Africa, but may also lead to congestion and delays at
   ports of entry.


It would have caused serious delays and embarassment, especially when we
host events such as the 2010 Soccer World Cup.

Thirdly, the problem with ID identification to obtain a cellphone and the
problem with street names and house numbers in informal settlements would
also have affected over a million cellphone users negatively.

Fourthly, the cost of implementing the Bill was also not clear, and the
additional cost to service providers would certainly have been passed on to
cellphone users. We will have to watch very carefully as to what the
eventual cost to the consumer is going to be.

Voorsitter, wat die bekamping van misdaad betref, is dit noodsaaklik dat
diensverskaffers en die veiligheidsdienste te alle tye oor inligting van
selfoongebruikers beskik. Die wet sal ons op dieselfde standaard plaas as
die res van die wêreld. Voorsitter, die wetgewing is aansienlik verbeter en
die DA ondersteun dit graag.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Chairperson, with regard to the fight against crime, it is necessary that
service providers and the security forces have access to information of
cellphone users at all times. This Act will place us on par with the rest
of the world. Chairperson, this legislation has improved considerably and
the DA gladly supports it.]

Mnu M A MZIZI: KuNgqongqoshe, unwele olude. Ibambe njalo Nkosazana,
seliyangomtsha wendoda. Sihlalo, kuhlale kuthiwa njalo, abantu abacabanga
ngokufana bakhuluma into eyodwa. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph
follows.)

[Mr M A MZIZI: To the hon Minister, thank you. Hang in there, Madam, we are
almost there. Chairperson, it is always said that people who think alike
speak with one voice.]

I had a list of concerns from the IFP regarding this Bill. I have been in
and out of the committee and therefore those amendments that I have listed
– which basically reflect my own thoughts – have been suggested by us.

I am not misleading the House; it is indeed true that we were going to
support the stated intention of the Bill, which is to combat crime, but we
also mentioned that there are various provisions of the Bill that cannot be
implemented. However, like-minded people always think alike.

Abafowethu uma belokhu bekhuluma sengiyathola ukuthi, hhayi bo!
[Uhleko]Udaba elokuthi uNgqongqoshe nguyena kuphela osula ilayisense,
saluchitha. Sengiyakuvuma ngempela ukuthi saluchitha. Udaba oboluthi ...
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[When the hon members were speaking I realised that something wrong.
[Laughter.] The fact that it was only the Minister who could cancel
licences, was rejected. I really agree with the fact that it was rejected.
The ...]

... matter relating to the handset prior to registration for purposes of
international roaming is hugely problematic.

Ngiyakhumbula ukuthi impela sesalususa. Ngakho-ke Sihlalo, akusadingekile
ukuthi ngibe ngilokhu ngisalandela okunye. Ngithi-ke cha, asenze lokuya
nalokuyana kodwa nje ngingakusho kuNgqongqoshe okukhona futhi okwenzekayo
... (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[I remember that we rejected it. Therefore, Chairperson, it is unnecessary
for me to follow up on other issues by saying let us do this and that and
not mentioning things to the Minister that are already taking place ...]

When people report the loss of their cellphones to the police, they are
faced with a huge problem in that the police send them from pillar to post
before they can register the loss. My question is: What happens if, in the
process of reporting a stolen cellphone to the police, they cannot open a
case or give you something as proof that you have reported the matter, and
somebody uses the cellphone elsewhere? You cannot go to the police and
claim that you have reported your cellphone as lost. So many things are
involved here. For instance, you must now go to the subscriber and tell
them about your loss. If it’s over the weekend, you can’t. If that could be
looked into, then hurray! We would be very happy.

The IFP supports the Bill.

Mr W M DOUGLAS: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, one major
headache that causes a significant source of lost revenue to the
telecommunications industry is telecommunication fraud, as it lowers
customers’ confidence in the security of transactions available via the
service operator.

This type of fraud is a significant problem which needs to be addressed,
detected and prevented in the strongest possible manner.
Popular examples of fraud in the telecommunication industry include
subscription fraud, identity theft, Voice over Internet Protocol, VOIP,
fraud, cellular cloning, billing and payment fraud on telecom accounts,
prepaid and postpaid fraud and PBX fraud.

We see telecommunication being used more frequently in the commission of
organised crime, heists and other very serious offences. And so, there is a
need for the Regulation of Interception of Communications and Provision of
Communication-related Information Amendment Bill which aims to govern the
interception of certain communications, the monitoring of certain signals
and radio frequency spectrums, and the provision of certain communication-
related information.

The ACDP welcomes this Bill as it endeavours to provide an important weapon
in the fight against organised crime, telecommunication fraud and
terrorism.

To conclude, the ACDP would like to stress the point that the interception
of certain communications, the monitoring of certain signals and radio
frequency spectrums, and the provision of certain communication-related
information should be conducted only to pursue the aims of law enforcement
and not for some nefarious or corrupt purpose, or as a political tool.

It’s my hope that this Bill will provide more stringent measures to stop
operators from using the technology at their disposal for political ends.
The ACDP supports this Bill. I thank you.

Rre A L MOSEKI: Modulasetilo, Tona Mabandla, badirammogo kwa komiting,
Kgoshi Mokoena le ba bangwe, ntlha ya ntlha ke tla bua ka tiro ya sepodisi
sa rona mo go netefatseng gore Molaotlhomo o o o tla bong ele molao mo
nakong e e sa fediseng pelo, e tsenngwa tirisong ka botlalo, mme e tswela
batho ba rona mosola.
Ntlha ya phisegelo  e e botlhokwa ke gore disenyi, difelekwane tse di
tsietsang batho ka go dirisa mafaratlhatlha a le melao e re e dirileng go
tokafatsa matshelo a batho ba ga rona, ba se bone tšhono ya go
tlhakatlhakanya setšhaba sa ga rona le go diga ekonomi. Ke ntlhakgolo e
komiti e batla go bua ka yona.

Komiti ya re gore re kgone go tsenya Molaotlhomo o mo tirisong sentle,
sepodisi sa rona se tshwanetse go dirisana le setšhaba le batho ba ba
dirisang dicellphone le didirisiwa tsa tsone go itirela lotseno le
bokamoso, go ba thusa go tshwara maferefere le difelekwane, Ntate Mzizi,
tse di tlhakatlhakanyang.

Komiti ya re re na le cell C, mme MmaMabandla, le baabi ba ditirelo
[service providers] ba le bararo ba o buileng ka bone, le baagi [community]
ba rona le bao ba rekisang mo mebileng. Tirisanommogo ya sepodisi le baabi
ba ditirelo tse, gore re tshware batlhakatlhakanyi ba, bomasenyeletsa, e
tshwanetse go nna e e tseneletseng. Ke dintlha tse di botlhokwa tse komiti
e di tlhagisitseng.

Mo ntlheng e nngwe e komiti e e tlhagisitseng, Ntate Mzizi le wena
Modulasetulo, ke gore Aforika Borwa e na le Molaotheo [Constitution] o o re
sireletsang rotlhe. Le fa Molaotheo o o re sireletsa rotlhe, go na le
maferefere, difelekwane, bomabinagotsholwa, bomasenyeletsa, ba ba dirisang
Molaotheo o go nyatsa tsamaiso e e siameng le kgolo ya Aforika Borwa.

Le fa re na le tshwanelo ya gore re nne le tshedimosetso, tshwanelo eo e
tshwanetswe go tsamaisiwa ka tolamo; ope a seke a e dirisa go
tlhakatlhakanya Aforika Borwa. Re dirise tshwanelo e ya rona ya gore re nne
le tshedimosetso go thusa Aforika Borwa go gola jaaka temokerasi e e
golang.

Komiti gape ya re ga go na ope yo e leng modiragatsi wa molao [law
enforcement agency] yo o tshwanelwang ke go dirisa ditshwanelo tsa gore re
bone tshedimosetso go batlisisa bomabinagotsholwa, bomasenyeletsa, go
akaretsa le baagi ba ba nang le maikaelelo a go aga.

Ntlha e nngwe e e botlhokwa ke gore tshedimosetso e re nang le yone ya gore
re bone basenyi e tshwanetse gore e tsamaisiwe ka tsela e e maleba. Mme
komiti ya re re dirise ditšhono tse di leng teng tsa go nna le lefelo le le
lengwe [central point] la go kokoanya tshedimosetso go bona gore basenyi ke
bo mang, ka tsela e e maleba.

Ka jalo, ke ne ke re ke sedimose dintlha tse Kgoshi a rileng ke bue ka
tsona, mme ke buile ka tsona. Jaanong ke batla go bua ka ntlha e nngwe ke
e. (Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[Mr A L MOSEKI: Chairperson, Minister Mabandla, colleagues in the
committee, Kgoshi Mokoena and other people present here. The first point
that I would like to talk about here relates to the work done by our Police
Service in order to ensure that this Bill is soon enacted into law, and
implemented to benefit our people.

A burning issue is that criminals are using technology and our legal system
which we have established to rob our community rather than improve the
lives of our people. We must ensure that we deny them the opportunity to
cause either confusion in our society or an economic downturn. That is the
most important point that the committee wants to articulate.

The committee believes that for us to put this Bill to effective use, our
Police Service needs to work hand in glove with the community.  For this to
be achieved, we request people using cellphones and other related
accessories as a means to earn a living to help us catch crooks and
criminals, Mr Mzizi, who rob our nation.

Mrs Mabandla, the committee acknowledges Cell C as well as the other three
service providers that you mentioned, and our community including hawkers.
We need co-operation between the police and these service providers to
ensure that these criminals and defrauders are caught. These are important
points that the committee has raised.

The other point the committee has presented, Mr Mzizi and Chairperson, is
that South Africa has a Constitution that protects us all. Although the
Constitution protects us all, there are crooks and tricksters who are
waiting to jump on the bandwagon and defrauders who are using this
Constitution to disrupt the smooth running and development of South Africa.

Even though it is our right to have access to information, it should be
properly utilised, so that no one would be able to use it to create havoc
in South Africa. We need to use this right of access to information to help
South Africa grow as a developing democracy.

The committee further states that no law enforcement agency should misuse
the right to access information by investigating people who jump on the
bandwagon, such as defrauders, including people with good intentions.

It is also important to note that the information used to catch criminals
should be used appropriately. The committee also feels that there is a need
to use available resources to establish a central point and gather
information in an appropriate manner about these criminals.

I just wanted to clarify some of the issues that Kgoshi raised earlier on,
and I think I have done so. Furthermore I would like to talk about another
issue.]

Mr Le Roux, very opportunistically so, thinks that the ANC is about to
destroy itself. You are going to be very disappointed, let me assure you.
Hence he is opportunistically talking about the ‘winds of change’, quoting
Macmillan. Let’s assure you that this movement, the ANC, which has been
here for almost 100 years, has survived difficult times and is going to
survive now. Rest assured.

Those winds of change that you are talking about are winds of change that
will be dictated by the ANC, and not by the DA or any of the opposition who
are unable to add value in terms of our democratic development. Thank you
very much. [Applause.] [Interjections.]

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Well, what can I
say? This is one Bill where there is a lot of consensus. It’s a plus for
fighting crime in our country. To my comrade, just to say that there is one
area where you are in agreement with Mr Le Roux and that is that tribute
should go to the committee under the fantastic and able leadership of
Kgoshi Mokoena. I must say that I also concur that you have done good work
but also want to add and say that I am aware of how overloaded you are.
With regard to justice, you have to consider a lot of Bills and I know that
you put in a lot of time as the select committee to actually address this
challenge.

Baba uMzizi ngiyajabula uma ngikuzwa ukhuluma ngoba ... [Hon Mzizi, I am so
pleased to hear you talking because ...]

I know how passionate you are about justice; how much you are committed to
us in this country having an efficient justice system and I do know how
well you have worked with the chairperson of this committee. I wasn’t aware
that you had left the committee, but just to say to all of you, to my
comrades, hon Ntuli and Manyosi...

Hhayi mina ngiyabonga vele injalo ... [As far as I am concerned, I am
grateful – it is like that ...]

Mr Douglas, I hope that you will continue to work well in this committee.
There are many very challenging Bills that will still come before you.
Please assist with getting these Bills passed so that it can become
legislation. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill, subject to proposed amendments, agreed to in accordance with section
75 of the Constitution.

                   MANDATING PROCEDURES OF PROVINCES BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, colleagues, comrades and friends, you will
remember that some time back we came before the House and humbly requested
to pass the Bill that provided for uniformity when provinces send mandates
to this august House. When we brought that Bill before the House, we humbly
requested you to please note that when provinces send us mandates, we are
not going to allow those final mandates to be signed by chairpersons or any
other person heading a committee any more.

When this Bill becomes an Act, all final mandates will be signed by the
Speaker or any other person who has been designated by the Speaker.
Negotiating mandates, of course, can be signed by the chairperson or any
other person designated to do that. However, in terms of final mandates, it
is now going to be a requirement that they be signed by the Speaker.

With this Bill, we are doing away with mandates that don’t have letterheads
of provinces. We are, therefore, requesting provinces to support these
amendments that have been agreed on by all provinces. I therefore want to
humbly submit this Bill to the House for processing, and request that we
accept the amendments as proposed by yours truly on behalf of the
committee. I so move.

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Bill be rejected.

Declaration of vote:

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: With your permission, Chairperson, there is a whisper
by members that they don’t understand what is going on. There were
amendments from our colleagues in the National Assembly to the effect that
all questions in this House were to get mandates. As you indicated, we are
rejecting the amendments by our colleagues in the National Assembly. The
Bill will be passed in the original form in which it was submitted by the
select committee. If we accept the Bill with the amendments from our
colleagues in the National Assembly, it will mean that for any other
question in this House, we will have to get a mandate. That is not
desirable; we cannot accept that. Thanks, Chairperson. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Order, please! Order, please! Hon
Watson! Thank you. We shall now proceed to the voting on the question.

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Chair!

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Yes, hon member?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Is it parliamentary for a member to say to another
member in the House that he is silly?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Who said that?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Hon Watson said that to hon Shiceka.
Mr A WATSON: That is an untruth, Madam Chair. I didn’t say he is silly. I
said he mustn’t be silly.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Hon members, could we please
proceed? We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do
this in alphabetical order per province.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, Limpopo, Western Cape.

Bill  accordingly  rejected  in  accordance   with   section   65   of   the
Constitution.

                  NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT LAWS AMENDMENT BILL

            (Decision of Question on Bill and of Report thereon)

Question put: That the Bill be agreed to.

IN FAVOUR:  Eastern  Cape,  Free  State,  Gauteng,  KwaZulu-Natal,  Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT: WASTE BILL

            (Decision of Question on Bill and of Report thereon)

Question put: That the Bill be agreed to.

IN FAVOUR:  Eastern  Cape,  Free  State,  Gauteng,  KwaZulu-Natal,  Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                MINERAL AND PETROLEUM RESOURCES ROYALTY BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

       MINERALS AND PETROLEUM RESOURCES ROYALTY (Administration) Bill

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr M O ROBERTSON: Chairperson, can I respond to hon Sulliman. We have had a
lot of snow in the Eastern Cape and if they want veld for their cattle,
then we will hire it out to them.

These Bills before the NCOP provide a legislative framework persuading
extractors of mineral resources in South Africa to pay royalty. This
royalty payment compensates for the loss of nonrenewable resources.

These Bills are outcomes of many drafts and have been extensively debated
and relevant stakeholders have been consulted. The Mineral and Petroleum
Resources Development Act, Act 28 of 2002, about the year that hon Adams
was born, is the foundation for these pieces of legislation, which
stipulate that all South Africans must benefit from its vast mineral
resources.

The taxpayers will pay the value of the minerals mined, that is, gross
sales less the transport costs between the seller and the buyer of the
final mineral product. Resource rents or mineral royalties should be
payable irrespective of whether or not mining companies are making a
profit. The tax is based on the extraction of mineral deposits and not on
the profitability of mines.

To ensure equitable royalty rates, and in response to requests for relief
for marginal mines, a dual-formula based royalty rate structure has been
proposed - one for refined and one for unrefined minerals.

Chairperson, oil and gas production will be subjected to the refined
formula. Oil and gas have lower rates because South Africa does not have
large deposits of these resources and prospecting for these resources is an
ongoing activity.

The Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Act, Act 28 of 2002,
protects the right of certain communities to continue to receive community
royalties. These community royalties will not be allowed as an offset
against royalty payments to the state.
The Select Committee on Finance does not agree with the many mining
companies that such payments to communities are double royalties. Mining
companies and communities are also encouraged, where deemed appropriate, to
convert the interests of communities into equity.

These Bills also provide an administrative framework for the royalty
payment. Extractors of mineral deposit must submit returns every six
months. This system is similar to the VAT system and requires provisional
payments in line with value extracted. Extractors must keep records for
five years.

The Select Committee on Finance appeals to the NCOP to support these pieces
of tax legislation. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): That concludes the debate. I shall
now put the question in respect of the Fifth Order. The question is that
the Bill be agreed to. In accordance with Rule 63, I shall first allow
political parties to make their declarations of vote, if they so wish. Is
there any party that wishes to make a declaration of vote? There is none.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. Before I call the
voting, please press button number one to confirm your presence. There
should be lights flashing. Are your lights flashing? If not, the service
officers will assist you.

Those in favour, please press button number four. Those against, press
button number two. Those who abstain, press button number three. Have all
the hon members voted?

HON MEMBERS: Yes!

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): If any of the members have
mistakenly pressed the incorrect button, please press the correct button.
If any member is experiencing problems with voting, their vote will be
recorded manually.

The voting will now close. Could the staff members submit the results?

Mr M A Sulliman: Chairperson, it has been brought to my attention that not
all members have cast their votes. Can we rerun this process if possible?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Those members who have not cast
their votes can do so manually. You are quite correct. There is a procedure
to deal with that and I have only 24 members that have voted and there are
no abstentions.

Hon members, I have satisfied myself that all members have voted and all
members – not the majority – have voted in favour. I therefore declare the
Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.
[Applause.]

Mineral and Petroleum Resources Royalty Bill agreed to in accordance with
section 75 of the Constitution.

I shall now put the question in respect of the Sixth Order. The question is
that the Bill be agreed to. In accordance with Rule 63, I shall first allow
political parties to make their declarations of vote, if they so wish.

In the absence of any declaration, we shall now proceed to the voting on
the question. Before I call on members to vote, please press button number
one to confirm your presence. There should be lights flashing. Are your
lights flashing? If not, the service officers will assist you.

Those in favour, please press button number four. Those against, press
button number two. And those who abstain, press button number three. Have
all members voted?

If any members have mistakenly pressed the incorrect button, please press
the correct button. The voting will now close. Could the staff members
submit the results?

I am not sure but there is one member who has not voted. I don’t know
whether it is by omission, or whether it was done on purpose, or by
abstention. Hon Mkono, according to our records you have not voted. I have
to confirm whether or not it is due to a technical problem.

Mr D G MKONO: I thought I had voted because even my supervisors agreed, but
I can always do it manually.

Mr J M SIBIYA: I also did not vote. The lights were not on and I did raise
my hand, but I think these things are on strike.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): I will confirm that, hon Sibiya.
Yes, you are right. Can you also vote on paper?

Ms B N DLULANE: Chairperson, the hon Whip from Gauteng is reading a
newspaper in the House. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon member, it is the Whip of
Gauteng – this is whipping by another Whip. Okay, hon members...
[Interjections.]

Order! Hon members! The majority of members have voted in favour. I
therefore declare the Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the
Constitution.

Mineral and Petroleum Resources Royalty (Administration) Bill agreed to in
accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF JOINT BUDGET COMMITTEE – EXPENDITURE FOR FIRST
                       QUARTER 2008–09 FINANCIAL YEAR

Mr B J MKHALIPHI: Thank you very much, hon Chairperson. Good afternoon,
colleagues. We wish to draw your attention to the report that appeared in
the ATCs of 14 August 2008. This is the first quarterly report for the
expenditure of departments. This report should be compared to concerns you
have raised during the debates on the Budget Votes. Are all those matters
and concerns that you have raised during these debates reflected in the
expenditure patterns as shown in the departmental reports?

We also want to share with you and highlight that, earlier this year, the
government of the day called upon all of us, departments and institutions
alike, to engage in “business unusual”. Despite this clarion call by the
government of the day, we note with disappointment, as reflected in this
report, that there are departments that are just carrying on as usual. This
calls upon us to put more effort and focus in our oversight responsibility,
especially with regard to budget implementation. As we always say: Poor
budget implementation may later lead to poor service delivery. As we
approach the twilight of the term of this Parliament, we should not relax
our efforts. This will be our legacy that we have to reflect on later.
Thank you, hon members. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

                     GROUP PHOTO OPPORTUNITY FOR MEMBERS

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon members, before I adjourn the
Council, I need to make one important announcement. Members are reminded
that they are expected to meet at the entrance of the NCOP for a group
photo. It is a very historic photo opportunity, which all members are
expected to attend.

The Council adjourned at 16:04.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS
                           FRIDAY, 22 AUGUST 2008
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1. The Minister for Public Enterprises

   a) Report and Financial Statements of Eskom Holdings  Limited  for  2007-
      2008,  including  the  Report  of  the  Independent  Auditors  on  the
      Financial Statements for 2007-2008.


2. The Minister of Labour

   a) Report and Financial Statements of Agriculture Sector Education and
      Training Authority for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
      General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
      2007-2008 [RP 67-2008].


   b) Report and Financial Statements of the Finance, Accounting,
      Management Consulting and other Financial Services Sector Education
      and Training Authority for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
      Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
      Information for 2007-2008 [RP 74-2008].

                           MONDAY, 25 AUGUST 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

   1. The transmission for concurrence from the National Assembly to the
      National Council of Provinces of the Constitution Fifteenth Amendment
      Bill [B 63B – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 74) (see Announcements,
      Tablings and Committee Reports, 20 August 2008, p 1565), was incorrect
      and is hereby withdrawn.

      In terms of section 74(5)(c) of the Constitution, 1996, a public
      debate on the Bill is to be conducted by the National Council of
      Provinces.

2.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(3) classified the following
         Bills as section 75 Bills:

          a) Methodist Church of Southern Africa (Private) Act Repeal Bill
             [B 68 – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75)
          b) Dutch Reformed Churches Union Act Repeal Bill [B 69 – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).
          c) Apostolic Faith Mission of South Africa (Private) Act Repeal
             Bill [B 71 – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75)

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
 1. The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Local Government Budgets and Expenditure Review (2008), 2003/04
        - 2009/10 [RP 113-2008].

 2. The Minister of Labour


     a) Report and Financial Statements of Productivity SA  for  2007-2008,
        including the Report of the Independent Auditors on  the  Financial
        Statements for 2007-2008.

     b) Report and Financial Statements Clothing,  Textiles,  Footwear  and
        Leather Sector Education and  Training  Authority  (CTFL-Seta)  for
        2007-2008, including the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
        Financial Statements for 2007-2008 [RP 70-2008].

     c) Report and Financial Statements of the Banking Sector Education and
        Training Authority (Bank-Seta) for 2007-2008, including the  Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial  Statements  for  2007-2008
        [RP 68-2008].

 3. The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

     a) 2007-2008 Yearly Report to Parliament in terms of section 26(1)  of
        the National Environmental Management Act (NEMA), 1998 (Act No  107
        of 1998).


     b) 2005-2006 Yearly Report to Parliament in terms of section 26(1)  of
        the National Environmental Management Act (NEMA), 1998 (Act No  107
        of 1998).
National Council of Provinces

   1. The Chairperson

     a) Policy Document in compliance with the provisions of Section 35  of
        the Constitution, 1996.


        Referred to the Select Committee  on  Security  and  Constitutional
        Affairs for consideration and report.


     b)  Notice  issued  in  terms  of  section  106(1)(b)  of  the   Local
        Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No  32  of  2000),  on
        allegations   of   corruption,    maladministration    and    other
        irregularities within Mkhondo Local Municipality.


        Referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on   Local   Government   and
        Administration for consideration.


     c) Notice issued in terms of section  106  of  the  Local  Government:
        Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000) in  the  Pixley  Ka
        Seme Local Municipality.


        Referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on   Local   Government   and
        Administration for consideration.


     d) Notice issued in terms of section  106  of  the  Local  Government:
        Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000) in Amajuba District
        Municipality.


        Referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on   Local   Government   and
        Administration for consideration.


     e) Tabling of the correspondence from  Sidu  and  Nhlapo  families  of
        Mpumalanga Province.


        Referred to the Select Committee on Members Legislative Proposals.


     f) Tabling of the correspondence from Ms  Westraadt  of  Kwazulu-Natal
        Province.


        Referred to the Select Committee on Members Legislative Proposals.


      (g)   The President of the Republic  submitted  the  following  letter
        dated 31 July 2008 to the Chairperson of the  National  Council  of
        Provinces informing Members of the Council of the employment of the
        South African National Defence Force  in  Uganda,  for  service  in
        fulfilment of the International  Obligations  of  the  Republic  of
        South Africa towards the Republic of Uganda:


        EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE  IN  UGANDA,
        FOR SERVICE IN FULFILMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS  OF  THE
        REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA
        This serves to inform the National Assembly that I have  authorised
        the employment of the South African National Defence Force  (SANDF)
        personnel Uganda, in fulfilment of the international obligations of
        the Republic of South Africa towards the  Republic  of  Uganda,  to
        provide technical assistance in the destruction of  explosives  and
        ammunition.
        This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution  of  the  Republic  of  South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002).


        A total of seven (7) SANDF members were employed as  from  15  July
        2008 to 30 November 2008 to assist in the destruction of explosives
        and ammunition in Uganda.


        I will communicate this report to members of the National Assembly,
        and wish to request that you  bring  the  contents  hereof  to  the
        attention of the National Council of Provinces.


        Yours Sincerely,


        signed
        TM Mbeki

                          WEDNESDAY, 27 AUGUST 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)     The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(3) classified the following
         Bill as a section 75 Bill:
         (a)      Bible Society of South Africa Act Repeal Bill [B 70 –
             2008] (National Assembly – sec 75).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


The Minister of Labour

    (a)      Report  and  Financial  Statements  of  the  Insurance  Sector
        Education and Training Authority (Inseta) for 2007-2008,  including
        the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial  Statements  and
        Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 79-2008].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements  of  the  Safety  and  Security
        Sector Education and Training Authority (SAS-Seta)  for  2007-2008,
        including the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the  Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 84-2008].

     c) Report and Financial Statements of the  Manufacturing,  Engineering
        and Related Services Sector Education and Training Authority  (MER-
        Seta) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information for  2007-2008
        [RP 82-2008].

     d) Report and Financial Statements of the Forest Industries  Education
        and Training Authority (FIETA) for 2007-2008, including the  Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and  Performance
        Information for 2007-2008 [RP 76-2008].


     e) Report and Financial Statements of Department of Labour –  Vote  16
        for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General  on  the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008  and
        the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial  Statements  and
        Performance Information of the Sheltered Employment  Factories  for
        2007-2008 [RP 60-2008].


     f) Report and Financial Statements of Umsobomvu Youth Fund  for  2007-
        2008, including the Report  of  the  Independent  Auditors  on  the
        Financial Statements for 2007-2008.


     g) Report and Financial Statements of Transport Education and Training
        Authority for 2007-2008,  including  the  Report  of  the  Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2007-2008 [RP 87-2008].

     h) Report and Financial Statements of Services  Sector  Education  and
        Training Authority for  2007-2008,  including  the  Report  of  the
        Auditor-General  on  the  Financial  Statements   and   Performance
        Information for 2007-2008 [RP 88-2008].

     i) Report and Financial Statements of Mining Qualifications  Authority
        for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General  on  the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008  [RP
        86-2008].

     j)  Report  and  Financial  Statements  of  the  Food  and   Beverages
        Manufacturing Industry Sector Education and Training Authority  for
        2007-2008, including the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008  [RP
        75-2008].
     k) Report and Financial Statements of the Wholesale and Retail  Sector
        Education and  Training  Authority  for  2007-2008,  including  the
        Report of the  Auditor-General  on  the  Financial  Statements  and
        Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 88-2008].

The Minister for Public Enterprises

    Report and Financial Statements of Alexkor for 2007-2008, including  the
    Report of the Independent Auditors for 2007-2008.

The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

    (a)     Government Notice No 808 published in the Government Gazette  No
        31281 dated  1  August  2008:  Intention  to  declare  certain  land
        situated in the Harrismith and Bethlehem Registration Division, Free
        State Area as part of the Golden Gate Highlands National Park,  made
        in terms of section 33(1)(a) of the National Environment:  Protected
        Areas Act, 2003 (Act No 57 of 2003).


    (b)     Government Notice No 835 published in the Government Gazette  No
        31301 dated 8 August 2008:  National  Moratorium  on  the  trade  of
        individual Rhinoceros Horns within South Africa, made  in  terms  of
        section 57(2) of the National Environment:  Biodiversity  Act,  2004
        (Act No 10 of 2004).


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Isimangaliso Wetland Park
        Authority for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance  Information  for  2007-
        2008  and  the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the  Financial
        Statements and Performance Information  of  the   People  and  Parks
        Development for 2007-2008.

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson
     a)  Notice  issued  in  terms  of  section  106(1)(b)  of  the   Local
        Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No  32  of  2000),  on
        allegations   of   corruption,    maladministration    and    other
        irregularities within Nkomazi Local Municipality.


        Referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on   Local   Government   and
        Administration for consideration.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs on the
   Minerals and Petroleum Resources Developement Amendment Bill [B 10D –
   2007] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 20 August 2008.



   The Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs, having considered
   the subject of the Minerals and Petroleum Resources Development Amendment
   Bill [B10D – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75) referred to it, agrees to
   the Bill with proposed amendments as follows:


                                  CLAUSE 8
     1. On page 6, in line 38, to omit “prior written”  and  to  substitute
        “[the] prior written consent”.
     2. On page 6, in line 44, to omit “the”.

                                  CLAUSE 13
     1. On page 8, in line 57, after “on” to insert “the”.
                                  CLAUSE 19
     1. On page 11, from line 9, to  omit  “(d)  by  the  substitution  for
        subsection (3) of the following subsection:”.
   2. On page 11, after line 9, to insert the following subsection:
      “(d)   by  the  substitution  for  subsection  (3)  of  the  following
      subsection:”.

                                  CLAUSE 21
     1. On page 11, from line  40,  to  omit  “and  the  right  has  become
        effective” and to substitute  “of  the  date  on  which  the  right
        becomes effective.”.

                                  CLAUSE 23
     1. On page 12, in line 43, to omit the second “any”.

                                  CLAUSE 34
     1. On page 15, in line 47, after “works” to insert “that has ceased to
        exist”.
     2. On page 16, in  line  15,  to  omit  “healthy”  and  to  substitute
        “health”.
3. On page 16, in line 26, to  omit  “holder  a  permit  or  right”  and  to
   substitute “holder of a permit or a right”.

                                  CLAUSE 37
     1. On page 17, in line 10, after “works” to insert “that has ceased to
        exist”.
     2. On page 17, in line 24, after “works” to insert “that has ceased to
        exist”.

                                  CLAUSE 54
     1. On page 20, in line 51, to omit the first “operation”.
                                  CLAUSE 56
     1. On page 21, in line 18 after "Office" to  insert  “within  60  days
        after the permit has been issued”.

                                  CLAUSE 57
     1. On page 21, in line 33,  after  “accepted”  to  insert  “and  which
        remains to be granted or refused”.


     2. On page 21, in line 37, to omit “application and” and to substitute
        “application”.

                                  CLAUSE 68
     1. On page 24, in line 44, after “days” to insert “of”.

                                  CLAUSE 81
     1. On page 27, in line 53, to omit “for deregistration for
        deregistration of” and to substitute "for deregistration of the".


                                  CLAUSE 82
     1. On page 28, in line 25, to omit ”for the”.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Labour  and  Public  Enterprises  on
   the Skills Development Amendment Bill [B 49B –  2008],  dated  26  August
   2008:

       The  Select  Committee  on  Labour  and  Public  Enterprises,  having
       considered the subject of the Skills Development  Amendment  Bill  [B
       49B - 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75),  referred  to  it,  reports
       that it has agreed to the Bill with a proposed amendment, as follows:

                                  CLAUSE 4

      1.    On page 4, in line 49, after “skills development” to insert
           “providers”.

                          THURSDAY, 28 AUGUST 2008
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Labour

     (a)     Report  and  Financial  Statements  of   the   Commission   for
          Conciliation, Mediation and  Arbitration  (CCMA)  for  2007-2008,
          including the Report of  the  Auditor-General  on  the  Financial
          Statements and Performance  Information  for  2007-2008  [RP  55-
          2008].


     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of  the  Compensation  Fund  for
          2007-2008, including the Report of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
          Financial Statements and Performance  Information  for  2007-2008
          [RP 64-2008].


     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of  the  Unemployment  Insurance
          Fund (UIF) for 2006-2006, including the Report  of  the  Auditor-
          General on the Financial Statements and  Performance  Information
          for 2007-2008 [RP 201-2008].


     2. The Minister for Public Enterprises

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South  African  Forestry
         Company Limited (SAFCOL) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.

                           FRIDAY, 29 AUGUST 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) Financial Intelligence Centre Amendment Bill [B 18B – 2008] – Act
         No 11 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 22 August
         2008).

      2) Cross-Border Road Transport Amendment Bill [B 51B – 2007] – Act No
         12 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 22 August 2008).


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Labour
    (a)      Report  and  Financial  Statements  of  the  National  Economic
          Development and Labour Council (NEDLAC) for 2007-2008,  including
          the  Report  of  the  Independent  Auditors  on   the   Financial
          Statements for 2007-2008.


    (b)     Report and  Financial  Statements  of  the  Chemical  Industries
          Education  and  Training  Authority   (CHIETA)   for   2007-2008,
          including the Report of  the  Auditor-General  on  the  Financial
          Statements and Performance  Information  for  2007-2008  [RP  69-
          2008].

     2. The Minister in The Presidency

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the International  Marketing
         Council of South Africa (IMC) for 2007-2008, including  the  Report
         of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and  Performance
         Information for 2007-2008 [RP 144-2007].

     3. The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of South  African  Tourism  for
         2007-2008, including the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
         Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008.

     b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Weather
        Service (SAWS) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2007-2008 [RP 197-2008].


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
        Biodiversity Institute (SANBI) for 2007-2008, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2007-2008.


     4. The Minister of Home Affairs

    (a)     Annual Performance Plan (Revised) of  the  Department  of  Home
         Affairs for 2007-2008.


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs on  the
    Diplomatic Immunities and Privileges Bill  [B  55B  –  2008]  (National
    Assembly – sec 75), dated 27 August 2008:


       The  Select  Committee  on  Economic  and  Foreign  Affairs,   having
       considered the subject of the Diplomatic  Immunities  and  Privileges
       Bill [B 55B – 2008] (National Assembly – sec  75),  referred  to  it,
       reports that it has agreed to the Bill.


                          MONDAY, 1 SEPTEMBER 2008

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1. The Speaker and the Chairperson

     a) Report and Financial Statements of Parliament  of  the  Republic  of
        South Africa Vote 2 for  2007-2008,  including  the  Report  of  the
        Auditor-General  on  the  Financial   Statements   and   Performance
        Information for 2007-2008.


     b) Report  and  Financial  Statements  of  the  Office  of  the  Public
        Protector for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance  Information  for  2007-
        2008 [RP 211-2008].


     c) Report of the Public Protector on an Investigation into  the  Causes
        of Delays in  the  Administration  of  Criminal  Appeals  lodged  by
        Prisoners [Report No 10 of 2008-2009].


     d) Report of the Public Protector on Systematic Investigation into  the
        Deficiencies with the Processing  of  Pension  Benefits  payable  to
        Former Government Employees and their Dependants [Report  No  11  of
        2008-2009].


     e)  Report  of  the  Public  Protector  on  an  Investigation  into  an
        Allegation of the Misappropriation of Public Funds by  the  Kungwini
        Local Municipality in the Gauteng Province [Report No  12  of  2008-
        2009].


     f) Report and Financial Statements of the Electoral Commission for 2007-
        2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on  the  Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008.


     g) Report and Financial Statements of Parliament of the  South  African
        Human Rights Commission for 2007-2008, including the Report  of  the
        Auditor-General  on  the  Financial   Statements   and   Performance
        Information for 2007-2008 [RP 89-2008].

2. The Minister of Education

   (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Department  of  Education
        Vote 14 for 2007-2008, including the Report of  the  Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance  Information  for  2007-
        2008 [RP 220-2008].


   (b)       Report  and  Financial  Statements  of  the  National   Student
        Financial Aid Scheme for 2007-2008,  including  the  Report  of  the
        Auditor-General  on  the  Financial   Statements   and   Performance
        Information for 2007-2008.


   (c)       Report  and  Financial  Statements   of   the   South   African
        Qualifications Authority for 2007-2008, including the Report of  the
        Auditor-General  on  the  Financial   Statements   and   Performance
        Information for 2007-2008 [RP 149-2008].


   (d)       Report  and  Financial  Statements  of  the  Education   Labour
        Relations Council for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information  for
        2007-2008  and  the   Report   of   the   Auditor-General   on   the
        Transformation Fund of the Education Labour  Relations  Council  for
        2007-2008 [RP 136-2008].


   (e)      Report  and  Financial  Statements  of  the  Council  on  Higher
        Education for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance  Information  for  2007-
        2008.

3. The Minister of Communications

   Report  and  Financial  Statements  of  Sentech  Limited  for  2007-2008,
   including the  Report  of  the  Independent  Auditors  on  the  Financial
   Statements for 2007-2008.

4. The Minister of Labour

     a) Report and Financial  Statements  of  the  Local  Government  Sector
        Education and Training Authority for 2007-2008, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements  and  Performance
        Information for 2007-2008 [RP 80-2008].


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the Energy Sector  Education  and
        Training Authority  for  2007-2008,  including  the  Report  of  the
        Auditor-General  on  the  Financial   Statements   and   Performance
        Information for 2007-2008 [RP 73-2008].


     c) Report and Financial Statements of the  Health  and  Welfare  Sector
        Education and Training Authority for 2007-2008, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements  and  Performance
        Information for 2007-2008 [RP 77-2008].


     d)  Report  and  Financial  Statements  of   Education   Training   and
        Development Practices Sector Education and  Training  Authority  for
        2007-2008, including  the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for  2007-2008  [RP
        72-2008].

5. The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

   Report and Financial Statements of the Marine Living Resources  Fund  for
   2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on  the  Financial
   Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 190-2008].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs on the
    Competition Amendment Bill [B31B – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75),
    dated 28 August 2008.

       The  Select  Committee  on  Economic  and  Foreign  Affairs,  having
       considered the subject of the Competition  Amendment  Bill  [B31B  –
       2008] ( National Assembly – sec 75) referred to it and classified by
       the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, agrees to the Bill
       with proposed amendments as follows:

                                  CLAUSE 3

       1.   On page 4, in line 10, to omit “these Acts” and to substitute
             “this Act, and that other national legislation".
                                  CLAUSE 4


       1.   On page 4, in line 35, to omit “parallel conscious” and to
             substitute “conscious parallel”.
       2.   On page 4, after line 42, to insert the following subsection:


            “(2) For the purposes of subsection (1)(b) ‘conscious parallel
             conduct’ occurs when two or more firms in a concentrated
             market, being aware of each other’s action, conduct their
             business affairs in a cooperative manner without discussion or
             agreement.”


       3.   On page 4, in line 51, to omit “(2)” and to substitute “(3)”.


       4.   On page 4, in line 53, to omit “(4)” and to substitute “(5)”.


       5.   On page 5, from line 11, to omit “the Tribunal”.


       6.   On page 5, in line 12, to omit “(3)” and to substitute “(4)”.


       7.   On page 5, in line 16, to omit “(3)” and to substitute “(4)”.


       8.   On page 5, in line 17, to omit “(4)” and to substitute “(5)”.


                                  CLAUSE 5


       1.   On page 5, in line 34, to omit “the National Assembly” and to
             substitute “Parliament”.
                                  CLAUSE 12


       1.   On page 8, from line 48, to omit subsection (2) and to
             substitute:
                       “(2)  For the purpose of subsection (1)(b),
             ‘knowingly acquiesced’ means having acquiesced while having
             actual knowledge of the relevant conduct by the firm.”.


       2.   On page 9, in line 7, after “subsection (4)”, to insert “,”.


       3.   On page 9, in line 27, to omit “in the absence of evidence to
             the contrary, conclusive” and to substitute “prima facie”.


                          TUESDAY, 2 SEPTEMBER 2008

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

  1. The Minister of Labour

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Tourism, Hospitality  and
        Sport Education  and  Training  Authority  (Theta)  for  2007-2008,
        including the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the  Financial
        Statements and Performance information for 2007-2008 [RP 128-2008].




    (b)     Report and Financial Statements  of  the  Information  Systems,
        Electronics and Telecommunications  Technologies  Sector  Education
        and Training Authority (ISETT-Seta) for  2007-2008,  including  the
        Report of the  Auditor-General  on  the  Financial  Statements  and
        Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 78-2008].


2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

        a) Report and Financial Statements of the Legal Aid Board for 2007-
           2008,  including  the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
           Financial Statements and Performance Information  for  2007-2008
           [RP 97-2008].


3.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

      (a)   Government Notice No 314  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
           30886 dated 20 March  2008:  AgriBEE  Sector  Charter  on  Black
           Economic Empowerment, in terms of the Broad-Based Black Economic
           Empowerment Act, 2003 (Act No 53 of 2003).


           Please Note: The above item replaces entry 3(b)  under  Tablings
           of the Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of 29  July
           2008, as published on page 1472.


      (b)   Government Notice No 672  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
           31145 dated 20 June  2008:  International  Trade  Administration
           Commission of South Africa: Export  control,  in  terms  of  the
           International Trade Administration  Act,  2002  (Act  No  71  of
           2002).


      (c)   Government Notice No 776  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
           31255 dated  18  July  2008:  Framework  for  accreditation  and
           verification by all Verification Agencies, in terms of the Broad-
           Based Black Economic Empowerment Act, 2003 (Act No 25 of 2003).

4.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

      (a)   Report and Financial  Statements  of  the  South  African  State
           Theatre for 2007-2008, including  the  Report  of  the  Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance  Information
           for 2007-2008 [RP 224-2008].


      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the Msunduzi/Voortrekker  and
           Ncome Museums for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance  Information
           for 2007-2008 [PR 160-2008].


      (c)   Report and Financial Statements of the National English Literary
           Museum for 2007-2008,  including  the  Report  of  the  Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance  Information
           for 2007-2008.


      (d)   Report and Financial Statements of the Market Theatre Foundation
           for 2007-2008, including the Report of  the  Auditor-General  on
           the Financial Statements and Performance Information  for  2007-
           2008 [RP 102-2008].


      (e)   Report and Financial  Statements  of  Blind  SA  for  2007-2008,
           including  the  Report  of  the  Independent  Auditors  on   the
           Financial Statements for 2007-2008.


      (f)   Report  and  Financial  Statements  of  the  National  Museum  –
           Bloemfontein for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance  Information
           for 2007-2008.


      (g)   Report and Financial Statements of the  Iziko  Museums  of  Cape
           Town for 2007-2008, including the Report of the  Auditor-General
           on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
           2008 [RP 185-2008].


      (h)   Report and Financial Statements of the War Museum  of  the  Boer
           Republics for 2007-2008, including the Report  of  the  Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.


      (i)   Report and Financial Statements of the National Film  and  Video
           Foundation (NFVF) for 2007-2008, including  the  Report  of  the
           Auditor-General on  the  Financial  Statements  and  Performance
           Information for 2007-2008 [RP 176-2008].


      (j)   Report and  Financial  Statements  of  Artscape  for  2007-2008,
           including the Report of the  Auditor-General  on  the  Financial
           Statements and Performance Information for  2007-2008  [RP  189-
           2008].


      (k)   Report and Financial Statements of The Freedom  Park  Trust  for
           2007-2008, including the Report of the  Auditor-General  on  the
           Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008.


      (l)   Report and Financial Statements of  the  William  Humphreys  Art
           Gallery for 2007-2008, including  the  Report  of  the  Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance  Information
           for 2007-2008.


      (m)   Report and Financial  Statements  of  Business  and  Arts  South
           Africa  (BASA)  for  2007-2008,  including  the  Report  of  the
           Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements  for  2007-2008
           [RP 166-2008].


      (n)   Report and Financial Statements of the Natal  Museum  for  2007-
           2008,  including  the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
           Financial Statements for 2007-2008 [RP 158-2008].

   5. The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

        a) Report and Financial Statements  of  Vote  26  –  Department  of
           Environmental Affairs and Tourism for 2007-2008,  including  the
           Report of the Auditor-General on the  Financial  Statements  and
           Performance Information of Vote 26 for 2007-2008 [RP 53-2008].

      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of  the  National  Environmental
           Advisory Forum (NEAF) for 2007-2008 [RP 101-2008].


                         WEDNESDAY, 3 SEPTEMBER 2008

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces



1.    The Minister for Public Enterprises

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements  of  Vote  30  –  Department  of
        Public Enterprises for  2007-2008,  including  the  Report  of  the
        Auditor-General  on  the  Financial  Statements   and   Performance
        Information of Vote 30 for 2007-2008 [RP 156-2008].


  2. The Minister of Arts and Culture

     (a)    Report  and  Financial  Statements  of  the  Pan  South  African
        Language Board (PANSALB) 2007-2008, including  the  Report  of  the
        Auditor-General  on  the  Financial  Statements   and   Performance
        Information for 2007-2008 [RP 137-2008].


     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Heritage Council
        for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General  on  the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008  [RP
        203-2008].


     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of  The  Playhouse  Company  for
        2007-2008, including the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008.


     (d)    Report and Financial Statements of the Nelson  Mandela  National
        Museum for 2007-2008, including the Report of  the  Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information  for  2007-
        2008 [RP 202-2008].


     (e)    Report and Financial Statements of the Afrikaans Language Museum
        en Language Monument for 2007-2008, including  the  Report  of  the
        Auditor-General  on  the  Financial  Statements   and   Performance
        Information for 2007-2008 [RP 161-2008].


     (f)    Report and Financial Statements of the  South  African  Heritage
        Resources Agency (SAHRA) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General  on  the  Financial  Statements   and   Performance
        Information for 2007-2008 [RP 192-2008].


     (g)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Library for
        the Blind for 2007-2008,  including  the  Report  of  the  Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2007-2008.


     (h)     Report  and  Financial  Statements  of  the  Northern  Flagship
        Institution for 2007-2008, including the  Report  of  the  Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2007-2008 [RP 164-2008].


     (i)    Report and Financial Statements of the Windybrow Centre for  the
        Arts for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General  on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008.




National Council of Provinces

1. The Chairperson

    (a)     Report of the 39th Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA)
        Africa Region Conference held in Livingstone, Zambia from 9 – 19
        July 2008.


        Copies of the report are available from the Office of the Clerk of
      the Papers.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Joint Standing Committee on Defence on the employment
    of the South African National Defence Force (SANDF) in Uganda, the
    extension of employment of SANDF in Burundi and within the Republic of
    South Africa in co-peration with the South African Police Service
    (SAPS), dated 27 August 2008.


     The Joint Standing Committee on Defence, having considered the letters
     from the President on the employment of the South African National
     Defence Force (SANDF) in Uganda, the  extension of employment of the
     SANDF in Burundi and extension of employment of SANDF for a service in
     co-operation with the SAPS within the Republic of South Africa,
     referred to the Committee, reports that it has concluded its
     deliberations thereon.



                         THURSDAY, 4 SEPTEMBER 2008

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Foreign Affairs

     (a)    Treaty of Friendship and Partnership  between  the  Republic  of
        South Africa and the Russian Federation, tabled in terms of section
        231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (b)     Explanatory  Memorandum  to  the  Treaty  of   Friendship   and
        Partnership between the Republic of South Africa  and  the  Russian
        Federation.
National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

    (a)     Notice issued in terms of section 106 of the Local Government:
        Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000): Thembisile Local
        Municipality.

         Referred to the Select Committee on Local Government and
        Administration.


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs on  the
      National Energy Bill [B 52D-2008] (National Assembly-sec 75), dated  2
      September 2008:

      The  Select  Committee  on  Economic  and  Foreign   Affairs,   having
      considered the subject of the  National  Energy  Bill  (B52D  –  2008)
      (National Assembly-sec 75) referred to it, reports that it has  agreed
      to the Bill.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Land and  Environmental  Affairs  on
      the National Environmental Management: Integrated  Coastal  Management
      Bill [B40B-2007], dated 2 September 2008:
      The  Select  Committee  on  Land  and  Environmental  Affairs,  having
      considered the  subject  of  the  National  Environmental  Management:
      Integrated Coastal Management Bill [B40B-2007]  (National  Assembly  –
      sec 76), referred to it, reports the Bill with amendments [B40C-2007].

3.    Report of the  Select  Committee  on  Public  Services  on  the  Legal
      Succession to the South African Transport Services Amendment  Bill  [B
      43B – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 2 September 2008:

      The Select Committee on Public Services, having considered the subject
      of the Legal  Succession  to  the  South  African  Transport  Services
      Amendment Bill [B 43B – 2008] (National Assembly – sec  75),  referred
      to it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as  a  section  75
      Bill, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.


4.    Report of the Select Committee on  Education  and  Recreation  on  the
      Intellectual Property  Rights  from  Publicly  Financed  Research  and
      Development Bill [B 46B - 2008]  (National  Assembly  –  Section  75),
      dated 3 September 2008:

      The Select Committee on Education and  Recreation,  having  considered
      the subject of the Intellectual Property Rights from Publicly Financed
      Research and Development Bill [B 46B  –  2008]  (National  Assembly  –
      Section 75), referred to  it  and  classified  by  the  Joint  Tagging
      Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports that it has agreed to the Bill
      with proposed amendments as follows:

                                  Clause 4
    1.     On page 4, in line 3, after the second "the", to insert
          "regulations and any".

                                  Clause 10

    1.     On page 6, from line 30 up to and including line 31, to omit
         "for as long as revenue are derived from such intellectual
         property".

    2.     On page 6, in line 31, to omit "rights expire" and to substitute
         "right expires".


                          FRIDAY, 5 SEPTEMBER 2008


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises and the Select Committee on Local
        Government and Administration for consideration:


          (a)     Eskom’s 2008/09 tariff increase and amended pricing
             structure subsequent to NERSA’s revision of the 2008/09 Eskom
             price increase from 14,2% on 18 June 2008, tabled in terms of
             section 42(2) of the Local Government: Municipal Finance
             Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003), and supporting
             documents required in terms of section 42(3) of the same Act.

     2. The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance for consideration:


          a) Government Notice No 612 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
             31116 dated 5 June 2008: Amendment of  the  framework  for  the
             2010  FIFA World Cup Stadiums Development  Grant  published  in
             Government Gazette No  30978,  in  terms  of  the  Division  of
             Revenue Act, 2008 (Act No 2 of 2008).


          b) Government Notice No R.680 published in Government  Gazette  No
             31176  dated  25  June  2008:  Amendment  of  schedule   No   2
             (No.2/302), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act,  1964  (Act
             No 91 of 1964).


          c) Government Notice No R.681 published in Government  Gazette  No
             31176  dated  25  June  2008:  Amendment  of  schedule   No   2
             (No.2/303), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act,  1964  (Act
             No 91 of 1964).


          d) Government Notice No R.682 published in Government  Gazette  No
             31176  dated  25  June  2008:  Amendment  of  schedule   No   2
             (No.2/304), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act,  1964  (Act
             No 91 of 1964).


          e) Government Notice No 696 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
             31180 dated  4  July  2008:  Determination  of  public  benefit
             activities, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58  of
             1962).


          f) Government Notice No 830 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
             31190 dated 4 July 2008: Rate on  the  interest  on  government
             loans, in terms of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act
             No 1 of 1999).


          g) Proclamation No 28 published in  Government  Gazette  No  31246
             dated 14 July 2008: Transfer of the administration of the  Land
             and Agricultural Development Bank Act, 2002 (Act No 15 of 2002)
             (the Act) and powers and functions entrusted  by  the  Minister
             responsible for Agriculture to  the  Minister  of  Finance,  in
             terms of section 97 of the Constitution of South Africa, 1996.


          h) Government Notice No R.630 published in Government  Gazette  No
             31123 dated 4 June 2008: Amendment of schedule No 2 (No 2/300),
             in terms of the Customs and Excise Act,  1964  (Act  No  91  of
             1964).


          i) Government Notice No R.631 published in Government  Gazette  No
             31123 dated 4 June 2008: Amendment of schedule No 2 (No 2/301),
             in terms of the Customs and Excise Act,  1964  (Act  No  91  of
             1964).
          j) Government Notice No R.698 published in Government  Gazette  No
             31181 dated 26 June 2008: Cancellation of an appointment of  an
             authorized dealer in foreign exchange: Rennies Bank Limited  in
             terms of the Exchange and Control Regulations.


          k) Government Notice No R.699 published in Government  Gazette  No
             31181 dated 26 June 2008: Appointment of an  authorised  dealer
             in foreign exchange: Bidvest  Bank  Limited  in  terms  of  the
             Exchange and Control Regulations.


          l) Government Notice No 702 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
             31184 dated 27 June 2008: Exemption from provisions of the  Act
             to facilitate ESKOM’s electricity price increase, in  terms  of
             the Local Government: Municipal Finance  Management  Act,  2003
             (Act No 56 of 2003).


          m) Government Notice No 797 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
             31195 dated 27 June 2008: Effective date of ESKOM’s electricity
             price increase for municipalities and  municipal  entities,  in
             terms of the Local  Government:  Municipal  Finance  Management
             Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


     3. The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Economic and Foreign Affairs for consideration:

         a) Government Notice No 304 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
            30874 dated 20 March 2008: Standards matters, in terms  of  the
            Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).

        (b)      Government Notice No 314 published in  Government  Gazette
            No 30886 dated 20 March 2008: AgriBEE Sector Charter  on  Black
            Economic  Empowerment,  in  terms  of  the  Broad-Based   Black
            Economic Empowerment Act, 2003 (Act No 53 of 2003).


        (c)      Government Notice No 361 published in  Government  Gazette
            No 30917 dated  4  April  2008:  Amendment  to  the  compulsory
            specification for vehicles of Category  N1,  in  terms  of  the
            Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


        (d)      Government Notice No 362 published in  Government  Gazette
            No 30917 dated  4  April  2008:  Amendment  to  the  compulsory
            specification for vehicles of Category  M1,  in  terms  of  the
            Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


        (e)      Government Notice No 365 published in  Government  Gazette
            No 30917 dated 4  April  2008:  Incorporation  of  an  external
            company as a company in the Republic of South Africa, in  terms
            of the Companies Act, 1973 (Act No 61 of 1973).


        (f)      Government Notice No 366 published in  Government  Gazette
            No 30917 dated  4  April  2008:  Regulations  relating  to  the
            payment of levy and the issues of sales permits  in  regard  to
            compulsory specifications: Amendment, in terms of the Standards
            Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


        (g)      Government Notice No 515 published in  Government  Gazette
            No 31021 dated 9 May 2008: Notice in terms  of  section  18(3):
            Withdrawal of certificate in terms  of  section  18(2)  of  the
            Trade Metrology Act, 1973 (Act No 77 of 1973).


        (h)      Government Notice No R604 published in Government  Gazette
            No 30713 dated 29 May 2008: Amendments to the  National  Credit
            Regulations, 2006 in terms of the  National  Credit  Act,  2005
            (Act No 34 of 2005).


        (i)      Government Notice No R574 published in Government  Gazette
            No 31084 dated 30 May 2008: National Building  Regulations,  in
            terms  of  the  National  Building  Regulations  and   Building
            Standards Act, 1977 (Act No 103 of 1977).


        (j)      Government Notice No R575 published in Government  Gazette
            No  31084  dated  30  May  2008:  Proposed  introduction  of  a
            compulsory specification for preservative treatment of  timber,
            in terms of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


        (k)      Government Notice No R576 published in Government  Gazette
            No  31084  dated  30  May  2008:  Proposed  introduction  of  a
            compulsory specification for lamp controlgear, in terms of  the
            Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


        (l)      Government Notice No R577 published in Government  Gazette
            No  31084  dated  30  May  2008:  Proposed  amendment  of   the
            compulsory specification for electronic apparatus, in terms  of
            the Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


        (m)      Government Notice No R578 published in Government  Gazette
            No 31084 dated 30 May 2008: Regulations: Payment  of  levy  and
            the  issue  of  sales   permits   in   regard   to   compulsory
            specifications: Amendment, in terms of the Standards Act,  1993
            (Act No 29 of 1993).


        (n)      Government Notice No R579 published in Government  Gazette
            No  31084  dated  30  May  2008:  Proposed  amendment  of   the
            compulsory specification for personal floatation aids, in terms
            of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


        (o)      Government Notice No 603 published in  Government  Gazette
            No 31098 dated  30  May  2008:  Incorporation  of  an  external
            company as a company in the Republic of South Africa, in  terms
            of the Companies Act, 1973 (Act No 61 of 1973).


        (p) Government Notice No R633 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
            31125 dated  4  June  2008:  Substitution  of  the  regulations
            relating to the standard of training of estate agents, in terms
            of the Estate Agency Affairs Act, 1976 (Act No 112 of 1976).


     4. The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Labour
        and Public Enterprises for consideration and report:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Transnet  Ltd  and  the
             Group for 2007-2008, including the Report  of  the  Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.


     5. The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration:


          a) National Instruction on Sexual Offences in terms of section  66
             of the Criminal  Law  (Sexual  Offences  and  Related  Matters)
             Amendment Act, 2007 (Act No 32 of 2007).

          b) Report of the National Commissioner of the South African Police
             Service (SAPS) for the period of July 2007 to December 2007, in
             terms of section 18(5)(d) of the Domestic  Violence  Act,  1998
             (Act No 116 of 1998).

     6. The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Land and
        Environmental Affairs for consideration and report:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Mhlathuze Water for the
             year ended  2007,  including  the  Report  of  the  Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for the  year  ended  June
             2007.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

       a) Annual Financial Statements of the Corporation for Public Deposits
          for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
          the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.


      (b)   Report and Financial  Statements  of  the  Accounting  Standards
          Board for 2007-2008,  including  the  Report  of  the  Independent
          Auditors on the Financial Statements and  Performance  Information
          for 2007-2008 [RP 109-2008].


      (c)   Government Notice No 871  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
          31336 dated 15 August 2008: Appointment of Board members of the Co-
          operative Banks Development Agency, in terms of section 58 of  the
          Co-operative Banks Act, 2007 (Act No 40 of 2007).


      (d)   Government Notice No 887  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
          31342 dated 22 August 2008: Designation of  Institution  of  which
          the activities do not fall within the meaning of “The Business  of
          a Bank” (“Financial Service Co-operative”), in terms of the  Banks
          Act, 1990 (Act No 94 of 1990).


      (e)   Government Notice No 880  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
          31342 dated 22  August  2008:  Amendment  of  Schedule  No  1  (No
          1/1/1360), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
          of 1964).


      (f)   Government Notice No 881  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
          31342 dated 22 August 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No 2/305),
          in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


      (g)   Government Notice No 882  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
          31342 dated 22 August 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No 3/634),
          in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


      (h)   Government Notice No 883  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
          31342 dated 22 August 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No 3/635),
          in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


      (i)   Government Notice No 884  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
          31342 dated 22 August 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No 4/314),
          in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


      (j)   Government Notice No 885  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
          31342 dated 22  August  2008:  Amendment  of  Schedule  No  1  (No
          1/1/1359), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
          of 1964).


      (k)   Government Notice No 886  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
          31342 dated 22 August 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No 3/633),
          in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


      (l)   Government Notice No 895  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
          31342 dated 22  August  2008:  Amendment  of  Schedule  No  1  (No
          1/1/1361), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
          of 1964).


      (m)   Government Notice No 878  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
          31346 dated 22 August 2008: Municipal Asset Transfer  Regulations,
          in terms of the Local  Government:  Municipal  Finance  Management
          Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on  the  Convention  between
   the Republic of South Africa and the Kingdom of the Netherlands  for  the
   avoidance of double taxation and the prevention of  fiscal  evasion  with
   respect to taxes on income and on capital, dated 4 September 2008:


   The Select Committee  on  Finance,  having  considered  the  request  for
   approval by Parliament of the Convention between the  Republic  of  South
   Africa and the Kingdom of the Netherlands for  the  avoidance  of  double
   taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion with respect  to  taxes  on
   income and on capital, referred to it in terms of section 231(2)  of  the
   Constitution, reports that it approves the agreement.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Mineral and
   Petroleum Resources Royalty (Administration) Bill [B 60-2008] (National
   Assembly - Section 75), dated 4 September 2008:


   The Select Committee  on  Finance,  having  considered  the  Mineral  and
   Petroleum Resources Royalty (Administration) Bill [B  60-2008]  (National
   Assembly - Section 75) referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging
   Mechanism as a Section 75 Bill reports that it has agreed to the Bill.


3.    Report  of  the  Select  Committee  on  Finance  on  the  Mineral  and
   Petroleum Resources Royalty Bill [B 59-  2008]  (Section  77)],  dated  4
   September 2008:

   The Select Committee  on  Finance,  having  considered  the  Mineral  and
   Petroleum Resources Royalty Bill [B 59 - 2008] (Section 77)  referred  to
   it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as  a  Section  77  Bill
   reports that it has agreed to the Bill.


                          MONDAY, 8 SEPTEMBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Transport


          a) Civil Aviation Bill [B 73 – 2008] (National Assembly –
             proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
             of its introduction published in Government Gazette No 31120
             of 4 June 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Transport of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
             Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
             Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the Competition Tribunal  for
         2007-2008, including the Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
         Financial Statements and Performance information for 2007-2008 [RP
         183-2008].


      (b)    Report  and  Financial  Statements  of  the  National  Consumer
          Tribunal for 2007-2008,  including  the  Report  of  the  Auditor-
          General on the Financial Statements  and  Performance  Information
          for 2007-2008 [RP 217-2008].


      (c)   Report and Financial Statements of the Export  Credit  Insurance
          Corporation of South Africa Limited for 2007-2008,  including  the
          Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for
          2007-2008.


      (d)   Report and Financial Statements of the  South  African  National
          Accreditation System (SANAS) for 2007-2008, including  the  Report
          of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for  2007-
          2008 [RP 199-2008].


      (e)   Report and Financial Statements of the National Credit Regulator
          (NCR) for 2007-2008, including the Report of  the  Auditor-General
          on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for  2007-
          2008 [RP 140-2008].


      (f)   Report and Financial Statements of the South African  Bureau  of
          Standards for 2007-2008, including  the  Report  of  the  Auditor-
          General on the Financial Statements  and  Performance  Information
          for 2007-2008 [RP 208-2008].


      (g)   Report and Financial Statements  of  the  South  African  Micro-
          finance Apex Fund for  2007-2008,  including  the  Report  of  the
          Auditor-General  on  the  Financial  Statements  and   Performance
          Information for 2007-2008 [RP 111-2008].


      (h)    Report  and  Financial  Statements   of   the   Companies   and
          Intellectual Property Registration Office for 2007-2008, including
          the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements  and
          Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 187-2008].

      (i)   Report  and  Financial  Statements  of  the  National  Metrology
          Institute of South Africa for 2007-2008, including the  Report  of
          the  Independent  Auditors  on  the   Financial   Statements   and
          Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 221-2008].


      (j)   Report and Financial Statements of the National  Gambling  Board
          for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on  the
          Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP
          125-2008].

      (k)   Report and Financial Statements of  the  Industrial  Development
          Corporation of South Africa Limited (IDC) for 2007-2008, including
          the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
          for 2007-2008.


      (l)   Report and Financial  Statements  of  Khula  Enterprise  Finance
          Limited for 2007-2008, including the  Report  of  the  Independent
          Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008 [RP 210-2008].


      (m)   Report and Financial Statements of  the  Competition  Commission
          for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on  the
          Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP
          107-2008].


                          TUESDAY, 9 SEPTEMBER 2008
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Transport

       a) Report and Financial Statements of the Air Traffic and Navigation
          Services Company Limited  (ATNS)  for  2007-2008,  including  the
          Report of the Independent Auditors on  the  Financial  Statements
          for 2007-2008.

2.    The Minister for Public Enterprises

       a)  Report  and  Financial  Statements  of  South   African   Airways
          (Proprietary) Limited (SAA) for 2007-2008, including the Report of
          the Independent Auditors on the  Financial  Statements  for  2007-
          2008.


       b) Report and Financial Statements of Broadband Infraco (Pty) Limited
          for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
          the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.
3.    The Minister of Communications


       a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African  Post  Office
          Limited for 2007-2008, including the  Report  of  the  Independent
          Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.


4.    The Minister of Health


       a) Report and  Financial  Statements  of  the  Council  for  Medical
          Schemes for 2007-2008,  including  the  Report  of  the  Auditor-
          General on the Financial Statements and  Performance  Information
          for 2007-2008 [RP 96-2008].

5.    The Minister of Correctional Services

       a) Report and  Financial  Statements  of  Vote  19  –  Department  of
          Correctional Services for 2007-2008, including the Report  of  the
          Auditor-General  on  the  Financial  Statements  and   Performance
          Information of Vote 19 for 2007-2008 [RP 217-2007].


6.    The Minister of Trade and Industry


      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the National Lotteries  Board
          for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on  the
          Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008.


      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of  the  Support  Programme  for
          Industrial Innovation (SPII) for 2007-2008, including the  Reports
          of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for  2007-
          2008.


                        WEDNESDAY, 10 SEPTEMBER 2008


TABLINGS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Social Development

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements  of  the  South  African  Social
         Security Agency for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements  and  Performance  Information
         for 2007-2008 [RP 108-2008].


2.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements  of  the  National  Library  of
         South Africa for 2007-2008, including the Report of  the  Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements  and  Performance  Information
         for 2007-2008 [RP 222-2008].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Luthuli Museum for 2007-
         2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements and Performance  Information  for  2007-2008  [RP  181-
         2008].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

 1. Report of the Select Committee on Education and Recreation on the South
    African National Space Agency Bill [B 20B – 2008], dated  10  September
    2008:

      The Select Committee on Education and  Recreation,  having  considered
      the subject of the South African National Space Agency Bill [B  20B  –
      2008] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and  classified  by
      the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports that it  has
      agreed to the Bill.


                         THURSDAY, 11 SEPTEMBER 2008

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Health

      (a)    Report  and  Financial  Statements  of  the   National   Health
           Laboratory Service (NHLS) for 2007-2008, including the Report of
           the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements  for  2007-
           2008.


      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of  the  South  African  Medical
           Research Council (MRC) for 2007-2008, including  the  Report  of
           the Auditor-General on the Financial  Statements  for  2007-2008
           [RP 173-2008].


                          FRIDAY, 12 SEPTEMBER 2008


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs:



          (a)     Report of the Auditor-General on the repair and
             maintenance of correctional centres at the Department of
             Correctional Services [RP 121-2008].


    2.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance:



          (a)     Government Notice No 819 published in Government Gazette
             No 31293 dated 1 August 2008: Regulations made under section
             86: Call for comments, in terms of the Cooperative Banks Act,
             2007 (Act No 40 of 2007).




          (b)     Government Notice No 778 published in Government Gazette
             No 31256 dated 25 July 2008: Borrowing powers of water boards
             listed under Schedule 3 Part B of the Public Finance Management
             Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).



          c)  Agreement  on  Customs  and  Tax  Administration  Co-operation
             between the Government of the Republic  of  South  Africa,  the
             Government of the Republic of India and the Government  of  the
             Federative Republic of  Brazil,  tabled  in  terms  of  section
             231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.
          d) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement.

          e) Agreement between the  Government  of  the  Republic  of  South
             Africa  and  the  Government  of  the  Republic  of  the  Sudan
             regarding   Mutual    Assistance    between    their    Customs
             Administration, tabled  in  terms  of  section  231(3)  of  the
             Constitution, 1996.

       f) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement.


    3.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Land and Environmental Affairs for consideration:



          (a)     General Notice No 722 published in Government Gazette No
             31209 dated 4 July 2008: Policy on Boat-Based Whale and Dolphin
             Watching, in terms of the Marine Living Resources Act, 1998
             (Act No 18 of 1998).



          (b)     Government Notice No 723 published in Government Gazette
             No 31210 dated 4 July 2008: Policy on White Shark Cage Diving
             (WSCD), in terms of the Marine Living Resources Act, 1998 (Act
             No 18 of 1998).




          (c)     Government Notice No 724 published in Government Gazette
             No 31211 dated 4 July 2008: Regulations: Management of white
             shark cage diving, in terms of the Marine Living Resources Act,
             1998 (Act No 18 of 1998).




          (d)     Government Notice No 725 published in Government Gazette
             No 31211 dated 4 July 2008: Regulations: Management of boat
             based whale watching and protection of turtles, in terms of the
             Marine Living Resources Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of 1998).



          (e)     General Notice No 868 published in Government Gazette No
             31239 dated 11 July 2008: Introduction of the National
             Environmental Management: Protected Areas Amendment Bill, in
             terms of the National Environmental Management: Protected Areas
             Amendment Act, 2003 (Act No 57 of 2003).




          (f)     General Notice No 869 published in Government Gazette No
             31239 dated 11 July 2008: Introduction of the National
             Environmental Management: Protected Areas Amendment Bill, in
             terms of the National Environment Laws Amendment Bill, in terms
             of the National Environmental Management Act, 2003 (Act No 107
             of 1998).



          (g)     Government Notice No 742 published in Government Gazette
             No 31220 dated 11 July 2008: Correction Notice, in terms of the
             World Heritage Convention act, 1999 (Act No 49 of 1999).




          (h)     Government Notice No 741 published in Government Gazette
             No 31220 dated 11 July 2008: Declaration of a Management
             Authority for Ukhahlamba Drakensberg Park World Heritage Site,
             in terms of the World Heritage Convention act, 1999 (Act No 49
             of 1999).



          (i)     Government Notice No 741 published in Government Gazette
             No 31220 dated 11 July 2008: Declaration of a Management
             Authority for Ukhahlamba Drakensberg Park World Heritage Site,
             in terms of the World Heritage Convention act, 1999 (Act No 49
             of 1999).

          (j)     Government Notice No 740 published in Government Gazette
             No 31220 dated 11 July 2008: Declaration of a Management
             Authority for Taung Skull Fossil World Heritage Site which is a
             Component of the Fossil Hominid sites of South Africa, in terms
             of the World Heritage Convention act, 1999 (Act No 49 of 1999).



          (k)     Government Notice No 739 published in Government Gazette
             No 31220 dated 11 July 2008: Declaration of a Management
             Authority for the Richtersveld Cultural and Botanical Landscape
             World Heritage Site, in terms of the World Heritage Convention
             act, 1999 (Act No 49 of 1999).



          (l)     Government Notice No 738 published in Government Gazette
             No 31220 dated 11 July 2008: Declaration of a Management
             Authority for Makapan Valley World Heritage Site which is a
             Component of the Fossil Hominid Sites of South Africa, in terms
             of the World Heritage Convention act, 1999 (Act No 49 of 1999).



    4.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Land
        and Environmental Affairs for consideration and report:



          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Botshelo Water for the
             year ended 2007, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended June
             2007.



    5.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Local Government and Administration:
          (a)     Report of the Auditor-General on a  performance  audit  of
             the management of the Municipal  Infrastructure  Grant  at  the
             Department of Provincial and Local Government – June  2008  [RP
             120-2008].


    6.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Education and Recreation:


          (a)     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial  Statements
             of South African Institute for Drug Free Sport.

          (b)     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial  Statements
             of Iziko Museums of Cape Town.


          (c)     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial  Statements
             of Artscape

    7.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs:


          (a)     Proclamation No R.23 published in  Government  Gazette  No
             31189 dated 27 June 2008: Commencement of section 62(1) to  (5)
             of  the  Regulation  of  Interception  of  Communications   and
             Provision of Communication-related Information Act,  2002  (Act
             No 70 of 2002).

    8.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Land
        and Environmental Affairs:


          (a)     2006-2007 Yearly Report to Parliament in terms of  section
             26(1) of the   National Environmental  Management  Act  (NEMA),
             1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).

     9. The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Public
        Services:


          a) Air Services Agreement between the Government of  the  Republic
             of South Africa and the Swiss Federal Council, tabled in  terms
             of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


    b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement.

TABLINGS

 National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson
      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the Office  of  the  Auditor-
        General for 2007-2008, including  the  Report  of  the  Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements  and  Performance  Information
        for 2007-2008 [RP 235-2008].


2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

      (a)   Report and  Financial  Statements  of  the  International  Trade
         Administration Commission of South Africa for 2007-2008, including
         the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements  and
         Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 207-2008].


       b) Report and Financial  Statements  of  the  South  African  Quality
          Institute for 2007-2008, including the Report of  the  Independent
          Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

 National Council of Provinces

 1. Report of the Select Committee on Security and  Constitutional  Affairs
    on  the  General  Laws  (Loss  of  Membership  of  National   Assembly,
    Provincial Legislature or Municipal Council) Amendment Bill [B64B-2008]
    (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 26 August 2008:



       The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
       considered the subject of the General Laws (Loss of Membership of
       National Assembly, Provincial Legislature or Municipal Council)
       Amendment Bill [B64B-2008] (National Assembly -sec 75), referred to
       it, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.




                          MONDAY, 15 SEPTEMBER 2008



TABLINGS
 National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


      (a)   Government Notice No R.827 published in Government Gazette No
          31297 dated 1 August 2008: Amendment of regulations, in terms of
          the Attorneys Act, 1979 (Act No 53 of 1979).


2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 32 – Department of Trade
         and Industry for 2007-2008, including the Report of  the  Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of
         Vote 32 for 2007-2008 [RP 198-2008].


      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the South African Council for
         the Non-Proliferation of  Weapons  of  Mass  destruction  for  the
         period July 2007 to 31 March 2008.


      (c)   Report and Financial Statements  of  the  Technology  and  Human
         Resources for Industry  Programme  for  2007-2008,  including  the
         Report of the Auditor-General  on  the  Financial  Statements  and
         Performance Information for 2007-2008.


      (d)   Report and Financial Statements of the National Empowerment Fund
         for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
         the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008
         [RP 228-2008].


      (e)   Report and Financial Statements of  the  Estate  Agency  Affairs
         Board for 2007-2008,  including  the  Report  of  the  Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.



                        WEDNESDAY, 17 SEPTEMBER 2008

TABLINGS

 National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Safety and Security

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of  Vote  23  –  Department  for
          Safety and Security for 2007-2008, including the  Report  of  the
          Auditor-General  on  the  Financial  Statements  and  Performance
          Information of Vote 23 for 2007-2008 [RP 204-2008].


2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry
      (a)   Report of the Strategic Industrial Projects for  April  2002  to
          March 2008.


      (b)    Report  and  Financial  Statements  of  the  Small   Enterprise
          Development Agency for 2007-2008.


      (c)   Fund – Souvenir Brochure 2008.


3.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

       a) Report and  Financial  Statements  of  the  National  Agricultural
          Marketing Council (NAMC) for 2007-2008, including  the  Report  of
          the Auditor-General on the Financial  Statements  and  Performance
          Information for 2007-2008.


       b) Report and Financial Statements of the Ncera Farms (Pty)  Ltd  for
          2007-2008, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
          Financial Statements for 2007-2008.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    First report of the Select Committee on  Security  and  Constitutional
      Affairs on the Child Justice Bill [B49B – 2002] (National  Assembly  –
      sec 75), dated 5 September 2008.

      The Select Committee on Security and  Constitutional  Affairs,  having
      considered  the  subject  of  the  Child  Justice  Bill  [B49B  -2002]
      (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it, reports  the  Bill  with
      proposed amendments as follows:

                              TABLE OF CONTENTS

    1.     On page 4, in line 43, to omit “or  appropriate  adult”  and  to
         substitute “, appropriate adult or guardian”.
    2.     On page 5, in line 1, to omit  “or  appropriate  adult”  and  to
         substitute “, appropriate adult or guardian”.
    3.     On page 5, in line 3, to omit  “or  appropriate  adult”  and  to
         substitute “, appropriate adult or guardian”.
    4.     On page 5, in line 4, to omit “recognisances” and to  substitute
         “recognisance”.

                                  CLAUSE 1

    1.     On page 8, in line 10, to omit “or a guardian”.
    2.     On page 8, after line 45, to insert:
           “guardian” means a guardian referred to  in  section  1  of  the
           Children’s Act;

                                  CLAUSE 3

    1.     On page 10, in line 19, to omit “and appropriate adults” and  to
         substitute “, appropriate adults and guardians”.

                                  CLAUSE 9

    1.     On page 12, in line 5, to omit “an  appropriate  adult”  and  to
         substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.
    2.     On page 12, in line 6, to omit “or  appropriate  adult”  and  to
         substitute “, appropriate adult or guardian”.
    3.     On page 12, in line 7, to omit “or  appropriate  adult”  and  to
         substitute “, appropriate adult or guardian”.
    4.     On page 12, from line 22, to omit “or an appropriate adult”  and
         to substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.
    5.     On page 12, in line 42, “or appropriate adult” and to substitute
         “, appropriate adult or guardian”.

                                  CLAUSE 13

    1.     On page 14, in line 9, after “adult”, to insert “, guardian”.

                                  CLAUSE 18

     1. On page 15, from line 32, to omit “or an appropriate adult” and  to
        substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.
     2. On page 15, in line 33, to  omit  “or  appropriate  adult”  and  to
        substitute “, appropriate adult or guardian”.
     3. On page 15, in line 36, to omit “or an appropriate  adult”  and  to
        substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.
     4. On page 15, in line 38, to omit the first  “or  appropriate  adult”
        and to substitute “, appropriate adult or guardian”.
     5. On page 15, in line 38, to omit the second “or  appropriate  adult”
        and to substitute “, appropriate adult or guardian”.
     6. On page 15, in line 41, to  omit  “or  appropriate  adult”  and  to
        substitute “, appropriate adult or guardian”.
     7. On page 15, in line 49, to  omit  “or  appropriate  adult”  and  to
        substitute “, appropriate adult or guardian”.


                                  CLAUSE 19


      1. On page 16, from line 5, to omit “or an appropriate adult”  and  to
         substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.
      2. On page 16, in line 6,  to  omit  “or  appropriate  adult”  and  to
         substitute “, appropriate adult or guardian”.
      3. On page 16, in line 9, to omit “or an  appropriate  adult”  and  to
         substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.
      4. On page 16, in line 11, to omit the first  “or  appropriate  adult”
         and to substitute “, appropriate adult or guardian”.
      5. On page 16, from line 11, to omit the second “or appropriate adult”
         and to substitute “, appropriate adult or guardian”.
    6.     On page 16, in line 14, to omit “or appropriate  adult”  and  to
         substitute “, appropriate adult or guardian”.
    7.     On page 16, in line 21, to omit “or appropriate  adult”  and  to
         substitute “, appropriate adult or guardian”.


                                  CLAUSE 20


      1. On page 16, in line 46, to omit “or an appropriate  adult”  and  to
         substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.
      2. On page 16, in line 47, to omit “or an appropriate  adult”  and  to
         substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.


                                  CLAUSE 21


      1. On page 17, from line 16, to omit “or an appropriate adult” and  to
         substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.
      2. On page 17, from line 25, to omit “or an appropriate adult” and  to
         substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.
    3.     On  page  17,  in  line  28,  to  omit  “recognisances”  and  to
         substitute “recognisance”.


                                  CLAUSE 22


    1.     On page 17, in line 31, to omit “or appropriate  adult”  and  to
         substitute “, appropriate adult or guardian”.
    2.     On page 17, in line 34, to omit “or an appropriate adult” and to
         substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.
    3.     On page 17, in line 37, to omit “or an appropriate adult” and to
         substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.
    4.     On page 17, from line 38, to omit “or appropriate adult” and  to
         substitute “,  appropriate adult or guardian”.


                                  CLAUSE 23


    1.     On page 17, in line 46, to omit “or appropriate  adult”  and  to
         substitute “, appropriate adult or guardian”.
    2.     On page 17, in line 48, to omit “or an appropriate adult” and to
         substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.


                                  CLAUSE 24


      1. On page 18, in line 1,  to  omit  “or  appropriate  adult”  and  to
         substitute “, appropriate adult or guardian”.
    2.     On page 18, in line 1, to omit “recognisances” and to substitute
            “recognisance”.
    3.     On page 18, in line 11, to omit “or an appropriate adult” and to
         substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.
    4.     On  page  18,  in  line  13,  to  omit  “recognisances”  and  to
         substitute “recognisance”.
    5.     On page 18, in line 36, to omit “or an appropriate adult” and to
         substitute “,  appropriate adult or a guardian”.
    6.     On page 18, in line 37, to omit “or appropriate  adult”  and  to
         substitute “, appropriate adult or guardian”.
    7.     On page 18, from line 37, to omit “or appropriate adult” and  to
         substitute “, appropriate adult or guardian”.
    8.     On  page  18,  in  line  41,  to  omit  “recognisances”  and  to
         substitute “recognisance”.
    9.     On page 19, in line 1, to omit “or an appropriate adult” and  to
         substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.

                                  CLAUSE 25

      1. On page 19, in line 12, to omit “or an appropriate  adult”  and  to
         substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.
      2. On page 19, in line 15, to omit “or an appropriate  adult”  and  to
         substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.


                                  CLAUSE 28

    1.     On page 20, in line 4,  after  “which”,  to  insert  “take  into
         account their particular vulnerability and”.
    2.     On page 20, in line 6, after “appropriate adults,  ”  to  insert
         “guardians,”.
    3.     On page 20, in line 7, after  “probation  officers,”  to  insert
         “assistant probation officers,”.

                                  CLAUSE 38


      1. On page 23, in line 38, to omit “or an appropriate  adult”  and  to
         substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.
      2.  On page 23, from line 53, to omit “or an appropriate adult” and to
         substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.
      3. On page 24, in line 2,  to  omit  “or  appropriate  adult”  and  to
         substitute “, appropriate adult or guardian”.

                                  CLAUSE 40


      1. On page 24, in line 32, to omit “or an appropriate  adult”  and  to
         substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.
    2.     On  page  24,  in  line  33,  to  omit  “recognisances”  and  to
         substitute “recognisance”.

                                  CLAUSE 42


    1.     On page 25, in line 42, to omit “or appropriate  adult”  and  to
         substitute “, appropriate adult or guardian”.

                                  CLAUSE 43


      1. On page 26, from line 16, to omit “or an appropriate adult” and  to
         substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.

                                  CLAUSE 44


    1.     On page 26, in line 38, to omit “or an appropriate adult” and to
         substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.
      2. On page 26, in line 46, after  “appropriate  adult”  to  insert  “,
         guardian”.
    3.     On page 26, in line 49, after “appropriate adult” to  insert  “,
         guardian”.
                                  CLAUSE 46


      1. On page 27, in line 10, to omit “or an appropriate  adult”  and  to
         substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.


                                  CLAUSE 47


    1.     On page 28, from line 12, to omit “or an appropriate adult”  and
         to substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.
      2. On page 28, in line 14, to omit “or an appropriate  adult”  and  to
         substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.

                                  CLAUSE 48


   1. On page 29,  in  line  4,  after  “an  appropriate  adult”  to  insert
      “,guardian”.


                                  CLAUSE 49


      1. On page 29, in line 33, to omit “or an appropriate  adult”  and  to
         substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.
      2. On page 29, in line 38, to omit “or an appropriate  adult”  and  to
         substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.
      3. On page 29, in line 42, to omit “or an appropriate  adult”  and  to
         substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.


                                  CLAUSE 52


      1. On page 30, in line 29, to omit “or an appropriate  adult”  and  to
         substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.


                                  CLAUSE 55


    1.     On page 33, in line 26, to omit “or appropriate adults”  and  to
         substitute “, appropriate adults or guardians”.
                                  CLAUSE 61

    1.     On page 36, in line 21, to omit “or an appropriate adult” and to
         substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.
    2.     On page 36, in line 23, to omit “or an appropriate adult” and to
         substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.
    3.     On page 36, in line 47, to omit “or an appropriate adult” and to
         substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.
    4.     On page 36, from line 50, to omit “or an appropriate adult”  and
         to substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.
    5.     On page 36, from line 52, to omit “or an appropriate adult”  and
         to substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.

                                  CLAUSE 65


    1.     On page 38, from line 6, to omit “or an appropriate  adult”  and
         to substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.
    2.     On page 38, in line 8, to omit “or an appropriate adult” and  to
         substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.
    3.     On page 38, in line 11, to omit “or an appropriate adult” and to
         substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.
    4.     On page 38, in line 12, to omit “or an appropriate adult” and to
         substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.
    5.     On page 38, in line 15, to omit “or an appropriate adult” and to
         substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.
    6.     On page 38, in line 17, to omit “or appropriate  adult”  and  to
         substitute “, appropriate adult or guardian”.
    7.     On page 38, in line 18, to omit “or an appropriate adult” and to
         substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.
    8.     On page 38, in line 21, to omit “or an appropriate adult” and to
         substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.
    9.     On page 38, in line 23, to omit “or an appropriate adult” and to
         substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.

                                  CLAUSE 74

    1.     On page 41, in line 4, to omit “or an appropriate adult” and  to
         substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.

                                  CLAUSE 80

    Clause rejected.

                                 NEW CLAUSE

    1.     That the following be a new Clause:

      Requirements to be complied with by legal representatives

           80.   (1)   A legal representative  representing  a  child  must
      allow the child, as far as reasonably possible,  to  give  independent
      instructions concerning the case.
                 (2)   A legal representative must-
      (a)   explain the  child’s  rights  and  duties  in  relation  to  any
           proceedings under this Act in a manner appropriate  to  the  age
           and intellectual development of the child;
      (b)    promote  diversion,  where  appropriate,  but  may  not  unduly
           influence the child to acknowledge responsibility;
      (c)   ensure that the assessment, preliminary inquiry,  trial  or  any
           other proceedings in which the child is involved, are  concluded
           without delay and deal with the matter in manner to ensure  that
           the best interest of the child are at  all  times  of  paramount
           importance; and
      (d)    uphold  the  highest  standards  of   ethical   behaviour   and
           professional conduct.
                  (3)  (a)   If a presiding officer is of the opinion that a
      legal  representative  at  any  stage  during  the  conduct   of   any
      proceedings under this Act, acted contrary to subsection  (2),  he  or
      she must record his or her  displeasure  by  way  of  an  order  which
      includes an appropriate remedial action or sanction.
                       (b)   A presiding officer  who  has  made  any  order
      referred to in paragraph (a) must immediately direct the clerk or  the
      registrar of the court to notify-
      (i)   the relevant law society  referred  to  in  section  56  of  the
           Attorneys Act, 1979 (Act No. 53 of 1979);
      (ii)  in the case where the legal representative  concerned  has  been
           employed by the Legal Aid Board, the Board;  or
      iii) in the case of an advocate, the controlling body  of  which  the
           advocate is a member,
      of the order.

                                  CLAUSE 87

    1.     On page 45, in line 30, to omit “or appropriate  adult”  and  to
         substitute “, appropriate adult or guardian”.

                                  CLAUSE 90

   1. On page 47, from line 29,  to  omit  “or  appropriate  adult”  and  to
      substitute “, appropriate adult or guardian”.

                                  CLAUSE 94


   1. On page 48, in line 24, after “the”, to insert “National”.

                                  CLAUSE 97

    1.     On page 50, in line 48, after “the”, to insert “National”.
    2.     On page 50, in line 50, to omit “or an appropriate adult” and to
         substitute “,  an appropriate adult or a guardian”.
    3.     On page 50, from line 57, to omit “or an appropriate adult”  and
         to substitute “, an appropriate adult or a guardian”.
    4.     On page 51, in line 13, to omit “or appropriate  adult”  and  to
         substitute, “, appropriate adult or guardian”.
    5.     On page 51, in line 52, after “the”, to insert “National”.


                                 SCHEDULE 4

     1. On page 57, in line 51, in  the  third  column,  before  “The”,  to
        insert “Subject to section 4(2) of the Child Justice Act,”
     2.  On page 58, in line 4, in the third column, before “An”, to insert
        “Subject to section 4(2) of the Child Justice Act,”
     3. On page 58, in line 29, in the third column, before “If”, to insert
        “Subject to section 4(2) of the Child Justice Act,”.
     4. On page 63, from line 15, in the third column, to omit  “child  and
        youth care centre providing a  programme  contemplated  in  section
        191(2)(j) of the Children’s Act, 2005 (Act No. 32 of 2005)”, and to
        substitute “child and  youth  care  centre  providing  a  programme
        contemplated in section 191(2)(j) of the Children’s Act, 2005  (Act
        No. 32 of 2005)”
     5. On page 63, in line 48, in the first column, to omit “59 of  1992”,
        and to substitute “13 of 2004”
     6. On page 63, in line 49, in the second column, to omit “1992” and to
        substitute “2004’.
     7. On page 63, in line 52, in the third column, to omit “57(1)” and to
        substitute “72”.
     8. On page 64, from line 37, in the third column, to omit “24(4)(d) or
        75” and to substitute, “24(4)(d), 75 or 76”.
    10.    On page 64, in line 45, in the third column, to omit “or” and to
        substitute “,”.
    11.    On page 64, in line 46, in the third column, after  “1977]”,  to
        insert “section 29 or”.
    12.    On page 64, in line 56, in the third column, after “1977)]”,  to
        insert “section 29 or”.


                                 SCHEDULE 5


    1.     On page 77, in line 29, in the third column, to omit “57(1)” and
         to substitute “”72”.

2.    Second Report of the Select Committee on Security  and  Constitutional
   Affairs on the Child Justice Bill [B 49B – 2002], dated 5 September 2008:

   The Select Committee  on  Security  and  Constitutional  Affairs,  having
   considered the subject of the Child Justice Bill [B49B -2002] (NA  –  sec
   75), referred to it, and having proposed  amendments  thereto,  make  the
   following comments:

   The Committee requests  the  Department  of  Justice  and  Constitutional
   Development, when implementing the Bill, to ensure that the principles of
   restorative  justice,  with  particular   reference   to   family   group
   conferences, as captured in the  Bill,  take  into  account  Afro-centric
   values and integrate key aspects  of  traditional  law,  compatible  with
   constitutional values.  In doing so,  the  Department  must  amplify  and
   operationalise these principles in its training and awareness  strategies
   and programmes.

   The Committee expresses its reservation for the inclusion of  a  specific
   date for the commencement of the Bill, but has, however, agreed  to  this
   inclusion in view of the urgent need for a  therapeutic  and  restorative
   child justice system.  The Committee urges the roleplaying Departments to
   intensify their efforts and to adopt a  “business  unusual”  approach  to
   ensure the expeditious yet effective implementation of the Bill.


   The  Committee  expresses   grave   concern   regarding   the   increased
   responsibilities the Bill places on probation and other  services,  while
   acknowledging  the  implementation  plans  tabled   by   the   respective
   Departments.   The   Committee   nevertheless   urges   the   roleplaying
   Departments to develop effective monitoring systems to ensure
   implementation of the tabled plans.

   Report to be considered.

3.    First Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
   Affairs on the Regulation of Interception of Communications and Provision
   of Communication-related Information Amendment Bill [B9B-2006] (National
   Assembly – sec 75), dated 28 August 2008:

    The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
    considered the subject of the Regulation of Interception of
    Communications and Provision of Communication-related Information
    Amendment Bill [B9B-2006] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it,
    reports the Bill with proposed amendments, as follows:


                                  CLAUSE 1


    1.     On page 2, in line 9, to  omit  “network”,  and  to  substitute:
         “electronic communications system”.


    2.     On page 3, from line 4, to omit paragraph (a) and to substitute:
         (a)      to whom  an  electronic  communication  service  provider
             provides an electronic communications  service,  including  an
             employee of the electronic communication service  provider  or
             any person who receives or received such service  as  a  gift,
             reward, favour, benefit or donation;.

                                  CLAUSE 2


    1.     On page  4,  from  line  14,  to  omit  subsection  (1)  and  to
         substitute:
                 (1)    (a)    Subject  to  paragraph  (b),  an  electronic
           communication service provider who provides  a  mobile  cellular
           electronic communications service shall not  activate a SIM-card
           on its electronic communications system  unless  subsection  (2)
           has been complied with.
                 (b)   Paragraph (a) does not apply  to  a  customer  of  an
           electronic communication service provider who provides a  mobile
           cellular electronic communications service outside the  Republic
           who enters the geographical coverage area of a  mobile  cellular
           electronic communication service provider in  the  Republic  and
           uses the electronic communications system of  such  provider  to
           make, receive and send voice  calls  or  data  or  access  other
           services.

    2.     On page 4, in line 26, to omit “(d) and (e)”, and to substitute:
         “(b) and (c)”.


    3.     On page 4, from line 27, to omit paragraphs (b) and (c).


    4.     On page 4, in line 31, to omit “(d)” and to substitute “(b)”.


    5.     On page 4, in line 35, to omit “or a cellular phone”.


    6.     On page 4, from line 39, to omit “or a cellular phone”.


    7.     On page 4, in line 45, to omit “(e)” and to substitute “(c)”.


    8.     On page 4, in line 53,  to  omit  “(2)(d)  and  (e)(i)”  and  to
         substitute “(2)(b) and (c)(i)”.


    9.     On page 4, in line 57,  to  omit  “(2)(d)(i)  and  (e)”  and  to
         substitute “(2)(b)(i) and (c)”.


    10.    On page 5, line 23, to omit “after” and to substitute “in”.


    11.    On page 5, in line 27, to omit “cellular phone or”.


    12.    On page 5, in line 29, to omit “cellular phone or the”.


    13.    On page 5, in line 30, to omit “cellular phone or”.


    14.    On page 5, in line 34, to omit “the cellular phone or”.


    15.    On page 5, in line 37, to omit the first “and” and to substitute
      “,”.


    16.    On page 5, in line 40, to omit “or the cellular phone”.

    17.    On page 5, in line 42, to omit “, (b) and (c)”.


    18.    On page 5, in line 52, to omit “;and” and to substitute “.”.


    19.    On page 5, in line 58, to  omit  “identity”  and  to  substitute
      “identification”.


    20.    On page  5,  from  line  61,  to  omit  subsection  (9)  and  to
      substitute:
                  (9)  An electronic communication service provider must, on
           its electronic communications system, record and store─
            (a)    every MSISDN-number used with every IMEI-number; and
            (b)    every IMEI-number used with every MSISDN-number,
           which must, on production of a  direction,  be  provided  to  an
           applicant within 12 hours.

                       (10)  The information recorded and stored in terms of
            subsections (2), (6) and (9) must be stored  by  an  electronic
           communication service provider for a period of five years after—
           (a)   a customer has cancelled his  or  her  contract  with  the
                 electronic communication service provider; or
           (b)   the electronic communication service provider has ended
                 the electronic communications service provided to the
                 customer.

                                  CLAUSE 3

    1.     On page 6, from line 33, to omit “(6) or (7)” and to  substitute
      “(6), (7), (9) or (10)”.


    2.     On page 6, in line 48, to omit “the provision in  question”  and
      to substitute “section 62C”.


    3.     On page 6, in line 57, to omit “(6) or  (7)  and  to  substitute
      “(6), (7), (9) or (10)”.


                             CLAUSE 4


    1.     On page 7, in line 6, to omit “12” and to substitute “18”.


    2.     On page 7, in line 8, to omit “cellular phones or”.


    3.     On page 7, in line 11, to omit “and (4),” and to  substitute  “,
         (4), (9) and (10),”.


    4.     On page 7, in line 16, after “any”, to insert “activated”.


    5.     On page 7, in line 16, to omit “or cellular phone”.


    6.     On page 7, in line 18, to omit “12-month” and to substitute “18-
         month”.


                                  CLAUSE 5

    1.     On page 7, line 22, to omit “after” and to substitute “in”.


    2.     On page 7, in line 31, after “provider”, to insert “who provides
         a mobile cellular electronic communications service”.


    3.     On page 7, in line 34, after “62(6)”, to insert “and 62C”.
    4.     On page 7, in line 40, to omit “or cellular phones”.


    5.     On page  7,  from  line  41,  to  omit  subsection  (1)  and  to
         substitute:
                  (1)  Any juristic person,  having  complied  with  section
           40(2) or 62(6), and who provides a SIM-card to a person  in  its
           employment must, before handing over the SIM-card to  the  other
           person–
           (a)   record the particulars as required in  section  40(2)  and
                 the date on and period for which the SIM-card is provided;
                  and
           (b)   verify –
                 (i)    the  full  names,  surname,  identity  number   and
                       identity of  the  person  to  whom  the  SIM-card  is
                       provided; and
                 (ii)  the address contemplated in section 40(3)(a)(iii),
                 by  means  of  documentation   contemplated   in   section
                 40(3)(b).


    6.     On page 7, in line 45, after “Any person”, to insert  “,  having
         complied with section 40(2) or 62(6), and”.


    7.     On page 7, in line 45, to omit “or cellular phone”.


    8.     On page 7, in line 46, to omit “cellular phone or”.


    9.     On page 7, in line 49, to omit “cellular phone or”.


    10.    On page 7, in line 52, to omit “cellular phone or”.


    11.    On page 8, in line 6, to omit “5” and to substitute “five”.


    12.    On page 8, after line 6, to add:
     (4)     (a)    An  applicant  may,  for  the  purposes  of  making   an
         application for the issuing of a direction, in writing  request  a
         person contemplated in  subsection  (1)  or  (2)  to  provide  the
         applicant with the information recorded and  stored  in  terms  of
         subsection (1) or (2), respectively.
        (b)       A person  contemplated  in  subsection  (1)  or  (2)  who
             receives  a  request  referred  to  in  paragraph   (a)   must
             immediately comply with that request if the request relates to
             any SIM-card in its, his or her possession or to any person to
             whom the SIM-card was provided or rented.
      (5)   If a person contemplated in  subsection  (1)  or  (2)  knows  or
           suspects  that  an   identification   document   submitted   for
           verification as contemplated in section 40(3) is false,  it,  he
           or she must, within 24 hours, report  the  matter  to  a  police
           official at any police station.

                                  CLAUSE 6

    1.     On page 8, in line 17 to omit “2007” and to substitute “2008”

                                  CLAUSE 7

    1.     On page 8, in line 20, to omit “2007” and to substitute “2008”.


      2. On page 8, in line 21, to omit “1 January 2008 or on such  earlier
         date as the President may determine” and  to  substitute  “a  date
         determined by the President”.

   4. Second Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
      Affairs on the Regulation of Interception of Communications and
      Provision of Communication-related Information Amendment Bill [B9B-
      2006] (National Assembly –sec 75), dated 28 August 2008:

      The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
      considered the subject of the Regulation of Interception of
      Communications and Provision of Communication-related Information
      Amendment Bill [B9B-2006] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to
      it, and having proposed amendments thereto, recommends that:

      The Department of Justice and Constitutional Development and the
      service providers affected by the envisaged Act, report to the
      Committee within six months after the Bill has been assented to, and
      thereafter every six months, regarding, among others –
              a) progress made regarding the implementation of the envisaged
                 Act;
              b) challenges encountered in this regard; and
              c) possible solutions for challenges experienced.

      Report to be considered.


                         THURSDAY, 18 SEPTEMBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bill


     (1)    The Portfolio Committee on Communications


          a) Financial Management of Parliament Bill [B 74 – 2008]
             (National Assembly – proposed sec 76(1)) [Draft Bill and
             memorandum setting out its objects published in Government
             Gazette No 28166 of 28 October 2005.]


             Bill initiated by the Portfolio Committee on Finance of the
             National Assembly, and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
             (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

National Council of Provinces
1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Economic and Foreign Affairs for consideration and report:



        (a)      Treaty of Friendship and Partnership between the  Republic
             of South Africa and the Russian Federation, tabled in terms of
             section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.
        (b)  Explanatory  Memorandum  to  the  Treaty  of   Friendship   and
             Partnership between the  Republic  of  South  Africa  and  the
             Russian Federation.

TABLINGS

 National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Foreign Affairs

      (a)   Report and Financial  Statements  of  Vote  3  –  Department  of
          Foreign Affairs  for  2007-2008,  including  the  Report  of  the
          Auditor-General  on  the  Financial  Statements  and  Performance
          Information of Vote 3 for 2007-2008.


2.    The Minister of Communications

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of  the  Universal  Service  and
          Access Agency of South Africa (USAASA) for  2007-2008,  including
          the Reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
          Universal Service and Access Agency of South Africa (USAASA)  and
          the Universal Service and Access Fund (USAF)  for  2007-2008  [RP
          219-2008].


3.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

      (a)   Report on the  National  Lotteries  Distribution  Trust  Fund  –
      Souvenir Brochure 2008.


      (b)    Report  and  Financial  Statements  of  the  Small   Enterprise
          Development Agency Technology Programme for 2007-2008.


          Please Note: The above item replaces  item  2(b)  and  (c)  under
          Tablings of the Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports  of
          17 September 2008, as published on page 1694.


                          FRIDAY, 19 SEPTEMBER 2008


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bill

     (1)    South African Judicial Education Institute Bill [B 4D – 2007] –
        Act No 14 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 12
        September 2008).
2.    Introduction of Bill - correction


     The introduction of the Financial Management of Parliament Bill [B 74 –
    2008] (National Assembly – proposed sec 76(1)) in the ATC of 18
    September 2008 was incorrectly placed under the heading “Portfolio on
    Communications”. It should have read “Portfolio Committee on Finance“.

TABLINGS

 National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Defence

        a) Report and Financial Statements of the Armaments Corporation  of
           South Africa Limited  (ARMSCOR)  for  2007-2008,  including  the
           Report of the Auditor-General on the  Financial  Statements  and
           Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 58-2008].

2.    The Minister of Finance

        a) Report and Financial Statements of Sasria Limited for 2007-2008,
           including  the  Report  of  the  Independent  Auditors  on   the
           Financial Statements for 2007-2008.


        b) Report and Financial  Statements  of  the  Development  Bank  of
           Southern Africa for  2007-2008,  including  the  Report  of  the
           Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for  2007-2008.


        c) Report and Financial  Statements  of  the  Development  Bank  of
           Southern Africa Development Fund for  2007-2008,  including  the
           Report of the Independent Auditors on the  Financial  Statements
           of The Fund for 2007-2008.

      (d)   Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services  Board
          (FSB) 2007-2008, including the Report of the  Auditor-General  on
          the Financial Statements for 2007-2008 [RP 139-2008].


                          MONDAY, 22 SEPTEMBER 2008


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)    Bills passed by National Assembly on 22 September 2008:


          a) Jurisdiction of Regional Courts Amendment Bill [B 48D – 2007]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).


          b) Renaming of High Courts Bill [B 5B – 2008] (National Assembly
             – sec 75).


          c) Liquor Products Amendment Bill [B 22B – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


    (1)    Bills passed by National Assembly and transmitted for
         concurrence on 22 September 2008:


          a) Provision of Land and Assistance Amendment Bill [B 40B – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).


          b) National Environment Laws Amendment Bill [B 66B – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).


          c) National Environmental Management: Protected Areas Amendment
             Bill [B 67B – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75).


            The Bills have been referred to the Select Committee on Land and
             Environmental Affairs of the National Council of Provinces.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of  the  South  African  Reserve
         Bank for  2007-2008,  including  the  Report  of  the  Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.


      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 12  -  Statistics  South
         Africa for 2007-2008, including the Report of the  Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 12
         for 2007-2008 [RP 126-2008].


      (c)   Report and Financial Statements of  the  Independent  Regulatory
          Board for auditors for 2007-2008,  including  the  Report  of  the
          Auditor-General  on  the  Financial  Statements  and   Performance
          Information for 2007-2008.


2.    The Minister of Transport

      (a)   Report of the Regulating Committee of the  Airports  Company  of
         South Africa and Air Navigation Services Company for 2007-2008.


      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the  South  African  National
         Roads Agency Limited for 2007-2008, including the  Report  of  the
         Auditor-General  on  the  Financial  Statements  and   Performance
         Information for 2007-2008 [RP 104-2008].


      (c)   Report and Financial Statements of the South African Search  and
          Rescue Organisation (SASAR) for 2007-2008.


      (d)   Report and Financial Statements of the Road  Traffic  Management
          Corporation for 2007-2008, including the Report  of  the  Auditor-
          General on the Financial Statements  and  Performance  Information
          for 2007-2008 [RP 103-2008].


3.    The Minister of Communications

       a) Report and  Financial  Statements  of  Vote  25  –  Department  of
          Communications for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
          General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of
          Vote 25 for 2007-2008 [RP 247-2008].

4.    The Minister of Public Works

       a) Report and Financial Statements  of  the  Independent  Development
          Trust for 2007-2008, including the Report of  the  Auditor-General
          on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for  2007-
          2008 [RP 154-2008].

5.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

       a) Proclamation No R.35  of  Government  Gazette  No  31394  dated  4
          September  2008:  Referral  of   matters   to   existing   Special
          Investigating Unit and Special Tribunals, in terms of the  Special
          Investigation Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74  of
          1996).

       b) Proclamation No R.36  of  Government  Gazette  No  31394  dated  4
          September  2008:  Referral  of   matters   to   existing   Special
          Investigating Unit and Special Tribunals, in terms of the  Special
          Investigation Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74  of
          1996).

6.    The Minister of Science and Technology

       a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 31 – Department of Science
          and Technology for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
          General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of
          Vote 31 for 2007-2008 [RP 200-2008].

7.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs


      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 28 – Department of  Land
          Affairs for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General
          on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 28
          for 2007-2008.


                         TUESDAY, 23 SEPTEMBER 2008


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent


    1) Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 23 September 2008:


          a) Mineral and Petroleum Resources Royalty Bill [B 59 – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 77).


          b) Mineral and Petroleum Resources Royalty (Administration) Bill
             [B 60 – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75).

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


    (1)    Bills passed by National Assembly and transmitted for
         concurrence on 23 September 2008:


        (a)      National Radioactive Waste Disposal Institute Bill [B 41B
             – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75) (introduced as National
             Radioactive Waste Management Agency Bill [B 41 – 2008]).


          (b)    Mine Health and Safety Amendment Bill [B 54B – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).


             The Bills have been referred to the Select Committee on
             Economic and Foreign Affairs of the National Council of
             Provinces.
          (c)    Medicines and Related Substances Amendment Bill [B 44B –
             2008] (National Assembly – sec 75).


             The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Social
             Services of the National Council of Provinces.


          d) National Conventional Arms Control Amendment Bill [B 45B –
             2008] (National Assembly – sec 75).


             The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Security
             and Constitutional Affairs of the National Council of
             Provinces.


          e) Built Environment Professions Bill [B 53B – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).


             The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Public
             Services of the National Council of Provinces.


          f) Methodist Church of Southern Africa (Private) Act Repeal Bill
             [B 68 – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75).


          g) Dutch Reformed Churches Union Act Repeal Bill [B 69 – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).


          h) Bible Society of South Africa Act Repeal Bill [B 70B – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).

          i) The Apostolic Faith Mission of South Africa (Private) Act
             Repeal Bill [B 71B – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75).


             The Bills have been referred to the Select Committee on
             Education and Recreation of the National Council of Provinces.
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of  the  South  African  Revenue
          Service (SARS) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
          General on the Financial Statements  and  Performance  Information
          for 2007-2008 [RP 193-2008].


2.    The Minister of Education

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the South African Council for
          Educators (SACE)  for  2007-2008,  including  the  Report  of  the
          Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.


3.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

       a) Report and Financial Statements of  the  South  African  National
          Parks (SANparks) for  2007-2008,  including  the  Report  of  the
          Auditor-General  on  the  Financial  Statements  and  Performance
          Information for 2007-2008 [RP 182-2008].


4.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the Ingonyama Trust Board for
         2007-2008, including the Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
         Financial Statements for 2007-2008.


      (b)   Report and  Financial  Statements  of  the  Perishable  Products
          Export Control Board (PPECB) for 2007-2008, including  the  Report
          of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for  2007-
          2008.


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

   1. Report of the Select Committee  on  Social  Services  on  the  Tobacco
      Products Control Amendment Bill [B 7B – 2008] (National Assembly – sec
      76 (1)), dated 23 September 2008:

      The Select Committee on Social Services, having considered the subject
      of the Tobacco Products Control Amendment Bill [B 7B – 2008] (National
      Assembly – sec 76 (1)), referred to it and  classified  by  the  Joint
      Tagging Mechanism  as  a  section  76  Bill,  reports  the  Bill  with
      amendments [B 7C – 2008].

   2. Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Protocol amending the
      agreement between the Government of the Republic of South  Africa  and
      the Kingdom of Netherlands for the Avoidance of  Double  Taxation  and
      the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on  Income  and
      on Capital, dated 4 September 2008:

      The Select  Committee  on  Finance,  having  considered  the  Protocol
      amending the agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
      Africa and the Government  of  the  Kingdom  of  Netherlands  for  the
      Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal evasion with
      respect to Taxes on Income and on Capital, referred to it in terms  of
      section 231(2) of the  Constitution,  reports  that  it  approves  the
      agreement.

