---
title: 'National Assembly - 04 March 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2008-03-04
---

TUESDAY, 4 MARCH 2008
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:01.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Dr S M VAN DYK: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move the
following motion:

   That the House -

   (1)      notes that Minister Alec Erwin is failing in his responsibility
        as Minister for Public Enterprises to exercise proper and diligent
        oversight over government’s shareholding in Eskom;


     2) further notes his loss of credibility following the 2006 bolt
        incident where he falsely insinuated that the Koeberg power station
        had been the target of sabotage;


     3) further notes his denial of the existence of a national energy
        crisis;


     4) further notes his multiple comments negating the harmful effects of
        the energy crisis on industry and growth;

The SPEAKER: Hon member, that sounds like a statement. Please, when you
want to make a long speech, make a statement. Otherwise give a brief,
straight to the point notice of motion.

Dr S M VAN DYK: Thank you, I will do so.


     5) further notes his accusations that the private sector is using
        electricity rationing as an excuse to downsize their workforce; and


     6) resolves to reduce Public Enterprises Minister Alec Erwin’s salary
        to a symbolic 1c per annum.

Thank you.

                      CONGRATULATIONS TO KENYAN PEOPLE
                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –

   (1)      notes that on Thursday, 28 February 2008, the Kenyan government
        and the Orange Democratic Movement reached an agreement aimed at
        resolving the political crisis that has engulfed the East African
        country since the December 2007 elections;


   (2)      urges all Kenyans to embrace the spirit of national healing and
        reconciliation and work with their leadership in ensuring that
        peace returns to their country;


   (3)      applauds the efforts of the African Union, under the esteemed
        Kofi Annan, his team and other multilateral organisations, for
        their efforts to bring about peace in Kenya; and


   (4)      extends its best wishes to the Kenyan people on reaching an
        agreement aimed at bringing peace to their country.

Thank you.

Agreed to.

                          ACHIEVEMENTS OF ERNIE ELS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House -

     1) notes that Ernie Els won the Honda Classic at the PGA National
        Resort and Spa in Florida on Sunday, 2 March 2008;


     2) further notes that this is his first win on American soil since
        2004;


     3) recognises that he has achieved more than fifty victories worldwide
        thereby making him a true golfing legend and also placing South
        African golf in the international spotlight;


     4) acknowledges the vital role he has played in developing the talents
        of young sportsmen and women by assisting young individuals from
        families with limited resources who have shown promise in the game
        of golf through his Ernie Els and Fancourt Foundation; and
     5) congratulates him on his victory and wishes him well in achieving
        his goal of adding to his three Major titles this year.


Thank you.

Agreed to.

                CONGRATULATIONS TO SOUTH AFRICAN CRICKET TEAM

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –

   (1)      notes that South Africa beat Bangladesh by an innings and 205
        runs in the second test on Monday, 3 March 2008;


   (2)      further notes that this victory means that South Africa won the
        two-match series 2-0;


   (3)      recognises that Graeme Smith and Neil MacKenzie set a test
        opening partnership record of 415, topping the previous mark set in
        1956;
   (4)      further recognises that Dale Steyn took four wickets, which
        lifted him to 100 dismissals in only his twentieth test;


   (5)      congratulates both Graeme Smith for winning man of the match and
        Dale Steyn for winning man of the series, as well as the rest of
        the South African cricket team, on their superb performance; and


   (6)      wishes the Proteas well in their upcoming three tests against
        India.

Thank you.

Agreed to.

            HARMFUL EFFECTS OF GLOBAL WARMING AND CLIMATE CHANGE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr I M CACHALIA (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, climate change is being
brought home to the ordinary residents of our country. We have witnessed
trees shedding their leaves early and plants flowering out of season or not
at all.

Over the past five years the effects of climate change have started to
become more pronounced in the natural environment. Cosmos, an early autumn
bloomer started flowering as early as December. Clivias and Azaleas, both
early spring bloomers, were also found to be blooming in certain parts of
the country.

These are just some of the changes in nature that have been observed by
people. We have come to know it as climate change. Its long-term effects
bode ill for humanity. The ANC recognises that climate change also poses a
serious threat, not only to our country, but to the African continent as a
whole. We are extremely vulnerable to the effects of global warming and the
risk to the poorest of the poor is extremely grave and incalculable.

The vision of the ANC regarding our future includes a sustainable economy
where all South Africans including present and future generations, are
entitled to an environment that is not harmful, but conducive to their good
health and their wellbeing. Thank you very much.

            POOR STATE OF PERCY STEWART WATER PURIFICATION WORKS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Me A M DREYER (DA): Mevrou die Speaker, in my kiesafdeling, Mogale City,
dreig ’n ernstige gesondheidsramp.

Die Percy Stewart-watersuiweringswerk in Krugersdorp funksioneer slegs
gedeeltelik. Weens stukkende pompe op die terrein word slegs ’n derde van
die biofilters gebruik. Die betondamwalle is gebars en word met staalkabels
vasgehou.

Terwyl die waterwerke ontwerp is om 28 megaliter riool daagliks te hanteer,
is daar ’n invloei van 30 megaliter. Weens die onklaar pompe en die
toestand van die damme hanteer die stelsel nou slegs 12 megaliter per dag.
Selfs hierdie 12 megaliter wat wel deur die proses gaan, voldoen nie aan
die Departement van Waterwese en Bosbou se standaarde nie. Dis erg
besoedel, dit vloei deur die Wieg van die Mensdom-wêrelderfenisgebied, en
beland uiteindelik in die Hartebeespoortdam.

Soos met die kragkrisis is die wortel van die probleem ’n gebrek aan
instandhouding en ’n gebrek aan vaardige personeel. Daar is byvoorbeeld nie
’n enkele elektrisiën by die waterwerke in diens nie. Namens die kiesers
van Mogale City waarsku die DA die Minister: ’n Skrikwekkende
gesondheidsramp is op pad. (Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement
follows.)

[Ms A M DREYER (DA): Madam Speaker, in my constituency, Mogale City, a
serious health crisis is looming.

The Percy Stewart water purification plant in Krugersdorp is only
functioning partially. Due to broken pumps on the site only a third of the
biofilters are being used. The concrete dam walls are cracked and are being
held in place by steel cables.

While the waterworks are designed to deal with handle 28 megalitres of
sewage daily, there is an influx of 30 megalitres. Due to the broken pumps
and the condition of the dams the system now only deals with 12 megalitres
per day. Even the 12 megalitres that do go through the process do not
comply with the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry’s standards. It is
severely polluted, it flows through the Cradle of Humankind world heritage
site, and eventually ends up in the Hartebeespoort dam.

As with the energy crisis, the root of the problem is a lack of maintenance
and a shortage of skilled staff. For example not a single electrician is
employed by the waterworks. On behalf of the voters of Mogale City, the DA
warns the Minister: A terrible health disaster is on the way.]

                            BATTLE AGAINST CRIME

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr B W DHLAMINI (IFP): Madam Speaker, the South African public and visitors
are deeply concerned about the rate at which people are being followed from
O R Tambo Airport and are then robbed. There is strong evidence that these
atrocities occur almost every week though the police believe that they are
not necessarily orchestrated by a gang of robbers that is stalking people
arriving at the airport.

Many victims of these attacks believe that they have been ambushed by a
well-connected syndicate. It is believed that the culprits are sitting
there at the terminal and are in cahoots with some thugs parading around
the airport. There is a growing concern because the World Cup is just
around the corner and most of our esteemed visitors will be landing at O R
Tambo.

Needless to say, these attacks send out a negative image and send a wrong
message to the rest of the world. People who are planning to spend their
holidays here now think twice because O R Tambo Airport has become a
dangerous place. It is high time that the police, airport authorities and
relevant government departments make sure that justice is served. I thank
you.

            GAUTENG TO RECRUIT AND TRAIN COMMUNITY HEALTH WORKERS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs M M MADUMISE (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC commends the plan by the
Gauteng Department of Health to recruit and train 1 000 community health
workers to ensure that people across the province receive a professional
health care service. These health workers will also be sent to schools and
they will help to identify learners who are experiencing learning
difficulties due to poor eyesight, hearing and dental problems.

The government of the province will further extend the know-your-health
status campaign throughout the province, aimed at promoting regular
comprehensive testing for HIV and Aids, diabetes, hypertension as well as
promoting oral hygiene. The ANC continues to work to strengthen the
provision of child nutrition, food security and the ongoing improvement of
regular nourishment.

The government will work consistently to decisively attack communicable and
preventable diseases through, amongst others, immunisation programmes and
ensuring the possible earliest treatment of chronic and noncommunicable
diseases.

The ANC believes that the achievement of an enhanced health status is an
important part of improving the quality of life of poor South Africans. I
thank you.

                       EFFECT OF PETROL PRICE INCREASE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G T MADIKIZA (UDM): Madam Speaker, the UDM expresses its sympathy with
all South Africans who will from midnight have to deal with the effect of a
61 cent per litre increase in the petrol price. This comes at a time when
interest rates are already on the rise. We can assume that this latest
increase will immediately filter down into the cost of such basics as food
and transport fares.

We realise that the escalating international oil prices and unfavourable
exchange rates expose this country to these price increases. However, it is
also true that more than 40% of our fuel is locally manufactured and not
imported, yet the industry and government are complicit in a scheme that
charges the consumer as if that fuel was imported and paid for in dollars.

The liquid fuel industry is overregulated and the consumer is paying a
heavy price. Another unspoken reality is that a significant proportion of
the fuel price is tax levied by the government. This is a regressive tax
that hits the poor harder than the rich and government continues not only
to maintain this tax but to increase it annually. This situation is forcing
poor households to choose between bare essentials like food and transport.
Thank you.

              GOVERNMENT NOT FULFILLING ITS CONSTITUTIONAL DUTY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr P J GROENEWALD (VF PLUS): Mevrou die Speaker, die Grondwet bepaal dat
die staat ’n plig het om landsburgers te beskerm teen misdaad en om hul
eiendom te beveilig.
Die werklikheid in Suid-Afrika is dat daar waar mense die veiligste behoort
te wees, naamlik in en by hul huise, word hulle wreedaardig vermoor. Die
nuutste is die bekende Johannesburgse argitek, mnr Julian Lap, en die
sakevrou, Marilyn Visser. Terwyl die gesin ’n rustige Sondagmiddag
deurbring in hul huis word hulle almal deur rowers geskiet sonder dat daar
enigiets in die huis geneem is.

Die publiek vra tereg: Hoe lank moet hulle, nie net misdadigheid nie, maar
die wreedheid waarmee dit gepleeg word, duld en trotseer? Hoe lank moet
daar verneem word van ’n bepaalde boer - of ’n bejaarde boer - en sy vrou
wat eers met strykysters gebrand word en dan met kookwater gemartel word om
dan vermoor te word met die regering en die Minister van Veiligheid en
Sekuriteit se reaksie van: die motief is gewoon roof?

Hoe kan gewone roof die motief wees as slagoffers eers wreedaardig gemartel
word? Hoe kan gewone roof die motief wees as vrouens eers wreedaardig
verkrag word; baie keer ten aanskoue van hul mans? Hoe kan gewone roof die
motief wees as daar rassistiese opmerkings teen slagoffers gemaak word?

Wat die VF Plus betref, misluk die ANC-regering klaaglik om sy grondwetlike
plig na te kom en die publiek te beskerm. Die Minister van Veiligheid en
Sekuriteit het ’n taakspan saamgestel om na hierdie wreedheid van moorde te
kyk. Ons wag steeds vir die antwoord en die verslag. (Translation of
Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD (FF PLUS): Madam Speaker, the Constitution stipulates
that the state has a duty to protect its citizens against crime and to
safeguard their property.

The reality in South Africa is that where people are supposed to be the
most secure, namely in and around their homes, they are being brutally
murdered. The latest incident being that of the well-known Johannesburg
architect, Mr Julian Lap, and the businesswoman, Marilyn Visser. While the
family were enjoying a tranquil Sunday afternoon in their home, robbers
shot all of them without taking anything from their house.

Justifiably, the public are asking: How long must they endure and face, not
only the incidents of criminality, but the savagery with which it is being
committed? How long must it still be heard that a specific farmer - or an
elderly farmer and his wife had first been burnt with flat irons, then
tortured with boiling water and thereafter murdered, with the reaction of
the government and the Minister of Safety and Security being: the motive
was common robbery?

How can the motive be common robbery if the victims are being brutally
tortured first? How can the motive be common robbery if women are first
being brutally raped; many times in the presence of their husbands? How can
the motive be common robbery if racist remarks are made to victims?

As far as the FF Plus is concerned, the ANC government is failing miserably
in the performance of its constitutional duty to protect the public. The
Minister of Safety and Security has assembled a task team to look into the
savagery of murders. We are still awaiting an answer and the report on this
matter.]

                  EXTENSION OF RAILWAY LINE TO KHAYELITSHA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Nksz X C MAKASI (ANC): Somlomo, urhulumente oxhuzula imikhala nokhokelwa
ngumbutho wesizwe i-ANC ukholelwa ekubeni imizila kaloliwe yenye yezinto
ezibalulekileyo kuqoqosho lweli lizwe lakuthi. Ngoko ke, le mizila kufuneka
ilawulwe ngembeko nangobunono bekati.

Abahlali baseKhayelitsha eHarare, eMandela Park naseKuyasa baya kuxhamla
kutyalo-mali olukuma-300 ezigidi zeerandi olujonge ukwandisa umzila
kaloliwe ukuze ufikelele nakwezi ndawo zikhankanywe apha ngasentla.

Olu lwakhiwo lwemizila kaloliwe luze nemisebenzi kubahlali bendawo, yatsho
yashenxa ikati eziko. Lukwa yinxalenye yokuvuselelwa ngokutsha kweendawo
ezihlala abantu ezidolophini. Ukuvuselelwa ngokutsha kweendawo esihlala
kuzo kubandakanya utyalo-mali, ulwakhiwo lweendawo zokonwaba, uphuhliso
lwezakhono zabantu, ukhuthazo lwamashishini asakhulayo, kunye nokulwa
nenxele likakhethsekile.

Singamalungu ombutho wesizwe siya kuthi gqolo sisilwa intlupheko nendlala,
sibambisene nabantu ekuhlaleni. Ndiyabulela, Somlomo. (Translation of
isiXhosa member’s statement follows.)

[Ms X C MAKASI (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC-led government believes that
railway lines are one of the most important aspects of our country’s
economy. Therefore, these railway lines should be managed with respect and
meticulous efficiency.

The communities of Khayelitsha, Harare, Mandela Park and Kuyasa will
benefit from the R300 million investment aimed at extending the railway
line to the areas mentioned above.

The construction of these railway lines has created job opportunities for
the local communities, thereby bringing an end to starvation. It is also
part of urban renewal. The revival of the urban renewal process involves
investment, the construction of recreational facilities, skills
development, promotion of small businesses and eradication of poverty.

We, the members of the ANC, will constantly fight poverty and hunger,
working closely with the people in the community. Thank you, Speaker.]

      RESPONSIBILITY OF MUNICIPALITIES TO MAINTAIN HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr P H K DITSHETELO (UCDP): Madam Speaker, the UCDP would like to encourage
all municipalities to play a vital role in our everyday lives. Every
municipality should be part of our healthy environment.

Municipalities do not reflect the features that we need them to. There are
always problems with leaking sewerage pipes, drainage, and refuse lying all
over the show.

Furthermore, municipal managers, councillors, officials and people in all
wards should be educated to take responsibility regarding the cleanliness
of our towns and cities.

                        SIGNIFICANCE OF ROBBEN ISLAND

                            (Member’s Statement)
Dr S E M PHEKO (PAC): Madam Speaker, Robben Island must not be treated
frivolously. It must be treated in the same manner as places where the Jews
experienced their own Holocaust. Robben Island must not be a place where
tourists have their weddings and honeymoons.

There was savagery and inhumanity on Robben Island. There was human
degradation and genocide. A self-respecting nation must not allow this
abomination and distortion of African magnanimity. The first document to
tell the world about what was happening to anti-apartheid prisoners on
Robben Island was an affidavit by Lindi Sogalela, smuggled to the United
Nations by the PAC.

Prisoners were buried alive there; they were starved; they were urinated on
and they were made to work like slaves. Many died out there and others,
such as Mangaliso Robert Sobukwe, were poisoned.

Robben Island is the wrong place for weddings and honeymoons. It is like
dancing on the graves of our parents. This nation cannot ignore a national
leader who was detained on Robben Island without even a mockery of a trial
and banished to Kimberley to die there. A national monument befitting
Sobukwe’s revolutionary contribution must be erected to his honour. He died
30 years ago.

                STATE OF EASTERN CAPE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr G G BOINAMO (DA): Madam Speaker, although Matric results were
republished more than two months ago and the new school year is already
well under way, 33 learners at Chatty Secondary School in Port Elizabeth
have still not received their results for the Matric exams because their
exam papers have been lost by the Education Department. The lives of these
learners have had to be put on hold while they wait for this bungle to be
sorted out. They cannot get jobs, they cannot proceed to higher education,
and yet no serious attention is being paid to finding a way to solve this
problem.

This is indicative of the disorder that prevails within the Eastern Cape’s
Department of Education. The Auditor-General has found the department to be
riddled with fraud, unable to ensure that schools are run efficiently and
unable to deliver basic services such as the school feeding scheme.

Any improvement in the performance of our children in schools needs to
start with ensuring that basic administrative processes are in place. In
this regard, the Eastern Cape Department of Education and many others
across the country have failed dismally. I thank you. [Applause.]

                               WORLD MATHS DAY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr R S NTULI (ANC): Madam Speaker, 5 March marks World Maths Day. Millions
of children across the world continue to participate in their country’s
teams online after being provided with personal passwords by their
different schools and other maths-promoting institutions.

While this is commendable, we note with grave concern that millions of
children do not as yet have access to digital technology to enable them to
participate as equals in mathematics worldwide. The recent study that
measures the ability of South African learners in maths competency has
further highlighted the urgency and the importance of creating an enabling
environment for all our learners to become maths and science champions.

Our education expenditure stands at R121 billion, which is one of the
highest by world standards. This actual input should correlate properly
with the desired outputs and outcomes to enable our children and all other
learners to sharpen their mathematical reasoning. We urge everyone to dig
deep within themselves to uncover mathematical abilities. I thank you.
[Applause.]

                       IMPROVEMENT OF HEALTH STANDARDS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr R RABINOWITZ (IFP): Madam Speaker, the Department of Health’s latest
ambitious goal, is the intention to provide dual therapy to mothers with
HIV. Like the rest of South African health policies’ ambitious ideals, it
is an ideal that is being overtaken by an ever more disturbing reality.

The IFP believes that none of the measures adopted by the department within
the constraints of the currently centralised dispensation of the health
policy can succeed. We maintain that health must be depoliticised. The
system must be decentralised. The public service must become a bulk
purchaser of care from the private sector to increase standards and reduce
prices. The regulation of health care must be simplified, and all services
must be monitored by health ombudspersons with defaulters held accountable
to the law. Charters change nothing.

Centralised interference has handicapped the public sector and is eroding
the private sector. Appallingly, the Health Professions Council operated
with a deficit of R6,8 million last year. This year it will again increase
fees by 10%, and at the same time professionals have lost the right to vote
for their representatives on the council. Their morale is diminishing
daily.

Overregulation, too, has not achieved its goal with medical schemes and it
is contributing to the increase in hospital costs. Socialist policies are
not the mechanism through which to cope with dual therapy, HIV, TB or the
ever-mushrooming number of mentally ill people in our country, where infant
mortality is on the rise and life expectancy steadily declines. Thank you.

                            GROWTH IN SA TOURISM

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs J CHALMERS (ANC): Madam Speaker, tourism is one of the fastest growing
sectors of our economy. And we are pleased to report that the overall
foreign arrivals increased by 8,6% from January to November 2007. The
growth in Africa air markets was led by healthy increases: Out of Kenya it
was 15,4% and out of Nigeria 14,8%.

Arrivals from the Americas have shown consistent annual growth since 2002,
with over 23 400 more visitors arriving from the United States. This brings
the total figure to 255 822 and makes this market the second largest source
market for South Africa.

Arrivals out of Europe are up by 2,6% for the year to date, and this was
driven largely by the significant increase of 9,6% out of France. We
believe that this is due to the turnaround strategy implemented in this
market. However, air capacity issues may inhibit further growth.

The increase in arrivals from across all the regions of the world, and in
particular air arrivals, reflects not only the growing awareness of South
Africa as a tourism destination but also the success of the Airlift
Strategy passed by Cabinet in 2006 that resulted in increased access to the
South African market for foreign carriers.

The ANC can therefore say with the utmost confidence that South Africa is
in an excellent position to welcome more and more tourists to our shores in
the days, months and years to come and we look forward to doing this. Thank
you. [Applause.]

                  DELAYS FOR HEALTH PROFESSIONAL IMMIGRANTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M WATERS (DA): Madam Speaker, several foreign qualified nurses who want
to make South Africa their home and to live and work here, have recently
been in the news because of the impossible delays amounting to more than
two years in some cases - in obtaining registration here.

I would like to give an example. A particular nurse had to wait for 22
weeks to have her Finnish qualifications verified. She then had to wait for
another ten weeks to receive a letter from the Department of Health just
stating that there were actually vacancies for nurses in this country. She
had to wait a further six weeks for an application form from the council; a
further nine weeks for her criminal record to be checked; a further six
weeks to be told that she had to write an ethics examination and another 19
weeks before she could actually write the examination because this only
happens twice a year. And so the list goes on.

In complete contrast, an individual approached us yesterday saying that a
friend a highly qualified nurse - had emailed the Australian Consulate at
15h00 on a Sunday afternoon in February, to enquire about the immigration
process. Two hours later she was telephoned by the Consulate and within
three and a half hours she had been given the requisite information and
assured she would be welcomed in Australia. She will be leaving for
Australia soon.

During the conversation with the official, he asked her if Alberton North
was a large city. She replied: “No, it is a suburb of a fairly large town.”
He said he was very surprised because he had received 10 applications from
nurses in the Alberton North area alone recently.

The government lacks professionalism in helping foreign qualified nurses
and this is indicative of our complete lack of respect for health
professions in general. The Minister of Health should rather focus on
insuring that we have enough doctors and nurses for all our people than
attacking private hospitals. Thank you.
                              ARTS AND CULTURE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G LEKGETHO (ANC): Madam Speaker, recently, the Development Bank of
Southern Africa launched an exhibition titled The Soul of Africa Art
Exhibition, thus creating a platform for artists to exhibit their works. It
is aimed at creating opportunities for young and talented artists from
previously disadvantaged groups. It is also showcasing works by already
established artists.

The initiative featured art works from African countries such as Madagascar
and Angola, and also gave local artists the chance to put their works on
display.

Art is an expression of peoples’ consciousness and perspectives. It is
linked closely to the soul and the heartbeat of the people. It reflects the
spirit of the time and reveals the inner current of culture and traditions.


The ANC believes that arts and culture embrace customs, beliefs, tradition,
religion, language, crafts, art and all art forms such as music, dance, the
visual arts, film, theatre and written and oral literature. Arts permeate
all aspects of society and are integral to the improvement of the social
and economic lives of communities.

The ANC-led government will always encourage and facilitate cultural
exchanges between people of South Africa and the rest of the world. Thank
you.

                            BATTLE AGAINST CRIME
                        SIGNIFICANCE OF ROBBEN ISLAND

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Speaker, with regard to the question of
crime, it is important that members of the House should have a better
understanding than ordinary people on the street.

First of all, an examination of the budget of this nation will show that
over the past few years, government has increased the budget for policing
in order to tackle the problems of a shortage of police personnel as well
as the necessary equipment. Out of that budget, government has intensified
the recruitment of members of the police to beef up the numbers.

We have sent large numbers of young people of this country to various
academies around the world for training, some of whom are already coming
back into the country. This money has gone into the mobilisation of large
numbers of communities, reinforcing policing fora in communities, including
indeed, organising them even street by street so that there is more
vigilance on the part of the community. The advertisements on the radio
today and so on, which continue to focus the attention of communities on
the battle against crime, speak to what efforts are being made by
government in this regard.

The collaboration between the government and the private sector, especially
business, in initiatives that go beyond what government itself can do,
speaks to the seriousness with which the government treats the question of
crime.

The government’s strategy to fight crime does not end there; all of the
welfare grants speak to an attack on poverty. As regards the problem of
unemployment, disability grants, children’s grants and so on are intended
to assist those families that may be faced with problems caused by
unemployment. The increment in pension payouts makes it possible for the
recipients to purchase some sorely needed items so that those families can
put bread on the table.

To look at the strategy against crime purely on the basis of what has been
done by the police, is to miss the overall picture of the efforts to deal
with this scourge.

Indeed, even when we talk to business about the question of job creation we
are talking about the battle against crime. I have to deal with more than
one issue, Madam Deputy Speaker.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you want to deal with another question? Do complete
it. We will just take one slot away from the Ministers. There is no
problem.

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Speaker, I wanted to deal with the second
issue, which is the issue that the hon Motsuoko Pheko raised, which I think
is a serious and important matter. Whilst it is true that Robben Island was
a place of deep suffering, it is also true that we want Robben Island to be
a symbol of reconciliation; of the transformation of relations amongst the
people as we move forward.

Why should we say to young people who want to get married: “You may not go
and get married on Robben Island where Mangaliso Sobukwe suffered and where
Nelson Mandela suffered”? If those young people want to show their
commitment to the ideals for which these people suffered, if they want to
keep the levels of awareness of society focused on the mistakes we have
made in our history, in what other positive way could they do so?

I believe that those who do so do get married there do so in order to say
that, indeed, even their as yet unborn children will remember that South
Africa paid the price for this democracy. Never again should we allow what
happened here on Robben Island to happen again. We must rather, like those
who paid the price there, that the future belongs to all who live in this
country.

I think we must sustain that, because the buildings are there and the story
is being told of the suffering people went through. [Applause.]

  GROWTH IN SA TOURISM HARMFUL EFFECTS OF GLOBAL WARMING AND CLIMATE CHANGE

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Deputy Speaker, I would
like to respond to two statements, the first being the one on climate
change by the hon member Dr Cachalia and the second the one on tourism by
the hon member Judy Chalmers. Let me deal with the tourism statement first.


Three years ago we announced that our objective was to have 10 million
foreign arrivals by 2010 and people said that it was impossible. The
statement by the hon Chalmers referred to the first 11 months of the year.
This morning I received the statistics for the full 2007 and I would like
to table it here in Parliament. It is good news again and we are growing at
an extraordinary rate.

Tourism worldwide is growing at the moment by about 6%. Last year in South
Africa, we grew by 8,6% and that is extraordinarily good growth.
[Applause.]

If we look at the different markets, we see that the United States is now
our second biggest source market. It is more than just a recovery of the
pre-9/11 market and the collapse of that market at that stage. We are
seeing new growth there.

For instance, last year we received 22 000 more arrivals from the United
States compared to the previous year, and that is growth of just over 8,7%.
It is partly due to the Cabinet’s Airlift Strategy. We have seen
announcements from new airlines flying directly from the United States -
Delta Airlines - and it is evident in the arrivals statistics from that
country.

But, as the hon member has pointed out, there is also good growth from
Africa. From Nigeria we’ve had an increase of almost 13%, 12,8%, and from
Kenya 14,7%, and this illustrates quite clearly that Africa is a good
market for us with a lot of potential growth. From Asia and Australasia
we’ve experienced the same; from China 12,9% and from India almost 17%. We
are quite proud of our growth strategy in that market.

In terms of tourism we are on target. It is still the fastest growing
sector of our economy and judging by the way that we are performing at the
moment, we will definitely reach that figure of 10 million foreign arrivals
by 2010.

On the climate change statement, yes, I agree with that statement. We are
not only seeing and experiencing change in terms of the environment. This
also applies to agriculture, for instance, as well as health.

Last week we had a debate in Parliament which you and a number of other hon
members participated in. With regard to agriculture, we predict - and we
think it is pretty close to what will happen - that we will see quite a
dramatic decline in our maize production over the next few years, because
we will receive less rain in the western part of our country, which is our
maize basket, while in the eastern part - and people who live in KwaZulu-
Natal and the Eastern Cape can attest to this – we will receive more rain.
More unpredictable weather and more rain and cold fronts are moving in,
compared to what we are used to as South Africans.

With regard to international negotiations, we committed ourselves in Bali
in December last year to concluding the negotiations by the end of 2009.
All of that is on course. Last week we took note of the United States
saying that all developing countries must come in on the same basis as the
developed countries. We would like to remind them that that is not what we
agreed to in Bali.

In Bali we agreed to a category for developed countries, with specific
targets and comparable effort between all developed countries, and for
developing countries measurable verifiable actions which we determine
voluntarily.

I would like to report back to Parliament that we are quite advanced with
our long-term mitigation study process. We will report back to Cabinet
within the next two to three months and then we will report back to
Parliament before making the results of the study public. That is what will
be required from us; the steps that we have to take to achieve some kind of
target.

I would like to say to Parliament that the ANC proposed a reduction target
for the country in Polokwane. We are looking into that right now and one of
the tools will be a price on carbon. Our message to the private sector is:
Please take note, it will happen; it may take a few years, but it will
happen. Thank you. [Applause.]

                         HEALTHY LIFESTYLE CAMPAIGN

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Madam Deputy Speaker, I was
going to respond to two statements, but the hon Minister of Defence covered
me with the comment he made about crime. So, I shall respond to the
statement by the hon Madumise.

Firstly, Deputy Speaker, we want to commend the Gauteng Department of
Health on the launch of the Healthy Lifestyle Campaign. And, indeed, it was
a campaign that was launched by the national department just over a year
ago. We would also like to encourage all other provincial departments, to
launch and sustain a similar campaign.

Secondly, is no secret, Deputy Speaker, that most ailments and diseases are
lifestyle-related. Diseases such as diabetes, high blood pressure and HIV,
are all lifestyle-related.

Thirdly, Madam Deputy Speaker, I would also like to just emphasise that,
yes, I do have the right to access basic health care by the state but I
also have a responsibility to keep myself healthy. And, I want to emphasise
that with every right also goes a responsibility, and that is to keep
ourselves healthy.

Fourthly, Madam Deputy Speaker, we also want to call on or encourage all
South Africans to adopt a healthy lifestyle by eating healthily, exercising
regularly and also embarking on healthy lifestyle practices. That also
includes all of us in this House. Thank you, Deputy Speaker.

 CONSIDERATION OF FIFTEENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
  - ANNUAL REPORT AND REPORT OF AUDITOR-GENERAL ON FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF
  DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR ENDING 31 MARCH 2007

 CONSIDERATION OF SIXTEENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
  - ANNUAL REPORT AND REPORT OF AUDITOR-GENERAL ON FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF
     DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS FOR FINANCIAL YEAR ENDING 31 MARCH 2007

     CONSIDERATION OF SEVENTEENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
    ACCOUNTS - CONSIDERATION OF THE APPROVAL OF UNAUTHORISED EXPENDITURE
              INCURRED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES

Mr N T GODI: Hon Deputy Speaker, comrades and hon members, we are bringing
before the House three reports from our committee – the 2006-07 annual
reports of the Departments of Public Enterprises and Public Works and the
report on the unauthorised expenditure incurred by the Department of Public
Enterprises.

The unauthorised expenditure, totalling R11 006 245, incurred during the
1997-98 and 1999-2000 financial years in terms of the Exchequer Act of
1975, relates to the contravention of procurement procedures. We recommend
that the House approves the unauthorised expenditure as the accounting
officer has confirmed that the services received were to the satisfaction
of the department, control measures are now in place to prevent this from
happening again and systems have been put in place to address expenditure
control and financial management.
The Department of Public Enterprises got an absolutely clean report from
the Auditor-General. When they appeared before us, it was more to commend
their achievement and showcase a rare success story. Except for concerns
raised around staff turnover, especially with regard to skills and contract
levels, as well as fruitless expenditure of R80 000 relating to the late
cancellation of a conference, we are satisfied that the department is
exemplary in its financial management.

The budget of this department is almost equal to that of Home Affairs. This
proves that there is no reason why Home Affairs should not properly account
for its expenditure, when the Department of Public Enterprises can get a
clean audit.

We also found that leadership and teamwork are cornerstones of the
department’s success. This is something to be emulated.

In the Department of Public Works’ annual report, the committee raises
concerns about a number of issues which need correction or attention,
namely the high vacancy rates, especially at senior management and highly
skilled levels. The impact of such vacancies on service delivery,
compliance and effective management is obvious.  We recommend that
Parliament be given quarterly progress reports on how the department is
addressing this issue.

There are significant shortcomings in the management and control of assets
owing, among other things, to inadequate monitoring and inadequate policies
and procedures. We would like to see these inadequacies being addressed,
including the training of staff, and disciplinary action being taken for
deviations from or noncompliance with policies and procedures.

We have also reported on significant internal control weaknesses which
impact on rental debt recovery, implementation of policies and procedures
and noncompliance with applicable legislation. This is definitely
unacceptable. We would like to see managers managing and monitoring to
ensure full compliance with control measures. I thank you.

Mr E W TRENT: Madam Deputy Speaker, as is my custom, I’m not going to deal
with those aspects of the reports that we are all able to read. I rather
want to deal with the macro issues involved. I would just like to repeat
what the hon Godi has said - managers must manage.

There are fundamentally two government departments that must carry the
lion’s share of the responsibility to ensure that effective and efficient
management of public resources takes place. These are the departments,
obviously, headed by the Minister of Finance and the Minister for the
Public Service and Administration. It is critically important that these
two Ministers work hand in glove with each other, and I‘ve noticed that
neither of them is here this afternoon, as usual.

In reply to my question of February 2008, the hon Minister of Finance
announced that amendments to the Public Finance Management Act would be
tabled during June. He said that he had initiated a review of the Public
Finance Management Act with the objective of, amongst other things,
strengthening the accountability of departments and public entities to
Parliament, and that he was going to align its provisions with those of the
Municipal Finance Management Act.

He said that the tabling of the amending Bill had followed extensive
consultations. Well, we applaud that. In fact, I withdrew a Private
Member’s Bill as the Minister had promised me that they were going to come
with amendments.

I believe that it should be compulsory for departments - those that drag
their feet on tabling their annual reports - to be required to submit the
annual audit report independently of the annual report as is the
requirement or provision in the Municipal Finance Management Act.

An example of this is Home Affairs, which submitted its annual report for
the 2007 financial year about a month ago. This is just not good enough. It
makes it difficult for the Standing Committee on Public Accounts to do its
work within reasonable timeframes. We welcome the Minister’s announcements
in this regard, but, as I have said, they are long overdue. This Act is now
eight years old.

The Act is an outstanding piece of legislation, but after eight years
problems have arisen with regard to its implementation. Amendments must
allow for a higher level of accountability, begin to be more performance
and value-for-money-oriented and make it possible for aspects such as
fruitless and unauthorised expenditure to be monitored far more
effectively.

In the very limited time I have available, and before I move on to the
Minister for the Public Service and Administration, I would like to raise
just two further issues.

Firstly, I firmly believe that to simply update the schedules, Schedules 1,
2 and 3 of the Public Finance Management Act, by amending the lists of
entities is simply not good enough. The Minister has to go further and look
at these more than 300 entities that we have in South Africa to ascertain
whether they are in fact the most efficient and cost-effective way of
delivering services.

We can’t just go on and accept that these entities are good at doing the
job. That is the experience we are having in Scopa. I have no doubt that
the portfolio committee has found the same thing. We must get rid of those
that aren’t working and stick with those that are. I think that is very
important.

Secondly, I think the Minister must be reminded that this Parliament is
rapidly drawing to a close, and I want to appeal to the Minister to do
everything in his power to make sure that the amending Bill is dealt with
before the end of the year. If he fails to do that, with the election
coming and a new Parliament being elected, I fear that this Bill will wait
another two years before it is amended. Why is it important? Because we
want to improve public finance management; it’s as simple as that.

Speaker, one of the entities that, without a doubt, does sterling work is
the Commission for Administration. This commission has researched and
tabled at least thirty reports over the past two years on a wide range of
issues that directly relate to the performance of our Public Service, most
recently the indebtedness report of the Public Service - and I will
highlight just a few issues in this report. This is shocking. Some of you
are familiar with it.

Public servants had their wages docked to the tune of more than
R1 billion in just a year as their levels of indebtedness rose massively,
raising fears that this could increase fraud and corruption. This is one of
the opportunities that you need for fraud. Opportunities and indebtedness
are two of the issues that create fraud.

I also believe that this indebtedness could have an adverse effect on the
productivity of these employees. They are psychologically affected and they
are not productive. The report recommends, inter alia, that government
should amend the service regulations to compel senior managers to declare
their loans liabilities and, in addition, their private business interests.


In conclusion, I want to say that it’s one thing to amend the Public
Finance Management Act, but unless the recommendations of the Public
Service Commission are taken seriously by the Minister and amendments to
the Public Service regulations and the necessary legislation are made, the
total effect on our Public Service will not be at the desired level. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr H J BEKKER: Madam Deputy Speaker, with the exception of the Department
of Public Enterprises, it seems to me that every time this House debates
Scopa reports on the audited financial statements of state departments, the
same weaknesses appear over and over again.

Just over two weeks ago, this House debated various Scopa reports. The
major failings of the relevant departments were high vacancy rates, high
staff-turnover rates, poor assessment in terms of asset management and weak
internal controls. Today those very same weaknesses are evident in the
Auditor-General’s report for the relevant departments we are discussing
today.

I confidently predict that in future we will find exactly the same problems
in other departments when we again debate Scopa reports. This clearly
indicates the pervasive nature of the weaknesses in our public
administration.

South Africa is experiencing a skills shortage in all sectors. However, it
appears to the IFP that this problem is very serious in our state
departments, which has obvious consequences for service delivery and for
accountability to Parliament.

The problem of high staff turnover rates is also of major concern. Clearly,
a large number of public servants are being lured to the private sector.
However, we must question whether the Public Service has done enough to
retain personnel, especially those that have received on-the-job training
in the government departments.

The IFP has already welcomed the President’s announcement that all Public
Service vacancies should be filled within the six months period after such
a vacancy occurs. But our fear is that even if the vacancies are filled,
there is no guarantee that those persons will remain in the Public Service
for very long.

The continuous problems of poor asset management and poor internal controls
concern us greatly. These weaknesses have to be addressed urgently by the
accounting officers of these departments and Parliament must be a great
deal more vigilant in its oversight in order to ensure that they actually
take the steps expected of them to rectify these shortcomings. I thank you.
[Time expired.]

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Madam Deputy Speaker and hon members, the 15th report on
the Department of Public Enterprises confirms that the Auditor-General has
given the department an unqualified audit report for the 2006-07 financial
year.

Nevertheless, two issues of concern are raised, namely fruitless
expenditure of R80 000 and a skilled staff turnover of nearly 11%. The
latter is a cause for concern since this is one of the most common factors
in departments that regularly fail to deliver or satisfy PFMA requirements.

The report on the Department of Public Works raises once more the familiar
theme of capacity constraints as a result of staff shortages. Vacancy
rates, especially in critical positions, remain at an unacceptably high
level. This causes or exacerbates other problems such as insufficient
control over asset registers and internal control weaknesses. The UDM
supports the four recommendations made in the report.

The 17th report of Scopa... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Madam Deputy Speaker, the ACDP commends Public Enterprises
for receiving an unqualified audit opinion. In view of the large number of
qualified opinions and disclaimers in other departments, this is a rarity
and should be commended, but it should be the rule and not the exception.
We also share the concerns expressed by Scopa regarding the high turnover
of personnel, especially skilled persons, in the report on Public
Enterprises.

A lack of skilled personnel, as has been pointed out by speakers, permeates
the Public Service and is also highlighted in the report on Public Works
that has an average rate of 17,5% for vacant posts, of which a high
proportion relates to critical posts. We support the proposals from Scopa
to address this issue.

The Public Works report also highlights significant shortcomings in the
management of state assets. This is our family silver and we need to
protect it. We can’t afford to lose these assets worth billions of rands.

We also note the significant control weaknesses regarding the recovery of
rentals. The state could be losing millions of rands if these rentals are
not followed up, particularly considering the three year prescription
period. The ACDP will, however, support these reports. I thank you.
Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Adjunk Speaker, dié verslag raak basies twee
aangeleenthede aan: Die eerste is, byvoorbeeld, die vrugtelose uitgawes by
Openbare Ondernemings wat die gevolg is van wanadministrasie deurdat ’n
kongres gekanselleer is. Maar daar word nie opgetree teen hierdie amptenare
nie, want hulle het die diens verlaat. Dit word ’n mode onder amptenare om
wanadministrasie te pleeg en dan gaan hulle net eenvoudig uit die
departement uit en daar word nie teen hulle opgetree nie.

Die tweede aspek gaan basies oor personeel: die een geval van 10,8% van
omset in personeel by Openbare Ondernemings en 17,5% van personeelvakatures
by Openbare Werke. Die vraag is: Hoekom gebeur dit juis daar?

Daar moet weereens gekyk word van die ANC-regering se kant of dit nie as
gevolg van regstellende aksie is nie. Daar is mense wat aansoek doen vir
poste, maar omdat hulle nie kan deel wees van regstellende aksie nie word
daai poste nie gevul nie. Dalk moet u luister na die agb Kader Asmal wat
sê, “die ANC-regering moet indringend herbesin oor regstellende aksie”.
[Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Deputy Speaker, this report touches on two basic
issues: The first is, for example, the fruitless expenditure at Public
Enterprises which is the result of maladministration because a convention
was cancelled. But no steps are being taken against these officials because
they have left the Public Service. It is becoming fashionable amongst
officials to involve themselves in maladministration and then to simply
leave the department with no steps being taken against them.

The second aspect is basically about staff: in one instance a 10, 8% staff
turnover at Public Enterprises and staff vacancies of 17,5% at Public
Works. The question is: Why is it occurring there?

The ANC government should be determining whether this is the result of
affirmative action. There are people who apply for positions, but because
those people cannot be part of affirmative action, those positions are not
filled. Perhaps you should listen to the hon Kader Asmal, who said, “the
ANC government should seriously reconsider affirmative action”. [Time
expired.]]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Madam Deputy Speaker, the MF once again stresses the
importance for us to operate in a system of transparency and checks and
balances. We need to firmly institute our responsibility and answerability
to the people. Scopa plays a vital role in securing this.

As regards the 15th report, we join Scopa in applauding the Department of
Public Enterprises in its good management and share in the concerns
regarding a 10,8% staff turnover for 2006-07 and the fruitless expenditure
of R80 000 resulting from the late cancellation of a conference. We hope
the Scopa recommendations are met with keen consideration.

The 16th report of Scopa on the Department of Public Works expresses great
concern regarding the large number of vacancies in the department, some of
which are absolutely crucial positions. The MF hopes that we will comb
through the ranks of the unemployed and find people to fill these vacancies
fast.

The 17th report of Scopa regarding unauthorised expenditure by the
Department of Public Enterprises in 1997-98 to 1999-2000 states that
satisfactory measures have been taken to ensure that such expenditure will
not reoccur. The MF will support the reports.

Mr D M GUMEDE: Hon Deputy Speaker, comrades and colleagues, I shall
restrict myself to the listed reports. Of these reports, two are financial
reports of which one is qualified and the other contains a request for
approval of unauthorised expenditure.

In each report there are challenges in a number of areas, which I shall
highlight, starting with the financial report of the Department of Public
Works.

Beginning with the brief historical background of the Department of Public
Works, it is patchy, indicating that progress is made in some areas, with
constant challenges in others.
Areas of concern include the weaknesses that have been identified in the
key systems of some of the departments, especially at regional level.

These include a lack of monitoring and general control over systems; asset
registers for movable and immovable assets; data control; the lease
portfolio, where reconciliation is not done on time, leading to write-offs;
procurement systems that appear to have no control over them and not to be
in line with Treasury specifications; and unauthorised expenditure, because
we have a number of funded vacancies that are unfilled, especially for
skilled personnel and management.

Affirmative action is necessary and has to happen for South Africa to be
stable. There is no way we can run away from affirmative action.
[Applause.]

The reports we are dealing with today have those control problems that I
have talked about. There are, however, also areas of the ICT environment
that are a cause for concern. Given that there are vacancies at senior
management level, positions that are responsible for exercising control
using available skills and capacities, it is not surprising that we have
problems in areas of control and monitoring, even where the Auditor-General
indicated a need for intervention in previous years. We therefore view the
filling of vacancies as a matter of urgency so as to address problems that
the department has, including those listed above.

This will provide resources and capacities that are required in line with
due execution and stewardship of public resources and capacities by the
accounting officer. We humbly request that the portfolio committee assist
where it can, and we are prepared to be guided by them in areas where we
may not have the necessary insight.

I now come to the annual report of the Department of Public Enterprises and
we commend the department for its unqualified report. The committee is of
the view that the department has to establish reasons for the high staff
turnover, otherwise we request that they continue with their good work as
reflected in the annual report.

Lastly, coming to the unauthorised expenditure incurred by the Department
of Public Enterprises, one has to explain why this expenditure exceeding
R11 million was approved by Scopa. The first amount arose from the
extension of an existing contract with consultants. As restructuring of
state assets had to continue, this contract, which was perfectly legal, had
to be extended. The extension required that the State Tender Board ratify
it before the consultants could continue with their work. What rendered
this expenditure unauthorised is that the department used more than it had
foreseen when its budget was allocated.
The second amount arose from consultancy fees that were invited without
official tenders, thus incurring unauthorised expenditure, and unauthorised
expenditure remains unacceptable and undesirable.

However, looking at the nature and possible impact of the unauthorised
expenditure, we felt that because the unauthorised expenditure was
fruitful, we received value for money. Furthermore, there are control
measures in place to prevent a recurrence.

The officials concerned with procurement were trained to ensure that future
procurement is in line with the supply management request. We should
approve the expenditure because there was value for money and the
objectives of the budget were met.

We were satisfied that the required systems, capacities and controls are in
place and that services were rendered in line with the objectives of the
budget. Scopa proposes that the unauthorised expenditure be approved by
Parliament.

Coming back to what was proposed before, that we should upgrade the
requirements for financial management, I think in principle we should not
disagree. However, at the same time we have to look back to see what
skills, resources and capacity the country has. Then we can move on, Mr
Trent. Thank you very much. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, we move:

  That the Reports be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Reports accordingly adopted.

                               POINTS OF ORDER

                                  (Ruling)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, during the debate on the President’s state
of the nation address on 13 February 2008, the hon Minister of Housing
raised a point of order around whether it was parliamentary and acceptable
that in his speech, the hon Chief Whip of the Opposition should “find that
black women and engineers are mutually exclusive”. By way of interjection,
the hon Mr Lowe then said, and I quote: “We already know that you are
stupid, you don’t have to show it.”

A further point of order was then raised by hon Ms Mentoor around whether
such an interjection was parliamentary. On a further point of order, Mrs
Seaton then informed the House that the hon Minister of Housing had shouted
that members on this side of the house are stupid.

In addition, at a later stage in the debate, various questions were posed
during the hon Dr Delport’s speech around his reference to “my mense”, his
people.

Having had the opportunity to study the unrevised Hansard, I would now like
to rule as follows: The Minister of Housing’s initial point of order is a
matter of debate, and not a point of order. Although the interjection by
the hon Mr Lowe is audible on the recording, the remarks ascribed to the
Minister of Housing are not.

I have ascertained that the word “stupid” has indeed on occasion, although
not consistently, been ruled unparliamentary. However, as the full exchange
that took place was not audible and therefore could not be captured by
Hansard, I cannot rule on the matter.

With regard to the general quality of the debate that took place on the
day, including during the hon Dr Delport’s speech, I would like to caution
hon members to moderate their language and to conduct themselves in such a
way that contributes positively to the level of debate in the House.

The House adjourned at 15:11.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                          FRIDAY, 29 FEBRUARY 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and Disinfectants Amendment Bill [B 35F –
         2005] – Act No 39 of 2007 (assented to and signed by President on
         23 February 2008).


      2) Tobacco Products Control Amendment Bill [B 24B – 2006] – Act No 23
         of 2007 (assented to and signed by President on 23 February 2008).

2.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM on 22 February 2008 in terms of Joint Rule 160(6)
         classified the following Bill as a section 77 Bill:
          a) Appropriation Bill [B 3 – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 77).




National Assembly


The Speaker

 1. Membership of Committees

      1) The following changes have been made to the membership of Portfolio
         Committees:

         Minerals and Energy
         Appointed:    Ngcobo, Mr E N N
         Discharged:   Mthethwa, Mr E N

TABLINGS

National Assembly

The Speaker

CREDA PLEASE Scan in - T080229- Insert 1 - PAGES 372-377

                            MONDAY, 3 MARCH 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

      1) Castle Management Act Repeal Bill, 2008, submitted by the Minister
         of Defence. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Defence and the
         Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs.


      2) Defence Amendment Bill, 2008, submitted by the Minister of Defence.
         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Defence and the Select
         Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs.

      3) Tobacco Products Control Amendment Bill, 2008, submitted by the
         Minister of Health. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Health
         and the Select Committee on Social Services.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Labour

      a) International Labour Organisation (ILO) Convention 187 and
         Recommendation 197 concerning the Promotional Framework for
         Occupational Safety and Health, 2006, tabled in terms of section
         231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.
      b) Explanatory Memorandum to the International Labour Organisation
         (ILO) Convention 187 and Recommendation 197 concerning the
         Promotional Framework for Occupational Safety and Health.

      c) International Labour Organisation (ILO) Convention 188, concerning
         work in the Fishing Sector and Recommendation 199, concerning work
         in the Fishing Sector, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.

      d) Explanatory Memorandum to the International Labour Organisation
         (ILO) Convention 188, concerning work in the Fishing Sector and
         Recommendation 199, concerning work in the Fishing Sector.

      e) International Labour Organisation (ILO) Recommendation 198
         concerning the Employment Relationship, 2006, tabled in terms of
         section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

      f) Explanatory Memorandum to the International Labour Organisation
         (ILO) Recommendation 198 concerning the Employment Relationship,
         2006.

      g) International Labour Organisation (ILO) Maritime Labour Convention,
         2006, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


      h) Explanatory Memorandum to the International Labour Organisation
         (ILO) Maritime Labour Convention, 2006.

National Assembly
1.    The Speaker

      a) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the Evaluation of
         Government’s Poverty Reduction Programme – October 2007 [RP 239-
         2007].

     (b)    Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the
         Implementation of Fraud Prevention Plans in the Public Sector –
         November 2007 [RP 236-2007

                            TUESDAY, 4 MARCH 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


          a) Renaming of High Courts Bill [B 5 – 2008] (National Assembly –
             proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
             of its introduction published in Government Gazette No 30799
             of 21 February 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Justice and Constitutional Development of the National
             Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
             (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Communications


     a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Communications for 2008 to
        2011.

2.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

      a) Government Notice No R.15 published in Government Gazette No 30645
         dated 4 January 2008: Notice in terms of section 16 of the Marine
         Living Resources Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of 1998).


      b) Government Notice No 19 published in Government Gazette No 30666
         dated 18 January 2008: Correction of Government Notice No 1197
         published in Government Gazette No 30590 dated 18 December 2007,
         in terms of the World Heritage Convention Act, 1999 (Act No 49 of
         1999).
COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

“1.   Report of the Joint Standing Committee on Defence on employment of
    SANDF for a service in co-operation with the South African Police
    Service, dated 20 February 2008.

     The Joint Standing Committee on Defence, having considered the letter
     from the President on the employment of the South African National
     Defence Force (SANDF) for a service in co-operation with the South
     African Police Service, referred to the Committee, reports that it has
     concluded its deliberations thereon.




2.    Report of the Joint Standing Committee on Defence on employment of
    SANDF in Darfur, Sudan, dated 20 February 2008.

     The Joint Standing Committee on Defence, having considered the letter
     from the President on the employment of the South African National
     Defence Force (SANDF) in Darfur, Sudan, referred to the Committee,
     reports that it has concluded its deliberations thereon.”


CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - Insert T080304 – Insert 1 - PAGES 392-401

