---
title: 'National Assembly - 17 January 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: JANUARY
month_slug: Jan
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2008-01-17
---

THURSDAY, 17 JANUARY 2008
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 15:03.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                                 NEW MEMBER

                               (Announcement)

The Speaker announced that the vacancy that had occurred due to the
resignation of Mr D H M Gibson from the National Assembly had been filled
by the nomination, with effect from 15 January 2008 of Dr D T George.

                                    OATH

Dr D T George, accompanied by Mr W P Doman and Mrs S V Kalyan, made and
subscribed the oath, and took his seat.
                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, on behalf of the ACDP, I give notice that I
shall move:

   That the House debates the price of bread, the negative impact of this
   price on society and the need for an urgent intervention. Thank you.

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that I intend moving
on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates the following –

   (1)      the emerging crisis regarding the national supply of electricity
        and its impact on the economic sector; and


   (2)      the negative humanitarian consequences and adverse impact on
        investor confidence, including the steps government and Eskom are
        taking and ought to take to prevent this emerging crisis.

Ms A M DREYER: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that I intend moving:

   That the House debates the merits of the Minister of Labour, Membathisi
   Mdladlana’s proposed changes to the Sector Education and Training
   Authorities, or Setas, and possible alternatives to this current system.

[Applause.]

  INTERNATIONAL AWARD TO SOUTH AFRICA’S CONSERVATION PIONEER, DR IAN PLAYER

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –

   (1)      notes that South African wildlife conservationist Dr Ian Player
        received the Peter H Capstick Award from the Dallas Safari Club and
        Ecological Foundation in the United States on Saturday, 12 January
        2008;

   (2)      further notes that he joins the ranks of previous recipients
        that include former US President Theodore Roosevelt;

   (3)      recognises that he founded the Dusi Canoe Marathon which starts
        today, 17 January 2008, and that he won it three times;

   (4)      acknowledges the vital role he has played in influencing and
        educating young conservationists, especially through the Wilderness
        Leadership School which he founded in 1957;


   (5)      further recognises that the Peter H Capstick Award joins the
        many awards he has received in the past, which include the Knight
        of the Order of the Golden Ark and the Decoration for Meritorious
        Service; and

   (6)      congratulates him on this great honour that has been bestowed on
        him and on the contribution he has made to Africa and its
        conservation.

Agreed to.

                 ANC’S 52ND NATIONAL CONFERENCE IN POLOKWANE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:
   That the House –

     1) notes –


          a) that from 16 to 20 December 2007, the African National
             Congress held its 52nd National Conference in Polokwane,
             Limpopo; and


          b) that the conference adopted various policies to inform its
             work during the next five years and beyond;

     2) recalls that the Conference reaffirmed the ANC’s commitment to the
        creation of a truly democratic, nonracial, nonsexist and prosperous
        South Africa;


[Laughter.] [Interjections.] It is a good thing that you laugh about
“nonracial”.

   (3)      congratulates the ANC and its newly elected leadership on
        holding a successful conference; and


   (4)      wishes the new leadership success in their important work.

Thank you. [Applause.]
Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: It is convention for
these things to be circulated to parties beforehand. We as the DA are being
asked to vote on something that is very strictly an ANC matter. I do wonder
whether this is in fact exactly what the ANC intended us to do. It has not
been circulated. We have not got it, and consequently we are a little bit
stumped as to what we should do in this case.

The SPEAKER: Hon Chief Whip, I do request that the Whips continue to make
it easy for the House to proceed with matters such as notices without
motion.

However, having heard the content, do you have any objection, hon Ellis?
[Interjections.] Well I see the head of the Chief Whip of the Opposition
indicating there is no objection, and I take it there is no objection.

Mr M J ELLIS: That is it! [Applause.]

Agreed to.

                       BEST WISHES TO MEMBERS FOR 2008

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs S A SEATON: Madam Speaker, may I just, on behalf of the IFP, wish all
members of this House a happy and prosperous 2008. Thank you. [Applause.]

Agreed to.

                             ELECTIONS IN KENYA

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House –

   (1)      notes that on Thursday, 27 December 2007, the people of Kenya
        went to the polls to elect a new president;


   (2)      further notes that the international observers who were there
        commended the manner in which the Kenyan people conducted themselves
        during the process of voting;


   (3)      recalls that the outcome of the election was disputed, resulting
        in violence breaking out. The violence is reported to have claimed
        more than 700 lives, destroyed property and displaced tens of
        thousands of people;
   (4)      encourages all parties in Kenya to seek a peaceful resolution to
        the challenges their country faces; and


   (5)      conveys its condolences to Kenya for the lives that have been
        lost.


The SPEAKER: Are there any objections?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: We
did not receive a copy of this. There is an objection, particularly to the
first part. I suggest you hold it over to the following meeting. Thank you.

The SPEAKER: Okay, hon members. We shall hold that in abeyance until such
time as there has been proper consultation.

                             NEW SPRINGBOK COACH

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –

     1) notes that on Wednesday, 9 January 2008, Peter de Villiers became
        the new coach of our national rugby team, the Springboks, taking
        over from Jake White;


     2) further notes that Peter de Villiers has coached a number of teams
        before, including amongst others the Emerging Springboks, who won
        the IRB tournament in Romania, and the South Africa U21 team, who
        won the World Championship in 2005 and were the losing finalists in
        2006;


   (3)      expresses its appreciation to the SA Rugby Board on the mature
        and visionary leadership they have displayed in crossing the racial
        prejudice divide; and


   (4)      congratulates Peter de Villiers on his appointment as the first
        black person ever to coach the Springbok Rugby team in our country.

[Applause.]

Agreed to.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House –
     1) notes that on Thursday, 27 December 2007, Ms Benazir Bhutto and
        other Pakistani nationals were assassinated in Rawalpindi, Pakistan;


     2) humbly urges the people and political parties in Pakistan to remain
        calm during this very turbulent and trying period in their history
        and to remain committed to the political processes towards
        elections;


     3) further urges the authorities in that country to leave no stone
        unturned to ensure that the perpetrators of this heinous crime face
        the full might of the law; and


     4) conveys its condolences to the people of Pakistan and the Bhutto
        family on the lives that have been lost as a result of the political
        instability.


Agreed to.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:


   That the House –

   (1)      notes that –


        (a) on Thursday, 3 January 2008, Mr Mlungisi Sisulu, the son of the
            former Chief Whip of the Majority Party Max Sisulu, passed on
            in London, England, while on a visit to that country; and

        (b) at the time of his death, Mr Sisulu was a South African diplomat
            based in Khartoum, Sudan, where he was the First Secretary;


   (2)      remembers that Mr Sisulu served the Department of Foreign
        Affairs and indeed the country with diligence, professionalism,
        loyalty and dedication; and


   (3)      conveys its condolences to his family, loved ones and the
        African National Congress.


Thank you.


Agreed to.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: I
certainly don’t object to that motion. But, may I just emphasise your
point. I have spoken to the Chief Whip of the IFP and indeed I can speak
for the DA that we have not received any copy of those motions that are
without notice. Please, can we in future make sure that those are
circularised appropriately!
The SPEAKER: Hon Chief Whip, can we please just make sure that we sort this
one out. I don’t think we need a debate on the matter.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, our apologies
to any party which might not have received the motions. The information
that we have is that they were circulated. If they weren’t, we will look
into the matter. We apologise if this didn’t happen.

The SPEAKER: Apology accepted. I am quite sure hon ... [Interjections.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker, the Deputy Chief Whip has also sent us
motions without notice in the past. I just wonder whether the fact that he
didn’t do it now has anything to do with the fact that he now wears a
beard. [Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: I doubt that.

Is there any other motion without notice?

I must say, for a split second I didn’t recognise him. [Laughter.]

              CHOICE ON TERMINATION OF PREGNANCY AMENDMENT BILL
                  (Decision of Question on Second Reading)

Question put: That the Bill be read a second time.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, ours is just a small
technical point, and that is that declarations of vote have been asked for
but no one has ever asked us yet to vote. So, shouldn’t we first hear if
there are objections?

The SPEAKER: Indeed, you are correct. I’d like those political parties that
might want to make declarations of vote to make up their minds so that we
deal with that quickly when we start.

Declarations of vote:

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, the ACDP opposes this Bill in the strongest
possible terms and implores members of this House to make a stand and do
the same. Do not let the blood of more innocent babies be on your hands.

In view on the tremendous public concern and in response to submissions
made in the public hearings, the ACDP proposed eight amendments.

These amendments were aimed at not only protecting the women and children
who may consider termination, but also providing protection for health care
workers and professionals who choose not to participate in termination of
pregnancy due to religious, ethical or moral beliefs. Court cases, where
medical personnel have been discriminated against because of their
convictions, are ongoing.

The ACDP amendments provide for mandatory counselling to ensure mothers are
well informed about the risks of abortion and the alternatives available.
Many women are suffering the consequences of abortions as they did not have
enough information to make an informed choice. Physical, emotional and
psychological risks must be weighed against the benefits.

The ACDP believes that by ignoring calls for explicit and mandatory
counselling, legislators are setting themselves up to be sued in the future
for suppressing information and the findings of medical research. Those,
for whom we are seeking protection, could, in time, be asking for justice
and compensation just as tobacco companies and mines have had to pay for
the consequences of their neglect in failing to fully inform smokers and
users of short-fibre asbestos.

The portfolio committee has sadly once again ignored input and proceeded
unabated on a mission to steamroll the Choice of Termination of Pregnancy
Amendment Bill through Parliament.

In addressing these issues, the ACDP does not waver in our conviction that
the value of human life is priceless and that human life must be respected
and protected absolutely from the moment of conception.

Debate on the controversial issues around the Choice of Termination of
Pregnancy Act is generally suppressed. Presumably, government is aware that
Members of Parliament may be persuaded to have the courage of their
convictions and stand against legislation facilitating and expanding
abortion on demand.

The great anti-slavery campaigner, William Wilberforce, understood that
while people may ignore the truth, they still recognize it. So, he looked
for ways to remind people of what they already knew in their hearts.

Independent polls show the 1996 abortion law to be South Africa’s most
unpopular law and that nine out of ten South Africans believe that abortion
is morally wrong. The vast majority of nurses and doctors oppose it and
worldwide medical advances are giving more mothers reason to consider
options other than abortion for their babies.

It is just a question of time before overwhelming public sentiment,
opposing abortion, is expressed at the ballot box. Thank you.

Mr M WATERS: Thank you, Chairperson. The DA has twice stated its stance on
the amendment to the Choice on the Termination of Pregnancy Bill - late
last year and two years prior to that. We do have a free vote in the DA and
we therefore will be calling for a division later on, Madam Speaker.

We have two points of concern which we have raised in the past. The first
is that of nonmandatory counselling. We believe that counselling should be
made mandatory, particularly for girls who go for abortions as they are
unaware of the consequences of termination of pregnancy. Also, post-
counselling is important in order for family planning to prevent repeat
abortions taking place.

Our second concern is that of conscientious objection by medical staff. We
believe that doctors, mid-wives and nurses have the right to exercise their
conscience similar to that of the Civil Unions Bill, where marriage
officers have the right to refuse people like myself from getting married.
We believe they have a right to object and we believe that it should be
written into the law.

Having said that, Madam Speaker, we have, on two previous occasions, stated
our concerns with the Bill. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, the FD is in principle a strong defender of
pro-life policies and will not support any legislation that promotes
abortion on demand. Since 1997, when abortion became legal in this country,
more than 500 000 women have terminated their pregnancies.

Is it not a contradiction that our law does not allow 16 year old teenagers
to kiss in public but it allows a 12 year old pregnant girl to have an
abortion without the knowledge or the permission of her parents?

One of the alleged apparent successes of the legalisation of abortion is a
study done by the MRC on mortality among women during 1998-2001, which
indicates that there was a reduction of up to 98% in deaths from unsafe
abortions.

However, one of the primary failures, to date, with the abortion laws is
the continued increase in the rate of abortions, especially amongst our
youth. If legislation is aimed mainly at reducing the rate of mortality
linked to unsafe abortions without helping to lower the demand for
abortions, then our women still do not have a free enough choice to govern
their own bodies.

The Bill aims to establish facilities that are better-equipped and safe for
women requesting abortions. However, when the enactment of legislation only
partially addresses the perceived problem, then a review is desperately
needed.

The FD is of the opinion that to provide more and more facilities or even
to enforce licensing upon health professionals to perform abortions whilst
there is no downward trend in the demand for abortions not only impacts on
the state’s governance capacity but also limits our society’s ability to
advance in being truly free to respect life and human dignity.

During the public hearings and the debates in the portfolio committee,
there was a suggestion that a clause be inserted allowing conscientious
objection. The FD echoes the right to such recourse, which, besides
strengthening the democratic values upon which our society is built, also
adds respect among health professionals for one another’s moral principles.

Given the absence of such measures, as well as the inability of the health
system to reduce the rate of abortions over the years, the FD is unable to
see how the current legislation will make a difference in our society, and
cannot support this amending Bill. I thank you.

Dr C P MULDER: Madam Speaker, this matter was before the House at the end
of our session last year, and the only reason that we are dealing with it
again today is because the ruling party couldn’t muster sufficient votes
during that process. We all remember that. It seems that the new leadership
elected in the party has had a very positive effect, if I look at the
discipline that we see today with all the members who are present and ready
to vote. [Interjections.] We take note of that positive change, which is
what it seems to be.

Mevrou die Speaker, die feit van die saak is dat hierdie wetgewing reeds
voor die Parlement was. Dit handel oor aborsie en die implikasies daarvan.
Dit is omstrede wetgewing, want die feit van die saak is ’n 18-jarige
meisie mag nie alkohol koop nie; sy mag nie ingaan in ’n restaurant waar ’n
rookgedeelte is nie, maar ’n kind van 12 kan ’n besluit neem oor aborsie
sonder om haar ouers te ken daarin. Ons weet wat die implikasies en die
gevolge is op haar lewe later met so ’n tipe besluit. Dit is ingrypend en
ons besef dit.

Die feit van die saak is hierdie wetgewing word deurgeforseer. Dit word op
ons afgeforseer tot ’n groot mate, en ek het in die vorige debat reeds gesê
dit is nodig dat ons ’n debat sal voer oor die werklike redes waarom die
vrouens in die ANC so ongelooflik sterk voel oor hierdie saak. Daar is
ander redes hoekom hulle so voel as wat voor die hand liggend is. Die effek
van hierdie wetgewing is dat dit makliker gemaak word om aborsies deur te
voer. Dit word gedensentraliseer na provinsiale vlak toe, asook ander
probleme daarmee.

Die VF Plus, in beginsel, kan nie daarmee gaan nie. Ons sal teen die
wetgewing stem. Geluk aan die ANC – ons hoop ons kan meer sien van die nuwe
dissipline wat nou geld in die party. Baie dankie. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Madam Speaker, the fact of the matter is that this legislation has already
been tabled in Parliament. It deals with abortion and its implications. It
is controversial legislation, because the fact of the matter is that an 18-
year old girl is not allowed to buy alcohol; she is not allowed into the
smoking section of a restaurant, but a child of 12 is allowed to make a
decision about abortion without consulting her parents. We know what the
implications and consequences of such a decision are for her later on in
her life. It is far-reaching and we realise that.

The fact of the matter is that this legislation is being forced through. It
is being forced on us to a great extent, and I already said in the previous
debate that we need to have a debate about the actual reasons why the ANC
women, in fact, feel so strongly about this matter. There are other
reasons, not very obvious ones, why they feel that way. The effect of this
legislation is that it makes it easier to perform abortions. It is being
decentralised to provincial level, which results in other problems as well.


In principle, the FF Plus cannot go along with this. We will vote against
the legislation. Congratulations to the ANC – we hope that we will see more
of the new discipline that is in force in the party. Thank you very much.]

Ms M M MDLALOSE: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

Ngakithi uma amakhosikazi egiya aye esho isaga esithi “amatshitshi
aphelile” bese engeza ngokuthi “wadla qembu elibusayo”.Kusho ukuthi ake
sibhekisise-ke ngokusebenza kwalo Mthetho. Khona lapho ungenelisi khona.
Nathi siyiqembu le-Nadeco asihambisani nalo Mthetho. (Translation of
isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[In my area, when women perform a traditional dance, they sometimes shout:
“There are no more virgins” and then add   “There you go, oh ruling party”.
This means that we have to look at the impact of this Act. There is
something about it that is not satisfactory. As Nadeco, we also do not
support this Act.]
Madam Speaker, the Bill before this House empowers the MEC for health of a
province to approve the facilities where terminations of pregnancy may take
place in that province. This process needs to be applied stringently and be
streamlined.

Recent media reports, in addition, state that a number of young women below
the age of 18 are flocking to health facilities to exercise their right to
terminate pregnancies. These young women face the danger of being preyed
upon by illegal surgeries. It is these young women who are often desperate
and vulnerable. That is what we should be keeping in mind as we deliberate
upon this Bill. Thank you.

Mr L V J NGCULU: Madam Speaker, I think it is sad that when we attempted to
vote on this Bill last time, the opposition sabotaged the voting.
[Interjections.] You may howl.

One of the things we said last time we were debating this Bill is that this
Bill, principally, is about the rights of women. One of the things that
gratifies me as I stand here today is that as soon as we have voted on this
Bill – as we are going to do – there are many reproductive alliance groups
that are going to call a press conference, hailing the ANC for this
decision. This is one thing that strengthens us, because all of us – those
who stand for the rights of women, those who agree that women must be given
the choice to decide about their reproductive rights - will actually be
happy that indeed today that opportunity is going to be given.

When the ACDP, led by the hon Cheryllyn Dudley, raised this particular
question on counselling, she actually spoon-fed those she wanted to talk to
about counselling. Yet, in the Bill, counselling is there but it states
that it must be nondirective and nonmandatory so that, again, the central
piece of the Bill on choice is actually the determinant. You must not
actually put your own subjective interests forward in the determination of
this particular issue.

On the question of conscientious objection, we must always move from the
premise that those who practise - medical professionals, midwives and
nurses – enter the profession by their own choice. No-one is compelled to
be a doctor; no-one is compelled to be a nurse; no-one is compelled to be a
midwife. [Applause.] How then, when you determine your own profession, do
you think there must be a conscientious objection? It is disingenuous and
manipulative for the opposition to put forward this particular view.

Again, I want to say that it gratifies me as a member of the ANC and I am
sure many members of the ANC and, going broader, those who support the
emancipation of women and a nonsexist South Africa that, as we go out after
voting, the reproductive rights alliance is going to go outside and
congratulate the ANC on the decision that would take South Africa towards
saving many women who would have died in backstreet abortions. That is what
gratifies me. [Applause.] We shall be voting for this Bill. Thank you very
much. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: I was told that a division would be demanded. Is that true?

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, yes, we do call for a division on behalf of
those members who would like to vote against this piece of legislation.

Division demanded.

The SPEAKER: Hon members, would you all please take your seats. I would
like to remind members that they may only vote from their allocated seats.
I also wish to remind members that in terms of Rule 89 every member present
in the Chamber when the question is put with the doors locked shall vote.
When requested to do so members must simply indicate their vote by pressing
the appropriate button. If a member inadvertently presses the wrong button,
the member may thereafter press the correct button. The last button pressed
will be recorded as the member’s vote when the voting session is closed by
the Chair.

The question before the House is that the Choice on Termination of
Pregnancy Amendment Bill be read a second time. Voting will now commence.
Those in favour of the Bill being read a second time should press the “yes”
button, those against should press the “no” button. Those wishing to
abstain must press the “abstain” button.

The House divided:

   AYES - 266: Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Arendse, J D; Asmal, A K;
   Balfour, B M N; Baloyi, M R; Bapela, K O; Beukman, F; Bhoola, R B; Bloem,
   D V; Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Bonhomme, T J; Booi, M S; Botha, N G W; Burgess,
   C V; Cachalia, I M; Cele, M A; Chalmers, J; Chohan, F I; Coetzee, R;
   Combrinck, J J; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; Dambuza, B N; Daniels, P;
   Davies, R H; De Lange, J H; Diale, L N; Didiza, A T; Dikgacwi, M M;
   Dithebe, S L; Dlali, D M; Dlamini-Zuma, N C; Doidge, G Q M; Du Toit, D C
   ; Fazzie, M H; Fihla, N B; Fraser-Moleketi, G J; Frolick, C T; Fubbs, J
   L; Gabanakgosi, P S; Gcwabaza, N E ; George, M E; Gerber, P A; Gigaba, K
   M N; Godi, N T; Gogotya, N J; Gololo, C L; Gore, V C; Greyling, C H F;
   Gumede, D M; Gumede, M M; Gxowa, N B; Hajaig, F; Hanekom, D A ; Hangana,
   N E; Hendricks, L B; Hendrickse, P A C; Hlangwana, N; Hogan, B A;
   Holomisa, S P; Jacobus, L; Jeffery, J H; Johnson, C B; Johnson, M;
   Jordan, Z P; Kalako, M U; Kasienyane, O R; Kasrils, R; Kekana, C D;
   Khauoe, M K; Khoarai, L P; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, K K; Khumalo, K M;
   Khunou, N P; Kohler-Barnard, D; Komphela, B M; Kondlo, N C; Koornhof, G
   W; Kota, Z A; Kotwal, Z; Labuschagne, L B; Landers, L T; Lekgetho, G;
   Lekota, M G P; Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T; Louw, S K; Lowe, C M; Ludwabe, C
   I; Mabandla, B S; Mabena, D C; Mabudafhasi, T R; Madella, A F; Madumise,
   M M; Magau, K R; Magubane, N E ; Mahlaba, T L; Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G L;
   Mahlawe, N M; Mahote, S; Maine, M S; Maja, S J; Makasi, X C; Makgate, M
   W; Malahlela, M J; Maloney, L; Maluleka, H P; Maluleke, D K; Manana, M N
   S; Manuel, T A; Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Martins, B A D; Masango, S J;
   Maserumule, F T; Mashangoane, P R; Mashiane, L M; Mashigo, R J; Mashile,
   B L; Masutha, T M; Mathibela, N F; Matlala, M H; Matsemela, M L; Matsepe-
   Casaburri, I F; Matsomela, M J J ; Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M; Mbili, M
   E; Mbombo, N D; Mdaka, N M; Mdladlana, M M S; Mentor, M P; Meruti, M V;
   Mgabadeli, H C; Mkhize, Z S; Mkongi, B M; Mlambo-Ngcuka, P G; Mlangeni,
   A; Mnguni, B A; Mnyandu, B J; Moatshe, M S; Modisenyane, L J; Mogale, O
   M; Mogase, I D; Mohlaloga, M R; Mokoena, A D; Mokoto, N R; Moleketi, P J
   ; Monareng, O E; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K; Morgan, G R; Morkel, C M;
   Morobi, D M; Morutoa, M R; Morwamoche, K W; Mosala, B G; Moss, L N; Moss,
   M I; Motubatse-Hounkpatin, S D; Mpahlwa, M B ; Mshudulu, S A; Mthethwa, E
   N; Mtshali, E; Mzondeki, M J G; Ndlazi, Z A; Ndzanga, R A; Nel, A C;
   Nene, M J ; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N
   D; Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngcobo, N W; Ngculu, L V J; Ngele, N J;
   Ngwenya, M L; Ngwenya, W; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njikelana, S J ; Njobe, M A
   A; Nkuna, C; Nogumla, R Z; Nqakula, C; Ntuli, M M; Ntuli, R S; Ntuli, S
   B; Nwamitwa-Shilubana, T L P; Nxumalo, M D; Nxumalo, S N ; Nyambi, A J;
   Nzimande, L P M; Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G; Oosthuizen, G C;
   Padayachie, R L; Pahad, A G H; Pahad, E G; Pandor, G N M; Phadagi, M G;
   Phungula, J P; Pieterse, R D; Radebe, B A; Radebe, J T; Rajbally, S ;
   Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin, M; Ramodibe, D M; Ramotsamai, C P M;
   Rasmeni, S M; Reid, L R R; Rwexana, S P; Schippers, J; Schneemann, G D;
   Schoeman, E A; Seadimo, M D; Sefularo, M; Sekgobela, P S; Selau, J G;
   Semple, J A; September, C C; Shabangu, S; Sibande, M P; Sibanyoni, J B;
   Sibidla, N N; Siboza, S ; Sikakane, M R; Sithole, D J; Skhosana, W M;
   Skweyiya, Z S T; Smith, V G; Solo, B M; Solomon, G; Sonjica, B P; Sonto,
   M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Stephens, J J M; Steyn, A C; Surty, M E ;
   Swanson-Jacobs, J; Thabethe, E; Thomson, B; Tinto, B; Tlake, M F; Tobias,
   T V; Tolo, L J; Tsenoli, S L; Tshabalala-Msimang, M E; Tshivhase, T J;
   Tshwete, P; Turok, B; Twala, N M; Van den Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe, S
   C ; Van Der Walt, D; Van Wyk, A; Vundisa, S S; Wang, Y; Xingwana, L M ;
   Yengeni, L E; Zita, L; Zulu, B Z.


   NOES - 52: Bekker, H J; Blanché, J P I; Boinamo, G G; Botha, C-S; Chang,
   E S; Cupido, H B ; Davidson, I O; Delport, J T; Ditshetelo, P H K; Doman,
   W P; Dreyer, A M; Dudley, C; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; George, D T; Green,
   L M; Jenner, I E; Julies, I F; Kganyago, N M; King, R J; Marais, S J F;
   Mars, I; Meshoe, K R J; Mfundisi, I S; Mulder, C P; Mulder, P W A; Ngema,
   M V; Opperman , S E; Pheko, S E M; Pule, B E; Rabie, P J; Roopnarain, U;
   Sayedali-Shah, M R; Schmidt, H C; Seaton, S A; Selfe, J; Seremane, W J;
   Sibuyana, M W; Simmons, S; Skosana, M B; Smuts, M; Spies, W D; Swart , M;
   Swart, P S; Swart, S N; Swathe, M M; Van der Merwe, J H; Van Dyk, S M;
   Van Niekerk, A I; Vos, S C; Waters, M; Zikalala, C N Z.


   ABSTAIN - 12: Bici, J; Camerer, S M; De Lille, P; Direko, I W; Greyling,
   L W; Kalyan, S V; Leon, A J; Madikiza, G T; Mdlalose, M M; Mohamed, I J;
   Sigcau , S N; Xolo, E T.


The SPEAKER: Have all members voted? Thank you. The voting session is now
closed.

Hon members, the results are as follows: There were 12 abstentions, 52
members voted against and 266 members voted “yes”. [Applause.] The
Secretary will read the Bill a second time. [Interjections.] [Laughter.]

Question agreed to.

Bill accordingly read a second time.

The SPEAKER: The Bill will be sent to the NCOP for concurrence. Hon
members, that concludes the business for the day. The House is adjourned.

The House adjourned at 15:41.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                          FRIDAY, 23 NOVEMBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Transport


          a) Cross-Border Road Transport Amendment Bill [B 51 – 2007]
             (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of
             Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
             Government Gazette No 30485 of 23 November 2007].


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Transport
         of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     The Budget and Strategic Plan of the Auditor-General for 2008-
        2011 [RP 231-2007].


2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

     a) Report of the South African Council for the Non-Proliferation of
        Weapons of Mass Destruction for July 2006 to June 2007.


National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

    (a)     Request from the Minister of Communications for approval by the
        National Assembly of the following candidate recommended for
        appointment to the Independent Communications Authority of South
        Africa in terms of section 7 of the Independent Communications
        Authority of South Africa Amendment Act, 2006 (Act No 3 of 2006).

        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Communications for
        consideration and report.


                          FRIDAY, 30 NOVEMBER 2007

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a section 75 Bill:

          a) Technology Innovation Agency Bill [B 49 – 2007] (National
             Assembly – sec 75)

2.    Translations of Bills submitted


     (1)    The Minister of Minerals and Energy


          a) uMthetho wokuChibiyela uKulawulwa kukuGesi [Um 20D – 2006]
             (National Assembly – sec 76).


         This is the official translation into isiZulu of the Electricity
         Regulation Amendment Bill [B 20D – 2006] (National Assembly – sec
         76).


     (2)    The Minister for the Public Service and Administration


          a) Staatsdienswysigingswetsontwerp [W 31 – 2006] (National
             Assembly– sec 76).


         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Public
         Service Amendment Bill [B 31 – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 76).

     (3)    The Minister of Trade and Industry


          a) Nawumbisi wa ku Cinca Nawu wa Rixaka wa ku Beja [B 31 – 2007]
             (National Assembly – sec 76)
         This is the official translation into Xitsonga of the National
         Gambling Amendment Bill [B 31 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 76).

     (4)    The Minister of Finance


          a) Umthetho Oyilwayo Wolungelelwaniso Lohlahlo-Mali [B 41 – 2007]
             (National Assembly – sec 77)


         This is the official translation into isiXhosa of the Adjustments
         Appropriation Bill [B 41 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 77).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson



    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Independent Electoral
        Commission (IEC) for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2006-2007 [RP 103-2007].


2.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     General Notice No 1634 published in Government Gazette No 30464
        dated 13 November 2007: Draft Municipal Asset Transfer Regulations:
        Call for comments, in term of the Local Government: Municipal
        Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).




    (b)     Government Notice No R.1026 published in Government Gazette No
        30420 dated 26 October 2007: Correction notice: Amendment of
        Schedule No 1 (No 1/1/1346) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act,
        1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (c)     Government Notice No R.1071 published in Government Gazette No
        30460 dated 16 November 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No 4/302)
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


3.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Albany Coast Water for the
        year ended 30 June 2007, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
        2007.


National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

    Please note: The following item amends item 1(a) under the entry
    “Tablings – The Speaker”, published on page 2389 of the Announcements,
    Tablings and Committee Reports of 23 November 2007:
    (a)     Request from the Minister of Communications for approval by the
        National Assembly of the following candidate recommended for
        appointment to the Independent Communications Authority of South
        Africa in terms of section 7 of the Independent Communications
        Authority of South Africa Amendment Act, 2006 (Act No 3 of 2006):


        Ms R Msiza.


    Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Communications for consideration
    and report.


     b) Letter from the Minister of Education, dated 22 November 2007, to
        the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section 65(2)(a)
        of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999),
        explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual Reports of the
        South African Council of Educators (SACE) and Umalusi for 2006-
        2007.


        Late Tabling of the Annual Reports of the South African Council of
        Educators (SACE) and Umalusi


        Dear Ms Mbete


        I wish to apologise for not tabling the Annual Reports of SACE and
        Umalusi by 30 September 2007, as required in terms of section 65 of
        the Public Finance Management Act, 1999.


        SACE indicated that there were delays in finalising the audit for
        the 2006/07 financial year. Furthermore, before printing they had
        to present their annual report to their Council for the final
        adoption of the audited financial statements. The Council meeting
        was scheduled for 6 and 7 September 2007. SACE underestimated the
        time it will take to print the annual report. They apologised for
        this oversight.


        In respect of Umalusi, the annual report was submitted to the paper
        store in Parliament on 29 August 2007. The Department was not
        informed that the annual report had been delivered. It was only
        discovered on investigation after the end of September 2007.


        Both these entities have met all the requirements regarding the
        submission and the auditing of the financial statements to the
        Auditor-General. Their annual reports were tabled in Parliament on
        10 October 2007.


        I trust that my sincere apology will be appreciated.


        With my best wishes


        Yours sincerely


        GNM Pandor, MP
        Minister of Education


     c) Letter from the Minister of Arts and Culture, dated 23 November
        2007, to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section
        65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of
        1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual Reports of
        PACOFS, Luthuli Museum and the Nelson Mandela Museum for 2006-2007.


        EXPLANATION FOR THE LATE TABLING OF ARTS, CULTURE AND HERITAGE
        INSTITUTIONS’ ANNUAL REPORTS IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 65(2)(A) OF
        THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT ACT, NO 1 OF 1999: 2006/2007


        Dear Ms Mbete


        In terms of section 65(1)(a) of the above-mentioned Act the annual
        reports and financial statements, and the audit reports on those
        statements, of Arts, Culture and Heritage institutions listed below
        were not tabled by 30 September 2007.


        The following are reasons for the late tabling of reports:


          1. PACOFS


        In April 2007 the PACOFS Board suspended three senior employees
        including the CEO and CFO pending the outcome of a forensic
        investigation.


        These employees were instrumental in producing annual financial
        statements, relevant HR reports and other important documentation
        pertaining to the compilation and approval of the PACOFS annual
        report for 2006/2007.


        PACOFS submitted its annual financial statements late due to the
        above mentioned situation. External auditors appointed by the
        Office of the Auditor-General subsequently commenced the annual
        PACOFS audit on 4 June 2007.


        The Audit and subsequent finalization of the Audit Report is
        therefore behind schedule.


        In the light of the above-mentioned situation PACOFS is not in a
        position to submit the PACOFS annual report for 2006/2007 before 30
        September 2007 for tabling in Parliament.


          2. Luthuli Museum


        Although the submission of the Annual Financial Statements by the
        Museum to the Auditor-General was late (6 June 2007 versus 31 May
        2007) the finalization of the Audit was in this period hampered by
        the protracted exchanges between the Museum personnel and the
        Auditor Generals Office resulting in the financial statements being
        revised numerous times.


        The Museum Director also had to be hospitalized in this period
        following emergency surgery. As a key player in the production of
        the Annual Report this situation has impacted negatively on the
        finalization thereof.


        The Annual Report of the Luthuli Museum is in its final stages of
        completion and will be tabled in the near future.


          3. Nelson Mandela Museum


        In May 2007 the Chief Financial Officer wrote a letter to the
        Department requesting an extension for the submission of the Annual
        Financial Statements to the Auditor General. The Nelson Mandela
        Museum first submitted their Annual Financial Statements to the
        Auditor General on 29 June 2007 and the Auditor general rejected
        the Annual Financial Statements as they were signed by the CEO Mr K
        Mpulwana.


        After a great deal of contact between the CEO, the Auditor and the
        Department, the Auditor General finally accepted the fact that Mr
        Mpulwana was authorized to sign the Annual Financial Statements.
        He signed the statements in his capacity as Accounting Authority as
        the Museum was operating without a council. The council was only
        subsequently appointed.


        The Annual Financial Statements was finally submitted to the
        Auditor General on 16 August 2007 and the Audit is at present in
        progress.


        Yours sincerely
        Z PALLO JORDAN
        MINISTER


COMMITTEE REPORTS

 National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Housing on the Annual Report and
    Financial Statements for 2006/2007 of the Department Housing, dated 06
    November 2007:

        The Portfolio Committee on Housing, having been briefed by the
        Department of Housing on its Annual Report and Financial Statements
        of Vote 28 for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements of Vote 28 for 2006-2007,
        referred to it, reports that it will further interact with the
        department and deliberate on the report.


2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Transport on oversight visits to
    eight host cities and Department of Transport, dated 25 June 2007:

        The Portfolio Committee on Transport (National Assembly), having
        undertaken oversight visits to the National Department of Transport
        and eight host cities, reports as follows:

   1. Introduction
         1. In the course of the Parliamentary second term, the Transport
            Portfolio Committee in the National Assembly has conducted a
            relatively intensive oversight programme to assess transport
            preparations for the 2010 FIFA World Cup. The Committee has
            interacted with the National Department of Transport (DoT),
            including a full-day interaction with departmental staff in the
            head office in Pretoria. The Committee has also conducted a
            series of oversight visits to host cities. At the time of
            completing this report, eight of the nine host cities
            (Johannesburg, Polokwane, Nelson Mandela, eThekwini,
            Rustenburg, Mangaung, Mbombela and Cape Town) had been visited.
            For the moment, the Committee has been unable to establish a
            date with the City of Tshwane.

        1.2 Cabinet has identified public transport as the primary legacy
            that should be derived from our hosting of the World Cup. If
            the opportunity of hosting the 2010 FIFA World Cup is to be
            used to provide a sustainable transport legacy, then planning
            and the assurance of effective funding for public transport
            systems needs to be more or less completed already, and full-
            scale implementation needs to be underway in the coming months,
            if this is not already the case.


         3. The relatively tight time-lines that we are now facing need to
            be further appreciated in terms of the FIFA requirement that no
            major infrastructural construction should be underway in the
            host cities for six months prior to the actual event in June
            2010. This means that there are, effectively, just two-and-a-
            half years in which to complete significant public transport
            transformation.


         4. In this report the Committee will raise a number of concerns
            about the current state of progress. In the light of attempts
            in some quarters, mostly outside of our country, to suggest
            that South Africa will not be able to host a successful FIFA
            World Cup, The Committee wishes to state up-front that they
            have no doubt that the capacity to provide effective transport
            for the event itself exists within our country and that we will
            rise to the occasion. The Committees concern relates less to
            event-oriented transport provision in the narrower sense, and
            much more specifically to the question of ensuring that an
            effective and sustainable public transport legacy will be laid
            down.


         5. In the light of the tight deadlines, the Committee has decided
            to produce this interim report on its work before the end of
            the Parliamentary second term. The Committee will focus on some
            key areas of concern, making recommendations which it believes
            needs to be addressed by the Executive with a sense of urgency.
            It will consider compiling a fuller report providing much more
            specific details once it has completed its round of host city
            oversight visits and other ongoing oversight work.


     2      Reinforcing dedicated 2010 capacity in the National Department
        of Transport


        2.1 In the budget hearings with the DoT on March 20th, 2007, the
            Committee was informed that the DoT had a staff vacancy rate of
            41%. The Director General assured the Committee that 50% of
            these vacancies “were in the process of being filled”. It is
            possible that some progress has since been made, but that still
            leaves a very high level of vacancy. Whatever the general
            levels of staff shortage, the shortage of senior DoT staff
            working in a relatively dedicated way on 2010 was very evident
            to the Committee. It was also raised as a concern with
            theCommittee by a number of host cities.


        2.2 At present there is only one senior official, a Chief Director,
            who is working full-time on 2010 in the DoT. The official
            reports to an Acting Deputy Director who heads the Department’s
            Programme Four (Integrated Planning and Inter-sphere Co-
            ordination). This programme has four sub-programmes, of which
            2010 co-ordination is one. The Committee was impressed with the
            competence and long work hours put in by both the Chief
            Director and Acting Deputy Director General, but it was clear
            that they were seriously over-stretched. Many other senior
            officials in the DoT are also actively involved with 2010
            matters, and the Committee was impressed with the general
            understanding senior members of the DoT brought to the
            challenges - but they all have many other responsibilities and
            principal points of focus.


        2.3 This situation should be compared to Germany’s World Cup
            preparations where, the committee has been told; the Local
            Organising Committee had a team of 80 full-time transport
            specialists. The committee understands that a similar sized
            team of transport experts is working full-time on London’s 2012
            Olympic preparations.


        2.4 The Committee recommends that the DoT should urgently build up a
            dedicated 2010 transport team. The committee has been told that
            R65m has been allocated to the DoT for capacity-building for
            2010. We further understand that the DoT intends to allocate
            R15 of this sum to strengthen its own needs and turnover of
            R50m will be allocated to host cities.


         5. An important role for such a team should be to support the work
            of the host cities, through:


                 • Augmenting city capacity where it is needed, which may
                   require some full-time secondment to host cities;


                 • Ensuring a more effective flow of national information on
                   2010 transport. Several host cities commended the early
                   support they had received from the DoT but added that
                   “things have gone a bit quiet over the past six months”;


                 • Assisting host cities to more effectively access national
                   transport entities – for instance, Nelson Mandela Bay
                   Municipality is uncertain what ACSA’s plans are for the
                   Port Elizabeth airport. This is impacting upon their road
                   based transport infrastructure planning in terms of
                   connecting the airport to local hotels. eThekwini
                   expressed even stronger concerns and uncertainties about
                   road access to the planned new King Shaka airport at La
                   Mercy; and


                 • Ensuring that there is effective coordination between
                   provinces and host cities.


       2.6  The committee recommends that much more detailed planning and
            integration with city base plans are essential.

     3. Challenges in host cities

         1. The level of planning and preparedness varies greatly from host
            city to city. In some of the major cities, including City of
            Johannesburg (CoJ), eThekwini Cape Town and Nelson Mandela Bay
            Municipality there are clearly competent transport teams in
            place, most planning is effectively completed and
            implementation of the main 2010 projects and systems is poised
            for roll-out. However, in each of these cities there are
            challenges and frustrations that needs to be addressed some of
            which will be noted below.


         2. Other cities, Polokwane and Rustenburg in particular, appear to
            have made very little progress and there are serious capacity
            and other concerns that will also be noted below.

    4. Johannesburg

         1. The Johannesburg 2010 flag-ship public transport project is the
            Rea Vaya Bus Rapid Transit system based on dedicated bus-lanes
            in the media. Phase one of the project, which is scheduled to
            be operational by 2009 in time for the Africa Confederations
            Cup, will involve at least 94 km of dedicated bus-lanes and
            will provide an estimated 413,000 passenger trips per day. The
            first phase runs on several key routes including a major south-
            north line from Lenasia through Soweto to Sunninghill, another
            line begins in Alexandra, and there are lines around and
            through the CBD. The routes take in the two Johannesburg 2010
            stadiums - Soccer City and Ellis Park - as well as some of the
            training stadiums. The capital expenditure will be R2,1bn, and
            the city expects to have secured all funding by January 2008.


         2. Costing less than one-tenth of the Gautrain project, and with a
            first phase that will transport about four times more
            passengers, this is a major project. The CoJ is receiving full
            support for the Rea Vaya project from National Treasury and has
            successfully accessed other financial assistance.


         3. The CoJ has, however, identified several potential risks to the
            Rea Vaya project, including:

                • The slow pace at which Environmental Impact Assessment
                  approvals particularly in regard to heritage sites are
                  moving;


                • Uncertainty about the provincial Operating Licensing Board
                  and the province’s impending conclusion of new bus
                  contracts and subsidy policies and whether these will be
                  coordinated with Rea Vaya planning;


                • The dangers of competing provincial initiatives on similar
                  routes that will undermine the financial sustainability of
                  Rea Vaya – the example of the recent Monorail proposal was
                  cited.


         4. The CoJ also mentioned capacity challenges. In this regard the
            Committee believes that the CoJ should consider building a full-
            time Rea Vaya team. At present leading officials dealing with
            Rea Vaya are not full-time on this project, they all have other
            transport responsibilities. In particular, the Committee
            believes that, while strong engineering, infrastructural and
            town-planning skills exist within the City, much greater
            attention should be given to the very complex area of
            institutional development, financial models, and BRT
            operational and regulatory features. The CoJ is pioneering one
            of the first integrated public transport systems ever in South
            Africa. It plans to integrate the city-owned Metrobus, the
            privately owned Putco, and the taxi associations currently on
            the routes, into BRT operating consortia. This is a highly
            commendable approach, but it is an extremely complex matter
            which cannot be left to the last few months before the first
            phase becomes operational. Integrated mass-based, public
            transport systems have not been built in South Africa for 40
            years and more, if at all. Experience and skills, particularly
            in regard to public transport financial, institutional,
            business-planning and the operating and regulatory systems are
            not readily available. Experienced international transport
            economists and operational planners may well have to be brought
            in, to work closely with South African counterparts.


         5. The CoJ is of course involved in numerous other 2010-related
            transport projects including park and ride facilities for
            access to stadiums, coordination with the SA Rail Commuter
            Corporation on stadia-related stations, access to fan parks,
            and the first phase of an International Transit and Shopping
            Centre for buses and taxis arriving from the Southern African
            region, and even further afield on our continent.

    5. E- Thekwini


         1. The Committee was also impressed with the senior officials in
            this metro and with the detailed 2010 transport planning
            processes underway. After considerable evaluation, eThekwini
            has decided not to go for a full BRT system as their principal
            2010 flagship public transport legacy project. Instead they
            have decided to focus on upgrading, extending and revitalising
            the north-south rail corridor. They indicate that they are
            working closely with the SA Rail Commuter Corporation/Metrorail
            in this regard. Most of the infrastructure expenditure will
            have to be borne by SARCC/Metrorail.


         2. Using existing rail infrastructure obviously has many
            advantages, however, a major challenge will be to greatly
            improve on the very low present levels of rail ridership on the
            corridor – a mere 17,000 out of a current 200,000 public
            transport passenger trips per day (the majority of them
            currently in minibus taxis).


         3. The City’s major contribution to the north-south rail corridor
            is an ambitious plan to transform the Warwick Junction
            precinct. In terms of passenger movements, Warwick Junction is
            by far the City’s major rail station and transport interchange
            hub with several major taxi ranks. It is also a thriving
            commercial centre for small traders. However, the present
            reality is chaotic – different taxi ranks are located
            irrationally, pedestrians have to cross the extremely busy N3
            main route into Durban from Gauteng, the area has the highest
            concentration of pedestrian fatalities in the country, and the
            commercial potential of the location is compromised.


         4. The City has completed extensive planning for a major overhaul
            of the Warwick Junction area. The overhaul involves
            transforming existing taxi ranks and regulating them more
            effectively, so that taxi associations servicing townships in
            the North, West and South of the City are respectively located
            on the appropriate side of the precinct (which is not the case
            at present). The overhaul also involves building a fly-over for
            the Gauteng-Durban road at this point, to create a safer
            pedestrian and public transport environment below. Despite
            planning having been completed for some years, the project has
            failed, for some reason, to secure DoT support, and therefore,
            there has not been funding for it. Unless approval is secured
            before September 2007, it will be too late to proceed with the
            renewal ahead of 2010.


         5. The DoT’s reluctance to support the project appears to be based
            on the belief that this is basically a car-friendly, free-way
            oriented project. The proposed fly-over is about pedestrian
            safety and about freeing up ground-level space to public
            transport. The Committee recommends that the DoT should engage,
            as a matter of urgency, at a high level with eThekwini to
            clarify this matter. The Committee further recommends that
            eThekwini’s Warwick Junction transformation plans should be
            fully supported as a key component of providing a 2010
            transport legacy.
         6. eThekwini has many other important public transport plans
            related to 2010 – including an inner-city People Mover bus
            project. This project envisages, stadium related pedestrian
            infrastructure, public transport priority lanes on some east-
            west corridors, and a proposed extension of the rail line to
            Bridge City in the North.


         7. eThekwini is also engaging the taxi industry with a view to
            developing an active role for existing associations as feeders
            for the flagship north-south rail corridor and in regard to the
            inner-city people mover they intend to remove existing taxi
            operators from these routes. While commending the objectives of
            this process, the Committee is concerned that the City does not
            yet seem to have very clear ideas about exactly how taxi
            association cooperation will be secured, and particularly what
            business and financial models and integrated operating systems
            are envisaged. Once again, the Commitee believe this reflects
            the relative strengths on the engineering and town planning
            side in our country, and the relative lack of expertise in
            operationalising integrated mass public transport networks. The
            Committee recommends that this should be an important area of
            assistance that should be provided by a dedicated DoT 2010
            transport team as envisaged in 2.5 above.


         8. The city officials raised a concern that the plans to beautify
            the access routes to stadium have not yet identified funds.


         9. Serious concerns around road access and transport plans for the
            new King Shaka airport under construction at La Mecy as noted
            above, the committee recommend that the DoT as a matter of
            urgency ensures that the is dynamic interaction between the
            City and ACSA.

    6. Nelson Mandela Bay Municipality


         1. The NMBM has opted for a BRT system as its flagship 2010 public
            transport legacy project. Route planning is more or less
            complete, and the city has decided to go for low-floor, left-
            door buses on the system, partly because it will not be a fully
            closed BRT system throughout, and will therefore rely on
            kerbside loading in some cases. The city is relatively sure of
            adequate funding for the project. In the view of the Committee,
            here as elsewhere, the principal challenges lie in the
            operational, business, financial and regulatory models. The
            city is currently in negotiations with eight taxi associations
            operating on the proposed BRT route. It envisages breaking the
            Algoa Bus Company’s current single contract for the whole city
            into five and combining Algoa Bus Company and taxi operators
            into consortia. The proposal is to have a negotiated contract
            for BRT routes.


         2. Nelson Mandela Bay Municipality officials have identified as
            potential risks to their 2010 transport programmes several
            issues, among them:


                • A lack of in-house capacity. The Committee believes that
                  this applies less to infrastructural, engineering and town-
                  planning capacity, and rather more to operational,
                  business, financial and regulatory capacity for the BRT;


                • Slowness in obtaining environmental impact assessment
                  approvals. The city officials recommended that national
                  government considers establishing a 2010 fast-track
                  capacity in the Department of Environmental Affairs and
                  Tourism – not in order to avoid effective environmental
                  impact assessments, but in order to ensure that delays on
                  this front do not undermine the whole objective of using
                  2010 to lay down an effective (and environmentally
                  enhancing) public transport legacy. The Committee
                  recommends that this proposal should be seriously
                  considered.


         3. As mentioned in 2.5 above, Nelson Mandela Bay Municipality also
            expressed concern about a lack of clarity around ACSA’s plans
            for Port Elizabeth airport. This hampers their own ability to
            plan effectively for road transport and infrastructure to cater
            for the anticipated 2010 surge in passengers through the
            airport – an estimated 5000 per day compared to the current
            1200.


         4. It is anticipated that significant number of 2010 visitors and
            perhaps even teams will be based in East London. This requires
            that urgent attention be given to upgrade the R72 and or N2
            between the two cities.


    7. Polokwane


         1. The Committee is very concerned with what they found in
            Polokwane. The City does not appear to have any serious 2010
            public transport planning in place. In fact, it has not even
            completed its regular Integrated Transport Plan, as is required
            by the National Land Transport Transitional Act.


         2. For the present, 2010 transport projects involve widening to
            four lanes the main access roads to the stadium but with little
            thought given to a public transport legacy. The Committee was
            told by the mayor that public transport is a “provincial
            matter”.


         3. The city is also planning to build a bus and taxi rank near the
            rail station for cross-border international transport. The city
            is still in negotiation with Transnet, which owns the land for
            this proposed rank.  It is upgrading and extending a second
            existing rank for domestic buses and taxis but at some distance
            from the proposed international rank - that is, without any
            consideration for integrating national, domestic and road and
            rail modes. This second rank which is under extension is close
            to a third taxi rank that is being unused. The city officials
            were unable to provide satisfactory explanations for any of
            this. Nor were they able to provide any sense of current
            ridership levels on different routes. The Committee was
            referred to “studies that are still underway”.


         4. Planning for the road-based connections to the airport at
            Polokwane are also a serious matter of concern. The Committee
            did not have a sense that any serious planning or consultation
            is happening in this regard.


         5. It is true that smaller host cities like Polokwane may well not
            encounter as many inherent transport challenges as cities like
            Tshwane, Johannesburg and Cape Town that already face serious
            daily congestion problems. However, the Committee believes that
            the situation in Polokwane needs to be addressed as a matter of
            urgency. In particular, the Committee recommends that the DoT
            and the Limpopo provincial Department of Transport engage
            actively with the city.


    8. Rustenburg

         1. The Committee was equally unimpressed with the state of
            preparedness and planning in Rustenburg.


         2. There is absolutely no evidence of any attempt to lay the
            ground for an effective post-2010 public transport legacy. 2010
            transport planning seems to be almost exclusively focused on
            the access roads to the stadium. Nothing appears to be planned
            for the CBD, except the widening of one intersection.


       8.3  No mention was made of work with or transformation of the
            existing bus and taxi operations. One official told the
            Committee that they “think” they might upgrade one taxi rank.


       8.4  The Committee obviously strongly recommends that the DoT devotes
            focused attention to the situation in Rustenburg as a matter of
            priority.

   9. Mbombela
       9.1  In many respects the capacity challenges are similar in
            Mbombela, Polokwane and Rustenburg. There was, however, in the
            Committee’s estimation one very important difference. The
            officials in Mbombela were not defensive and readily admitted
            that they needed considerable assistance with transport and
            spatial planning and project management.


         2. The 2010 stadium is a new stadium currently under construction
            some 5 km outside of the city. This obviously means that
            Mbombela has no experience at this time of hosting major events
            at the location. They therefore have no experience to draw upon
            in trying to anticipate likely challenges. This is one critical
            area in which they will require technical assistance as soon as
            possible.


         3. The privately-owned and managed Kruger Mpumalanga International
            Airport (KMIA) will also be key for the hosting of 2010. The
            Committee was informed that there is uncertainty at present
            about its future ownership structure, and there had been talks
            about a possible purchase by the provincial government. The
            Committee was told that this had caused uncertainty and
            reluctance by private investors to upgrade. This, in turn,
            created uncertainty for the city in terms of planning road
            access to and from the airport. Clearly any uncertainty about
            this matter must be clarified as soon as possible, so that
            planning and implementation are not hampered.


         4. Two major road infrastructure projects are under-way, the
            upgrading of the N4 and the R40 (Mandela Drive), both of which
            are bypasses around the city, and both of which pass close to
            the stadium under construction. The N4 upgrade is being handled
            by SANRAL, and the R40 by the province. It was not clear to the
            Committee the degree to which these major investments and the
            city’s transport planning were all being coordinated and
            integrated. This is clearly an important task for a DoT 2010
            team.
         5. There is no forum in place between the city and the main local
            bus operator (Buscor) to plan for 2010. Nor is there any
            apparent engagement of this kind with local taxi associations.


         6. The largest taxi rank is privately owned. There have been
            recent upgrades of taxi ranks in the neighboring towns of Hazy
            View and White River.


         7. The City believes that there might be scope in the run-up to
            2010 for improving the current Spoornet/Shosholoza Meyl station
            which is on the line from Maputo to Gauteng. But there appears
            to have been no formal discussion with relevant entities.


         8. Mbombela also briefed the Committee on NMT projects including
            cycle-way. It is unclear to the committee how these plans are
            and what funding they will receive .The DoT should engage with
            the city in this regard.


   10.      Mangaung

       10.1 Mangaung has clearly done considerable planning in regard to the
            2010 event itself, and in particular in regard to access to the
            stadium. The city has an advantage in that the existing
            stadium, located close to the CBD, only requires relatively
            minor upgrading.


       10.2 For event-related access they are focusing on converting some
            streets into pedestrian walkways, and there is generally an
            important focus on non-motorised transport, including cycle-
            ways. A new access road is being constructed, and a large new
            rank and parkade for taxis and buses will be built.


       10.3 The Committee was told that the city has been in discussions
            with SANRAL on the link   road to the airport. It was not clear
            to the Committee what progress has been made in this regard.


       10.4 The City also referred to the upgrading of the ACSA-owned
            airport, but again they were unable to provide any clear
            indication of an effective working relationship with ACSA.


       10.5 The City officials indicated to the delegation that they expect
            many 2010 passengers to be arriving by train. It was not clear
            to the delegation whether this has been substantiated by any
            serious research, however, the station is old and in need of
            considerable upgrading. The City does not appear to be in
            contact with Transnet about its plans in regard to the station.


       10.6 The delegation was also told that the province is considering
            revitalising the Botshabelo rail-line.


       10.7 In general, the Committee formed the impression of a city that
            has begun to do useful planning on event-related access,
            especially in the general vicinity of the stadium. However, in
            regard to laying down a public transport legacy, very little
            serious planning has happened. The city would greatly benefit
            from focused DoT and National Treasury’s support particularly
            in regard to funding proposals and planning. The city would
            also benefit from more dynamic information sharing with other
            host cities, particularly with those that are beginning to
            develop exciting public transport legacy projects.


   11.      Cape Town

       11.1 The City of Cape Town has developed extensive and detailed plans
            for a post-2010 public transport legacy. The plans are part and
            parcel of their ongoing integrated transport planning process.
            The City has also conducted relatively extensive public and
            transport operator consultation, and the Committee strongly
            commends this.


       11.2 This consultative approach was also borne out in our own
            Committee hearing with the City, which was attended by a large
            number of City officials, councillors, officials from the
            provincial department of transport, MPLs from the provincial
            legislature, and members of the media. The Committee again
            commends this approach, the more multi-sectoral buy-in there
            is, the more the chance of success.


       11.3 However, the City appears to be a few months behind cities like
            Johannesburg and Nelson Mandela Bay in the finalisation of its
            plans, and this might present a challenge in meeting deadlines
            for funding. With the right assistance from DoT and from the
            National Treasury, this challenge should not be (and cannot be
            allowed to be) insuperable.


       11.4 Senior City officials indicated that they had “found it
            difficult to implement transport projects without funding up-
            front”. While understanding this concern, in the view of the
            Committee this problem has related more to a tendency in the
            recent past for the City (and Province) to tailor cut and trim
            transport projects around diverse funding streams, like
            existing bus subsidies, rather than to plan boldly for
            integrated networks. This tendency has, perhaps, been
            exacerbated by the City and Province’s experience with the stop-
            start Klipfontein bus corridor project, an earlier forerunner
            of the kind of BRT system now being implemented by the City of
            Johannesburg. The operational sustainability of the original
            Klipfontein project was uncertain because of the relatively low
            density of the route. But it was also a project that was
            proposed at a time in which there was little available budget
            for major integrated rapid public transport networks. That has
            now changed.


       11.5 The Cape Town Metrorail system carried some 601 000 passengers
            per day according to a rail census carried out in 2004. In Cape
            Town, uniquely for a South African city, rail is the primary
            public transport mode, accounting for 53% of public transport
            trips. The rail network penetrates extensive middle to high
            income areas as well as many low income areas, and therefore
            has the potential to connect and integrate the city. In its ITP
            and 2010 transport legacy planning, the City is, therefore,
            quite correctly placing considerable emphasis on investment and
            improvement in the rail network.


       11.6 Among the targets on priority rail corridors are:
                • An 18 hour service day;
                • Punctuality with 95% of trips on time
               • Frequencies in the peak with a train every 5 minutes, and
                 in off-peak every 20 minutes.


         7. The priority projects include:
                • Extension of the Khayelitsha line with two new stations
                • Refurbishment of the fleet
               • Increase in the operational rail fleet from 80 to 93 trains
                 on priority corridors
                • Upgrading Cape Town station

        8. These rail projects clearly require close work with
           SARCC/Metrorail. The City assured the Committee that this
           cooperation is proceeding well.


        9. Ahead of 2010, the City also plans an extensive network of
           busways as the first phase of a more comprehensive system.
           Priority corridors for phase 1 are:


               • Klipfontein Corridor including the N2 busway
               • Landsdowne Corridor
               • Koeberg Road/including the N1 busway
               • Symphony Way Corridor.


       11.10      Some of these busways will involve full bus rapid transit
           infrastructure - median busways and median stations, platform-
           level boarding, and pre-board fare collection. The Committee had
           the impression that some of the bus planning remains incomplete
           and the observations made in 11.4 above apply particularly to
           these planned road-based public transport corridors. City of
           Cape Town like same of the other major cities has strategically
           form planning and transport team capacity but lacking public
           transport network skills. The committee recommends that the DoT
           assist in this regards.

11. Summary and general recommendations

       12.1 The Committee recommends that the DoT develops and scales up a
           dedicated 2010 team that is able to assist host cities.


       12.2 In the larger host cities that the Committee have visited
           Johannesburg, eThekwini, Cape Town and Nelson Mandela Bay
           relatively good 2010 transport legacy planning is more or less
           completed. However, in the view of the Committee, each of the
           cities requires dedicated assistance, mostly in the area of
           organizational, business- and finance-planning, regulation and
           operationalising of the mass public transport network systems
           that they are proposing. This may well require importing some
           experienced international public transport experts, as there is,
           as far as we know, very little expertise within our country in
           these areas.
       12.3 In other host cities that we visited, with the possible
           exception of Mangaung,it is probably already too late to attempt
           to roll-out a catalysing mass public transport network as a 2010
           legacy. In these cities a more modest focus on some
           infrastructure legacy and, above all, a narrower focus on
           transport preparations for 2010 itself may be the key priority
           challenge.


       12.4 Government should give consideration to a fast-tracked mechanism
           for EIAs related to building 2010 transport infrastructure. This
           should not be seen as an attempt to avoid effective
           environmental impact assessments, but rather as a means to
           ensure that unnecessary delays do not completely compromise
           projects that are now working to very tight deadlines. The
           committee recommends that the proposed DoT dedicated 2010-team
           pay particular attention to inter-sphere, cooperation and
           ongoing engagement between the three spheres of government.


       12.5 The Committee has not been able to visit the City of Tshwane,
           but it hopes to do so in the coming months.


       12.6 Although it is not a host city as such, Ekurhuleni is a critical
           Metro from the point of view of 2010 and transport legacy. A
           major point of entry for 2010 international visitors will be
           Oliver Tambo International Airport, which is located within its
           boundaries. Ekuruleni will have an important responsibility for
           ensuring effective road-based transport connections and
           facilities in and around the airport. Ekurhuleni needs also to
           be more effectively engaged with, for instance, the City of
           Johannesburg’s Rea Vaya BRT system.


       12.7 The Committee wishes to thank all of those who hosted it’s
           visits, prepared inputs for thier hearings, and facilitated it’s
           work.


CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - Insert T071130-insert1 - PAGES 2408-2409
CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - Insert T071130-insert2 – PAGES 2410-2411
CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - Insert T071130-insert3 – PAGES 2412-2419
CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - Insert T071130-insert4 – PAGES 2420-2428
CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - Insert T071130-insert5 – PAGES 2429-2443

                          TUESDAY, 15 JANUARY 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Assembly

The following member vacated his seat in the National Assembly with effect
from 1 December 2007:

Maziya, M A.

TABLINGS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Government Notice No 1088 published in Government Gazette No
        30484 dated 16 November 2007: Recognition of stock exchange in
        terms of the definition of ‘‘Recognised Exchange’’ in paragraph 1
        of the Eighth Schedule of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of
        1962).


    (b)     Government Notice No R. 1094 published in Government Gazette No
        30486 dated 23 November 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 1
        (No1/2/148) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1963 (Act No 91
        of 1964).


    (c)     Government Notice No R. 1095 published in Government Gazette No
        30486 dated 23 November 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1347) Correction Notice in terms of the Customs and Excise Act,
        1963 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (c)     Government Notice No R. 1096 published in Government Gazette No
        30486 dated 23 November 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No 3/623)
        Correction Notice in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1963 (Act
        No 91 of 1964).


    (d)     Government Notice No R. 1097 published in Government Gazette No
        30486 dated 23 November 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No4/309)
        Correction Notice in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1963 (Act
        No 91 of 1964).
    (e)     Government Notice No R. 1098 published in Government Gazette No
        30486 dated 23 November 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 5 (No5/86)
        Correction Notice in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1963 (Act
        No 91 of 1964).


    (f)     Government Notice No R. 1099 published in Government Gazette No
        30486 dated 23 November 2007: Amendment of Schedule No 6 (No6/11)
        Correction Notice in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1963 (Act
        No 91 of 1964).


2.    The Minister of Home Affairs

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 4 — Department of Home
        Affairs for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 4
        for 2006-2007 [RP 208-2007].

3.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

    (a)     Government Notice No R. 1036 published in Government Gazette No
        30427 dated 31 October 2007: Regulations on financial assistance to
        resource poor farmers in terms of section 62 read with section 61
        of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker
    (a)     Letter from the Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry, dated 21
        November 2007, to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of
        section 6(3) of the National Forest Act, 1999 (Act No 84 of 1998).

        REPORT TO PARLIAMENT ON THE STATE OF SOUTH AFRICA’S FORESTS IN
        COMPLIANCE WITH SECTION 6(3) OF THE NATIONAL FORESTS ACT, 1998 (ACT
        NO. OF 1998)
        The National Forests Act, 1998 (Act No 84 of 1998) (NFA) place a
        legal obligation on the Minister to monitor forests to ensure
        sustainable forest management. In terms of section 6(3) of the NFA,
        I the Minister must report to Parliament at least every three years
        on the following:


        (a)      The facts and trends revealed by the monitoring process;
        (b)      whether the observed facts and trends are consistent with
             the national interest;
        (c)      the measures being implemented to address negative trends;
             and
        (d)      any other relevant issues related to South African
             Forests.


        In compliance with the above mentioned requirements, the department
        of Water Affairs and Forestry (DWAF) compiled a report on the state
        of South Africa’s forests and this report covers the period 2004 to
        2006.
        The system used to monitor the performance of forest management in
        South Africa is the Principles, Criteria, Indicators and Standards
        (PCI&S) framework. It is not mandatory as yet for the sector to
        report on the PCI&S framework and DWAF is in the process of making
        it compulsory to facilitate future monitoring and reporting.
        However, the attached report was produced based on the information
        derived through the use of the PCI&S framework.


        Both the full report on the state of the forests in South Africa
        and its summary are enclosed for your consideration and further
        action
        Yours sincerely
        MRS L B HENDRICKS, MP
        MINISTER OFWATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY


                          THURSDAY, 17 JANUARY 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

   (1)      Government Immovable Asset Management Bill [B 1B—2006] —Act No
        19 of 2007 (assented to and signed by President on 22 November
        2007).


   (2)      Criminal Law (Sexual Offences and Related Matters) Amendment
        Bill [B 50D—2003]—Act No 32 of 2007 (assented to and signed by
        President on 13 December 2007).


   (3)      Cross-boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related Matters
        Amendment Bill [B 25—2007]—Act No 24 of 2007 (assented to and signed
        by President on 13 December 2007).


   (4)      Constitution Thirteenth Amendment Bill [B 24—2007] (assented to
        and signed by President on 13 December 2007

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Transport

   (1)      Report and Financial Statements of Urban Transport Fund for 2006-
        2007, and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2006-2007 [RP 246-2007].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - Insert T080117-insert1 PAGES 10-24


