---
title: 'National Assembly - 07 May 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2008-05-07
---

WEDNESDAY, 7 MAY 2008
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 15:00.

House Chairperson Mr G Q M Doidge took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chairperson, on behalf of the ACDP, I give notice that I
shall move:

  That the House debates the impact of current land and agricultural
  policies on food and commodity prices.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Are there any further notices of
motion? None.

Order! Can we all be seated please? There is a lot of movement in the
House.
                          MYANMAR CYCLONE DISASTER

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without
notice:

  That the House-


     1) notes that more than 22 500 people have died and 41 000  are  still
        missing in Myanmar as a result of a cyclone;


     2) recalls that this is emerging as one of the worst cyclones  to  hit
        the  Asian  continent  and  that  the  storm  has  also  devastated
        Myanmar's main rice-growing region,  which  is  home  to  about  24
        million people, approximately half the country's population; and


     3) conveys its condolences to the affected families, the people and
        the government of Myanmar.



Agreed to.


               DEATH OF MINERS AT GOLD FIELDS SOUTH DEEP MINE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without
notice:


  That the House:


  (1) notes that -


        (a) fourteen miners died recently at the  Gold  Fields’  South  Deep
            Mine near Randfontein in Gauteng;


        (b) nine of those workers who lost their lives died  when, on 1  May
            2008, a chain attached to an elevator cage snapped causing  the
            cage to plummet 60m down a mine shaft;

        (c) eight of the nine victims were contract  workers  and  that  the
            accident appears to be a safety breach which could be due to  a
            lack of maintenance;


     2) urges the Department of Minerals  and  Energy  to  ensure  that  the
        matter is speedily investigated and, should anyone be found to  have
        been negligent, for the appropriate steps to be taken; and


     3) conveys its condolences to  the  families  of  the  deceased,  their
        fellow workers and the National Union of Mineworkers.

Agreed to.


                           ROLE OF MUSIC IN SOCETY
                            (Member’s Statement)

Muf T J TSHIVHASE (ANC): Mudzulatshidulo, dzangano la ANC li tama u swikisa
maipfi a ndivhuwo kha vhutambo ha vhufumi na vhuna ha Pfufho dza Sama (Sama
Awards) he ha farwa nga Mugivhela. Tshithu tsha ndemesa, ri tama u swikisa
maipfi ashu a u fhululedza vhaimbi vhe vha nangiwa na avho vhe vha wina
zwiphuga. Vhutambo uvhu vhu sumbedza na u dzhiela ntha vhukoni vhune
vhaimbi vhashu vha vha naho.

Vhu dzula vhu vhutambo vhune ha takalelwa nwaha munwe na munwe, vhu
sumbedza vhomakone vha khwinesa vho tou nanguludzwaho kha ndowetshumo ya
zwa muzika. Zwiphuga hezwi zwi isa phanda kha u bvisela khagala na u
tutuwedza vhathu vha Afurika Tshipembe nga u angaredza, sa izwi vhu na
mushumo muhulwane wa u fhata lushaka na u disa nyandano kha zwa
matshilisano.

Nga ndila dzo fhambanaho, muzika ndi vhutsila ha vhukuma nahone ndi mutheo
wa vhutsila na thaluso ya tshitshavha. Ndi tshihumbudzo tsha ndila ye
zwithu zwa vha zwi ngayo na tsumbo ya uri zwithu zwi nga tshiimo-de na
mbonelaphanda kha zwauri tshitshavha tshi khou ya ngafhi. Muzika ndi ndila
ya u sumbedza tshivhumbeo tsha tshitshavha. Muzika u a vha nga ndila ya u
endedza milaedza, vhurendi na vhutsila kana tshidziki tsha zwa
vhudimvumvusi. Ndi a livhuwa Mudzulatshidulo. (Translation of Tshivenda
member’s statement follows.)

[Mrs T J TSHIVHASE (ANC): The ANC would like to send words of gratitude to
the 14th Sama awards function which was held on Saturday. Of utmost
importance, we would like to send our words of praise to the musicians who
were nominated and to those who won the awards. This function shows and
also acknowledges the talent that our musicians have.

It remains the best function that is celebrated annually and it displays
the best artists who are nominated from the music industry. These awards
continue to expose and also to encourage the people of South Africa in
general, since they play a significant role of nation-building as well as
bringing about social unity.

In different ways, music is the real art and it is the basis for art and
national identity. It is a reminder of how things used to be and an example
of the current state of affairs and a view on where the nation is going.
Music is the way of expressing the state of the society. Music can be in
the form of passing messages, poetry and art or the core of entertainment.
I thank you, Chairperson.]

         WEBSITE OF DEPARTMENT OF HOME AFFAIRS IN NEED OF ATTENTION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr C M LOWE (DA): Chairperson, the Department of Home Affairs’ Internet
website, designed to provide services to foreign work seekers, is in
desperate need of attention. If government is serious about attracting
people with the necessary skills to our shores, it needs to urgently look
again at the state of its website and specifically the schedule of quotas
found under the link “Scarce skills and work permit quotas”.

The schedule is currently a national disgrace. It is hopelessly inadequate,
shamefully amateur and totally out of date with the true skills needs of
the country. The number of structural engineers this country apparently
needs is limited to 150. Mining and mechanical engineers are limited to 100
each. No reference is made to accountants of any type - chartered,
management, cost or production - or to project managers. The number of
maths and science teachers we need is apparently only 1 000.

Under the section “Health professionals”, not a single doctor or nurse is
required in this country; not one! But we do apparently need 300 research
and development pharmacologists. The mind boggles that this is the level at
which government operates on a matter of such importance, and I simply
cannot believe that the hon Deputy President, who leads the skills
acquisition project, has visited the site or is aware of the state of it.
The Deputy President, together with the Minister of Home Affairs, should
urgently address this problem. Thank you. [Applause.]

                                ATM BOMBINGS
                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr V B NDLOVU (IFP): Chairperson, the IFP wants to make it known that the
ATM bombings, especially the Dobsonville one, mean that more than 10
bombings have occurred this month, and that there have been 140 from
January until now.

The criminals have targeted the ATMs as if it were easy to get money out of
them. The innovative strategies and plans that need to be implemented by
the Safety and Security Ministry have to incorporate other people so that
they are able to catch the criminals. The criminals mustn’t see ATMs as an
easy way to get money, because at the end of the day, people are getting
hurt. Therefore we urge the Minister of Safety and Security to work with
all the other role-players to make sure that there is a strategy to curb
these criminal acts that are taking place. I thank you.

                           ASA AND SASCOC DISPUTE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr B M KOMPHELA (ANC): Chairperson, yesterday the Portfolio Committee on
Sport and Recreation met to assist the SA Sports Confederation and Olympic
Committee, Sascoc, and Athletics SA, ASA, to resolve a prolonged dispute
between the two bodies. At the centre of the dispute are remarks made by
the president of Athletics SA, Leonard Chuene, on the lack of
transformation in Sascoc and its affiliates.

In reaction to this, Sascoc has set up an inquiry into Mr Chuene’s conduct
for allegedly bringing the organisation into disrepute. After a lengthy
discussion, the president of Sascoc, Mr Moss Mashishi, assured the
portfolio committee that no action would be taken against Mr Leonard Chuene
for remarks made before the portfolio committee.

It is, however, important for Sascoc and Athletics SA to resolve the
outstanding issues. To this effect, a meeting will take place between the
Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation to heal the rift between the
two parties before Team SA leaves for Beijing. These events should not
overshadow the sterling performance of the South African athletes who will
be at the Beijing Olympics in August, after topping the medals table at the
Confederation of African Athletics, CCA, Africa Athletics Championships
concluded on Sunday in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
The team returned on Tuesday with a bag full of 22 medals - 12 of these
were gold, two were silver and eight were bronze. To cap this achievement,
14 of these athletes have qualified for the Olympics so far with ... [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

                              ZIMBABWEAN CRISIS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs C DUDLEY (ACDP): Chair, the ACDP salutes President Mwanawasa of Zambia,
President Kikwete of Tanzania and President Khama of Botswana for their
integrity and courage in declaring that the crisis in Zimbabwe warrants
immediate intervention. Accusations that President Mwanawasa is an agent of
neocolonialism for criticising Mugabe are both unjustified and a
smokescreen to hide the support for Mugabe’s brutal regime of terror by
other Southern African Development Community, SADC, leaders.

The ACDP views with deep concern the revelation by the Mozambique Human
Rights League of a co-operative loyalty pact of liberation struggle leaders
that even when faced with the brutality and terrorism of one of their own
number against his own people, they will not condemn.

The Pan-African Parliament’s statement on Zimbabwe is, however, encouraging
and the African Union’s efforts, although unclear, hold some promise that
Africa has not completely abandoned Zimbabweans who have felt betrayed by
their own and know that only an African solution can address this African
problem.

South Africa’s consistently callous attitude towards Zimbabwe is shameful,
and for SADC leaders to have endorsed Thabo Mbeki’s continued role as a
mediator in the Zimbabwe crisis is disgraceful. President Mbeki has failed
repeatedly and must be replaced by an impartial mediator.

The ACDP recognises the brave and relentless efforts of Zimbabwean civil
society and Zimbabwean opposition parties who have, at great risk, tried to
defend a dying democracy in Zimbabwe. We also congratulate the Movement for
Democratic Change on their victory at the polls and on persevering in the
face of such unrelenting opposition, violence and propaganda. Thank you.
[Applause.] [Time expired.]

  BESTB WISHES TO STUDENTS WRITING SUPPLEMENTARY MATRICULATION EXAMINATIONS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms P R MASHANGOANE (ANC): More than 25 000 young people this week will sit
for their matriculation supplementary examinations countrywide. These
examinations will give matric pupils who were unsuccessful last year
another opportunity to sit for their matric examinations. The ANC wishes
all the students writing the 2008 supplementary examinations success in
their endeavours.

The ANC believes that education is fundamental to the achievement of the
society envisaged in the Freedom Charter and, indeed, in our Constitution.
We believe that education must occupy the attention and energy of our
nation state. The students who are writing the exams need to understand
that the task they are embarking on is not just a personal one, but that it
also has profound national implications. Even as we ask our young people to
play their part, we likewise execute ours.

The ANC commits itself to the task of improving the access of poor South
Africans to quality education. In this connection, we shall intensify the
effort progressively to introduce free and compulsory education for the
poor until undergraduate level. We shall furthermore ensure that 60% of all
our schools achieve no-fee status by next year. Together, let us work to
build a better life for all. I thank you. [Applause.]

                              FOOD PRICE CRISIS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs P DE LILLE (ID): Chairperson, the ID agrees with government that we
must consider giving food vouchers to the poor. During the constituency
period, I visited five provinces and for many of our people it is a
struggle just to survive. We also know that the price of food is a global
problem. Therefore, today we call on the Minister of Finance to use the
R98,7 million penalty imposed on Tiger Brands for price-fixing for food
vouchers for the poor.

It makes no sense that those who suffer the most as a result of price-
fixing are not compensated for the money that was taken away from them. The
poor were disadvantaged by the actions of Tiger Brands and others involved
in price-fixing. But after the company is fined, the poor find themselves
in a worse position than before. It would be an indictment of this House if
we failed to offer protection to the most vulnerable in our society.

We also call on all the parties in this House to support the ID’s Private
Member’s Bill, which will make price-fixing a criminal offence. Any fraud
committed against the poor must be dealt with in the strongest possible way
and the perpetrators need to feel the full might of the law. I thank you.

                     PROBLEMS IN EASTERN CAPE GOVERNANCE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr I S MFUNDISI (UCDP): Chairperson, the Eastern Cape province should be
declared a disaster area as it has shown ineptitude in almost every aspect
of governance. The roads are a nightmare. We hope the recent financial
injection ordered by the Presidency will be put to good use. Education in
schools leaves much to be desired. Hospitals are disaster areas. We have
learned of scores of babies who have died because of impurities in the
water, something that could have been prevented.

The most unfortunate situation is the latest example of an individual who
has been allocated a tender to a tune of millions of rand to do laundry for
two big hospitals, namely, the Cecilia Makiwane Hospital and the Mount
Frere Hospital. The individual’s premises for such business hardly has a
tap for running water, let alone detergents for linen. Employees use their
bare hands, risking contracting diseases in the process. If this has been
done in the name of black economic empowerment or uplifting the formely
disadvantaged, it is misplaced in the extreme. Whoever allocated and
authorised such a tender has to be brought to book.

It has to be borne in mind that this is the same province to which
government sent a rescue team under the aegis of the Department of Public
Service and Administration when the administration was in the doldrums two
years ago. We call upon the people in positions of responsibility to be
seen to be responsible and accountable in what they are supposed to do. I
thank you.
                          DECOLONISATION OF AFRICA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M T LIKOTSI (APC): Chairperson, the position taken by the African Union
and the SA Development Community on the sociopolitical crisis caused by the
imperialists in Africa should be supported by all revolutionaries on the
continent and of the diaspora. Let this House know that the Organisation of
African Unity, now transformed into the African Union, played a significant
leading role in the decolonisation of Africa, including our beloved country
in its colonial name, South Africa.

The APC makes a clarion call to all the present revolutionaries of our time
to rise to the occasion, stand shoulder to shoulder and firmly protect the
gains of our liberation struggle. The imperialist forces, with their M3
plan, are still pursuing their agenda of domination in all walks of life in
Africa, the monopoly of economy being central to their strategy. The time
is now to regroup, leave behind our petty political differences and save
our country from all forms of attack such as electricity shortages, fuel
and food price hikes and, the biggest of them all, land acquisition
challenges. I thank you.

                                 LAND REFORM

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A J BOTHA (DA): Hon Chair, the DA supports the call for an urgent
national effort to resolve the problems with the government’s sluggish and
unsound land reform process. We therefore echo the proposal by the Centre
for Development and Enterprise for the establishment of a task team to
resolve speedily the impasse on land reform. However, we strongly recommend
that this structure be made up solely of representatives from relevant
civil society organisations, the Department of Agriculture and
agribusinesses.

If President Mbeki had any concern for the legacy of his administration
with respect to land reform, he would recognise that the Department of Land
Affairs, under Minister Lulu Xingwana, is clearly unable to effect a
turnaround in this process and immediately establish the proposed troika.

Presentations made at the Absa Agri-BEE seminar in Stellenbosch yesterday
underscored the dire consequences that the continuation of the current
impasse could have for the future stability of our economy and the
prosperity of our people.

It makes no sense for the government to continue with the land reform
process in a way that threatens the competitiveness, the capacity and the
output of our agricultural sector in an environment of crippling rural
poverty and heightened food price inflation. I thank you.

                  DECREASE IN SERIOUS CRIME IN GARSFONTEIN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr G W KOORNHOF (ANC): Chairperson, during March 2008 serious crimes in the
area of the Garsfontein police station, including crimes such as murder,
rape, attempted murder and violent house and business robberies declined by
a massive 40% compared to the same period last year.

This achievement is a classic example of how members of this particular
police station are succeeding in achieving the very objects of the Police
Service, namely to prevent, combat and investigate crime. It is a classic
success story of a co-ordinated effort by the SA Police Service, the
community policing forum and the community.

The police station has successfully established task teams to focus on
robberies of homes and businesses and hijackings. They arrested 53 people
who were linked to 87 cases of crime. One of the people arrested was
released on bail and, as he was released, he was immediately rearrested for
his suspected association with another crime.
This success story of the SA Police Service in Garsfontein can be
attributed to a combined effort by all in this community to win the fight
against crime. I thank you. [Applause.]

                    SCORPIONS BOSS TO MOVE TO WORLD BANK

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr H J BEKKER (IFP): Mr Chair, yesterday the news broke that Leonard
McCarthy of the Directorate of Special Operations, the Scorpions, had been
appointed the head of the World Bank’s anticorruption unit.

The IFP would like to congratulate Advocate McCarthy on this achievement.
This clearly shows the quality, dedication and integrity of DSO personnel,
which are also recognised worldwide. In fact, the President of the World
Bank heaped the following praise on him by saying that Leonard McCarthy was
known around the world for his integrity, independence and effectiveness in
fighting corruption and strengthening good governance.

What a pity our own government does not recognise a man on whom such a high
honour has been bestowed. It is known that other DSO personnel have already
left the Scorpions, some to work for the SA Revenue Service and the private
sector, and others for foreign governments. They clearly have no problem
with the quality and professionalism of DSO personnel.
The government’s insistence on breaking up the DSO is an indictment of
government’s seriousness in fighting corruption. Using the DSO as a
political football to settle factional scores will have dire consequences
for our country, least of which is the message it sends to criminals and
corrupt persons in the public and private sectors. All it says is that
South Africa is open for the business of crime and no one is watching the
score. Thank you. [Applause.]

                DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE IN INFORMAL SETTLEMENT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S J NJIKELANA (ANC): Last month the residents of Hospital Hills, an
informal settlement in the deep south of Johannesburg, went on a protest
march against the slow pace of development in their community.

During the march one youth died and about 20 residents were injured. A few
businesses and residential properties were damaged as well. The City of
Johannesburg is interacting intensely with the residents to address their
grievances.

However, the most inspiring initiative was when Mr Nadus Pillay and Ms
Shelly Govender from Lenasia South, an adjacent formal township, initiated
a process of involving keen residents from Lenasia South in ensuring that
development in Hospital Hills gained momentum. Such action was taken
without the usual complaining rhetoric that government must do its work.

Today I can proudly attest that last night the steering committee for the
development of Hospital Hills, which I also chair, comprising residents
from both communities, held its first meeting to implement its mandate from
a public meeting that was held last month. Such initiatives need to be
applauded especially when residents in their numbers from more affluent
communities take such a bold and brilliant step in solidarity with the poor
and disadvantaged.

On behalf of the ANC, I therefore strongly challenge all affluent
communities in our country to do the same. I thank you, Chairperson.
[Applause.]

                             VIOLENCE IN SCHOOLS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G G BOINAMO (DA): Chairperson, violence, gang warfare and sexual abuse
rule supreme in South African schools. Government allows crime to pay and,
as a result, in many parts of the country and in particular at many of our
schools the authorities have lost control. This is cause for concern for
every South African.

Two main South African teacher associations recently agreed with both the
Centre for Justice and Crime Prevention and a report from the SA Human
Rights Commission showing that schools have become the most dangerous
places in the country to be in and that violence in schools has become
endemic.

The studies have shown that many learners fear going to school toilets.
They fear travelling to school. They fear being at recreation centres. Both
the SA Democratic Teachers Union and the National Professional Teachers’
Association of SA agreed that violence was making many schools unworkable.

This situation needs to be dealt with urgently. The DA therefore calls for
a parliamentary debate on this matter. Thank you.

       REPRESENTIVITY OF WOMEN AND THE DISABLED IN THE PUBLIC SERVICE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N M MAHLAWE (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC continues to work tirelessly to
translate into practice its commitment to nonsexism through various
organisational and government policies and programmes.

The Public Service sector is on course to reach its representivity target
of 50% women in senior management positions by March 2009. The research
conducted in the Public Service sector indicates that there is a great
movement towards gender parity in this sector.

In 1995 women constituted 8% of senior management in the Public Service. By
the end of 2007, the number had improved to 33%. However, the ANC is
concerned about the slow movement in the implementation of policy regarding
the employment of people with disabilities who, it is reported, constitute
less than 1% of the workforce in this sector.

The ANC commends government on the progress made and reaffirms its
commitment to fighting for the total eradication of gender oppression in
all its manifestations. I thank you. [Applause.]

       REPRESENTIVITY OF WOMEN AND THE DISABLED IN THE PUBLIC SERVICE

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, I
really want to thank the hon member for raising the matters of both gender
and disability targets in the House. We can indeed do better. Even on the
issue of women’s representation, we’ve actually seen a huge movement
forward. Clearly, we need to do a lot more in order to meet our target of
50% by 2010.

On the issue of disability we have identified a major problem as
government. That is why we have developed the job access strategic
framework, with particular focus on ensuring that we take an integrated and
holistic approach to addressing the challenges both with regard to
representation and with regard to the development of people with
disabilities.

So, in this regard, we have put in place a human resources learning network
steering committee that consists both of national and provincial
departments. This will allow for a close tracking of the process across
government departments throughout the year. There is currently a situation
in which quarterly reports need to be provided on progress in this regard.

In November last year we also had a situation in which the Public Service
Commission conducted hearings with all national and provincial departments.
Here directors-general had to report on the low levels of employment of
people with disabilities.

The big issue that has been identified – and I’ll conclude on this matter -
is the fact that there is a lack of databases of people with disabilities
from which departments can readily recruit and employ. In this regard, the
Office in the Presidency - the office on disability under Minister Essop
Pahad - together with the Department of the Public Service and
Administration and the disability sector, are looking at how we will put
such a database in place. We need to do so speedily.

We are also looking at deepening the enhancement of skills of people with
disabilities. And then, we have also confronted the reality that there is
quite a challenge with the way in which we advertise jobs in the Public
Service because they automatically exclude a very large sector, if I can
call it that, of people with disabilities from applying for advertised
posts. We haven’t quite come up with a solution to that, but it is also an
issue we are dealing with.

And then, as a last matter, we feel, as I alluded to earlier, that the lack
of collaborative partnerships between disabled people’s organisations and
departments on the recruitment, employment and retention of people with
disabilities needs to be looked at a lot more closely. Thank you very much.

                              ZIMBABWEAN CRISIS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Ms S C van der Merwe): Chairperson,
there have been various statements in this House regarding the elections in
Zimbabwe, and I’d like to respond to the hon member from the ACDP.

While the combined elections, as we all know, of the National Assembly, the
Senate, the Local Council and the Presidency were held on 29 March, the
process is not yet complete. We will be urging all concerned parties,
including this Parliament, to see the process through to its conclusion.

Members of this Parliament, as we all know, formed part of the SADC
observer mission in the election, as well as in the recount process that
recently took place. We would urge, therefore, that again members of this
House participate in the run-off between the two leading candidates in the
presidential race.

The elections on 29 March, by all accounts, were conducted in a very
conducive environment. This, I believe, underscores the positive role
played by the facilitation team, led by our President, President Mbeki,
which has enabled the process to reach this point.

I should add that any allegations of violence should be treated with the
greatest concern. South Africa will therefore follow up on any such
allegations brought to our attention, with a view to ensuring that there is
no violence in the period leading up to the presidential run-off.

South Africa will therefore continue to make every effort to play its role
in supporting the people of Zimbabwe to complete the electoral process
peacefully and successfully, and we urge all parties to do the same. I
thank you. [Applause.]

                              FOOD PRICE CRISIS
                    SCORPIONS BOSS TO MOVE TO WORLD BANK
                             VIOLENCE IN SCHOOLS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, there are a few issues I would like
to respond to, starting with the hon De Lille. I would like to suggest too
that we might consider putting the R98,4 million in if she will put in Big
Marina’s brick as well. She knows what I’m talking about.

The point about food is that it is necessary that members in this House be
aware of the extreme sensitivity with which we must treat this, because
talk is cheap. The key issue about food prices is that it is a global
matter and that South Africa is not amongst the 50 worst affected countries
at the moment. So we mustn’t be talked into all kinds of panic. The key
issue about any measure we take is that we must be able to administer it.
And so when people say “price controls”, I say sure, but will each of us go
into our constituency and see that no spaza shop will overcharge even by
one cent? Will each of us be able to check to ensure that the vouchers will
be distributed and used for food only, and not to buy alcohol or other
things? If we don’t have those kinds of measures, I say talk is cheap.

This is not to suggest that we mustn’t deal with the issue of food prices
with the greatest amount of sensitivity and urgency, but I do want to
caution the House against quick-fix solutions that actually provide very
little for the poor, especially for young children who are badly in need of
nutrition.

I would also like to respond to the hon Bekker. Part of the difficulty of
his assertions is that I think he has failed to look at the founding
legislation for the Directorate of Special Operations. It wasn’t set up to
deal with corruption; it was set up to deal with organised crime. Now, for
as long as we have the wrong perception of what it ought to do, for so long
will we fail to measure correctly what it should be doing. [Interjections.]

The point about the appointment of Mr McCarthy – and, of course, we wish
him well in his endeavours and as government we were consulted in the
process - is that he was appointed by this government, not by that
government. In the course of democracy people will be noticed by the world
and will find appointments in multilateral organisations. There is nothing
wrong with that. It is part of a natural progression.

The other caution I want to raise is that the people who may have been
working for foreign governments, while they should have been working for
the Directorate of Special Operations, and earning two salaries are the
problem that the Khampepe commission has spoken to. That is what we must
root out of all our investigative services because that’s where the problem
lies. [Applause.]

I want to turn then to the hon Boinamo. He has left now. I hope he is still
on the road. Oh, he has crossed the floor. It is okay. [Laughter.] There
are problems in schools, but more precisely there are problems in a very
small minority of the schools. I have heard both teachers’ unions. I have
heard Mr Nxesi of the SA Democratic Teachers’ Union and I have heard Mr
Bolt of the National Professional Teachers Organisation of SA say, “Please
don’t exaggerate the impact of this thing.” There are more good things
happening in schools, and we must support what is happening in schools and
generalise from the strength of the good things taking place and not be so
caught up in the sensationalism. Nelson Mandela, as President of the
Republic, stood at this podium and said that one tree falling made a heck
of a lot more noise than a million trees growing. And in terms of the way
we approach these issues we have to take exactly the same approach to
education, failing which we will go around chasing the bad stories when, in
fact, there is so much that is good that is happening in education. Thank
you very much. [Applause.]

                DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE IN INFORMAL SETTLEMENT

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Hon Chairperson and hon members, I want to
respond to the matter that was raised by the hon Njikelana next to me here.
Indeed, one would want to appreciate the work that has been done in Lenasia
to assist the community who needs development.

In my view, there are two aspects that are lessons for all of us in this
House. The first aspect is that the people have been able to use their
democratic right to raise their concerns with the municipality about the
need for development in their area, but they didn’t end there by protesting
and raising their concerns. They went further in finding solutions. I think
the second lesson we must learn is that the people, in partnership with
government, have decided to resort to measures as communities, some of whom
may have the leverage of resources to support those communities that are
underdeveloped. They pool together their financial resources and, I would
dare say, their human strength and potential, to undertake their
development. We would like to applaud members of this House, like Mr
Njikelana and others, who have worked with their communities in their
constituencies to ensure that partnership in development can actually
assist us to develop our country and our people overall. Thank you.
                                 LAND REFORM

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Chairperson, I would like to
respond to the hon Botha who raised some of the recommendations made by the
Centre for Development and Enterprise report. I would like to say that as
this government, we don’t receive our mandate from the newspapers. We go
down to our people and consult and discuss with them, and that is where the
mandate of this government comes from.

I also want to assure the House that the people of South Africa want their
land back and they want it yesterday! We can come up with all the excuses
and delaying tactics. I don’t deny that there are serious challenges and
problems in our land reform programme, but we are addressing them. We have
come up with strategies to partner with progressive white commercial
farmers who have agreed to assist with the transfer of skills and to assist
our people to be able to keep sustainable and productive those farms that
have been handed over to them.

We are going to continue with our land restitution programme. To date, we
have achieved a 95% return on all the claims that had been lodged by
December 1998. We are committed to fast-tracking land reform and land
restitution in the country.
I also want to say that it is true that some of the farmers have escalated
prices. As we speak, the Dube clan in KwaZulu-Natal – the sugar farmers -
are charging R560 000 per hectare, which means that for a piece of land of
about 4 000 ha we have to pay R2 billion. These are the challenges we are
facing and that is our reality. Also in KwaZulu-Natal there is a farmer who
is charging R10 million per hectare for land that is under claim, because
they believe the government has no option but to buy, and so they can make
all those demands.

I want to concur with the Minister of Finance on food prices and say that
in the long run increased food production will be the answer. Increased
food production is the best strategy to stabilise the escalating prices. In
that regard, we have a strategy that will assist us to look at
mechanisation and going into those fallow lands, especially in our rural
areas, to cultivate and make them productive.

We also have a plan to increase land under irrigation. These programmes
have started in many of the provinces, including the Northern Cape and the
Eastern Cape. We are rehabilitating some of the irrigation schemes that
were built there some time ago, but we are also putting in place new
irrigation schemes.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order, hon Minister, I regret your
time has expired.
The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: We are also increasing maize
and wheat production, and the massification of livestock. Thank you,
Chairperson. [Applause.]

                  DECREASE IN SERIOUS CRIME IN GARSFONTEIN

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, I’d like to
respond to the statement made by the hon Koornhof and also, firstly, to
take the opportunity to congratulate the Garsfontein police station on
their success rate in bringing down crime. I think the hon member mentioned
a 40% reduction in serious and violent crime. That certainly needs to be
commended by all of us in this House.

Secondly, I’d also like to say that this bears testimony to what we can
achieve if we all work together – the police and communities – to fight
crime and any criminal activities within our communities. We’d also like to
take the opportunity to encourage communities throughout the country -
because we are all affected by crime - to emulate this example of
Garsfontein. I hope the hon member will take our congratulations back to
the police station there as well. We would like to encourage all members of
this House, because we are also all affected by crime, to take this message
to our constituencies and preach the message that crime does not pay. Thank
you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Thank you, Minister and Deputy
Ministers. Unfortunately, we don’t have sufficient time to take the
responses of the Deputy Minister of Trade and Industry and of Sport and
Recreation. We have run out of time.

 WORKSHOP WITH NATIONAL TREASURY ON THE CONTENT AND REVISION OF PFMA SECTION
                                 32 REPORTS

         (Consideration of Report of Joint Budget Committee thereon)

Ms L L MABE: Modulasetulo, ke leboga maloko a Ntlo e Kgolo e, le botlhe ba
ba utlweletseng kwa magaeng. Ke simolola ka gore ... [Chairperson, I would
like to thank the members of this House and everyone who is listening at
home. I shall start off by saying ...]

The PFMA section 32 reports are an important resource to be used when
Parliament does its budget oversight, but the problem is that these reports
have limited information which does not allow for robust and effective
oversight by parliamentarians. The Joint Budget Committee then recommended
to the National Treasury that they must review the format and content of
these reports in order to make it easier for us as members to do our
oversight function.

The committee then convened a workshop with National Treasury to assess
progress on the revision of these reports. The chairpersons of the
portfolio and select committees and researchers in Parliament were invited
to the workshop. We appreciate the valuable inputs by chairpersons who were
in attendance. The workshop also strengthened the working relationship
between the Joint Budget Committee and other parliamentary committees.

Therefore, it is important that all committees take an active part in
scrutinising their departmental Budget Votes on a regular and consistent
basis. This will go a long way towards addressing the problems of low
spending in the first two quarters and extremely high spending in the last
quarter of the financial year or in the month of December. We hope that the
new and detailed information will assist committees to track exactly what
the departments do in spending.

It is also worrying to discover that the police - I am citing an example –
always spend well, but that the level of crime is still high. Communities
complain about the nonavailability of police at times of great need, this
when the department has invested more in purchasing motor vehicles. Indeed,
motor vehicles have been bought to ensure that the police have easy access
to communities when they need the police. Unfortunately, the police are
also scared when it comes to criminals at night and these are the people we
rely on, who must be protected but who must also protect us.
These finer details are what parliamentary committees must focus on. They
must probe more deeply, because what we do as the committee is to focus on
the bigger picture.

With regard to national spending, we also looked at government spending at
the national level, and the pattern of habitual low and high spenders
remained the same as that of previous financial years.

These are almost the same departments that receive consecutive qualified
audit opinion reports from the Auditor-General. They are the same ones we
struggle with to get detailed and satisfactory responses to our queries. To
cite examples: We have Home Affairs, Sport and Recreation, Transport, and
Health as some of the few departments which either get qualified audit
opinion reports or cannot respond to how they utilised their budgets. We
cannot continue in that fashion. That is why it is important for us at the
portfolio committee level to probe more to ensure that departments do spend
what they had promised to spend.

We have also discovered that departments make high projections on spending
in their budget proposals, but spend far less, embark on fruitless spending
in the last quarter of the financial year or disguise underspending. We are
quite aware of that and have observed that most of these departments spend
on things that are not needed, things that to a limited extent assist the
poorest of the poor in our country.
Members of Parliament, is it correct that departments embark on fruitless
spending when poor people struggle to make ends meet? Is this correct?
These are the challenges we have to face. Whether we say no or yes, the
fact of the matter is that it is us as members who must probe and make
these departments accountable so that the poor can benefit from the Budget
that we are going to pass soon.

With regard to provincial spending, somebody remarked recently that the
Eastern Cape produces a high number of accountants in the country. On the
contrary, a large portion of financial resources that are allocated to that
province do not reach the intended beneficiaries who continue to face
poverty. Why is this the case, because we do have those skills in the
country? [Interjections.]

I don’t need your interruptions, because you must listen to what I am
saying to go out and assist those people who are suffering.
[Interjections.]

I also want to say that it’s not surprising that the Eastern Cape can
allocate tenders to nonexistent companies, because they do not take the
lives of our people seriously, and we can’t continue that way.
[Interjections.]

On the other hand, the province I come from, the North West, overspent by
R1,2 billion in the previous financial year. That overspending ...
[Interjections.] Leave the ANC alone because you can’t do anything that can
help our people.

That overspending was attributed to incorrect data and the miscalculation
of the impact of the redemarcation process in the budget. [Interjections.]
Thank you, Madam. You must learn listening skills. [Interjections.]

That overspending was also attributed to the projected salary increases in
the Public Service. But maybe it is time that the National Treasury, Mr
Minister - Comrade Trevor - ensures that the North West uses the same
financial reporting system as that used by all government departments to
make it easy for us to track and trace how the North West spends as
compared to other provinces. They should not continue using the Walker
system.

I want to continue by saying that if we did not have the necessary support
as Members of Parliament, we would not do proper oversight to ensure that
as we pass the Budget, the department officials would know that we are
serious about the Budget. We want them to help our people so that our
people’s lives can improve for the better.

Spending on conditional grants is still a big problem; a major problem for
that matter. For instance, when it comes to spending on Schedule 4 grants,
the information is usually not available on time when we want to know what
has happened to municipal infrastructure grants, what has happened to the
grants that must go towards the training of health professionals. Where has
the money gone? It’s difficult to track and to trace that spending because
information is not available on time. The departments must respond on time
so that we can know what they are doing with the money.

The committee also noted that MPs should maybe receive training on the
Vulindlela management information system, which was launched in 1997, that
is, 11 years ago, because it provides a repository of detailed spending and
Budget information that can assist us to do better oversight of the Budget.


The Joint Budget Committee will keep chairpersons of committees on board
with Budget-related information that will assist Parliament to engage in a
robust Budget oversight function. But it is also important that, as we
continue our interaction with different portfolio committees, they inform
us on how we can engage the National Treasury on making changes to these
reports so that they can be user-friendly to Members of Parliament.

I would like to thank a million times the chairpersons – the hon Jeremy
Cronin was there and he made a valuable input - and other chairpersons that
also made valuable inputs, as well as the researchers who attended to make
the workshop a success.

I would also like to thank members of the Joint Budget Committee for their
commitment, because without that commitment we would not perform our
function and the work we have been doing so far. I would also like to thank
the Minister of Finance for making available his team at all times, on our
specific request. That team relies on what we want and provides us with
what we want from them, not on what they want to give us. I want to thank
the Minister for that team and request the Minister to allow the team to
continue to give us the support so that we can perform a better oversight
function.

I would also like to say that through that interaction with the team from
the National Treasury, the team from the Auditor-General, the team from the
Financial and Fiscal Commission, we have started to ensure that Members of
Parliament find Budget oversight an enjoyable exercise that they can
continually probe.

Thank you, hon Chauke, because I have been monitoring the hon Bloem. I have
been monitoring the way you interact with your departments when it comes to
oversight of budgetary spending in those departments. I am very happy, and
we will continue to invite you to our workshops. We will also invite other
chairpersons in the near future when the National Treasury finally presents
what the report looks like, which is going to assist you in your oversight
function.

We must remember that this function of looking at the Budget is not meant
for accountants and economists. It is the nucleus of what we do as Members
of Parliament. It is central to what we do as Members of Parliament.

Finally, I want to present this report for adoption and would like to thank
the ANC for having supported us throughout our work in the Joint Budget
Committee and also those members from opposition parties who are always
ready and who even go the extra mile beyond working hours to ensure that we
can do our work properly. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr S J F MARAIS: Chairperson, we all should be acquainted with the role and
function of Parliament and its committees and, if not, then some members
may wake up one day and think that they have been left behind on a deserted
island.

Parliament has a constitutional role to play and a function that implies
that all its members and structures have oversight responsibilities and are
accountable to ensure, very importantly, that taxpayers’ money is used
effectively to broadly benefit all in South Africa.

Voorsitter, ons is egter ook almal bewus van die swak stand van
verskillende regeringsdepartemente soos gereflekteer deur hul jaarverslae.
Dit is ooglopend dat die komitees óf nie die vermoëns het om die oorsigrol
behoorlik te vervul nie óf dat hulle deurlopend probleme met die
verskillende departemente se hantering daarvan ervaar. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Chairperson, we are, however, also all aware of the poor state of various
government departments as reflected in their annual reports. It is obvious
that the committees either do not have the ability to fulfill their
oversight function properly or that they are continually experiencing
problems with the manner in which various departments are handling it.]

The Joint Budget Committee was established with a mandate, amongst other
things, to make proposals regarding the processes Parliament should follow
with regard to its role in the development of budgets, inclusive of
proposals about its role relative to other committees and also, on a
regular basis, to monitor monthly published actual revenue and expenditure
per department and ascertain whether these are in line with government
projections.

In monitoring expenditure, the JBC has utilised figures as published in
terms of section 32 of the Public Finance Management Act, and has reported
to this House on a quarterly basis. Although the PFMA section 32 reports
are an important resource as they provide a high-level snapshot overview of
expenditure, this information is nevertheless very limited.

Voorsitter, begrotings behoort ’n beplanning vir uitgawes te wees teen
goedgekeurde besigheidsplanne en nie ’n magtiging om na willekeur te
spandeer slegs omdat ’n begroting goedgekeur is nie. Verder behoort dit ook
gebaseer te wees op werklike kontantvloei, inkomstes en die regverdiging
van die uitgawes op die gegewe tydstip. Ons het ook gewoond geraak in die
laaste tyd aan ’n geneigdheid by departemente tot oorbesteding,
onderbesteding of eenvoudig wanbesteding van toegedeelde fondse sonder
noodwendige regverdiging van daardie uitgawes.

Die Gesamentlike Begrotingskomitee moet gekomplimenteer word daarmee dat
tekorte en potensiële probleemareas geïdentifiseer is en met hul visie om
die rol en funksie van die Wet op Openbare Finansiële Bestuur se artikel 32
só uit te brei om ook voorsiening te maak vir inkomstes, betalings,
kontantvloei teen goedgekeurde begrotings, asook verduidelikende notas.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, budgets ought to be a plan for expenditures relative to
approved business plans and not be a mandate to spend arbitrarily just
because the budget has been approved. Furthermore, it should also be based
on actual cash flow, revenue and the justification of expenditures at a
given time. Lately we have also become accustomed to a tendency by
departments to overspend, underspend or simply mismanage funds without the
necessary justification for those expenditures.

The Joint Budget Committee should be complimented on having identified
shortages and potential problem areas and on their vision for expanding
their role and function of section 32 of the Public Finance Management Act
to such an extent in order to make provision for revenue, payments, cash
flow to be relevant to approved budgets and explanatory notes.]
After consultation and a workshop with National Treasury, it was agreed
that a quarterly national programme and economic classification report be
considered. This will provide detailed in-year spending information in a
readable and understandable format and allow the JBC to do more
comprehensive, qualitative and timely reporting.

The expansion of section 32 reports will also assist in the empowerment of
other parliamentary committees in their oversight role and work. In this
process, hopefully, members of this House will improve their compliance
with the constitutional requirements.

Die DA glo aan fiskale dissipline en steun meganismes om die oorsigrolle te
verbeter sonder dat ons oorgereguleer moet word. Daar moet ruimte wees om
kundigheid en vaardighede te verbeter en dit effektief toe te pas. Die DA
steun egter die aanbevelings van die Gesamentlike Begrotingskomitee en die
aanvaarding van die verslag. Ek dank u. [Applous.] (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The DA believes in fiscal discipline and supports mechanisms to improve
oversight roles without us having to be over-regulated. There should be
room to improve expertise and skills and to apply them effectively. The DA
however, supports the recommendations of the Joint Budget Committee and the
acceptance of the report. I thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr H J BEKKER: Mr Chair, the National Treasury indicated in the
Intergovernmental Fiscal Review of 2003 that, although there had been a
remarkable improvement in public finance management, there remained a
challenge to bring all government departments and provinces up to the same
standard of budgeting, financial management and reporting.

This latter aspect – reporting on expenditure – is of vital importance in
order for the Joint Budget Committee and Parliament to monitor monthly and
quarterly expenditure published in terms of section 32 of the PFMA. The IFP
agrees with the JBC that, although section 32 reports are important, they
contain limited information. This affects ongoing monitoring by Parliament
of the expenditure trends in government spending.

The IFP therefore supported the committee’s initiative to request Treasury
to review the format and frequency of the section 32 reports to enable
Parliament to conduct ongoing monitoring rather than monitoring at only a
few selected points in time, which did not paint an accurate enough picture
of government’s performance.

The outcome of the joint workshop is the introduction of the quarterly
National Programme and Economic Classification Report, which we support.
This report will give Parliament the ability to look closely at expenditure
and to track performance, whilst acting as an early-warning system to alert
the public to problems with expenditure and service delivery.

The revision of section 32 reports will enable the JBC to play its
appointed oversight role much more effectively and will allow it to report
to Parliament in a manner that will give effect to its mandate. The IFP
supports increasing the committee’s capacity and effectiveness that this
move should achieve. The rest of Parliament - in other words, the various
committees - should also derive benefit from these new reports, enabling
them to also improve their oversight role. This should not detract from the
JBC’s mandate, but enhance Parliament’s overall effectiveness as an
overseer of the executive.

In general, the PFMA is an exemplary guideline for effective financial
control and financial experts are lauding it, with by far the majority of
its clauses being noted as practical and of great value for improved public
finance administration. Nevertheless, it has certain shortcomings. In its
implementation, it is sometimes theoretical and lacks the proper
sanctioning of public servants who have indeed contravened provisions of
the Act.

The acceptance and introduction of the PFMA was a major positive
development for South Africa in the promoting of fiscal discipline. This
moved the South African public sector from a basic cash recording system to
an accrual system, as prescribed by the Generally Accepted Accounting
Principles, which are in accordance with the international norm. The PFMA,
read together with the Treasury regulations, provides clear guidance for
effective financial control with definite sanctions for nonadherence to the
Act and the regulations. I thank you.

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, the ACDP agrees that section 32 reports are an
important resource as they provide a high-level overview of government
expenditure. The information they contain is, however, limited and this
affects the in-year monitoring capability of the Joint Budget Committee and
other portfolio committees in respect of determining and tracking
government expenditure. In response to this, the JBC recommended that
National Treasury should look at, revise and expand the content of these
section 32 reports, which the ACDP supports.

Clearly, in terms of parliamentary oversight, in-year monitoring by means
of these reports provides a bridge between the strategic and appropriation
phase, which is normally in the first and second parliamentary terms, and
the annual performance review, which is in the last term. Monitoring
expenditure presents a fundamental way through which Parliament can judge
government performance and it provides an important starting point for a
more detailed enquiry into policy outcomes and delivery. It also provides
an early warning system for government expenditure, revenue and cash flows.
The question arises: Why should we wait until there are negative Auditor-
General reports when there is an early warning system?

So, the revision of the section 32 reports and, specifically, the inclusion
of explanatory detail will allow for more comprehensive and timely
reporting by the JBC. It also assists other parliamentary committees in
their oversight work and, therefore, the ACDP supports these initiatives
and supports this report. I thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, it is crucial that a democratic government
operates in a system of transparency and checks and balances. This service
confidence in honest governance certainly makes corruption difficult.
Beyond this, as is reported by the Joint Budget Committee, budgets and
statistics service the tasks on an easier platform than that of committees.

In the light of this, the MF eagerly supports the running of in-year
reports. We, however, concern ourselves at this time with public knowledge
and involvement in Parliament’s processes and how this may be publicised to
the community. We need to realise that a large number of our people are not
literate; further, that they are not computer literate, that some also
don’t have access to the Internet or TV and that some don’t even have
access to radio.

Beyond members taking Parliament to the people, I strongly voice the need
to educate our people on the accessibility of partaking in Parliament, and
this should be advertised in all sectors of the media and community
notices. The MF supports the report by the Joint Budget Committee. I thank
you, Chair.

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

  That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

                          VOTE NO 17 OF 2007 BUDGET

   (Consideration of Report of Portfolio Committee on Social Development)

Mr T M MASUTHA: Chairperson, hon members, I just want to commence by
expressing my regret that we are considering this report just over a year
after it was adopted by the committee and ATCed. It is regrettable because
a lot of the recommendations that emerged from that report relate directly
to the committee’s responsibilities in exercising oversight of the
department. Those recommendations would have assisted in guiding the
department in its work.

I do want to say that we had a very fruitful meeting. I would like to thank
the chair of chairs, House Chairperson Mr Doidge, for organising the
meeting yesterday at which we had, as chairpersons, very fruitful
interaction with the Public Service Commission in terms of which it became
clear that for the committees of Parliament to effectively exercise their
oversight function, it is important that in addition to looking at the
Auditor-General’s reports - for example, the annual reports of departments
– they also take account of the findings and recommendations of the Public
Service Commission in its own reports relating to the specific departments.
I am definitely going to make sure that in our own committee, when we
consider the annual reports of our department, we do take into account
those specific reports.

The Department of Social Development has two core and interrelated
functions: the provision of social security and the delivery of social
services or welfare services, as they are commonly known. Given the high
levels of income poverty in South Africa, social grants play a critical
role in supporting especially children. In an effort to strengthen family-
based care for children, government introduced the child support grant in
1998 and progressively expanded coverage over the past 10 years.

For example, according to the database of the Social Security Pension
System, Socpen, we are pleased today to see over eight million children
currently receiving this grant. Despite some remaining challenges in the
implementation of this grant, it is important to highlight the fact that
this grant ensures that many children are lifted out of poverty.

In this regard, I want to emphasise the point that one of the core
principles that underpinned this grant was that the grant must follow the
child. So it is important to highlight the fact that if the child has since
moved from one person to another, the person from whom the child has moved
should not continue to receive the grant.

This is because the grant is aimed specifically at supporting the child,
hence the concept that was introduced of a primary caregiver, emphasising
the fact that the person who qualifies for the grant is not necessarily the
parent of the child in a situation in which the child may be cared for by
somebody else. In a sense, this also dispels the myth that this grant is
there merely to encourage young people, especially, to have children and
that some of these young people use these grants for perverse purposes
other than support for the children.

In such situations, one needs to emphasise that the grandparents and others
who may find themselves having to care for these children must approach the
department and make sure that the grant is actually given to them if they
are the ones who are taking care of the children, because the grant is
aimed primarily at targeting child poverty and that is the critical policy
objective of this grant.

In contrast, the social services arm of Social Development has lagged
behind considerably. Social services are generally classified in terms of
levels of intervention and include prevention, early intervention,
protection and alternative state care.

The social services arm is therefore a catch-all for a broad range of
interventions delivered through state and nongovernmental service
practitioners and volunteers. Across all four levels of service delivery,
the need for services far outweighs the capacity of the state to respond.
The committee’s oversight into the Department of Social Development’s
strategic plan and budget revealed multiple and interrelated challenges to
the delivery of social services.

Allow me to highlight briefly a few of the recommendations the committee
made in respect of these challenges. Firstly, the greatest obstacle to
implementation of services remains the acute shortage of suitably qualified
personnel. This includes social workers, social auxiliary workers and child
and youth-care workers. In this regard, the committee proposes that the
department work in consultation with the Department of Education around the
training and development of social workers, auxiliary workers and community
practitioners as a matter of urgency. Already many creative solutions are
being operationalised, which we welcome. Furthermore, disparities between
demand and service delivery are most pronounced in the poorest provinces.
In this regard, the committee recommends the stepping up of intervention
strategies to help build the capacity of service providers and has called
on the provinces to play a strategic role in implementing policy
directives.

The consolidation of intergovernmental initiatives to ensure that the
department plays its role in terms of oversight of and support for
provincial and local government spheres has been a key recommendation as
well. In this regard, the committee has engaged the department on numerous
occasions in that it is important to accelerate and improve service
delivery. Poor interdepartmental collaboration compromises care and
protection services and leads to costly inefficiencies in service delivery.


To ensure that crosscutting issues get the best possible attention, the
committee recommended that the Department of Social Development work
closely with the Departments of Education, Justice and Constitutional
Development, Health, and Provincial and Local Government to ensure that
policy alignment and coherence are achieved.

The committee’s recommendations also reflect upon the current fiscal
arrangements. We have a situation, for example, in which in terms of the
Constitution, provinces have full autonomy as to how their portions of the
equitable share are spent. This situation has led to many service delivery
gaps or policy omissions. In this regard, the national department must be
commended for the systems and mechanisms it has begun to put in place in
order to ensure greater accountability by provinces to achieve policy
cohesion.

With regard to the SA Social Security Agency, Sassa, and the National
Development Agency, the NDA, the committee made the following
recommendations. The committee has taken a keen interest in the NDA
precisely because it is tasked with facilitating systematic interaction and
dialogue between the state and civil society and communities, as well as to
mobilise resources for poverty eradication and ensure people-centred
development. One of the recommendations made was that the NDA put more
emphasis on its monitoring strategies. Concern was expressed by the
committee in respect of the sustainability of projects funded by the NDA.
To this end, the committee requested the NDA to review its implementation
strategies. Steps to combat corruption were welcomed and forensic reports
that were requested were supplied to the committee. I thank you. [Time
expired.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): I now recognise the Chief Whip of
the Majority Party.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, may I ask you what you know about the ANC’s
internal workings that we don’t know, because he is only the Deputy Chief
Whip? [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): I agree with you; he’s the Deputy
Chief Whip.

         OVERSIGHT VISIT TO NORTH WEST PROVINCE, 30 JULY TO 3 AUGUST
              OVERSIGHT VISIT TO FREE STATE, 24 JUNE TO 26 JUNE

    (Consideration of Reports of Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and
                                  Forestry)
Ms C C SEPTEMBER: Chairperson, indeed the reports before us are of the
oversight visits that the portfolio committee undertook to the Free State
province and the North West province. In the main, the reports will deal
with the oversight we undertook to deal with reaching the target that was
set regarding bucket sanitation last year.

We have been able to go to the two provinces. It is a pity that the reports
are coming before this House almost a year after the visits. Most of these
recommendations, we think, would have been quite relevant; some of them
still are. We think that we need to do quite a bit to make sure that the
reports of portfolio committees come to this House much earlier than is the
case at the moment. Nevertheless, I am here and you will have to listen to
me now.

We have recommended in our oversight report on the Free State that what we
needed to do, hon Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry, was to look at
the time period given in which the backlogs needed to be eradicated. We
also said that what we needed to look at was the funding allocations both
in relation to the municipalities and, more broadly, funding allocations
that were being given and whether they were sufficient to undertake these
targets in these instances.

The committee was extremely concerned and recommended that the sector
leader, in this instance the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry,
needed to do much more with regard to the choice that municipalities have
when they decided on the type of sanitation and in particular the type of
technology they wanted, so that the assistance that could be given to them
would also be of assistance when municipalities decided what particular
technology they wanted to go for as opposed to what the communities
actually wanted. In some instances, our experience is that they have not
been able to meet the target simply because of this tension between the two
of them.

We have also asked that we have a more structured approach when dealing
with the issue of targets. Equally, we ask that regular statistics be given
on the progress made. We think it is still relevant that the committee
receive statistics on the progress that has been made and in particular
whether we have realised the target that was set for 2007.

Of main concern – and we have experienced this very clearly in most
instances, in most of the municipalities and provinces – is the fact that
we do not seem to be overcoming the need to roll out services in a much
more integrated human settlement way. This will overcome the fact that they
will build a toilet first or last and then a house. We think that those
kinds of issues must be tackled.

Most of the time we are asking small businesses to get involved in these
projects. We think that we need to do much more to empower small businesses
when they undertake these projects. We must also ensure that we provide the
types of services that the communities have mandated.

On the North West side, we experienced the fact that there was a huge
challenge around water tariff reform. Also, the figures that they sometimes
supplied to us on the backlog were not conducive for the committee. Equally
so, we have asked that the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry and the
Water Research Commission undertake research on groundwater extraction
especially in the North West as there is quite a problem with water
scarcity. In fact, we think we need to do much more in all provinces with
regards to the vandalising of water infrastructure. We think that this
needs to go together with the kinds of campaigns that there are for
electricity.

In Swartruggens, in the Skielik area, which has received a lot of
publicity, we experienced exactly the same problem. We think that that area
still has to realise that we have had freedom since 1994. In that same area
we have a situation between the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry
and the Department of Provincial and Local Government. Much more needs to
be done about the debt that is owed to that municipality, particularly by a
small grouping opposed to transformation in this country that is not paying
the municipality there. We also want a report on the clean-up process at
the Hartebeespoort Dam and on ways to curb water losses.

Lastly, we urge that we do a study on the impact of urbanisation and, in
particular, what impact it has on services that need to be provided, in
this instance water and sanitation. We trust that our recommendations and
both reports of the portfolio committee will be adopted. I thank you.

Mev D VAN DER WALT: Agb Voorsitter, agb Minister, ek dink ek dra hierdie
verslag op aan al die mense in Akasiapark wat die afgelope tyd so gegrom
het, omdat ons met emmers water moet aandra. Hier is baie erger dinge aan
die gang. Volgens die opdrag vervat in die Grondwet van Suid-Afrika en die
Reëls van ons Parlement, het die komitee belas met Waterwese en Bosbou, die
oorsigrol aan hom toevertrou op genoemde datums uitgevoer. Die doelwit met
die besoek was om ons te vergewis van, eerstens, watter vordering gemaak is
ten opsigte van die uitroei of die wegdoen van die emmersanitasiestelsel en
die agterstand van watervoorsiening en tweedens wat die kwaliteit van die
waterhulpbronne. Dit het ook `n geleentheid aan komiteelede gebied om
eerstehands insae te kry met betrekking tot die verhoogde waterkrisis in
Swartruggens. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mrs D VAN DER WALT: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, I think that I dedicate
this report to all the people in Acacia Park who have been grumbling so
much this past spell because we had to fetch water with buckets. Much worse
things are occurring here. In accordance with the stipulations contained in
the Constitution of South Africa and the Rules of our Parliament, the
committee charged with Water Affairs and Forestry had fulfilled the
oversight duties entrusted to it by the specified dates. The object of the
visit was to acquaint ourselves with, firstly, the progress that had been
made with the eradication or disposal of the bucket sanitation system and
the backlog in respect of water provision, and secondly to ascertain the
quality of the water resources. It also afforded committee members the
opportunity of gaining first hand knowledge of the heightened water crisis
in Swartruggens.]

To remind us all, the deadlines stated by the President of South Africa
were as follows: the deadline for the eradication of the bucket toilet
backlogs was December 2007, the deadline for the eradication of the
sanitation backlog is 2010 and the target date for access to water is 2008
– this year, already in the fifth month.

I am going to look at the challenges facing these two provinces, as
mentioned in the report. In the North West the challenges are the low
population density and the relatively inadequate infrastructure, especially
in the remote rural areas; the inherited large backlogs in basic service
delivery and maintenance; the predominantly poor population with high
levels of illiteracy and dependency that affect their productivity and
ability to compete for jobs; and the significant inequalities between the
rich and the poor as well as between urban and rural areas. The available
resources are unevenly distributed and of a limited potential for improved
delivery of services and growth. A rapid rate of urbanisation is being
experienced in the North West province.

One of the challenges facing the Free State at that stage was that in order
to meet the deadline, approximately 80 000 bucket-sanitation toilets must
be eradicated every five to six months. It is huge and I wonder if we will
be able to meet that deadline. There is also the high cost of technology
that is to be implemented and the delays experienced due to the insistence
by the affected communities on all water-borne sanitation system
implementation. We all want that system. It is not always possible for
various reasons, such as droughts, rocks that have to be drilled through,
etc.

With regard to the municipal infrastructure grant, funding shortages are
experienced in the affected municipalities of the Free State. There are
also the delays experienced by contractors in the registration and
procurement processes for the projects under way, the poor quality of
materials used and performance of contracted service providers. Contract
administration is challenging, since supervision cannot be maintained all
the time.

In die verslag ter tafel is verskeie aanbevelings deur die komitee gemaak,
soos deur die voorsitter genoem is, om sodoende dienslewering binne die
daargestelde tydperk te help bereik. Dit het, wat my betref, ook weer eens
bevestig dat dit uiters noodsaaklik is dat die onderskeie departemente wat
betrokke is, naamlik Waterwese, Behuising en Plaaslike en Provinsiale
Regering nouer moet saamwerk, van die beplanningsfase af. Ons kan nie
langer toelaat dat toilette en wasbakke in die verste uithoek van `n huis
af geplaas word nie. Dit is onprakties. Dit is onveilig en dit is absoluut
onwaardig.

My dank aan die kollegas, want ten spyte van die sneeu wat ons in
Bloemfontein ervaar het, het die amptenare van die verskeie munisipaliteite
en die LUR`e ons op insiggewende, maar tog soms werklik skokkende, besoeke
geneem. Ons besef weer eens dat daar baie werk gedoen moet word, om al ons
mense van noodsaaklike dienste te voorsien, wat ook waardigheid uiteindelik
sal meebring. Voorsitter, die DA ondersteun die verslag. Ke a leboga.
Dankie. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The tabled report contains several recommendations made by the committee,
as mentioned by the chairperson, to assist in attaining service delivery
targets within the prescribed period. It has, in my opinion, emphasized the
absolute necessity of the various departments involved, namely Water
Affairs, Housing and Local and Provincial Government having to work closely
in concert from the planning phase. We can no longer allow toilets and
washing basins to be placed in an area that is far away from a house. It is
impractical. It is unsafe and absolutely undignified.

My thanks to colleagues, because despite the snow that we experienced in
Bloemfontein, the officials of the various municipalities and the MECs took
us on informative, but sometimes shocking visits. Once again we have
realised that there is plenty of work to be done in order to provide all
our people with essential services, that will eventually also restore
dignity. Chairperson, the DA supports this report. Ke a leboga. Thank you.
[Applause.]]

Mr M W SIBUYANA: Chairperson, the IFP, based on its values of ubuntu butho,
which includes unity in diversity, supports the reports. We, however, note
the following concern: the oversight visits in most cases covered municipal
officials, with very few, if any, ordinary citizens participating, if any,
in our meetings.

We believe that members of the committee are representatives of the voting
mass and should learn from the masses themselves if officials are
delivering services according to the budgets and plans. My Shangaan
learning is that ...

... ririmi i xongela n’wini. [... loose lips sink ships.]

This, in other words, tells us that the tongue cannot speak ill of its
owner. The officials will not speak of their failures and will never show
us places where progress is lacking and where they have failed to meet the
objectives. The committee oversight visits have always identified problem
areas.

In the North West municipal offices there were seats allocated to
traditional leaders, but the traditional leaders themselves were not
invited, yet they are the representatives of the masses of our people on
the ground. We observed that there was a complete lack of co-ordination
between the structures rendering service delivery from different
departments.

Overall, the IFP feels that the committee should take time to see what has
been done to remedy the problems identified. Although members of the
department can appear before the committee and say that the problems have
been fixed, this might not always be the case. It is doubtful if the
sanitation problem will be solved within the set target dates unless the
department rapidly steps up the implementation process and improves its
capacity problems at local level. I thank you.

Ms S N SIGCAU: Chairperson, hon members, what we witnessed in the Free
State can also be witnessed from the report on the North West in that there
are still serious backlogs of delivery in both provinces.

We are particularly concerned about the persistence of the bucket toilet
system which all of us are committed to eradicating. It is undignified and
unhygienic, and 14 years into democracy we should not have to witness the
continued existence of this system.

We are also deeply concerned about the overall water and sanitation
backlogs. A consistent problem that we encountered at the municipality we
visited was the lack of skills and capacity to manage these infrastructure
development projects. These are the problems that are not limited to the
water infrastructure alone, and which have crippled service delivery in
general throughout the country.

It is apparent that the national department should engage in more active
monitoring of provincial and municipal policy implementation, and that some
form of active mentoring and support is required at municipal level to
ensure the proper management of the infrastructure projects. The UDM
supports the recommendations of the reports. I thank you, hon Chairperson.
[Applause.]

Mr H B CUPIDO: Hon Chairperson, on behalf of the ACDP I would like to agree
with the contents, the findings and the recommendations of these reports of
the portfolio committee’s visits to the North West and the Free State
provinces. We support the report.

It is the portfolio committee’s constitutional responsibility to do
oversight and report to Parliament on their findings and to make
recommendations. My concern is that these reports, I feel, are completely
irrelevant at this stage as the target date for the eradication of the
bucket system has long passed - it’s about five months now. The visit by
the Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry was almost 11 months
ago.

That was my last oversight visit with the portfolio committee and I would
like to commend the chairperson and the portfolio committee on the very
objective manner in which they do their work.

There is not much that one can really debate in the reports unless it
includes information as at the end of December 2007, which was the cut-off
date for the eradication of the bucket system. At this stage I feel that it
would have been much more appropriate for the chairperson to present the
reports as was planned in terms of the parliamentary programme up until
yesterday for consideration. But we are here and therefore let’s say more.

Most local authorities, whom the portfolio committee met with, were very
resolute that they, with the financial and technical assistance of
provincial government and the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry,
would be able to reach the end of December target date. The lack of
technical support in the form of experienced engineers on a full-time basis
rendered great challenges. Most engineers were split between local
authorities on a day-to-day basis.

Sufficient funding became another challenge, as some communities were not
satisfied with the system the local authority planned as most of them would
have preferred the full waterborne toilets. Communities should be taken on
board fully ... [Time expired.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, the hon President gave deadlines for the
eradication of the bucket system and for accessibility to potable water and
sanitation. And we, as Parliament, have been tasked with overseeing that
these deadlines are met.

We applaud the Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry that has
given us a clear-cut view of the progress and backlogs in the North West
and the Free State. These oversight visits are crucial to delivery and are
a true eye-opener on the South African dilemma.

For the middle class it will be difficult to believe that many South
Africans are still relying on the bucket system and that many do not have
direct access to potable water or even hot water in their houses. A bigger
eye-opener is that middle class South Africans do not make up the majority
of South Africa – it is the impoverished class that does.

In view of these reports, though we do see some mobilisation in delivery,
we find it crucial that the committee’s recommendations be taken seriously
if we are to meet the deadlines and to turn around the lives of these
victims of poverty.

The MF is extremely worried about the South African situation with regard
to water. A few years ago discussions on water shortages even proposed
looking at alternative resources to manage our water supply, considering
the water shortage. Even if we were to report that this year we are in a
water safety zone, we should have possible alternatives in place so that we
do not find ourselves in another situation as we have had with electricity.


The MF supports both reports of the Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs
and Forestry. I thank you, Chairperson.

Mr B G MOSALA: Chairperson, hon members, the Portfolio Committee on Water
Affairs and Forestry is fully convinced that the objectives of the
oversight visits undertaken to the Free State and North West provinces were
realised.

The aim of our visit to the Free State from 24 June to 26 June 2007 was
mainly to check on progress made with regard to the eradication of the
bucket toilet sanitation system in view of the target date of December 2007
set by the President.

This province was listed as having the highest backlog in the programme on
the eradication of the bucket system in 2005. At the time of our visit, the
municipalities, including the provincial government, had made tremendous
progress in reducing the number of bucket sanitation toilets, but a backlog
of almost 80 000 toilets still remained. It is hoped that a lot more
progress has been made by now.

We were able to meet and have discussions with the MEC for local government
as well as with mayors and officials from Mangaung, Setsoto and Matjhabeng.

During our visit to the North West province from 30 July to 3 August 2007,
the committee was able to meet and hold discussions with the MEC for local
government and with the majority of municipalities in that province. We
gained valuable insight into the quality of water resources, and we were
also able to evaluate the role that municipalities were able to play as
water service authorities.

The challenges that the province had on sanitation and water backlogs,
including eradication of the bucket system were noted as reflected in our
report. All the challenges identified during our visits, including our
recommendations, are captured in our report. The most outstanding challenge
mentioned was the lack of funds, but given the enthusiasm and commitment
displayed by officials and councils during our visits, we remain hopeful
for the future.

We are very grateful and thankful for the support for these reports by all
the hon members from different parties who have participated in this short
debate. We remain hopeful that these reports will be supported and adopted.
I thank you. [Applause.]
Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: I move:

  That the Report of the Committee on Oversight Visit to North West Province
  from 30 July to 3 August be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: I move:

  That the Report of the Committee on Oversight Visit to Free State from 24
  June to 26 June be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

The House adjourned at 16:44.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Translations of Bills submitted

      1) The Minister of Correctional Services


          a) Wysigingswetsontwerp op Korrektiewe  Dienste  [W  32  –  2007]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).
         This  is  the  official   translation   into   Afrikaans   of   the
         Correctional Services  Amendment  Bill  [B  32  –  2007]  (National
         Assembly – sec 75).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)    Report of the Auditor-General on a performance audit of  housing
        subsidies to municipal employees and the administration of low-cost
        housing projects by certain provincial housing departments –  March
        2008 [RP 47-2008].

2.    The Minister of Labour

    (a)    Strategic Plan of the Department of Labour for 2008-2011 [RP 43-
        2008].

3.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism


    (a)    Strategic Plan of the Marine Living  Resources  Fund  for  2008-
        2011.

4.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)    Annual Report of The Office of  Consumer  Protection  for  2006-
        2007.


