---
title: 'National Assembly - 27 May 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2008-05-27
---

TUESDAY, 27 MAY 2008
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:01.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Mr C M LOWE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that I intend moving, on
behalf of the DA, the following motion:

  That the House debates the migration of people on the African continent,
  the role and responsibilities of the government in managing their
  movement and specifically the role of the Department of Home Affairs in
  responding to migration patterns in Southern Africa.

                            CHILD PROTECTION WEEK

                             (Draft Resolution)

THE CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

  That the House –


    1) notes that Monday, 26 May 2008, marked the beginning of Child
       Protection Week which will culminate in the commemoration of
       International Children’s Day on 1 June;


 (2)  further notes that the theme for the week is: “Getting South Africa
       ready to implement the Children’s Act”;


 (3)  recognises that a large number of our children, one of the most
       vulnerable groups in our society, are still victims of neglect,
       abuse and violence on a daily basis;


 (4)  acknowledges the selfless role stakeholders in civil society and in
       local communities have played in campaigning for the protection and
       development of our children; and


 (5)  calls on all South Africans to stand together to ensure that our
       children are protected from all forms of abuse so that they can
       enjoy the benefits of freedom and democracy which they so rightly
       deserve.
Agreed to.

       MUNICIPAL BY-ELECTIONS IN WARD 73 IN CHATSWORTH, KWAZULU-NATAL

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

  That the House –


    1) notes that the by-elections in Ward 73 in Chatsworth, KwaZulu-Natal,
       have been victoriously won by an MF candidate, Anandan Naidoo, in
       all nine voting district stations;


    2) further notes that this by-election has been a great success in
       numbers, and we would like to thank all supporters who led us to
       this victory ...

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: I don’t believe the hon
member has cleared this motion with the rest of the parties. She is talking
very much on a party-political matter which is absolutely taboo in terms of
motions without notice. I would suggest that you rule this out of order. We
certainly won’t be supporting it.

The SPEAKER: Hon Rajbally, these motions without notice are ordinarily
preceded by ensuring that all other parties have been brought on board
about them. It doesn’t seem like this happened. So, maybe you want to just
process that.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Yes, Ma’am, it has been processed. Thank you.

                     CONDEMNATION OF XENOPHOBIC ATTACKS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms A VAN WYK (ANC): Madam Speaker, the recent criminal attacks on foreign
nationals and South Africans have resulted in death, injury and the
displacement of many people in our country.

The ANC commends the stand taken by the great majority of our people to
condemn the criminal violence. As political organisations, government and
security agencies, workers, community organisations, business and sectoral
organisations, let us co-ordinate our efforts to stop these attacks once
and for all. Let us also work together to mobilise support for those
displaced by the violence, ensuring that they are treated in a humane
manner, and by attending to their most immediate needs, including that of
food and ablution facilities. We commend the leaders of the various
political organisations and communities who continue to work hard to end
these attacks.

The ANC reiterates its strong condemnation of the attacks on foreign
nationals and South Africans alike, whatever the motivation. This violence
does not merely affect those who have fallen victim to it, but is an attack
on our country’s just, humane and democratic values. [Applause.]

                    REMARKS CONCERNING XENOPHOBIC ATTACKS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr C M LOWE (DA): Madam Speaker, on Thursday last week, here in this House,
the hon Trevor Manuel accused the DA leader, Helen Zille, of “fanning the
flames of xenophobia-related violence”, following her address earlier that
week to residents of New Woodlands in Cape Town, in which she called on
government to honestly reflect on the perceptions which give rise to
xenophobia.

The hon Manuel should be wary of throwing stones from glass houses. While
Helen Zille and the DA-led coalition have worked tirelessly in the City of
Cape Town to bring this crisis under control since its inception, with
virtually no assistance from the ANC government at provincial or national
level, it would be fair to argue that the flames that Zille is now forced
to put out were in fact sparked by the ANC’s own Lumka Yengeni. Yengeni’s
planned meeting with foreigners and locals in Du Noon, ostensibly “to
promote peace and community cohesion” following the attacks across Gauteng,
was nothing short of a shambles.

Members of the community waited a full two hours in a packed hall for her
and other members of the ANC to show up. She never did. The aborted
meeting, which was due to take place on the very same day that hon Manuel
launched his disingenuous attack on the leader of the DA, is said to have
caused the tension which sparked the subsequent flare-up of violence in the
Western Cape.

Mr Manuel should apologise for his ill-conceived attack, and concede to the
irony of the fact that it was the members of his own caucus that really
fanned the flames of the violence in the Western Cape. Thank you, Madam
Speaker.

        SUSPENSION OF STUDENTS AT MANGOSUTHU UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A M MPONTSHANE (IFP): Madam Speaker, the IFP is extremely concerned
about the plight of 16 SA Democratic Student Movement-affiliated students,
who remain suspended following protests at the Mangosuthu University of
Technology in March of this year.

The protests were planned by the student representative council of the
university to protest against lack of services and basic tools of learning
at the university. The suspended students are now losing out on valuable
class time, and they could possibly struggle to get good marks this year,
which might have dire consequences for their future career paths.

The IFP calls on the Minister of Education, whose voice has not been heard
on this matter, to urgently intervene. If the Minister is serious about her
department’s mission, which is to build a South Africa in which all our
people have access to lifelong education and training opportunities, then
she is obliged to intervene as a matter of urgency, so that these students
can go back to class, and make the most of their educational opportunities.

As we have noted before, we as the IFP cannot allow politics and prejudice
to stand in the way of the future of these young students at that
university. I thank you.

   ESTABLISHMENT OF TASK TEAM ON FACTORS CONTRIBUTING TO HIGH FOOD PRICES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr T G ANTHONY (ANC): Madam Speaker, the government has set up an
interdepartmental task team to conduct an analysis and identify the factors
contributing to high food prices.

The task team will assess, amongst other things, the low availability of
grains worldwide and unfavourable climate conditions for the production of
grain in major grain-producing countries, and trade. Higher food prices
impact negatively on the purchasing power of the poor.

The ANC believes that the democratic state should continually implement
integrated antipoverty programmes and ensure that these programmes address
not only social assistance, but also the sustainable integration of all
communities into economic activity. This is not only critical in dealing
with poverty in general, but also in addressing the conditions of the
majority of women. Hence we commend government on this initiative and ask
producers of food products to continue to seek ways to keep the price of
food low to help bring relief to poor people. I thank you. [Applause.]

                        SECURITY BREACH AT PELINDABA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs C DUDLEY (ACDP): Madam Speaker, the ACDP is deeply concerned that
despite unanswered questions by Pelindaba communities and despite calls to
President Mbeki for an official inquiry, there have been no credible
answers about the breaches of security at the nuclear facility at the
Nuclear Energy Corporation of South Africa’s control centre at Pelindaba.
This is where hundreds of kilograms of weapon-grade, highly enriched
uranium are stored.

On the night of 7 November last year, two groups of armed men disabled the
detection systems at the site perimeter, entered without setting off any
alarm, and went to the emergency control centre where they shot a worker in
the chest. They spent 45 minutes inside without ever being engaged by site
security forces. After stealing a computer and other material, they
disappeared the same way. No one in either group was shot or captured.
Three people were arrested but released without charges.

No details of any investigation of the attack have been released to date.
Government is reported to have refused offers to remove the highly enriched
uranium at Pelindaba, as well as having refused an offer to help improve
security at the facility.

Strangely, there has been no fuss about this incident and, in fact, the
affair is now becoming a vague and distant memory for most. It may not be
causing ripples in South Africa, but it is doing so around the world. The
Pelindaba incident has made headlines on the websites of Terror Alert and
International Counter-Terrorism. It has also been cited in the opening
address of the United States Congress on Nuclear Terrorism, and South
Africa is listed as a country of nuclear strategic concern.

The public deserves an explanation and the ACDP wants answers. South Africa
promised never to use the site again after the facility for making a bomb
was dismantled. But, clearly, something worth stealing and worth the
anxiety of the international community is going on there. Why has an
inquiry not been set up? It has been six months since the theft: What
progress has been made on the arrests?

                     POOR GOVERNMENT AT MUNICIPAL LEVEL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr I E JENNER (OD): Mev die Speaker, ongeag die talle regeringsprogramme
en hulppakkette vir munisipaliteite is dit, met respek, my betoog dat
plaaslike regering nie na behore sal funksioneer alvorens die volgende
aspekte daadwerklik aangespreek word nie: die institusionele probleme in
munisipaliteite moet finaal aangespreek word; holistiese ondersteuning moet
deur alle staatsdepartemente aan munisipaliteite verleen word; die
professionele registrasie van munisipale bestuurders moet teruggebring
word; munisipale bestuurders moet statutêr belet word om gesagsposisies in
politieke partye te beklee; provinsiale regerings moet minder praat oor
hulpverlening en die daad by die woord voeg om kundiges in sukkelende
munisipaliteite te herontplooi en tesame met herstelplanne ook fondse toe
te ken; en raadslede moet opgelei word om ’n sinvolle begrip van openbare
belang te ontwikkel.

Die kruks van die saak is dat daar ’n realisme by die regering moet intree
oor die tekortkominge in plaaslike regering en dat die Polokwane-planne nie
met groot bohaai aangekondig word alvorens die basiese probleme, soos
hierbo vermeld, reggestel word nie. Ons ervaar reeds die nagevolge van swak
beplande infrastruktuuruitbreidings, sonder dat die kapasiteit van
munisipaliteite om dit te onderhou in ag geneem word. As ons op hierdie
trant voortsnel, jaag ons nie alleen die verwagtinge onrealisties die
hoogte in nie, maar skep ons ook ’n monster waarmee ons nageslag sal moet
handel. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Mr I E JENNER (ID): Madam Speaker, irrespective of the numerous government
programmes and support packages for municipalities, it is my respectful
submission that local government will not function properly unless the
following aspects are actively addressed : the institutional problems in
municipalities must ultimately be addressed; holistic support must be given
to municipalities by all government departments; the professional
registration of municipal managers must be reinstated; municipal managers
must be prohibited by law from holding positions of authority in political
parties; provincial governments should talk less about providing support
and put their words into action by redeploying experts to struggling
municipalities and allocating funds along with plans to restore them; and
council members must be trained to develop a meaningful grasp of public
interest.
The crux of the matter is that a sense of realism about the shortcomings in
local government should take root in government, and the Polokwane plans
should not be announced with great fanfare unless basic problems, such as
those mentioned above, are rectified. We are already suffering the
consequences of badly planned infrastructural extensions without
considering the capacity of municipalities to sustain it. If we were to
rush ahead in this manner, we are not only creating expectations that are
unrealistically high, but we are also creating a monster which our future
generation will have to deal with. I thank you.]

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: There is no
translation.

The SPEAKER: Can we have translation, please, Mr Mansura?

           ENCOURAGEMENT OF VEGETABLE GARDENS IN THE EASTERN CAPE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Nksz P BHENGU (ANC): Urhulumente osezintanjeni okhokelwa ngumbutho wesizwe,
iANC, uthe rhoqo ukusebenzela uveliso lwento esiwa phantsi kwempumlo
ngendlela eyakuthi iqinisekise imveliso esisigxina ngamaxabiso aphantsi.
Oku kwenzelwa ukuba abantu bakuthi bafumane ngokulula into eya ethunjini.

ISebe lezoLimo kwiPhondo leMpuma Koloni lisungule iphulo lokukhuthaza
abantu bakuthi ukuba bazame ukulima kwizitiya zabo ukuzama ukulwa nokunyuka
kwamaxabiso okutya. IPhondo leMpuma Koloni linomhlaba omkhulu ngokwaneleyo.
Lo mhlaba unakho ukuvelisa ukutya okunokutyiwa liphondo lonke kunye
noMzantsi Afrika ngokubanzi. Kodwa, ukuze le nto yenzeke kufuneka abantu
balime izitiya zabo.

Ngentsebenziswano phakathi kwabahlali nombutho wesizwe, iAfrican National
Congress, kunye namashishini abucala sinokuwalwa ngempumelelo amaxabiso
aphezulu okutya. Kwaye sikhuthaza abantu bakuthi ukuba baqinise imizamo
yokuvuka sizenzele. Siyabulela. (Translation of isiXhosa member’s statement
follows.)

[Ms P BHENGU (ANC): The ANC-led government continues with its commitment to
working towards the encouragement of food production in a manner which will
ensure constant availability of products at low prices. This project is in
place in order to enable our people to get food easily.

The Department of Agriculture in the province of the Eastern Cape initiated
the project of encouraging our people to have vegetable gardens in order to
fight the high prices of food. The Eastern Cape province has enough land.
That land can manage to produce food for the province and South Africa as a
whole. However, in order for this project to be successful people should
plough their gardens.

By working hand in hand with the community, the ANC and the private sector,
we could succeed in curbing the high food prices. Furthermore, we encourage
our people to take the initiative of doing things themselves. Thank you.]

                  APPEAL TO REFRAIN FROM XENOPHOBIC ATTACKS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr P H K DITSHETELO (UCDP): Speaker, we in the UCDP note with appreciation
the advent of the democratic South Africa, especially the
constitutionalised system of governance, which gave birth ...

The SPEAKER: Can you please speak into the microphone?

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: ... which gave birth to majority rule, did away with
racism and created nonracial and nonsexist governance committed to human
rights and human security.

In view of the present spate of xenophobic tendencies paralysing our
beloved country, are we not allowing our detractors an opportunity to
vilify us? I also think that we are ungrateful by forgetting too soon the
hospitality we enjoyed in the foreigners’ countries during the struggle for
liberation.

We must recognise the fact that we live in a global world, where
interdependence is the order of the day. No country can survive on its own
regardless of how wealthy, civilised and militarily equipped it may be.

Our successes in meeting the basic needs of our people such as education,
health care, supply of clean water, electricity and housing are a case in
point of interdependency.

My humble plea to our citizens is to avoid complacency and recognise one
another as the creation of God ... [Time expired.]

               XENOPHOBIC ATTACKS ON FOREIGNERS AND INVESTORS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr R B BHOOLA (MF): Madam Speaker, the recent splurge of xenophobic attacks
throughout the country has retarded the progress South Africa has made
globally when doing away with the apartheid regime and introducing
democracy in 1994. We have earned the title of a rainbow nation through our
humanitarian Constitution and the Bill of Rights.

We urge the perpetrators of the xenophobic attacks to remember our South
Africans who went into exile during the apartheid regime. We urge them to
educate themselves on the value and purport of our Constitution, and to
realise the value these foreigners bring to our economy, society and global
relations.

We call on the House to save us from the repercussions of these attacks on
investors and to bring stability to the country. We call on the Department
of Safety and Security and the Department of Foreign Affairs to advise us
on the seriousness of these attacks and the intentions to contain the
situation. I thank you. [Applause.]

        DEBATE ON NATIONAL CHILD PROTECTON WEEK DENIED BY PARLIAMENT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M WATERS (DA): Madam Speaker, this week is Child Protection Week, and
despite a request by the DA for a debate on this very important matter,
Parliament has denied the debate. Hardly a day goes by without the media
reporting a child rape, abduction or murder. In fact, every day 62 rapes of
children are reported in our country, a further 62 cases of assault are
reported, three children are murdered each day, and four are kidnapped
every day.

These levels of violence against children are unheard of in countries not
at war. With horrific statistics such as these, any ordinary South African
would have expected the government to invest more resources in the
specialised units created to combat this scourge, the Family Violence,
Child Protection and Sexual Offences units. However, instead of beefing up
these units, the government decided to close all the FCS units, against all
logic and using justifications which to this day make no sense at all.

The DA believes that the Minister of Safety and Security can redeem himself
by initiating a process for the reinstatement of the FCS units during
National Child Protection Week. Targeting specific crimes requires bringing
together particular skills, expertise and resources. This is the reason for
the existence of specialised units across the globe. Specialised units
allow for the cultivation of expertise and skills, and the accumulation of
institutional knowledge, research and analysis.

The DA proposes that an FCS unit be established in each police cluster;
that all police officers working in these units be analysed in order to
establish their suitability in working with children; that FCS units be
located away from police stations, in order to create a nonthreatening
environment, particularly for already traumatised children; that all the
FCS units have playrooms, observation rooms and child-friendly interview
rooms, where the police will be able to extract as much information as
possible from the child in a relaxed and comfortable environment; and that
all FCS units report to their own commander and that they have their own
resources allocated to them.

The President stated that it was “Business Unusual”. We hope that the
Minister of Safety and Security takes up this challenge. I thank you, Madam
Speaker.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, this is not a
strict point of order, but the statement was made that Parliament has
denied a debate on the issue of children’s rights. I am not aware of
sitting in any meeting where such a decision was ever taken.

The SPEAKER: The Speaker is not aware either.

      SENTENCING OF ILLEGAL TREE-FELLERS UNDER THE NATIONAL FORESTS ACT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms C C SEPTEMBER (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC welcomes the sentence handed
down after 89 yellowwood trees aged 300 or 400 years were illegally felled
in late 2001 at the Gonqogonqo State Forest in Umzimkhulu, particularly the
sentencing under the National Forests Act that prevents the cutting down of
indigenous protected trees in natural forests.
We commend the law enforcement agencies on the conclusion of this case. We
urge them to continue the good work and co-operation with the communities
to assist in the preservation of the environment, as well as the observance
and understanding of the objectives of the National Forests Act. The ANC
calls on all South Africans to stop and bring to an end the illegal felling
of protected trees. Forestry provides clean air and mitigates against the
effects of climate change. Instead of felling trees, we must intensify the
planting of trees, including fruit trees. I thank you. [Applause.]

                     WATER SHORTAGES IN THE EASTERN CAPE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M W SIBUYANA (IFP): Madam Speaker, the shortage of water in Mthatha and
Bizana in the Eastern Cape is an issue of great concern. After 14 years in
office, the department can no longer hide behind the legacy of apartheid
and periodic drought. In actual fact, the department lacks foresight in
terms of short-, medium- and long-term planning. The worst part of the
department’s shortcomings is the shortage of qualified water officers. This
has been going on for many years, resulting in budgeted funds remaining
unspent while our people loiter in the streets in search of jobs.

The IFP, with its values of ubuntu, deems it totally unacceptable that a
hospital such as Nelson Mandela Academy should run short of water. For 14
years, the department has done nothing to increase the capacity of uMthatha
dam, to conserve floods of water flowing to the sea during summer rains.

It is high time that the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry runs
ahead of issues, rather than acting after the events. It could do so by
firing employed officials who fail to fill vacancies in the department. I
thank you.

               PROTECTION OF CONSUMERS AGAINST DISCRIMINATION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S M RASMENI (ANC): Madam Speaker, the constituency offices of Lekwa
Teemane and Ditsobotla, in the North West, convened community workshops,
facilitated by the National Credit Regulator, on 16 April 2008 and 5 May
2008. The issues discussed included, among others, the protection of
consumers against discrimination in respect of credit; the right to
information in plain and understandable language; protections of consumers
against overindebtedness; prevention of reckless lending by credit
providers; and that credit providers must not charge consumers credit fees
exceeding the amount allowed by law.

These workshops highlighted the need for other regulators such as the
Financial Services Board, the Department of Social Development and others
to partner with the National Credit Regulator in order to address many
social ills imposed on the people, especially senior citizens and students.

The ANC commends the efforts of members of the public, the management and
the staff of the National Credit Regulator in deepening public education in
pursuit of implementation of the National Credit Act. Departmental district
officials should participate in these workshops in order to learn and also
to share information with the communities. I thank you. [Applause.]

                TREATMENT OF EXPROPRIATION BILL BY PARLIAMENT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A H NEL (DA): Madam Speaker, towards the end of the first parliamentary
term I submitted a question to the Minister of Agriculture and Land
Affairs, asking whether the Expropriation Bill would come before the
Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs. I believe that this
question needed to be asked, as the Bill will have an especially profound
effect on the agricultural sector at a time when soaring food prices have
illustrated how important it is to ensure that this sector is able to
survive and prosper.

The Questions Office, however, refused to publish my question, arguing that
this piece of legislation did not fall within the line function of the
above Minister. I subsequently submitted the exact same question to the
Minister of Public Works, the Minister under whose authority this piece of
legislation falls.

However, the Questions Office once again refused to publish my question,
giving the same reason as before: that it did not fall within the line
function of the Minister of Public Works.

The DA is gravely concerned about the fact that no Minister seems to be
accountable for a question related to a Bill that threatens the very
foundation of South Africa’s economic wellbeing – the security of property
rights.

The DA will therefore formally request that when the Bill comes before
Parliament in June, the matter is dealt with jointly by the Portfolio
Committee on Public Works and the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and
Land Affairs, to ensure that the ANC government is held accountable for
every aspect of a Bill that will clearly have far-reaching effects on the
property rights of all South Africans. [Time expired.]

                GRANTING OF HOUSE TO DISABLED MAN IN LIMPOPO

                            (Member’s Statement)
Ms N F MATHIBELA (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC endorses the principle that
all South Africans have a right to a secure place in which to live in peace
and dignity. Housing is a human right, not a privilege. In Mutale, Limpopo,
a severely physically challenged young man is to take ownership of a new
home as part of the provincial Department of Local Government and Housing
Programme to deliver houses to indigents.

Mr Molamoledi Rampamba of Guyuni village in Ha-rambuda, who is 22 years
old, is unable to speak and cannot walk due to his disability. His mother
is unable to find employment. The department decided to build a house for
the family after it was discovered that they were staying in a dilapidated
mud house.

The ANC works tirelessly to ensure the rights of people to live where they
choose, to be decently housed and to bring up their families in comfort and
security. I thank you. [Applause.]

                             XENOPHOBIC ATTACKS
                        SECURITY BREACH AT PELINDABA

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Speaker, I do think it is important that
such unfortunate developments as we have seen with the violence in the
communities in the country, must not be allowed to be used for party-
political gain. Rather, as a nation, and particularly leaders of different
political parties, we must attack these kinds of developments as a
collective.

In so far as the hon member has asserted that no support was given by
government, provincial, national or local, to efforts that were being made
by Her Worship the Mayor of Cape Town, I do want to state quite
emphatically that there is no foundation for this allegation. As a matter
of fact, as we speak, more than a thousand refugees who ran away from
communities where they were threatened are housed in the facilities of the
SA National Defence Force at Youngsfield, at the request of the mayor, made
personally to me earlier on.

Of course, there is other accommodation for these people elsewhere, again
where we are involved. I do know that some of the provincial government
people have also been involved. Most important, we should laud the fact
that there has been communication; there has been a collective effort to
deal with this and it has included church bodies and so on. I think that
all of us must insist on dealing with issues like these in the necessary
dignified manner that shows us to be a united people against something that
is clearly an aberration and in conflict with the provisions of our
national Constitution.

I should concur, in this regard, with one of the members who said that we
have a responsibility to educate various communities in our country on the
contents of our Constitution, because if only our people understand and
know and turn into practice the contents of our Constitution, they will not
allow themselves to be derailed into behaviour which discredits the country
and destroys its image.

In relation to the Pelindaba issue, I want to say that I think the hon
member must be sensitive to the fact that where a crime has been committed,
what one needs is an investigation of the crime and not an inquiry. What
happened at Pelindaba was a clear criminal act by persons who went in, shot
the bodyguards and then stole a computer.

That calls for an investigation by policing agencies and intelligence
agents to find out who committed the crime. It does not call for an
inquiry. If there were credible and established reasons to say that
Pelindaba poses a health hazard, a danger to communities and so on, then we
would need an inquiry, in order, therefore, to have a broad purview of
investigation, with recommendations that would indicate what action needs
to be taken to eliminate such threats. I thank you.

        SUSPENSION OF STUDENTS AT MANGOSUTHU UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY
                     POOR GOVERNMENT AT MUNICIPAL LEVEL
   ESTABLISHMENT OF TASK TEAM ON FACTORS CONTRIBUTING TO HIGH FOOD PRICES
           ENCOURAGEMENT OF VEGETABLE GARDENS IN THE EASTERN CAPE
                             XENOPHOBIC ATTACKS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Speaker, I want to reply briefly to the
matter of the suspended students that the hon member of the IFP referred
to. Just to point out, it is not the practice of the Ministry of Education
to tell universities how to run disciplinary inquiries where students are
affected. The hon member of the IFP said we shouldn’t politicise matters,
and yet he referred only to the suspended students of the SA Democratic
Students Movement, Sadesmo, which is an IFP-aligned students’ organisation.
He didn’t refer to the SA Students Congress students, who are suspended at
the University of Limpopo, or the Sasco students who are suspended at the
University of the North West, or the FF Plus students who are suspended at
the University of Pretoria. Therefore, he was himself politicising the
matter.

I have said to hon members before in the House that one of the things we
must do is to talk to all the student organisations, that any assault on a
student or a lecturer during a demonstration or destruction of property is
a criminal offence, and institutions must take action in that regard. I
have made that clear. Whatever the student organisation, that is what must
be done. [Applause.] I am sure the matter will be finalised by the
institution in line with that perspective.

I welcome the hon members’ call on the people of our country - hon members
of the ANC, particularly the hon Nxumalo - that we must do more to
encourage the people of South Africa to become engaged more and more in the
production of food. One often drives through stretches of our country where
you see arable land which remains nonproductive. We have to encourage our
people to grow food; we have to provide them with the facilities, the
advice and the support so that we indeed have cheaper food prices in our
country. I hope all hon Members of Parliament have vegetable gardens at
their homes so that we set the example, to the nation, of increasing food
production in South Africa.

Finally, let me just refer to this favourite practice that many of us have,
of being very negative about representatives in local government. We tend
to make local government representatives our board for bashing. Many of our
local government representatives work in very challenging circumstances and
do very difficult work at the local level. So, I think as Members of
Parliament at the national level, while certainly we must be attentive to
any corrupt practices or matters of ill-discipline, we also need to look at
how our statutory work in the national domain either supports or detracts
from local government exercising its due function. Therefore, I think,
rather than merely being critical in the House about representatives of
local government, let us examine how we as Parliament can assist the local
government sphere to carry out its particular role. So, let us not just
point to shortcomings.
There is a great deal that is being done by many local governments in
service provision, to ensure that land is available for housing and that
communities have access to water, to roads, and to electrification where
there are no outages. So, let us work with local governments to make all
spheres of government successful. That is the role I believe we should play
at national level.

Finally, Madam Speaker, with your permission, I agree with the hon member
of the UCDP that it is an important task we should undertake, that of
making our Constitution a living reality in every home, every community and
every institution of South Africa. We have a wonderful principle and
blueprint that should guide each of us as we live our daily lives in South
Africa. If we could make the Constitution a living document, I believe we
would avoid the kinds of evil and violence that all of us have referred to
in many statements in the House. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.
[Applause.]

                     POOR GOVERNMENT AT MUNICIPAL LEVEL
                     WATER SHORTAGES IN THE EASTERN CAPE

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Madam Speaker,
this is a response to the hon member from the IFP. I fully agree with the
Minister around local government. I wonder why he chose to refer to this
one particular municipality in the entire district of O R Tambo. I think he
is also misleading the House by saying that there is no water and that no
necessary arrangements have been made to give water to the residents.

For your information and the information of members: just about three weeks
ago the district municipality of O R Tambo received R6 billion to build a
new dam. That district will be serving many villages in that community. Not
only will it benefit the residents who fall under that district in terms of
water consumption, but it will also be beneficial economically for the
entire district. The hon member should actually give Parliament the correct
information and stop making cheap propaganda. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

       CONSIDERATION OF FIRST REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS –
 INVESTIGATION RELATING TO EXPORT AND SALE OF DIAMONDS, IN TERMS OF DIAMONDS
                                  ACT, 1986

Mr N T GODI: Madam Speaker, comrades and hon members, the first report of
the Standing Committee on Public Accounts is a continuation of the work
started on the 62nd report of 2005.

In that report, which was on the annual report of the SA Diamond Board, the
committee had taken up concerns raised by the Auditor-General about the
blanket exemptions given to the De Beers Company in 1992 to export diamonds
without paying the 15% tax as required by the Diamonds Act, Act 56 of 1986.
The Auditor-General was not certain that section 59 of that Act had been
applied according to the letter and spirit of the Act. Section 59 allowed
for diamond exporters to get exemptions from paying tax for diamond exports
from the Diamond Board without defining how this should be done. This was
compounded by the fact that the Diamond Board was dominated by diamond
exporters rather than government representatives.

The 62nd report had noted that, hitherto, a number of administrative
initiatives by government departments to resolve the matter had failed. The
report, amongst other things, required that all relevant state institutions
urgently initiate legal processes with a view to resolving the section 59
exemptions in question with the assistance of the Auditor-General. When
this aspect of the resolution seemed to have stalled, Scopa called all
parties concerned, including De Beers, to a hearing with a view to having
this matter resolved.

We are happy to indicate that despite years of procrastination and
obfuscation that have characterized this process, at the hearing, all
parties were prepared to co-operate and were awaiting the recommendations
from Parliament. We are happy therefore to present this first report that
seeks to assist with the way forward to resolve this matter of principle,
law and national interest.

What we are talking about here is the export in 1992, without paying tax
and under suspicious conditions, of 20 million carats valued then at $822
million. What this resolution seeks to do, once and for all, is to
determine the legality or otherwise of the section 59 agreement. We are
saying that National Treasury should seek an independent constitutional
expert legal opinion from senior counsel to determine the intention of the
legislature with regard to section 59 of the Diamond Act of 1986, and the
legality of the 3 December 1992 section 59 agreement between the SA Diamond
Board and De Beers.

We also want the Department of Minerals and Energy and the SA Reserve Bank,
with the assistance of the Auditor-General, to set up a task team to
interrogate the De Beers London stockpile records in London for the period
3 December 1992 to 19 March 1998. De Beers should co-operate, as promised
during the hearing, and also make available its local export data. The
Department of Minerals and Energy and National Treasury must each submit a
progress report on the issues mentioned above to the National Assembly
within 60 days of the adoption of this report.

The message that we are sending to one and all is that Parliament will
never equivocate where matters of public interest are concerned, whether it
relates to public institutions or private capital. It is known that De
Beers was accused of taking huge shipments of diamonds out of Namibia just
before independence without paying tax. In that case, a judicial commission
of inquiry was set up and they were found guilty, and they were firmly
dealt with. Amongst other things, they had to pay a heavy fine.
We therefore cannot fold our arms when we are not certain that our natural
resources were not carted away in fear of democracy. Scopa would like to
seek a speedy resolution to this matter. I thank you. [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Somlomo bengiphakamisa ukuthi, cha
asiwamukele lo mbiko. Ngiyabonga. [Madam Speaker, I move that this report
be adopted. I thank you.]

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

 CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT OF ADDITIONAL PROTOCOL
  ON THE TRADE, DEVELOPMENT AND CO-OPERATION AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC
      OF SOUTH AFRICA AND THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITY AND ITS MEMBER STATES

Mr B A D MARTINS: Madam Speaker, hon members, trade between the European
Union and South Africa is estimated at about €30 billion a year. The
European Union remains South Africa’s main trading partner, accounting for
over 40% of its imports and nearly 30% of its exports. Conversely, roughly
66% of South African assets abroad are held within the European Union.

Trade and investment between South Africa and the European Union has
developed positively. The government of the Republic of South Africa and
the European Community and its members signed a Trade, Development and Co-
operation Agreement on 11 October 1999. It came into provisional
application on 1 January 2000 and entered into force with effect from 1 May
2004. The additional protocol to the Trade, Development and Co-operation
Agreement between the Republic of South Africa and the European Community
and its member states takes account of the accession of the Republics of
Bulgaria and Romania to the European Union. In accordance with section 231
of the Constitution of South Africa, a presidential approval is required in
order for the additional protocol to be signed, ratified and put into
effect.

According to the Customs and Excise Act of the South African Revenue
Services, the protocol needs to be ratified by Parliament first before it
can be implemented retrospectively from 1 January 2007. Confirmation has
been received from the SA Revenue Services that they are in a position to
adjust the Customs and Excise Act retrospectively to provide for the
extension of the Trade, Development and Co-operation Agreement tariff
preferences to the two new member states of the European Community.

Legislation to implement the additional protocol has been prepared by the
SA Revenue Services. As the implementing agent, the SA Revenue Services
will implement the agreement retrospectively from 1 January 2007 once
parliamentary approval has been obtained. All operators that had to pay
normal customs duties during the period before ratification will be
reimbursed.

On 10 October 2007, South Africa and the European Union signed the
additional protocol to the Trade, Development and Co-operation Agreement at
the South Africa-European Union Ministerial Troika that was held in
Pretoria. I therefore request Parliament’s approval for the additional
protocol to the Trade, Development and Co-operation Agreement. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Additional Protocol on the Trade, Development and Co-operation Agreement
between the Republic of South Africa and the European Union and its Member
States approved.

The House adjourned at 14:50.


