---
title: 'National Assembly - 11 June 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2008-06-11
---

WEDNESDAY, 11 JUNE 2008
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:01.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 1 - The Presidency:

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker and Deputy Speaker, hon Deputy
President, hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers, and hon members, thank you
very much indeed for affording us this opportunity to address the National
Assembly during the consideration of the Budget Vote of the Presidency. Let
me also welcome and congratulate the deputy president of the ANC, the hon
Kgalema Motlanthe on his admission as a member of the House. [Applause.]
I’ll tell you that before he came in to be sworn in, he insisted that all
of us must call him “honourable” ... [Laughter.] ... but I would like to
assure you that he has always been honourable. Welcome. [Applause.]

In this Budget Vote debate, the Deputy President of the Republic will speak
to the House on the important matters of the work she is doing on behalf of
the Presidency, such as her role as the Leader of Government Business, and
her work on the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa,
including interventions in the Second Economy, as well as the SA National
Aids Council. The Minister in the Presidency will address the House on
issues such as gender, children, youth and disability.

We are meeting during Youth Month, and five days before the nation marks
the 32nd anniversary of the June 16 Soweto uprisings. Ideally, we should be
observing this month focusing all our efforts on the work we continue to do
further to advance the struggle of young people to attain a better life.

Although there is, during this month, the necessary attention to the
various challenges facing the youth of our country, we however also had to
concentrate our energies on both exogenous and endogenous factors that
impact negatively upon, and pose a number of serious challenges to, our
nation. I am referring here to challenges such as the high interest rates,
the rates of inflation, the rising cost of fuel and food, the electricity
emergency, and the criminal and callous attacks on nationals from other
countries resident in South Africa by a minority whose outlook and
sentiments clearly do not represent those of the overwhelming majority of
South Africans. Undoubtedly, these cowardly attacks have shamed all of us
and have soiled the good name of our country, which was earned through
centuries of bitter and heroic struggles in pursuit of a humane and just
society free of racism, sexism, xenophobia and other forms of intolerance.

This coming Saturday, a host of athletes from our country and other parts
of the world, both young and old – or not so young, rather than old - will
be pitting their powers of endurance against one another in the Comrades
Marathon in the spirit of brotherhood and sisterhood. In a way, these
athletes also communicate a message to our nation as a whole. That message
is that our advance towards the achievement of the goal of a better life
for all is a marathon that we must run together in unity, understanding
that there will be steep inclines as there will be declines but that, if we
persist, as we must, we will achieve our goal. We wish all the athletes
success. [Applause.]

Seven years ago, in 2001, our country was given the rare privilege to host
the United Nations World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination,
Xenophobia and Related Intolerance. We were chosen as a country not simply
because of the attractions of our beautiful landscape, or our rich flora
and fauna, but primarily because of what we as a nation had done to end
racist rule and begin the process of building a nonracial society. Both
through the struggle against apartheid, as well as in the manner in which
we defied formidable odds to find a peaceful political solution, we gave
hope that it was possible for the peoples of the world to be united in
their diversity. Accordingly, many around the world made bold to declare
South Africa a pilot project whose outcome should inform the global
struggle against the demons of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerances.

However, events of the last few weeks – of criminal attacks against
migrants – have impacted negatively on our collective standing as front
troops in the global struggle for a humane and tolerant world. Even though
these callous actions were carried out by a tiny minority among us, this
should however make all of us look at ourselves in the mirror to find an
answer to the question: What has happened to our age-old spirit of ubuntu
that at all times enjoins every member of the community to act in
solidarity with those in dire circumstances?

In 2001, we issued an Africa Day message published in the ANC Today,
highlighting the complexity and multifaceted nature of this challenge and
the urgent steps we needed to take as a nation. I will refer to this
message at some length because the issues raised at that time are even more
relevant today. We said, and I quote:


   It is a matter of concern that our level of knowledge about our own
   continent is not as high as it should be. This is partly the result of
   the many years of the international isolation of South Africa and the
   fact that, historically, a significant part of our international
   relations has focused on interaction with the countries of the North,
   especially Europe.

   Our mass media has also done very little to inform our population in
   general about the continent in a balanced way. As happens with news in
   general, what tends to get reported are the negative things that do,
   indeed, occur on our continent.

   But the continent also has a very rich culture to which we are not
   exposed, except, perhaps, in the area of popular music.

And maybe sports, and soccer in particular.

   Nevertheless, a better understanding of these cultures would help us
   greatly to understand both ourselves and the sister peoples of Africa,
   with whom we are bound by a common destiny ...

   It would therefore seem necessary that we pay some attention to improving
   teaching about Africa in our schools and institutions of higher learning.
   This should relate not only to such subjects as history and geography,
   but also to the matters to which we have referred, of culture and current
   political and socioeconomic activity as well as languages.

   Our youth should grow up knowing that they are African first before they
   become citizens of the world. This should help further to strengthen the
   commitment of the new generations to active involvement in the promotion
   of friendly relations of co-operation and solidarity with the peoples of
   our continent and the achievement of the objectives of the African
   Renaissance ...

   Apart from anything else, our intimate relationship with the rest of our
   continent is illustrated by the significant numbers of fellow Africans
   who have sought to settle in South Africa since 1994. Undoubtedly, this
   trend will continue, adding a new richness to our own society ...

I said then that -

   Necessarily, we must continue to be vigilant against any evidence of
   xenophobia against the African immigrants. It is fundamentally wrong and
   unacceptable that we should treat people who come to us as friends as
   though they are our enemies ...

   To express the critical importance of Africa to ourselves, both black and
   white, we should say that we are either African or we are nothing. We can
   only succeed in the objectives we pursue if the rest of our continent
   also succeeds. We sink or swim together.

The challenge today is to move with speed to implement the measures we
identified in the 2001 message so that all of us understand that, whatever
we do, as Africans across the continent, we will indeed sink or swim
together.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the many South Africans who
have united across the country to take a strong stance against these
attacks, thus affirming our ubuntu and Pan-African values that made our
country worthy of hosting the UN conference against racism. I am also
encouraged that some affected communities stood firm against the
instigation of this violence and even went a step further to protect their
immigrant neighbours. At the moment, the challenge is to create conditions
for the displaced people to be integrated into our communities.

As the world prepares for the Geneva conference to be held next April to
review progress in the implementation of what we had committed ourselves to
in Durban in 2001 at the anti-racism conference of the United Nations, we
should use this process not only to review our own progress in this area,
but also to engage in a healing exercise that will ensure that never again
in this country do we experience what we witnessed recently.

Government will play its role, but the best results will be achieved when
we act together in our various formations and communities to make
intolerance of any kind a thing that our country will not tolerate.

I have referred to the challenges of rising inflation, driven by fuel and
food prices, as well as the electricity emergency. It was in this context
that during the state of the nation address we called on all South Africans
to engage these and other challenges with all hands on deck and in a spirit
of “Business Unusual”. As government, we identified 24 Apex Priorities, the
successful implementation of which would address both the long-term
objectives of transformation and attainment of a better life for all as
well as ensuring that we complete the popular mandate given to government
in our third democratic elections in 2004.

I wish to report that government, in the spirit of “Business Unusual”, is
hard at work to implement the programme of action we announced in this
House some four months ago. In July of this year, Cabinet will conduct a
mid-year review of our work and we will report more comprehensively after
that lekgotla. I am certain that the Budget Votes by the Ministers over the
past few weeks have given hon members an indication of the extent to which
the Ministers and the public servants have put their shoulders to the wheel
to meet our obligations to society.

In commending the budget of the Presidency, I will reflect on a few of the
issues pertaining to the functions of this Office, some of which, as I said
earlier, will be addressed by the Deputy President and the Minister in The
Presidency, recognising that this Office is called upon to act as the
strategic management centre of government.

As hon members are aware, in many of the past Budget Votes of the
Presidency, we have consistently reported to Parliament on the ongoing work
of government on the transformation of the state, principally aimed at
ensuring that our democratic state is able effectively and efficiently to
implement programmes that will have the effect of bettering the human
condition in our country and, where possible, beyond our borders. This
process of building a developmental state with the necessary capacity and a
public service that is adequately skilled and driven by the principles of
Batho Pele has happened simultaneously with social transformation.

Of course we are the first to admit that there are a number of challenges,
especially on the need to further improve the performance of all state
organs in providing services to the population, building economic and
social infrastructure, progressively ensuring community safety and
security, and contributing to the realisation of social progress across the
board.

Part of this challenge further to improve the performance of the South
African state relates to the need to improve integration beyond the
formality of ministerial and director-general clusters and other such
structures. It relates also to the need to acquire and retain skilled
personnel. It applies as much to management in the headquarters of
departments as it does to the proper running of educational, health and
other agencies at the coalface of interaction with the public.

Among the critical matters to which we have continued to pay attention is
the challenge of monitoring and evaluation. We have over the past financial
year improved the integration of monitoring and evaluation systems across
national departments and in relation to the provinces.

Training programmes have been intensified and the system to monitor the
implementation of the government programme of action has fully been placed
on an electronic platform. In order to improve the executive management of
national government, we have introduced an additional instrument aimed at
assessing the functionality of departments and ministries.

In this context, we shall be better able to deal with poor, and at times
corrupt, management of various aspects of service delivery, including
instances of inadequate maintenance of infrastructure, disregard for public
property, insensitive handling of citizens in government offices as well as
health and other centres that deliver services to the people. Even though
transgressors may be in the minority, the reality is that they dishonour
the Public Service and lower the standing of government in the eyes of the
public.

However, these weaknesses should not make us lose sight of the achievements
of the past 14 years in many areas of the lives of South Africans,
including provision of infrastructure and services in the face of huge
backlogs inherited from the past. While we should acknowledge the
weaknesses, we need to affirm that the South African state is not faced
with a crisis of incapacity. Rather, we need to learn from the 14 years of
experience further to improve the state’s capacity to meet its obligations.

The improving capacity of the state is reflected for instance in the
progress in the fight against poverty and in building a better life for
all. The SA Advertising Research Foundation reports that between 2000 and
2007 there was a significant decrease in the number of people in the
poorest categories with regard to average monthly income and an increase in
the growth of the middle strata.

Some of the significant interventions against poverty have been the
expansion of social grants, employment creation, special interventions to
ensure more participation of black people in the economy and support for
SMMEs.

Further, to improve comprehensive social security, the War Room on Poverty
announced in the state of the nation address has been established, led by
the Deputy President.

While social assistance and the social wage are important, the challenge
still remains with regard to reducing unemployment as well as the high
levels of inequality between the rich and the poor, which in part is a
function of another major challenge in South Africa today - the scarcity of
skills, on which the Deputy President will elaborate.

Indeed, across most measures of human development, there is welcome
progress in improving people’s quality of life. Hon members may recollect
that during the course of 2007, the Presidency released a mid-term review
publication, detailing trends in 72 human development indicators. We
intended then to ensure that this data is updated on an annual basis, and
we are happy to report that in the coming month, the 2008 update will be
released. We do hope that hon members and the public at large will engage
the information contained in this publication, so that our collective
assessment of the state of our nation is based on fact rather than
conjecture.

Of all the three spheres of government, local government is at the coalface
of delivery and as such calls for ongoing efforts to refine it into an
effective machinery to respond to the needs of communities. Last week, the
Minister for Provincial and Local Government, the hon Sydney Mufamadi,
informed the House about some of the progress made to improve the
functioning of this sphere of government.

To achieve our objectives in this regard, we have in the past few years
engaged actively with councillors, officials and the general public through
the Izimbizo Programme, the better to understand the challenges faced by
this sphere of government; to identify weaknesses that hamper delivery; to
seek ways of strengthening important structures such as ward committees;
and to solicit community views regarding various local challenges.

The Presidency has also been carrying out work to ensure alignment among
the planning instruments across the spheres of government. Informed by the
National Spatial Development Perspective, the harmonisation of provincial
growth and development strategies and municipal integrated development
plans continues, with 23 districts either completed or presently engaged,
and 15 more being enrolled.

Currently, the Presidency is leading the preparatory processes for the July
Cabinet lekgotla. Among the issues that will engage the mind of Cabinet in
this regard are the Fifteen-Year Review and Scenario Planning, conducted by
the Presidency with the support of the various clusters. At the same time,
work is continuing to develop options for the setting up of long-term
planning capacity, having, as government, come to the conclusion that South
Africa needs this instrument to ensure integration of all strategic
objectives, programmes and projects, including road, rail, electricity,
human settlement and other infrastructure.

Improving the capacity of the state also implies strengthening supervision
of activities of state-owned enterprises and alignment of these with the
work of departments. While recognising that much of this work has ably been
handled at line-function level, it was however deemed necessary that
engagement across the line functions was critical to ensure effectiveness
of service provision.

In this respect, the Presidency conducted the first such engagement during
the course of last year. Beyond this, government highly values interactions
with various social partners, as part of the endeavour to mobilise all of
society in pursuit of our common objectives. Pursuant to this goal, we have
in the Presidency continued to strengthen these engagements as well as
those with friends from abroad, through the Presidential Working Groups and
other forums.

As part of our ongoing efforts further to improve the performance of our
economy, we have had several meetings with representatives of commercial
agriculture, trade unions, big business, black business, BUSA and the joint
working groups.

Through these meetings we continue to work together in a number of areas
that are critical to the different sectors of our economy. These include
the land and agricultural reform programme; food security, food prices and
relief for the poor; disaster and emergency aid to farmers; land reform and
the security of tenure of farm dwellers; collaboration between government
departments and the private sector regarding the development of programmes
aimed at addressing the needs of vulnerable communities; challenges around
energy and the need to work together; partnerships in the fight against
crime; the need for accelerated investment in skills development;
addressing the challenge of investment in strategic sectors such as
infrastructure, ICT and others; the need to broaden black people’s
participation in the economy while expanding the base of the economy and
ensuring economic growth, including reflection on the Broad-based Black
Economic Empowerment Codes of Good Practice, preferential procurement, and
monitoring of the implementation of employment equity; implementation of
the commitments made at the Growth and Development Summit; and the review
of SETAs so as to align them with the National Industrial Policy Framework.

In our engagement with the religious working group we agreed to ensure
better co-ordination between all spheres of government, including the
Department of Education and the religious community in the implementation
of the Early Childhood Development Programme; to work together on social
housing; to work in partnership so as to promote social cohesion; to
collaborate on skills development; to co-ordinate our work on community and
home-based care; and to build practical partnerships in various localities
to strengthen the offensive against crime.

Further, in our engagement with the Working Group on Higher Education we
emphasised the need for our education system to be responsive to the needs
of both our developmental state as well as our economy.

The Presidency continued to engage with working groups on women, youth, as
well as the leadership of provinces and Salga through the Presidential Co-
ordinating Council. With regard to the youth in particular, we were able
last Friday to complete the consultative process around the National Youth
Policy. We are confident that, in the coming few weeks, this critical
instrument to guide programmes for youth advancement will be formally
adopted for immediate implementation. We are also proud that we will in the
coming month submit to Parliament the African Youth Charter for
ratification.

The Presidential Co-ordinating Council, the next meeting of which takes
place in two days’ time, continues to offer us an important additional
platform to monitor work done at both provincial and local spheres of
government with regard to such important matters as delivery of
infrastructure and services as well as the better utilisation of community
development workers.

We have of course also benefited from the valuable advice from the
Presidential Advisory Panel of Economists.

Again, during the course of the past financial year, we engaged our
international friends on the best possible ways of growing the economy and
increasing rates of investment in the country and improving the image of
South Africa abroad.

In this regard, the meetings with the Presidential International Investment
Council reflected on an overview of the economy. This included looking at
broad macroeconomic developments; implementation of Asgisa and the
Industrial Policy Action Plan; Second Economy initiatives; preparations for
the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup; and other matters.

We also engaged the Presidential International Advisory Council on
Information Society and Development. This working group continues to help
us in our efforts to become a leading player in respect of building an
inclusive information society. In this regard, we have agreed to strengthen
the e-Skills Council so that it contributes to the objectives we have set
ourselves.

The Presidency, on behalf of government and indeed our nation as a whole,
had the opportunity to honour both South Africans and our friends from
abroad who have contributed to our democracy as well as doing exceptional
work to advance the objectives of our transformation.

These outstanding individuals have been honoured in the six categories of
our National Orders, which are: The Order of the Baobab, the Order of
Luthuli, the Order of Mendi for Bravery, the Order of Ikhamanga, the Order
of Mapungubwe and the Order of the Companions of O R Tambo.

We have also continued to discharge our international obligations,
especially with regard to the challenges on the African continent. We do
this within the framework of the African Agenda, at the core of which is
the renaissance of our continent.

Accordingly, we have worked to strengthen the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development through financial and logistical support. We are happy that
together with the Public Investment Corporation we have helped to launch
the Pan-African Infrastructure Development Fund to mobilise resources for
Africans to fund their own development.

We continuously do our best to ensure the success of the programmes of the
African Union. One of the focus areas, in the past year, was the need for
faster integration of the continent with the Grand Debate in Accra, Ghana,
directing all of us to concentrate our efforts partly on regional
integration as a necessary step towards greater unity.

For us in this region, the integration of the Southern African Development
Community, SADC, is of paramount importance. South Africa will continue to
do whatever is possible to accelerate this process, especially when we
assume the chairpersonship of SADC in August this year.

Further, our work to strengthen democracy and post-conflict efforts in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Republic of Burundi continues, as
we continue to follow developments in Côte d’Ivoire.

Again, we have directed our efforts towards peace in Sudan, including the
deployment of the hybrid force as well as capacity-building in the south of
Sudan and the implementation of the comprehensive peace agreement.

With regard to Zimbabwe, our SADC mandate is still on track. In this
regard, our facilitation helped to ensure, among other things, that the
March 29 elections were generally adjudged to have been credible.

At the moment, we are doing whatever we can to ensure that we do not
experience major problems in the presidential second-round elections set
for 27 June. We are at one with SADC and most of the international
community that the incidents of violence and reported disruption of
electoral activities of some of the parties are a cause for serious concern
and should be addressed with all urgency. SADC has also resolved to
strengthen its observer mission in that country.

We do hope that friends of the people of Zimbabwe, who seek nothing more
than freedom for the people of that country to elect a government of their
choice and overcome the current socioeconomic crisis, will work together in
pursuit of these objectives.

We have done what we could further to strengthen our South-South relations,
including the India-Brazil-South Africa Forum.

We were privileged to have been afforded the opportunity to be a
nonpermanent member of the UN Security Council, a tenure that ends in
December this year, as well as chairing some of the Security Council’s
sessions. At all times we sought to discharge our responsibilities in a
principled manner and in accordance with the Charter of the UN as well as
in the interests of our nation, of Africa and of the countries of the
South.

In this regard, part of the work we are doing is to ensure that the UN
Security Council works in collaboration with regional institutions as well
as other bodies of the United Nations and that matters appropriately
mandated to specific UN structures are handled by the relevant bodies.

Madam Speaker, to end, I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
Deputy President, the hon Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka; the Minister in the
Presidency, the hon Dr Essop Pahad; the Director-General of the Presidency,
Rev Frank Chikane; the Director-General for the Policy Co-ordination and
Advisory Services, Joel Netshitenzhe; the Chief Operations Officer, Trevor
Fowler; and the advisers and all the staff for executing their duties with
dedication and commitment.

As South Africans work together to realise our collective aspirations –
amid the difficulties that we have had to endure in the recent period – let
us all remember that we are indeed running a marathon, which demands
endurance, stamina, a refusal to be defeated even by the most difficult
parts of the course, and the need always to keep our eyes on the noble goal
we pursue.

Together, as the elected representatives of the people present here we
should all say, in word and deed: Beyond serving our people, we have no
other ambition. And with all hands on deck, we know we shall overcome!

I am honoured indeed to commend the budget of the Presidency to the House.
Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]
The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Speaker, I rise to support this Budget
Vote and the well-thought-out objectives that are elaborated in the
strategic plan of the Presidency for 2008-09.

I also hope, Mr President, to speak today for the invisible man, the
invisible man that Ralph Ellison referred to in his classical novel
Invisible Man, who described himself as follows:

  I am an invisible man. No, I am not a spook like those who haunted Edgar
  Allen Poe, nor am I one of your Hollywood-movie ectoplasms. I am a man of
  substance, of flesh and bone, fibre and liquids - and I might even be
  said to possess a mind.


  I am invisible, understand, simply because people refuse to see me. Like
  the bodiless heads you see sometimes in circus sideshows, it is as though
  I have been surrounded by mirrors of hard distorting glass. When they
  approach me they see only my surroundings, themselves or figments of
  their imagination - indeed, everything and anything except me.

The ANC referred in some way to this invisible man, when, at its conference
in December, it challenged government as follows: That our government
should work to build the strategic, organisational and technical capacities
of government with a view to developing a democratic developmental state,
one in which the poor are not the victims, but increasingly become
participants in promoting and sustaining growth, where the poor are not
invisible but visible to our society.

The ANC was not saying this because it believed in any way that government
was not attending to these important issues. I think if we are all honest
critics, we would all agree that looking back over the period of this
government, the Presidency can be justly proud that we have created
conditions for the longest expansion of the South African economy in
recorded history; that we have, since 2004, created half a million jobs
each year; that we have significantly reduced the level of severe poverty
for millions of our people; and that we have achieved a level of
macroeconomic stability not seen in South Africa for over four decades.

Our government has done a great deal to build a solid foundation for future
growth. [Interjections.] Madam Speaker, there is a man to my left who
should remain invisible, who makes a great deal of empty noise. [Laughter.]
Yet, there remains much more to be done. Our Presidency should build on the
potential that exists in the Expanded Public Works Programme to grow
opportunities for work and local development.

In the area of foreign relations, our President and his team in the
Presidency have maintained our strategic foreign relations and developed
these into a platform for development in Africa and in the world. The
burgeoning relations between China and Africa, the strategic collaboration
between South Africa, India and Brazil, the closer ties between developing
countries and the G8 forum are all initiatives that arise from the work of
this President and this Presidency. These efforts have retained, grown and
expanded foreign direct investment in South Africa and supported the
resilience of our economy. A phantom has emerged to my left! I wish it
would go and haunt somewhere else. [Laughter.]

Our President must be supported by this Parliament in executing this
important international economic network in the interests of South Africa
and our continent. Our President has also played a key role in giving shape
to Nepad and its main programmes. It is our belief that Nepad must be re-
energized and developed into a full partnership that gives practical effect
to the strategies set out in the Nepad founding documents.

The need for increased progress in co-ordinated African development arises
from the challenges posed by the fuel price increases that the President
has referred to, the high oil prices, and the rising food prices that exist
in the entire world. In order to build on the success of our past decade,
we must attend to these matters. We therefore urge the Presidency and the
President to initiate a focused Africa-wide deliberation on the threats to
economic progress and transformation that arise from the current
challenges.

The initiatives that President Mbeki has promoted must reach full fruition
urgently. We should see greater integration in the SADC region, on the
economic plane and in a range of social matters. Each of our countries on
the continent needs to work hard at identifying, both in the region and
continent-wide, our economic strengths, and agree that these should form
the basis for future economic and trade co-operation. We should look at
strategies that go well beyond regional economic strengths.

Energy is a major challenge for many of our countries on the continent. Is
it possible that there are countries with oil supplies which could in fact
provide greater energy resources for us as Africans? Might they earn
increased foreign revenue from South Africa and other African countries?

A further matter is that of co-ordination of the responses that we have in
government. Sadly, I think we still haven’t solidified this need to avoid
the work in silos and to work as a fully integrated government. I think we
tend to have pet projects that do not necessarily speak to the entire good
and it is indeed an area that must be addressed. However, the success we
have seen through the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South
Africa, as well as the intensive focus on poverty alleviation, are
testimonies that a co-ordinating function can be to the good of South
Africa.

The emphasis of Asgisa on human capital development, on infrastructure
renewal and investment, on encouraging entrepreneurship, on increasing
foreign investment, on ensuring implementation of our industrial policy –
all of these are policy imperatives that we fully endorse and recognise as
having the potential of ensuring that growth on the African continent will
be sustained in the long term. It is very important that, as Africa, we do
avoid the worst impact of the global turndown. The first months of this
year have been marked by signs of very serious economic gloom. Many of the
causes fall well beyond the control of our country and several other
countries of the world, but all of us stand at the precipice.

We’ve seen a decade of a great deal of progress in economic terms on the
African continent. Africa has begun to reap economic benefits that it has
not seen for decades. These have come due to increased peace on the
continent, the emergence of viable democracies and a growing confident
implementation of agreed African programmes and other strategic initiatives
of the African Union. The recent World Economic Forum debated these
challenges and proposed a number of possible solutions. Speaking at the
forum, our President expressed a wish that Africa should use her immense
natural resources to better effect for the benefit of the people of Africa.

What then, Madam Speaker, Mr President, should be done to ensure that the
poor are not forced just to bear their invisibility; are not forced to bear
the burden of the negative effect of the global downturn? The Presidency,
as Mr President has indicated, has given attention, and continues to do so,
to the alleviation of poverty in our country. One of the more important ANC
economic transformation resolutions in December 2007 stated that a
developmental state must ensure that our natural resource endowments,
including land, water, minerals and marine resources, are exploited
effectively to maximise the growth, development and employment potential
embedded in such national assets and not purely for profit maximisation.

We are a country that is endowed with a great deal of natural wealth and
yet we also have huge inequalities that result from the wide difference
between the earnings of the rich and that of the poor in our country. The
harsh reality facing many of our communities today is that of hunger. The
Presidency needs to consider urgent measures to assist the most vulnerable.
We thus welcome government’s work to refine and improve our poverty
targeting interventions.

One of the more serious challenges is that of child poverty and it is one
that we must attend to if we are to develop our youth to their fullest
potential. Our statistics indicate that about 12 million children live in
households with an income of less than R1 200 per month. More than 70% of
our children live in households with a combined income less than that, with
only 2,8% of white children making up this number. Therefore, African
children, who make up more than 75% of the poorest, need our attention. We
must do more to address their circumstances. We say this, knowing that this
government has done more than any other previous government of South Africa
to address poverty. [Applause.] The facts are well known to all honest
members of this House. Those of course who are dishonest will seek to
propound another story. [Interjections.] Especially the phantom which is
invisible to my left. [Laughter.]

The Presidency has a vital role to play in ameliorating the impact of high
oil prices, rising food scarcity ... [Interjections.] I always know when I
am saying something that makes sense, as the invisible man will rise.
[Laughter.] Greater access to economic opportunities, and greater focus on
small and medium business development are absolutely vital – thank goodness
for that! They, these small businessmen and -women, are the builders of a
new tomorrow and they deserve the President’s full attention and the
President’s support. The man to the left, who could not stand the heat of
the growing support of the ANC, is back today to mouth empty threats and
really quite inadequate comments. [Interjections.] You should tell us about
Zimbabwe, since you were party to colonising it. Thank you. [Applause.]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, Mr President, Deputy
President, hon colleague Motlanthe – are you here “on appro” or have they
given you a permanent seat? [Laughter.] Welcome.

The past year has proved to be a tumultuous period of shock and uncertainty
for all of us. However, we have shown in the past that we have the
resilience to overcome each and every obstacle, and we in the DA believe we
can do so again, provided we confront the challenges of governing a modern
state with the necessary humility and passion and avoid dissipating our
energies in factional fighting for sectional victories - fiddling, so to
speak, while our townships burn.

With the opening of this, the third democratic Parliament, in 2004, we
agreed that the Presidency should be committed to ensuring that South
Africa is moved forward decisively. Together we supported the Presidency at
its own request with championing the eradication of poverty and
underdevelopment and improving the quality of life for South Africans in
many critical areas of social existence, particularly in respect of health
and combating crime. We agreed that the Presidency should be instrumental
in driving the facilitation of the growth and development of our economy to
ensure that it becomes more inclusive and that it creates more jobs.

We applauded the President for saying that our public sector should be
enabled with skilled staff, with a special focus on strengthening the local
government system to ensure an improved response to the needs of the less
fortunate.

We concurred that the Presidency should promote public-private partnerships
for improved job creation and improved co-operation between government and
civil society in the interests of all the peoples of South Africa, but
especially to address the plight of the poor and issues such as HIV/Aids.
We listened approvingly when the President expressed his determination to
continue working towards the regeneration of Africa.

We also recognised the crucial need for the Presidency to lead the charge
in promoting enhanced levels of social cohesion, regenerating the moral
fibre of our people and building a sense of national unity, united action
and a new patriotism.

These are the key points that we agreed should inform every action by the
Presidency and I believe that this agreement remains as relevant now as it
was then.

We now have the fifth Budget Vote of the third Presidency before us, the
last such debate before the next elections and a most opportune moment to
ask: Did we get the kind of Presidency we deserved?

Dit sou oneerlik wees om te sê dat die Presidensie geen sukses behaal het
oor die laaste vier jaar nie, maar ons het nodig om ewe sober te kyk na wat
wel behaal is en wat heel moontlik agterweë gebly het. Daar is geen twyfel
dat hierdie Presidensie Suid-Afrika se oorgang na ’n moderne staat met ’n
indrukwekkende groeikoers teen sterk interne teenstand ingelei het nie, en
dat dit vir Suid-Afrika ’n plek op die wêreldplatforms verseker het.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[It would be dishonest to say that the Presidency has not attained any
success over the past four years, but we need to look with equal austerity
at what has been attained and what may well have failed to materialise.
There is no doubt that this Presidency ushered in South Africa’s
transformation into a modern state with an impressive growth rate against
strong internal opposition, and that this ensured South Africa’s position
on the world stage.]

Ongoing ... [Interjections.] Yes? [Interjections.] Are you arguing, are you
suggesting that you didn’t deserve your position on the world platforms?
[Interjections.] I am very intrigued.

Ongoing diplomatic efforts contributed to the formation of the African
Union, the acceptance of the Peer Review Mechanism, the recognition of
South Africa’s global importance by our inclusion on the Security Council
of the United Nations and acceptance as a voice to be listened to by the
G8.

However, in a number of critical areas the Presidency failed to provide the
leadership that was required. The tacit support linked to the National
Commissioner of Police when criminal charges were to be brought against him
has done tremendous damage to the government’s commitment to combating
organised crime and, dare I say, to the credibility of the President
himself.

This blow was exacerbated through the subsequent process to disband the
Scorpions against the recommendations of the long-suppressed Khampepe
Commission report and contrary to an earlier Cabinet decision. Also, the
murky waters around the suspension of the National Director of Public
Prosecutions and the passivity of the President on the arms deal have done
irreparable damage to the reputation of the highest office of our land in
terms of the promotion of clean government and a corruption-free society.

But it is to the credit of this Presidency that pertinent issues have been
placed on the table with respect to the economy, inter alia, through the
approach of identifying binding constraints on growth. Sadly, despite its
well-meaning overarching economic policy initiatives – Jipsa and Asgisa –
the Presidency has not succeeded in effectively mobilising the resources to
remove the barriers to growth to bring about the skills revolution
promised, or to improve the job-creating capacity of our economy. And these
will probably need an extension of term.

Most crucially, of course, the Presidency has not anticipated the crisis
with our electricity generation infrastructure capacity, along with some
other Ministers, and the serious constraints it would place on our economic
growth.
More grandiose projects have superseded the good work that Project
Consolidate and the Presidency’s izimbizo programmes were to achieve, and
have left these programmes impotent and especially the latter initiative
open to manipulation for party-political gain by the ruling party.
[Interjections.]

We also continue to be burdened with a crumbling health system, which
through sheer ineptitude does not deliver on its mandate with respect to
the management of facilities charged with the treatment of HIV/Aids and
other high-prevalence diseases.

The robustness of our modern state is being eroded by these failings, all
of which make it impossible to hold up the third Presidency as a model for
future incumbents of the highest office of our land.

In 2001 the government announced 22 presidential development nodes in the
poorest and least developed communities in our country to be prioritised
for key interventions aimed at improving the dismal quality of life in
these communities. The Ukhahlamba district in the Eastern Cape is such a
presidential node. Yet, when 140 infants recently perished there because of
diarrhoea contracted from impurities in drinking water and rendered
untreatable by the shortage of basic medicines at local hospitals, the lack
of response from the Presidency was chilling.

The women in these poor areas are subject to poverty and abuse. The
children are subjected to the highest child rape incidences in the world.
More than 60 children get raped per day. Yet we have under the Presidency
the Office on the Status of Women, the Office on the Rights of the Child
and the National Youth Commission that are supposed to address their needs,
but have failed to do so year after year.

It was in Alexandra township, probably the best known developmental node,
that the horrifying xenophobic violence we have been experiencing
originally exploded. Here we saw the poor turn on the poor in the most
brutal fashion, at least partially also out of frustration with their
economic situation and living conditions, something, Mr President, I think
you have yet to acknowledge.

This is not the kind of Presidency we deserve. We need the kind of
Presidency that will ensure that the state is an efficient service delivery
instrument.

Ons benodig egter nie ’n opgeblase openbare sektor om die regering se
doeltreffendheid rakende dienslewering en die verandering wat mense
benodig, teweeg te bring nie.

Maar ten spyte daarvan dat dit ’n pertinente prioriteit van die
Presidentskantoor is, het die hoeveelheid vakante poste in die nasionale
regering aan die einde van die 2006-07 boekjaar steeds meer as 40 000
vakatures beloop.

Daarbenewens is openbare-private vennootskappe, PPPs, nie genoegsaam
gebruik om die vakuum wat deur ons kwynende regeringskapasiteit veroorsaak
word te bevorder om die pas van dienslewering veral in terme van
werkskepping en infrastruktuur, te vul nie.

As gevolg van die tekort ... Mevrou, ek is nie ’n roker nie. Ek is jammer.

As gevolg van die tekort aan leierskap wat deur die Presidensie in dié
verband verskaf is, het daar ’n hinderlike – eintlik meer embarrasserende -
onenigheid ontstaan tussen die Tesourie wat die betrokkenheid van die
privaatsektor steun, en die Minister van Openbare Ondernemings, wat dit nie
steun nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[However, we do not need a bloated public sector in order to bring about
government efficiency regarding service delivery and the changes required
by the people.

Yet, regardless of the fact that it is a pertinent priority of the
President’s Office, the number of vacant posts in the national government
still totalled more than 40 000 at the closing of the 2006-07 financial
year.

Besides that, public-private partnerships were not utilised sufficiently to
fill the vacuum created by the fading capacity of the state to promote the
rate of service delivery, particularly in terms of job creation and
infrastructure.

Owing to a lack ... [Interjections.] Madam, I am sorry, but I do not smoke.

Owing to a lack of leadership provided by the Presidency in this regard, an
obstructive – actually more embarrassing – discord has developed between
the Treasury, which supports the involvement of the private sector, and the
Minister for Public Enterprises, who does not.]

This absence of government direction was starkly evidenced in the patent
lack of concerted action during the xenophobic attacks and the need for
emergency aid which civil society and local government had to provide in
the breach.

Prudent political leadership is what South Africa needs now and this is
also true when it comes to fostering and harnessing civil society co-
operation. The situation of foreign nationals in our country is a salient
reminder of the real need for South Africa to play a constructive role on
the continent.

The contributions that we have been able to make through our leading roles
in the African Union and the G77, and the mediation from our Presidency in
countries such as the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi have
been particularly fruitful.

All the greater the pity that these achievements have to be so callously
undermined by the ruinous positions we adopted during the violent aftermath
of both the Zimbabwean and Kenyan elections, and our morally duplicitous
stance as chair of the Security Council.

It is not an exaggeration, Sir, to call the situation in Zambabwe ...
rather Zimbabwe, slow. The situation in Zimbabwe ... [Laughter.] If I were
you, I would concentrate on what I am going to say.

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: That is where you can learn something. It is
not an exaggeration to call the situation in Zimbabwe slow-motion mass
murder achieved by cutting off the funds to starving children, so as to
subvert the results of democracy. The President cannot deny complicity in
this by obstructing the issue from going to the United Nations where it
belongs. He must now break his bonds with Mugabe. It is a simple question
for all of you of common decency, of siding with the people, and not with
the tyrants. It is your choice to make.

Madam Speaker, to get South Africa working for all South Africans, our
Presidency needs to be beyond reproach as a force for getting Africa to
work for all Africans. We need new ideas and decisive political leadership
to take our country forward.

Nuwe politieke denke, en ’n nuwe sosiale kontrak, word dringend benodig om
te verhoed dat ons nie weer eens, soos voor 1994, afstuur op ’n
doodloopstraat nie. Destyds is die land ook bestuur in belang van slegs ’n
gedeelte van die bevolking. Ons het dit omgeswaai; ons almal saam. Nou moet
ons saamstaan en dit weer doen. [Interjections.] U weet dat dit nie die
waarheid is nie.

Laat ek maar weer omonwonde herhaal: nie bruin of swart of wit sal alleen
die mas opkom nie. ’n Nuwe apartheid is die laaste ding wat ons wil hê.
Politieke transformasie, emosioneel noodsaaklik soos dit was, en steeds is,
is nie volhoubaar ten koste van kundigheid en die uitsluiting van die
grootste gros van die bevolking nie. Sonder transformasie kan ons nie ons
samelewing hervorm nie, maar sonder kundigheid kan geen moderne samelewing
vorentoe beweeg nie. Hierdie twee noodsaaklike fasette van ons huidige
bestel moet met omsigtigheid bestuur word; aanvullend, maar nie ten koste
van mekaar nie.

Dis ook noodsaaklik dat die Presidensie nie die waarde van taal en kultuur
van ons verskeidenheid van gemeenskappe onderskat nie. Dit moet te alle tye
deur die hoogste amp van die land begryp word en ek is ook bly dat hy dit
in sy toespraak genoem het.

Speaker, ons grondwetlike skikking het op die beginsels van die regstaat en
die reg tot privaateiendom tot stand gekom. Dit bly van kardinale belang
vir ons vooruitgang as ’n nasie, sowel as privaat individue - dit sluit
kommersiële boere, opkomende boere, voornemende boere en enigiemand wat nie
’n boer is nie – in. Dit sal rampspoedig wees as die beginsel omvergewerp
word deur een uit ’n vloed van ondeurdagte wetsontwerpe, wat tans deur die
Parlement gedruk word in ’n desperate poging om met wetgewing reg te maak
wat weens gebrekkige bestuur nie gedoen kon word nie.

Ons het aan die staat die verantwoordelikheid oorgedra om ons teen misdaad
te beskerm. Die staat kan nie nou daardie verantwoordelikheid ontduik nie.
Dit help nie om die Skerpioene lam te lê om politiese vriende te beskerm
nie; hierdie foefies ondermyn die hele regstaat. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[New political thinking and a new social contract are urgently needed in
order to prevent us from once again, like before 1994, heading down a dead-
end street. At that time the country was also governed in the interests of
only a section of the population. We turned that around; all of us
together. Now we must stand together and do it again. [Interjections.] You
know that’s not the truth.

So let me repeat plainly: neither brown nor black or white can go it alone.
The last thing we want is a new apartheid. Political transformation,
emotionally essential as it was, and still is, is not sustainable at the
expense of expertise and the exclusion of the great majority of the
population. Without transformation we cannot reform our society, but
without skills no modern society can make progress. These two vital facets
of our current dispensation must be managed with circumspection;
complementary to, but not at the expense of, one another.

It is also essential for the Presidency not to underestimate the value of
language and culture to our diversity of communities. This should be
appreciated at all times by the highest office of the country, and I am
also pleased that he has mentioned this in his speech.

Speaker, our constitutional dispensation was brought about on the
principles of the constitutional state and the right to private property.
It remains of vital importance for our progress as a nation, as well as
private individuals – including commercial farmers, emerging farmers,
prospective farmers and anyone who is not a farmer. It would be disastrous
if this principle were to be overthrown by one of the flood of ill-
considered Bills which are currently being forced through Parliament in a
desperate attempt to rectify by way of legislation what could not be
achieved because of poor management.

We have assigned to the state the responsibility of protecting us against
crime. Now the state cannot escape that responsibility. It doesn’t help to
incapacitate the Scorpions in order to protect political friends; these
stunts are undermining the entire constitutional state.]

I now rephrase my earlier question: what kind of Presidency do we deserve?
We actually need to go no further than the American example where a man ...
[Interjections.] ... unknown to the outside world, a mere 10 months ago – I
hope someone like that is hiding in your ranks – now stands on the cusp of
becoming the so-called leader of the free world. He achieved this
miraculous rise in prominence not only by promoting the simple message –
change we can believe in – but also by being the kind of man we can believe
in.

No one can be unaware of the inclusive spirit, common decency, and caring
that emanates from him. In South Africa we are desperately in need of
leaders of such unambiguous honesty, humble realism, moral rectitude, and
capacity to deliver the change we can believe in.

We will achieve this by cherishing contributions, whether they are local
and white; or foreign and black; or all of these things – whether they
belong to the previously advantaged or the currently disadvantaged. Bring
them together so that we can all be advantaged. We will achieve this if we
open up our society and opportunities for all.

We will achieve this by removing the fault lines of race and ethnicity as a
yardstick for determining the value of human beings, and of being the frame
of reference for political parties. It is necessary that we break free from
outdated political models and move towards a truly South African construct
which gives credence to the momentous changes we made in 1994.

We will also achieve a truly better life for all if we act like the
volunteers at the refugee centres who, when the need was greatest, saw
neither race nor creed nor colour, but simply frightened humanity looking
for help. We will achieve this by realigning the politics of this country
through a unity of purpose and vision, and the conviction that each and
every one of us is a valued and indispensable part of the future.

Either, to paraphrase the President, we succeed together or collectively we
will fail. When we differ, let it be on issues, not values; and when we
debate, let us use words as bricks and mortar, not sticks and stones. When
we act, let us remember the words of Dr Martin Luther King, “We are all
tied together in a single garment of destiny.” It is one thing to have a
new system of national orders, but it is an entirely different story to
encourage the formation of a new national order.

The choices made in the Presidency, or by the President, shape the destiny
of this land and every individual who resides in it. Instead of harnessing
that power in ever-increasing service of narrow sectional interests, we ask
that it be unleashed in the service of the broad national interest of all
the citizens and occupants of this resourceful and resource-rich country.

No presidential legacy will be greater, or last longer in the annals of
history, than that which placed service to the people above service to
self. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr A C NEL: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: Is it parliamentary for the
Leader of the Opposition to refer to “slow-motion murder taking place in
Zimbabwe” and to say that our President is complicit in that?

The SPEAKER: I would like to take that away and come back and make a
ruling.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Madam Speaker, Comrade
President, Comrade Deputy President, Ministers, Deputy Ministers, hon
members, it is truly a privilege to have been given the opportunity to
speak on this occasion. This is the last budget to be presented to the
National Assembly by you, Mr President, during this term of office. In a
matter of months we will once again be immersed in an election campaign,
and in less than a year a new administration will be in place.

This debate comes in the wake of a series of unfortunate developments:
electricity cuts, sharp increases in food and fuel prices, inflation has
moved out of the target band, and we have been hit rather hard by a series
of interest rate hikes. These are difficult times for everyone, and, as is
always the case, poor people and low-income earners are the most affected.

In the face of these challenges it would be easy to descend into a mood of
pessimism and to lose sight of the many immensely positive changes that
have reached every corner of our country since the arrival of democracy.

Fourteen years ago, on 27 April 1994, the course of history in our country
was changed forever. It was an exciting time, a time of joy, relief, and
celebration. For millions of people it brought real hope that their dignity
would finally be restored and that there was a life of quality to look
forward to. The ANC fought long and hard to make that first election a
reality. Hardly surprisingly, the ANC won convincingly. The election was
hailed a miracle, but that is not what it was. It was the product of good
leadership, dedication and the selfless struggle of millions of South
Africans.

Comrade President, there is a distinguished delegation of veterans here
from the Eastern Cape to listen to this debate. They are the people who
brought us the freedom we enjoy today. [Applause.]

History gave us the seemingly impossible task of uniting and bringing peace
to our country. We rose to the occasion and we took on the responsibility
of rebuilding our country, tackling poverty and unemployment, providing
shelter to the homeless, supplying water, sanitation and electricity to
those who had to do without, ensuring equality to women and people with
disabilities, and offering a life of dignity to all our citizens - the vast
majority of whom had been oppressed and enslaved for centuries. Today, 14
years later, we can say with some pride that we have made huge advances in
meeting the commitments we made to the people of our country. We are not
patting ourselves on the back and we are certainly not saying “mission
accomplished”. We will continue our fight against poverty until we can
truly say, it is no more. We will continue our unrelenting struggle for a
genuinely nonracial, nonsexist South Africa.

In 2004 almost 70% of our country’s voters gave the ANC yet another popular
mandate to govern. Our pledge to them was that we would halve poverty and
unemployment by 2014. This pledge was not lightly made and we were quite
aware that it was not going to be an easy task. But we can say with
confidence, as you said, Comrade President, in your state of the nation
address earlier this year, that whatever the challenges of the moment, we
are on course.

In 1994 when we took over the reins of government, 59% of households had
access to basic water supply. By 2007 this figure had risen to 83% and it
continues to rise. In 1994, 61% of households had access to electricity.
Today a staggering 80% have electricity and more than 2 million houses have
been built over the last 14 years.

When we took over the governing of our country in 1994 social grants were
the preserve of an elite minority; today more than 12 million people
receive social grants from the state. [Applause.] This is the story of what
has been happening in our country in the past 14 years. Uneven though it
may be, with its own ups and downs, it is by any standards a remarkable
story. With the benefit of hindsight it is clear that we could undoubtedly
have achieved a great deal more, but while we have made mistakes we have
also learnt from them and the once sinking ship is well on course.

Of course, we are acutely aware of the many challenges that remain,
including the immediate, much publicised so-called challenges of the
moment. Indeed, Mr President, we will have to strain every sinew of our
collective body to address these challenges. The persistently high level of
crime features prominently among these challenges and will have to be
tackled with unprecedented vigour by this government and society as a
whole.

Our dream of improving the lives of our people cannot be achieved if we do
not succeed in this fight. A pensioner whose pension has been stolen
doesn’t care about the statistics of social grant delivery. A house with
sanitation, electricity and water and a clinic and school nearby will be of
no consolation to the parents of a murdered child. An abused woman will
never fully  enjoy the fruits of democracy, and notwithstanding the quality
of our policies and plans, our economy will not grow as it needs to unless
we bring crime under control.

Other speakers in this debate, Mr President, will go into more details
about our plans to combat crime, but let it be said by every one of us: We
are serious about our determination to fight crime and to make South Africa
a most unwelcome place for criminals, whoever they are and wherever they
come from. [Applause.]

There is no running away from it: The rising cost of living is taking its
toll on our citizens. Our economy is facing some daunting challenges, some
of our own making and some imposed on us from abroad. During such times, it
is all too easy to slip into despondency and pessimism. However, in
confronting the problems that face us and in taking stock of our successes
and failures, we need to look back to see where we come from. As far as the
economy is concerned we have come a very long way.

In 1994 this government inherited an economy on its knees, bleeding jobs,
investment and human resources. We were on a downwards spiral that, if it
had been allowed to continue, would have left our country in ruins, but our
efforts stopped the descent and we have dug ourselves out of that deep
hole. Today we are in a much better position to confront the challenges of
our time precisely because we took the correct decisions on economic policy
at that time.

Madam Speaker, allow me to make a few comparisons between 1997 and 2007. In
1997 our economy was producing about R686 billion worth of products. In
2007 this figure exceeded R2 trillion. [Applause.] And although there is
understandable despair today about interest rates, let us not forget that
in 1997, even before the Asian crisis, interest rates stood at 19%; in 2007
they stood at 11%.

In 1997 public expenditure was just R189 billion; last year the government
spent R522 billion. [Applause.] Trevor, I hope I got these figures
accurately. After a long period of rising unemployment which started in the
mid-1980s, our unemployment rate fell from over 30% in 1997 to 23,5% in
2007. The past four years have been particularly good. Gross domestic
product growth has averaged close to 5% a year. National income per person
has grown by 22%. Since 2003, 1,3 million jobs have been created!
[Applause.]

I could go on. However, these facts in no way detract from the reality that
our people do face considerable hardships and that we are still confronted
by vast developmental challenges. However, there is no doubt that we have
made considerable gains in rebuilding our economy, in restoring credibility
in public finances and in providing the resources to meet our developmental
challenges. These gains must not be undone.
We are going through a difficult patch, but I have no doubt whatsoever that
we will get out of it and that we are on course.

Under your leadership, Comrade President, and the leadership of the ANC, we
will continue to change our country for the better. We will reach the
remaining households who do not yet have access to water, sanitation and
electricity. We will continue with what has to be one of the most
impressive housing programmes the world has ever seen. With the benefit of
learning and, of course, the benefit of the drive and energy of one
Minister Lindiwe Sisulu, we will do it even better, where the provision of
shelter becomes the provision of a well-located home with basic comforts.
Of course, we would call on all South Africans to play their part, because
the backlog remains huge.

We will tackle crime and we will do it with vigour. Our economy will
continue to grow and we will ensure that more jobs are created and that the
unacceptably large gap between the rich and the poor is narrowed.

Mr President, it goes without saying that the ANC supports the budget of
the Presidency. You have an excellent team of people. While we understand
that you will be retiring from your position - not this year, it should be
stressed - am I right, Kgalema? - [Laughter.] - and also as a young man,
that has to be stressed as well - I knew you would like that one, Mr
President - we would appeal to you not to take your entire team with you.
We need their experience and we need their expertise. [Applause.]

Mr President, Deputy President, and I am sure I speak on behalf of every
Minister and every Deputy Minister here, it has really been a privilege to
serve in this ANC-led government. It continues to be a privilege. And to
you, Mr President, we pledge that we will continue to serve with humility
and do justice to the millions who sacrificed so much to free our country.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Madam Speaker, your Excellency the President, your
Excellency the Deputy President, let me also take advantage of my being at
this podium to repeat what I scribbled to the deputy president of the ANC,
when I said that his entry into this House will add value and wisdom. I
know that he may not have got my message, because if there’s anything that
they failed to teach me in all the years in this institution it is how to
write. I know that he may not have understood what I meant.

On the occasion of President Mbeki's penultimate Budget Vote, I maintain
that history will remember him as someone who cared deeply and passionately
about the new South Africa, its people and its place in the world. I have
known the President for over 30 years and served alongside him in the
Cabinet for ten of those years. Yes, Mr President, you are perhaps the only
person in this House who can testify that I also worked with that icon,
Reginald Oliver Tambo, for decades.

Ke a tseba hore ha ke bua jwalo, botsebanyane ba tla re ke bua leshano. [I
know that when I say that, Mr Know-it-all will say that I am lying.]

You can hear them even now murmuring. Yes, President, you and I were
political opponents after our meeting in London in 1979, but we were never
enemies. We have sometimes differed sharply, and notably on the
government's strategy to combat HIV/Aids and immigration policy to attract
skills and maintain an open but controlled immigration policy, based on
international best practice. I contend that if my approach had prevailed,
and God knows we tried, an involuntary African diaspora with the flood of
millions of refugees from Zimbabwe into South Africa could have been
avoided.

I was saddened that my departure from your Cabinet, Your Excellency, was
preceded by finding myself cast in the improbable role of defendant in a
court in which my President was the litigant against me as his Minister. My
respect for the institution of the Presidency, however, was not diminished
by this sorry saga. To digress a little, may I take advantage of this
opportunity to record my disquiet at the manner in which the hon member of
the DA, the hon Mark Lowe, together with his colleague, tarred me with the
brush of mismanagement of the Department of Home Affairs yesterday.
I wonder whether Mr Lowe was here when one spook after another was
appointed to head the department. [Laughter.] That is people whose only
forte was that they were spooks with no particular record of efficiency or
experience in administration. Was Mr Lowe here when the Masetlha saga took
place, a director-general who defied me and refused even to implement my
decisions? I submitted to the President and Cabinet four lever-arch files
listing his acts of insubordination. I received no sympathy. He was instead
promoted to the Presidency, but God being great, I could not believe my
eyes one day and shared my surprise with the Director-General in the
Presidency, Rev Chikane, when we met at the airport. I said, “DG, what is
this I see in the Sunday paper?” It read: "The President is a liar –
Masetlha”. [Laughter.] The rest is now history.

In the same way, my party and I led the criticism inside and outside the
government of how the President's first term was unproductively spent
deciding whether HIV was the cause of Aids, something medical science had
long taken for granted, to the detriment of millions of people infected or
affected by this deadly virus. However, despite these failings, I was proud
to serve in the Cabinet with the President for ten years. More accurately:
I recall that Madiba often jocularly said that he was the de jure President
of South Africa and the de facto President was President Mbeki. Those of us
who were in the Cabinet since 1994 know how true that is. So, I say,
“humanum est errare” [to err is human].

South Africa has been led by a talented patriot with a clear grasp of
public policy for the past nine years. I would like to say that his
fiercest critics in this House and beyond cannot deny that this man has
given his best at home, and given South Africa political clout far
exceeding our lower-middle ranking status in the international community.
[Applause.] I know from sitting alongside him in countless international
meetings that he bats for South Africa at every opportunity.

The President’s crowning achievement is, of course, his meticulous work,
alongside the Finance Minister, to integrate South Africa into the global
economy. When we participated in the first Cabinet meetings in 1994, Mr
President, few of us could have imagined that the years of economic
stagnation experienced under the apartheid era in the 1980s would be so
swiftly reversed. [Applause.] These achievements, despite the rage all
around us, will stand and this country will endure, will revive and will
prosper because we are a great nation. [Applause.]

I am duty bound, as I have done over the past 14 years, to spell out some
of the dangers we face and call the President to account.
It is clear to me that our country seeks discipline and direction under
leadership. The President will, by now, have come to understand the painful
words of that Shakespearean character, Claudius, to be true: “When sorrows
come, they come not single spies but in battalions.”

Earlier in the year, I posed the question: Is the institution of the
executive Presidency the best prescription for South Africa? It was this
question that led me to table the Eighteenth Constitution Amendment Bill to
separate the head of state from the head of government, to establish both a
President and Prime Minister at the next general election. For partisan
reasons, even for those of you who are groaning in that corner, the ruling
party rejected its desirability, but does the President himself recognise
that a marker has been laid down and that sooner, rather than later, we
will have to address the tough questions of governance that my Bill raised?

The health of the Republic is not good. I mean, when a Deputy Minister can
stand here in front of you and ask the deputy president of the ANC whether
or not the President will complete his term, however jocularly he puts it,
when he knows that his term is not over, then the health of the Republic is
not good. Our democratic institutions are failing the South African people.
This Parliament has signally failed in its policy oversight and policy-
making role.
We all know that in the aftermath of the dastardly xenophobic attacks the
most immediate problem is food security. We must be tough on xenophobia and
tough on the causes of xenophobia, as the President has also emphasised.
The roots of such decadent lawlessness lie in an entrenched national
malaise. The president of the United States Franklin D Roosevelt’s adviser,
Harry Hopkins, famously observed in the midst of the American depression,
and I quote:

   People don't eat in the long run; they eat every day - or starve in the
   long run.


The time for food summits and workshops is long past.

I would like to ask the President to spell out in his reply tomorrow if the
Presidency will make it an Apex Priority to ensure that no displaced
person, and indeed no South African citizen, is left unfed. We need to hear
the details, not worthy aspirations. The muscle of the state is needed in
the strategic fight against poverty. I know; I was in your Cabinet,
President. I know that we tried. I always say so.

The IFP asks, however: Will the Presidency now accept that a basic income
grant must be urgently introduced? Failure to do so will, I fear, result in
the widespread rioting and looting that we have witnessed in countries such
as Egypt and Indonesia. The consequences for our already fragile national
unity are simply too terrible to comprehend.

At this time, Mr President, apart from the legitimate cut-and-thrust of the
democratic process, there seems to be a concerted effort to destroy your
legacy. I say what I’m going to say now because I do not want your legacy
to be destroyed.

I am concerned that, as your term of office comes to a close, the
undertaking that was made to the Coalition of Traditional Leaders by the
Cabinet committee which was chaired by the hon Mr J G Zuma, the then Deputy
President of the Republic and now president of the ANC, has been
dishonoured. I raised this matter with the hon president of the ANC at a
meeting this year of the traditional leaders of the world. I will not say
what he said to me then because he’s not here.

Once again, I must remind the President that the Cabinet committee promised
that, in order to prevent the obliteration of the powers and functions of
traditional leaders, Chapters 7 and 12 of the Constitution would be
amended. It was a solemn promise that the President made, both verbally and
in writing. Mr President, a promise is a promise. I would certainly be
saddened if the failure to fulfil such a solemn undertaking would be used
by those clearly wanting to destroy your legacy by branding you as someone
who will go down in history as having deceived the traditional leaders of
the Republic.
We also need a strong sense of leadership from the President in seemingly
trivial matters, not just in the big matters. We especially need direction
in protecting our fragile environment. We need to be told authoritatively
how important it is to save electricity and to begin car-sharing to reduce
carbon emissions. The endless traffic jams have become a permanent feature
of all our cities.

I fear that, due to our immediate political crisis, we have not kept pace
with the rest of the world on how to combat global warming. The IFP is
alarmed that South Africa is not rising to the green challenge and
exercising leadership. The damage to the environment, alongside poverty, is
undoubtedly, in my view, the biggest global challenge of our times. I would
like to hear from the President what plans he has for the government to
regain the green initiative.

Finally, in the life of every woman and man, in every nation, and yes,
every Presidency, there is a tipping point. In my judgement, this great
nation of ours has not yet reached the tipping point between success and
disintegration, but we are teetering on the brink. For the sake of this
country, I plead with the President to use these final few months, to use
the Presidency to reach out to the great majority of South African people
of goodwill, to safeguard our fragile achievements, and to have the courage
to discard failed policies. I would like to assure him of our support as he
tries to complete this great task. Dlamini! [Applause.]  
The SPEAKER: Hon members, before I call on the next speaker, I would like
to recognise a group of children who attended the Children’s Parliament
hosted by the Presidency and the Committee on the Improvement of Quality of
Life and Status of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons. [Applause.]

Prof B TUROK: Madam Speaker, hon President, hon Deputy President and hon
deputy president of the ANC, let me start by saying that I deplore the
cheap jibe by the Leader of the Opposition at our honoured deputy president
of the ANC, and assure the House that the country expects the hon member to
have a long and illustrious career in this House. [Applause.]

Mr President, I was fortunate to be present at the World Bank conference on
Monday this week when you made an inspirational and erudite speech in
support of development economics. You received a solid ovation despite
tackling the thorny issue of market fundamentalism in an audience with many
World Bank staffers who, in the past, have not supported development
economics. You informed the audience that, even today, the advice that you
constantly get is to privatise, deregulate and open to free trade. Yet, you
argued, such policies are not adequate for a developing country where, as
you said, the poor are knocking at the gate. I am reading these paragraphs,
Mr President, because I want to get them right. I have a copy of the
speech, which I have read three times - a very sophisticated speech indeed.
Indeed, one of the participants at the conference, a chief economist, said
to me that there are not many presidents in the world who give lectures of
this kind. [Applause.]

Mr President, you also quoted one of Africa’s most distinguished scholars,
Thandika Mkandawire, who happened to be in South Africa last week. I was
privileged to chair a session where he spoke at a conference convened by
the Development Bank of Southern Africa and the Human Sciences Research
Council on the theme “Constructing a democratic developmental state in
South Africa”. He spoke on some of the negative elements of World Bank
interventions in Africa because he wanted to point out some lessons to us
as a developing country. The conference had several international experts,
such as Prof Ha-Joon Chang from South Korea, who explained the process
through which South Korea moved, in a few decades, from being poorer than
Ghana – this was just after the Second World War - to becoming one of the
economic giants of our period. These experts were convinced, and I say this
to the hon Buthelezi - unfortunately he has left - that South Africa had
the capability to become a truly developmental state and that we had the
capacity. When the President said a moment ago that there was no crisis of
incapacity in government, which is a slightly negative statement, our
meeting, the conference, felt that we did indeed have the capability to
become a truly democratic developmental state. And I would say to the hon
Buthelezi that there is no tipping point in sight. Indeed, international
experts and development economists are convinced that we have all the
ingredients necessary to become a powerful, developmental and developed
state.

However, the conference and I believe that we need to have a further
mobilisation of the people of South Africa, because of two issues: Firstly,
we have a great deal of poverty and underdevelopment. We have rural areas
which have huge capacity but are presently not producing the public goods
that we require. Secondly, there are large areas of the world economy which
are unhelpful to our own advancement and integration into the world
economy. This morning, we were briefed in our portfolio committee that the
difficulties of negotiation between Africa and Europe around the economic
partnership agreements are enormous, with a great deal of stubbornness in
Europe for any advance. So, there are pockets of the world system which are
not in favour of our advance and our proper integration into the world
economy. This is why we need to take much stronger measures ourselves to
mobilise the resources and capabilities that we have as a country.

We were told that the Korean government, and I am going to be very brief
here and staccato, played a transformational role and not a restraining
role – a very important point. They placed a great deal of emphasis on
planning. They gave much direction to business and provided protection to
infant industries. By the way, we were informed that when it comes to
protectionism, the United States was the world champion in protectionism
from 1820 to 1940. Yet, we were told that we must all open up and have free
markets and liberalise everything while they have grown behind protective
barriers over such a long time.

We were also told that one of the key elements of advancement in South
Korea was to force business to procure locally. So, there are many lessons,
in my view, that we can learn from their experience. Certainly, they have
proven success. It is conceded that in the South Korean case and in other
East Asian tigers, there were authoritarian regimes in place. In discussion
with Prof Ha-Joon Chang and others, they said immediately that
authoritarianism is not a necessary ingredient for a developmental state
and for democracy.

Indeed, we in South Africa have this huge democracy and the huge ANC with
its mass support. This is something upon which we can rely rather than be
fearful of. So, what are the lessons for South Africa? Firstly, we must
expand the capabilities of all our people. The opinion of the experts who
come from all over the world is that this is a rich country; we have
excellent institutions; we have massive natural resources; and we have a
great deal of know-how. We must mobilise all these to a higher level,
including the ordinary people of this country who do have capabilities
which are not always recognised. These experts said to us that we must be
bolder. They said we should not be risk averse and that we must take a
chance and push forward on a developmental paradigm which will bring us to
a proper developed situation.
We must also use more state intervention. The Asian Tigers did not hesitate
to use state intervention. We must not be timid in this area. Let us move.
We have a strong state and big capabilities – let us move. Let us also
plan. We were informed that, in the private sector, every big firm plans.
No general manager or chief executive will come into a large corporation
and say they must see what the market wants and then they will meet the
market. No! They come in and say they have studied the market and that they
know what they are going to do. They say these are the plans and this is
how they are going to invest. That’s the way to move forward. And it seems
to me that we should not be timid about planning. There is nothing to be
ashamed of. We are not talking about a command economy with central
planning. But let us plan just like the private sector does - give
direction to business and co-ordination with business.

Last night there was a lecture at the same conference by a top businessman
from India who explained how, even in India, where the government is not
socialist or anything like that, they co-ordinate and work with business;
there is a partnership. Why is it that we get the impression that, in South
Africa, the partnership between the state and business isn’t as it should
be? Let us give more direction.

Let us also create an effective Public Service. We need a Public Service
which is as strong, educated and efficient as those they had in South
Korea, Japan and other countries. Let us not hesitate in this area.

Now, we talk about a democratic developmental state and not an
authoritarian developmental state. It is agreed now in most sectors of the
academic community and the planning community that democracy is an
advantage. We had one professor from the United States, Prof Evans, who is
an expert in development state theory, who argued that the capabilities of
people are a major asset in moving along a developmental path. And indeed I
think no one can dispute that, in South Africa, because of the large
problems of unemployment, poverty and marginalisation - especially in rural
areas - we are not expanding the capabilities of ordinary people as much as
we should. So, let us do that. And let us expand the capabilities of
ordinary people in line with democratic practices. Let us make the people
participate. We talk about a bottom-up democracy. Let us implement that.
Let us ensure that the Public Service sees to it that in every project
there is proper participation from below. In that way, we will build a
healthy democratic developmental state along the lines that our President
argued in front of the World Bank. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Lawulekani! [Be disciplined!]

Chairperson, hon President, hon Deputy President, hon Ministers and hon
members, I wish also to welcome the deputy president of the ANC.
Siyabulela, mkhuluwa! Silindile ukuba uza kude unyukele nini ngase kunxele
kwakho. [We thank you, Mr K Motlanthe! We are waiting to see you occupy a
higher position.]

The UDM supports the Budget Vote. The current escalation in the prices of
food and fuel, including paraffin and electricity, and interest rates will
undermine all the initiatives undertaken since 1994 to uplift the poorest
of the poor. Your Office and Cabinet, Sir, therefore need to devise
strategies to salvage the country from this unfolding crisis. For instance,
when the former Minister of Minerals and Energy, Penuell Maduna, sold our
oil reserves, he rebuffed concerns with the statement that we did not need
to worry because the world was awash with oil. Today those reserves could
have been used to intervene on behalf of South Africans. We say that the
government must do more.

Equally, it would be in the interests of our people to review the
instruments used by the Reserve Bank under Mr Tito Mboweni. Instead of
using inflation as the overwhelming measurement, he should rather include
factors such as unemployment too. This way we can halt this practice of
beating consumers and the economy over the head with high interest rates
for imported inflation. Indeed, if these monitoring instruments are not
reviewed, they will hit hard the majority of the citizens who have for
decades been locked out of the economic mainstream. Yes, in other countries
you have an interest rate dispensation that protects those who invest in
property, because shelter is a basic human right.

In all likelihood, Mr President, this will be the last Budget Vote you
present to Parliament. My observation is not based on the calls from some
of your colleagues for you to step down, but on the constitutional reality
that your term will expire early next year.
This country has to thank you for the job you have done, and in particular
for the institutions you have put in place. I’m thinking specifically of
the manner in which you have placed South Africa on the map of the
continent and the world. However, this recent spate of violent xenophobic
attacks has done much damage to our image. Whilst the architects of this
violence are yet to be exposed, one might be tempted to think that it was a
campaign designed to slap you in the face and undermine your legacy on the
continent.

There is no doubt that the big debate on the future of the continent will
continue despite recent setbacks. Perhaps the next phase that SADC
countries should consider is moving towards a form of federal governance
for the region in order to integrate economic, social and security
policies. Such closer co-operation would unlock the vast economic and human
resources of the region and benefit all its citizens. This would be in line
with the current plans to allow the free movement of citizens of the
Southern African Development Community.

During your term of office, Sir, it is a pity that some of your colleagues
entrusted with delivery could not live up to the legitimate expectations of
the nation. We now see that some of your wealthy colleagues are
masquerading all over, trying to portray failures and unpopular decisions
as belonging to the President only, whilst the public knows that these have
been the ANC’s collective decisions.

However, this does not address the inherent problems in the tripartite
alliance’s thinking and policies. Therefore, when these newly recycled
leaders come to power, nothing will change. They should stop misleading the
nation by claiming differently. We know them; some of them have been
Premiers and have participated in municipalities and government
departments; there is nothing new that they are going to bring.

Indeed, Sir, you and your party leader, Mr Jacob Zuma, have jointly written
to the City Press that the policy positions adopted by the ANC at the
Polokwane conference “do not represent a qualitative break” with past party
positions. So, who’s fooling who?

Despite all of this, there is no doubt that the country is crying out for
constructive change. This highlights, once more, the need for the national
convention that I’ve suggested in the House before, especially to debate
issues of economy and social cohesion, as President Mbeki suggested in this
House last year.
Finally, the idea of this convention should not be confined to Members of
Parliament only and should include other stakeholders outside this House.
Perhaps Madam Speaker and the President should approach the SA Human Rights
Commission to facilitate such a national convention. Time is against us.
Enkosi. [Thank you.] [Applause.]

Dkt S C CWELE: Sihlalo, Mongameli, Phini likaMongameli, malungu
ahloniphekileyo ePhalamende, mphakathi waseNingizimu Afrika, nami ngisukuma
egameni likaKhongolose ukuxhasa isabelo sezimali sehhovisi likaMongameli
uComrade uThabo Mbeki.

UKhongolose uyazithokozela futhi uzishayela ihlombe izinhlelo zikahulumeni
zokulwisana nazo zonke izinkinga esake sabhekana nazo. Ukhongolose
uyathokoza ikakhulukazi nge gxathu esesilithathile ekulwisaneni nobumpofu
nokusweleka kwemisebenzi.

Imiphumela emihle yalezi zinhlelo ifana nenkanyezi yokusa esihola isisusa
ebumnyameni beminyaka yencindezelo isiwezela ekusaseni eliqhakazile lempilo
engcono kubo bonke abantu baseNingizimu Afrika. Kodwa siyaqonda futhi
ukuthi yonke le mizamo ingaphelela eboyeni okwezithukuthuku zenja uma
singabambani sisukume silwisane nobugebengu, nesihluku sodlame olukhungethe
imiphakathi nezwe lethu.

Siyazi ukuthi umsuka wenzondo nokucwasana usemlandweni wethu omubi
weminyaka yencindezelo. Kodwa manje lesi yisikhathi sokubhukula silwisane
nezephulamthetho, ubugebengu, indluzula kanye nokucwasana kwemiphakathi
yethu. Zolo lokhu sibone izindimbane zabantu zimasha ePitoli zithi
sekwanele ukuhlukunyezwa izigelekeqe. Asisukume sibambisane nohulumeni
silwisane nendluzula.

Ngomgqibelo odlule nathi ePortshepstone besishaye uhologo simasha silwisana
nodlame nokuhlukunyezwa kwabezizwe abakhosele edolobheni lethu laseHibiscus
Coast. Abantu abalinganiselwa enkulungwaneni bazo zonke izinhlanga
ikakhulukazi abantu abasha kuhlanganisa nabafowethu nodadewethu abaqhamuka
kumazwe ase-Afrika.

Le mashi yayiholwa abefundisi, oDokotela uMgojo, abaholi bendabuko,
amaphoyisa, abaholi bamabhizinisi nabasebenzi, isiteshi somsakazo
somphakathi i-Radio Sunny South sasiphelezelwa  ngabaculi abaqavile KwaZulu-
Natali abanjengoProfessor noTzozo.

Obemele uhulumeni omkhulu bekungumhlonishwa uMalusi Gigaba, abaholi bendawo
bakaKhongolose, abe-IFP kanye neDA imbala, sonke besithi ngeke sisale
ekwakheni lolu mbimbi noma ukhukhulela ngoqo wokulwisana nodlame, inzondo
nendluzula. (Translation of isiZulu speech follows.)

[Dr S C CWELE: Chairperson, President, Deputy President, hon Members of
Parliament, fellow South Africans, I rise on behalf of the African National
Congress to support the Budget Vote for the Office of the president,
Comrade Thabo Mbeki.
The ANC is happy and it applauds government programmes aimed at fighting
the most challenging problems that we have ever faced. The ANC is happy
especially with the distance that we have travelled in the fight against
poverty and unemployment.

The good results of these initiatives are like a morning star at dawn that
leads us from the darkness of the years of oppression, leading us to a
brighter future with a better life for all South Africans. But we
understand that all this will come to naught if we do not unite and stand
firm against crime and violence in our communities and ultimately in our
country.

We know and understand that the root of hatred and discrimination arises
from our bad history of the years of oppression, but this is the time for
us to roll up our sleeves and fight against criminals, crime, violence and
discrimination in our communities. Just yesterday we saw a massive number
of people marching in Pretoria saying they cannot accept with being
terrorised by criminals anymore. Let us stand united with government in the
fight against violent crime.

Last Saturday we also embarked on a march to fight against violence and the
abuse of foreigners especially the ones who are housed in Hibiscus Coast
Municipality. About 1000 people of all races, especially the youth,
including our brothers and sisters from other African countries, took part
in this march.
This march was led by religious ministers, Dr Mgojo, traditional leaders,
police, businesspeople and workers and the local radio station, Radio Sunny
South, was also represented, and it was accompanied by well-known KwaZulu-
Natal musicians like Professor and Tzozo.

The representative from national government was Comrade Malusi Gigaba. We
had ANC local leaders, the IFP was also there, and even the DA as well. We
were all saying that we will not fail to unite and embark on a march
against riots, hatred and violence.]

These masses deliver the powerful message with one voice that the people of
South Africa will not allow themselves to be victims of crime, but will
unite to form a broad front against crime in our communities. We realise
that crime cannot be solved by government alone, but requires the active
participation of every citizen in order to realise our dream of a community
living in peace and comfort. We are conscious that the war against crime
will be won or lost at community level.

We listened to ordinary people and all stakeholders suggesting practical
ways of tackling crime. As peace-loving South Africans, we must mobilise
and empower our communities to go beyond workshops and talkshops towards
taking decisive steps to make criminality not a choice, through our local
initiative working together with our law enforcement agencies. Key to this
is the cultivation of our culture of ubuntu as a foundation for moral
regeneration and treatment of our neighbours. The ANC appreciates the
progress made in the co-ordination of our criminal justice system at all
levels and the introduction of community safety forums as local centres for
popular participation of our citizens. We must deploy the necessary
resources to capacitate and ensure the smooth functioning of these
community safety forums. We must revive our street or village committees in
all our neighbourhoods. These street committees must not be party-political
structures. They must be local organs of popular participation by all our
people to resolve all challenges in our neighbourhoods. They must be local
hub centres for efficient functioning of our ward committees and community
safety forums.

We understand that a large number of our people are still trapped in the
poverty cycle. Our democracy gives space to all to voice their concerns,
but there can be no justification for burning trains and stations simply
because someone has stolen signal cables, resulting in delays in our train
schedules. There can be no justification for destroying property and
community infrastructure because of delays in service delivery. There can
be no justification for allowing criminals to act with impunity.

We welcome the legislation that has been introduced in Parliament as part
of the transformation and strengthening of our criminal justice system. In
this regard we welcome legislative proposals that seek to build more
capacitated structure with the Saps to deal with organised crime.

Our budding democracy is thriving, and nothing will stop us from reaching
our destination of a united, nonracial, nonsexist and democratic society.
Unity is the key in dealing with whatever challenges we may encounter in
our path to a prosperous nation. However, we must heed the wise words of
our hero, O R Tambo, when he advised, and I quote:

   ... unity does not grow wild ... It has to be nurtured, built up, it
   wears away. It must be doctored, treated. It also has many enemies ...
   and you have to keep vigilant against these.

There are still challenges that threaten our social cohesion and progress
as a nation. First is the challenge posed by information peddlers who
continue to spread false information with the aim of causing confusion and
instability, and undermine our efforts to achieve peace and development in
our country and Africa. Part of this are the relentless attempts by these
individuals to abuse the democratic space created by South Africa to attack
our nation or destabilise our neighbours.

The other threat is transnational crime. We need to pay special attention
to our borders and undermine the capacity of these criminals to operate
across them. Key to the strategy should be the free movement of documented
people across SADC while improving our capacity to deter illegal migration
and criminals from crossing our borders. We must make resources available,
focusing on co-ordination of IT systems and increasing the capacity of
departments and brutally dealing with corruption at these posts.

We must address the new challenges that have emerged as we implement the
transfer of borderline control from the SA National Defence Force to the SA
Police Service. The terrain has changed, because the criminals are using
sophisticated technologies and heavy artillery in paving their way across
our borders. We must as a consequence capacitate our police to deal with
these challenges and probably review the timeline for handover next year.

In conclusion, there is nobody in the history of South Africa who has done
so much and remained so committed to the upliftment of the poor and
vulnerable as the ANC and its government. Our national project of nation-
building is on track. However, we are fully aware that this task of
building a national democratic society goes beyond the ruling party and
rests on the shoulders of every South African. We can overcome the current
challenge of crime in our community. We must unite and act now to make our
villages places of safety and comfort.

We support this Budget Vote. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Chairperson, the President of the
Republic, the hon Thabo Mbeki, hon members, and also a special word of
welcome to the deputy president of the ANC. I am glad you are here, deputy
president. Whenever we greet you, we like to say ...unginika umdlandla ...
[... your presence makes me happy and it gives me oomph ...]

I just want to assure you ... ngizokunika umdlandla nomthwalo, nomuntu
esengizothululela kuye eminye imithwalo engisindayo. [... that I will give
you all my burdens, and now that you are here with us, I will have a person
to report all my heavy loads to.] You are most welcome.

We are drawing close to the end of the third term of this democratic
government. It has been 14 years of progress and challenges. This year,
2008, is a tough year. It is full of contradictions, but it is also full of
milestones as well as challenges and setbacks. Nothing illustrates these
contradictions for our country and the world more than the food security
crisis the world is currently facing.

The Secretary-General of the UN, Mr Ban Ki-moon, captured it in his opening
address to the Conference on World Food Security, the Challenges of Climate
Change and Bioenergy in Rome last week, and I quote:


   The threats are obvious to us all. Yet the crisis also presents  us  with
   an opportunity.

So much in our own state of affairs represents opportunities and threats,
all at the same time.

Hon members, we come together to take stock in this important month of
June, Youth Month. We are reminded by our great leader Oliver Tambo that
our successes will be judged by the extent to which we build a society that
nurtures and unleashes the potential of young people. I am glad to see so
many of them in the House today.

I feel honoured to discuss this Budget Vote of the Presidency, which is
meant to manage and develop the strategic agenda of government and give
effect to the people’s contract.

It is important to reflect on what we have achieved despite the daunting
challenges we have faced and those that still lie ahead, especially now in
this present climate of high inflation and interest rates, food insecurity,
electricity shortages, high fuel costs, climate change, violence against
Africans who are not of South African origin, and the general concerns
about service delivery that concern some of our people.

We are also concerned about crime in our country, no doubt, because of how
it impacts on our citizens and their quality of life. We welcome the
initiatives, such as yesterday’s march, by members of our society to take
steps to fight crime. The comments by some of the speakers at the march
regarding the need to strengthen our social institutions coincide with our
moral regeneration objectives. Without common values and shared concerns
for fellow human beings we will not achieve our noblest goals of social
cohesion. We therefore applaud the draft Charter on Positive Values soon to
be launched by the Moral Regeneration Movement, some time in the next few
months.

I also want to extend our condolences to those families of South Africans,
of Zimbabweans, of Mozambicans, who lost their people in the recent
violence. Of course, one Somali citizen also lost his life. I must add that
those who are taking advantage of this difficult situation will be brought
to book, whether they are South Africans or foreigners. This violence is
not just by South Africans against foreigners; it is by criminals against
people.

The structural faults in the global economy have impacted upon us, and this
places a heavy burden on us as a developmental state. But we have not been
derailed in our goal of providing water and sanitation, of restoring our
public health system, of caring for the elderly and infirm, and of
educating our children for a more secure future. Yes, it is difficult, but
we know that it is not impossible.

Taken as a whole, these challenges, which impact on the public mood, may
seem daunting. I am convinced, however, that we are capable of turning the
corner and consolidating the gains we have made in our hard-won democracy
if, and only if, we adopt a “Business Unusual” approach, and only if we are
able to identify clearly the challenges we face and take advantage of the
opportunities, and there are plenty of them on the horizon.

Lapha  emsebenzini  wethu  kwihhovisi  likaMongameli   sibambisane   nabantu
abaningi, ngoba siyazi ukuthi injobo enhle ithungelwa ebandla. [In our  work
in the Presidency we have collaborated with  many  people  because  we  know
that two heads are better than one.]

In our work within the Presidency we are supported by our colleagues at
national, provincial and local level, as well as members of broader society
who give of their time, resources, energy and goodwill generously.

Platforms for engagement include the Presidential Working Groups which the
President convenes and attends without fail. We also have the Presidential
Co-ordinating Council, the Jipsa Joint Task Team, the International
Investment Council, the Presidential Information Advisory Council, the
Youth Development Forum as well as interministerial committees that co-
ordinate many other programmes of government.

I do want to thank especially the joint working group for the work it has
done in assisting us to deal with the emergency in energy, supporting the
two hardworking Ministers.

Ningadinwa nangomso! [We will forever be grateful to you – do it again!]

We would also like to acknowledge all of the people and organisations who
work with us, some of whom are here with us today. The people we
collaborate with include the people who participate in and are
beneficiaries of the National Youth Service, who are here. It also includes
the representatives and participants in the placement programme of Jipsa. I
know that we have some representatives here who have just returned from
India, the Netherlands and Germany. [Applause.] I want to thank you for all
the support that you have been able to give us and I’d like to urge all of
those people who have collaborated with us to give the same support to the
next team that will be in government. All of this co-operation would not
mean anything, though, if our own co-ordinating mechanism as government did
not meet the standards. In that regard I’d also like to express my
appreciation for the work done by our Cabinet office, serving the
Presidency and the executive. Without this centre holding, we would not be
able to serve you effectively.

The cluster system has also matured and filtered to all spheres of
government, making our collective tasks and intergovernmental co-ordination
possible, within clusters, between clusters and in terms of us being the
government as well as the ruling party.

Asgisa programmes cannot be implemented without greater co-ordination.
Through the cluster system we have been able to plan, execute and monitor
better the strategic interventions, especially the large overarching
interventions such as the Infrastructure Programme, the Expanded Public
Works Programme, the National Youth Service Programme and preparations for
2010 Fifa World Cup.

Again I would like to emphasize the fact that this co-ordination needs to
be refined, and I would encourage the next team to refine it. A good start
has been made and, when we do it well, it really works.

It should be much better once we have set up the planning capacity within
government to institutionalise integrated planning. I want to thank the
Policy Unit in the Presidency under the leadership of Comrade Joel
Netshitenzhe, for the sterling work they have done in all the areas of
policy execution and co-ordination.

I must, however, say that greater co-ordination by ourselves as members of
the executive, senior officials especially, will ensure that all of this
collective work yields even greater results. We must forge ahead, as the
Minister of Education was saying, with the removing of the remaining silos.
Fragmentation and poor co-ordination means loss of value in our work.
Through co-ordination the ruling party has been able to work as one ANC,
especially to advance and inform policy. Despite what people say and think,
the ANC is not a two-headed monster. Whatever the challenges and the
opportunities, renewal exists and many opportunities to forge ahead also
exist.

The Leader of Government Business convened a number of meetings towards the
beginning of the year with Ministers, committee chairs, the Chief Whips’
Office and the Whippery in general, as well as senior officials from
different departments, who were able to examine the government’s
legislative programme.

This has resulted in a more accurate programme. A larger number of Bills
were planned and actually tabled within the timeframes. I congratulate you,
hon members. Only a few Bills have failed to comply, and we are paying
attention to them. I want to thank the hon Chief Whip for the assistance
given in this regard.

The Leader of Government Business also gives fortnightly reports to Cabinet
on the programme of Parliament, issues before Parliament are discussed and
we remind Ministers of the number of unanswered parliamentary questions,
amongst other things. Sometimes we get it wrong and I end up answering
questions from Ministers as to why I am challenging them about questions
they have answered.

Uxolo bethuna! Siyanxenxeza no JJ! [Sorry, hon members! We are apologising
to JJ!] It’s all for the good!

Attempts are being made to build greater capacity at the level of the
Leader of Government Business to provide support on issues such as
monitoring the legislative programme of departments. More work needs to be
done on monitoring the quality of legislation as well.

After all, when you strip us of all the titles we have, our core
responsibility remains that of making laws. That is the essence of our
existence in this Chamber.

Singabashayi bemithetho nje kuphela. Ngakho-ke kufanele imithetho yethu
ibonakale ukuthi ishaywe abantu abaphekiwe. [We are legislators and that’s
it. So the pieces of legislation that we pass should therefore reflect our
experience and maturity.]

As the Leader of Government Business we have an essential role to fulfil in
offering an interface between the executive and Parliament. Although we may
differ on some issues, the highest law of the land, our Constitution,
obliges us to serve the nation together, whilst you, hon members, do your
oversight work. We congratulate you on that and encourage you to do that.
However, I also have to express concern, because there have been excesses
in some cases which are of concern, especially when they lead to a
breakdown in relations between committees, officials and Ministers. South
Africa loses when that happens as the substance becomes muddled up. This is
one of the matters we have to find solutions to.

We have launched the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South
Africa, Asgisa. Our goal was and still is to halve poverty and unemployment
by 2014. I am glad that hon Turok has highlighted that we have got what it
takes to achieve these objectives.

Asgisa has been one of the most innovative and challenging initiatives
under my responsibility. We said, when we started, that we could halve
poverty and unemployment if we were able to grow the economy by at least
4,5% on average a year between 2004 and 2009 and by at least 6% on average
from 2010 to 2014.

Despite recent economic developments, we will most certainly make progress
in some key areas. Government’s contribution through the R600 billion
investment in infrastructure has a massive and positive impact, especially
at this difficult time.

Asgisa has been making progress in the major areas of work such as
infrastructure; skills and education; industrial strategy; sectoral
development, especially in the sectors that we have prioritised such as
tourism, business processing, outsourcing and biofuels - and indeed we are
seeing fruit in the development of small business and addressing issues in
the second economy; and stability and government capacity.
Infrastructure has always been a cornerstone of Asgisa and we are glad that
visible progress has been made in the areas of building or refurbishing
power stations, new stadiums for 2010, airports, railway lines, railway
stations, harbours, hospitals, pipelines and telecommunications cables. We
are buying and building hundreds of railway locomotives and railway lines,
harbour equipment, etc. These are some of the concrete things that, when
all come together, are enabling us to meet the Asgisa objectives.

I acknowledge the shortcomings in some areas, either as a result of skills
shortages or misaligned legislation. I commend members and colleagues who
have taken it upon themselves to address some of these areas. One such area
is the deployment of skills in municipalities through Siyenza Manje, which
seeks to enable municipalities to meet what we think are supposed to be
their Asgisa targets.

At this stage, I also want to thank the departments, the state-owned
enterprises and the private sector for the enormous contribution they have
made in the different areas on which Asgisa touches.

It is a fact that in 1994 the government inherited a weak economy with high
levels of public debt, chronic unemployment, high tariff protection, low
levels of competitiveness and practically no foreign investment of note.
Also, during this time, there was a deliberate and designed strategy to
strip our workforce of their productive capacity through the systematic
denial of education and training opportunities. That was 1994.

But, due to policy interventions with foresight and aggressive economic
reforms, the picture is very different 14 years later. Even with the
current difficulties in the global trading environment, South Africa is
attracting large foreign investment and we are also mobilising significant
domestic investment. As the economies of Europe and North America
experience a slowdown, we are attracting a lot of their productive
capacity. I know because the Department of Trade and Industry and Trade and
Investment South Africa confirm this.

Highlights of recent developments on investments include a rapid increase
in fixed investment activity in South Africa on the back of a massive
infrastructure investment drive by government, public corporations as well
as the private sector, and a domestic and foreign investment pipeline:
There are 74 domestic and foreign investment projects in the investment
pipeline to the value of R206 billion; major Greenfield projects with
significant BEE opportunities, multiplier effects and geographic spread;
and domestic investment projects at R143 billion and foreign investment at
R53 billion, with a total of R171 billion in the pipeline committed or in
progress. This is an attractive economy, notwithstanding the challenges
that we face. We could not have achieved this if we had not worked hard in
the years that we are emerging from.

Manufacturing accounts for R19,7 billion, resources account for
R182,7 billion and we have R3,6 billion for  services in the pipeline. One
would have loved to have seen manufacturing featuring much better.

We recognise the work of the Department of Trade and Industry, and Trade
and Investment South Africa, and thank them and many of you for this good
work.

In line with commitments made in Asgisa, government’s obligation to
industrial strategy took a qualitative step forward. We once again
congratulate the hon members who have worked hard to make sure that we have
an industrial policy action plan, which is another milestone to which we
committed ourselves when we started with Asgisa.

I want to acknowledge the role played by many stakeholders, including
business and labour, and I hope that labour is very happy that we have come
this far. This has been one area where they had great interest.

We are also pleased that in the critical sectors of tourism and business
process outsourcing we have commenced with the implementation of some of
the areas that we have set for ourselves and indeed we can see progress. I
also want to commend the co-operation we have seen between government and
industries, and the role that has been played by the Setas. We tend to
criticize the Setas all the time but I have to say that they have played a
positive role in this case. This is another example of effective
collaboration.

With biofuels, we have approved the strategy which excludes maize in order
to ensure food security. We are pleased that the recent Food and
Agriculture Organisation conference confirmed the decision we took to
exclude maize from the feedstock. This decision has been shown to be
correct.

The issue of rising costs of food, declining stocks and the threat of crop
failure in many countries is of concern to us. Hence, the emphasis is not
only on shortcuts but long-term strategies to improve productivity.
Accordingly, we support aspects of the declaration that was adopted at the
food crisis summit, and I quote:

   Encourage the international community to continue its efforts in
   liberalising international trade in agriculture by reducing trade
   barriers and market distorting policies. Addressing these measures will
   give farmers, particularly in developing countries, new opportunities to
   sell their products on world markets and support their efforts to
   increase productivity and production.


At that conference on food the emphasis was on – and I think as South
Africa we should take this to heart - production, production and more
production. For us in South Africa and for many other countries that are
underproducing, it is important that we seize this opportunity and see it
not only as a time of crisis but as a time of opportunity for us to
increase our productivity and enhance our food security.

We must also heed the call of the director-general of the Food and
Agriculture Organisation who challenged the global community to act
timeously in delivering seeds, irrigation equipment and farming machinery
to farmers before it is too late to produce for the next season.

In South Africa, we are looking at short- and long-term interventions in
this regard. These range from strengthening and extending our safety nets
and social security, to improving the nutrition status and access to food
for our children and pregnant women, and improving agriculture, providing
starter packs for households to grow their own food. Each one of us can
grow something in our backyard. Growing a vibrant agricultural sector, both
commercial and noncommercial, and addressing the skills shortages in this
sector all form part of our medium-to-long-term intervention.

You will recall that the President announced in his state of the nation
address the setting up of an anti-poverty War Room to co-ordinate a
sustained and decisive campaign that would free millions of our people who
continue to suffer from the ravages of poverty.

I will officially launch the commencement of the National Campaign against
Poverty in the Gariep region of the Free State on 7 July. We have already
established the War Room. The campaign will be characterised by a door-to-
door visit to poor households whose member or members receive support from
the SA Social Security Agency.

Field workers of the campaign, yourselves, will carry a list of all
existing products and services to which individuals in these households are
entitled from national, provincial and local government as well as state-
owned entities. They will enquire whether there are any members in that
poor household who do not receive the support they are entitled to. They
will help them to identify the support services they should be receiving
from government but, above all, we also want members of that household to
agree that they must take active responsibility in addressing this. The
shift that we are introducing here is that it is not government in service
of our poor communities but it is government working together with our poor
communities so that they can also participate in releasing themselves from
poverty. [Applause.]

We will convey the information that we will gather during these visits to
the relevant agencies so that they can take follow-up action. We also
expect that provinces and municipalities will have their own anti-poverty
war rooms.

The uniqueness of our campaign this time is that it targets poverty at
household level, for the whole family, and this should enable us to develop
a blanket country–to-country intervention to address poverty in the manner
of addressing the specifics of a particular household.

If the field workers identify, for instance, that a young person in a
particular household should be going to school, which is another mechanism
to fight poverty, we will make sure that that happens. We will refer them
to an educational institution or a skills centre. If we identify someone in
a family who has the potential to start a sustainable small business, we
will link that person with the relevant agency. If we identify a child who
is not receiving the required attention, either from a social worker or
primary health care facility, we will make sure that, by the time we leave
that house, that has been addressed.

Our duty as the state is to provide safety nets to poor households, but the
success of our interventions will be limited unless these households take
responsibility as well.

The anti-poverty strategy points to the critical importance of employment
creation. All the data point to the fact that we are creating more jobs and
we have been doing so over the past five years. However, we know that
unemployment still remains unacceptably high.

Another major shift that we are making in our anti-poverty strategy, in
addition to targeting households, is to introduce intensive economic
interventions to address issues of poverty. This makes the economic cluster
a very important role-player in fighting poverty.

We have a number of interventions addressing poverty, some of them being
led from DTI. We have a fund of R200 million called the Masisizane scheme
contributed to by the private sector and we are collaborating with Old
Mutual as a contributing private sector partner in making finance
available. We are also working with other government departments such as
the Departments of Arts and Culture, Water Affairs, Agriculture, Public
Works and many others in bringing about the provision of these basic
services that are addressing people at the level of the second economy.

What we need are more opportunities for able-bodied South Africans to
participate actively in the economy. Initiatives such as the Expanded
Public Works Programme help us to do that and they have already delivered
on one million job opportunities, as mandated by the electorate in 2004. We
are still asking more from them because they are doing it well.

A recent review of the EPWP suggests that the training gained from the
programme has enabled participants to access further learning and
sustainable job opportunities. Seventy per cent of beneficiaries surveyed
who participated in the programme mentioned that the EPWP had had a
positive impact on their quality of life and the lives of their families.

Another innovation by the Public Works Department includes more than 5000
youths participating in the National Youth Service, using the maintenance
of public buildings for the provision of long-term jobs. This was also one
of the announcements made by the President in the previous state of the
nation address in 2007, and I am glad to say that we have been able to
deliver that and we have even excelled.

As we celebrate these achievements, we must remember that young people play
a key role in our society. There are a myriad of youth interventions that I
am sure Minister Pahad will speak about, which address young people so that
we can give them a meaningful opportunity to enter the labour market.

The National Youth Service programmes provide an opportunity to reintegrate
these young people into society. I must however say that, even though we
have made progress and identified areas and sectors where we can improve
and bring in many young people, we can still do much more. There are 50 000
young people who are already in this programme. However, I believe South
Africa should have the biggest National Youth Service programme in the
Southern Hemisphere. We have the capacity. We have the needy youth and the
National Youth Service is the only programme that I can think of where
there are no entry barriers for young people. Our inability to massify this
programme is something that we really have to pay attention to. The many
young people, that I know we are all concerned about, would benefit
significantly from this programme. Having said that, I want to thank those
departments that are running with the programme.

Jipsa has, in my view, also made a humble contribution in the area of
skills development, in directing and enabling training, in facilitating
consensus between and amongst stakeholders, and in enabling action to be
taken and to remove blockages that are identified by the multistakeholder
fora. But of course Jipsa does not replace the institutions, the
departments whose core mandate is to address education. In the forefront of
responding and finding solutions have been the Departments of Education and
Labour, the provinces, and of course we are also involving the Setas and
the private sector in this regard.

We launched Jipsa in 2006 to address primarily scarce skills. We have
received co-operation from many quarters, but I want to single out the
artisans because this is a programme that many of you were also concerned
about. To date there are 22 000 artisans in the training pipeline. Of these
22 000 artisans, we are able to train 18 000 or more because of service-
level agreements we have signed with different Setas, thanks to
facilitation by the Department of Labour.

We would also like to thank the previous chairperson of the Joint Working
Group, Comrade Gwede Mantashe. He has been relieved from this position and
has been replaced by Bheki Ntshalintshali, who has taken over the baton. He
is also making his presence felt in that position.

We thank our local and international partners who are supporting our
graduate placement programme. We are placing graduates in many countries
around the world, as well as in South Africa. Through this programme we are
able to facilitate easy and quick access to skills for many young graduates
who would otherwise take much longer to acquire work skills. We would like
to see this programme going from strength to strength. I want to indicate
that we are also beginning to receive positive responses from the
industries that we are approaching and asking to place also unemployed
matriculants, especially in the retail sector.

With regard to Sanac we can report that we have been able to launch the
National Strategic Plan, as you know, and it has been largely embraced in
South Africa and even by our international partners. However, with regard
to implementation, progress is modest. We need to do something to address
the issue of the secretariat and the skills capacity of Sanac. If we are
unable to address that, we will not be able to realise the fruits of that
programme.

Comrades, the late Comrade Manuel “Barbarroja” Pineiro noted there is no
universal law which says that present shortcomings won’t be succeeded by
future victories and successes. We are determined to intensify our work
towards the building of a better life for all, and this commitment will be
sustained by the next ANC government.

Experiences of the past 14 years have taught us important lessons that have
shaped our ready-to-govern determination. It has taught us to be audacious,
to be humble, to be resilient, to be more visionary and strategic, more
internationalist, more caring and also to deepen our democratic practices.

We are called upon to act together. Our people, in particular the poorest
of the poor, expect nothing less from us. Again, another writer, James
Baldwin, said: “Anyone who has ever struggled with poverty knows how
extremely expensive it is to be poor.”

Let me say this unequivocally: We are still firmly on track and our eyes
remain on the ball as public representatives of this third democratic
government. I look forward to seeing all of you participate in the
different programmes that our departments as well as the Presidency have,
especially starting with the programmes during the month of June, which
will be celebrating the youth.

Thank you to the great team in the Presidency led by Rev Chikane, Joel
Netshitenze, Trevor Fowler and the many other senior officials. Thanks to
our advisers, to the staff in our private offices, our protectors, our
staff at home, and thanks to you, hon members, for the camaraderie and the
challenges that you present me with, but let us reduce the challenges.

More than anything else, thank you for the support that ensures that we are
able to work together as a collective. I also want to thank you, Mr
President, for the opportunity to serve. I thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Thank you, Deputy President. Before
I call the next speaker, this House will remember that, immediately after
the hon the Leader of the Opposition completed her address, a point of
order was raised by the Deputy Chief Whip of the Majority Party regarding
her remarks on the President’s speech. I am informed that the hon the
Leader of the Opposition would want this opportunity now to withdraw that
remark. We do not have to wait for further accounts.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thank you, Chairperson, I would like to
withdraw the remark which I made starting, “The President cannot deny
complicity”, and I apologise. [Applause.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Chairperson, hon President, hon Deputy President, I would
also like to welcome Comrade Kgalema Motlanthe as an hon member of this
House. I am sure that he will add a lot of value to the debate. I also want
to put what I am going to say in context. What I am going to say today is
because I am a patriot, and I love my country; I care about my country and
I don’t hate anyone in my country.

Earlier this year, when the ID called for a vote of no confidence in the
President and his Cabinet, some said that it was political grandstanding.
Now many of those same voices share our disillusionment and disappointment
about the state of the nation and the lack of leadership we are facing.
What I want to make clear is that there is no leadership crisis in South
Africa; there is a leadership crisis in government. It is the President’s
and the Presidency’s role to provide that leadership. It is to the
President of the country that the people look to give them a sense of
direction and hope. Sadly, the early achievements of the Presidency have
long been overshadowed by the failures in several areas. From the
electricity crisis to the Scorpions to xenophobia, we have not seen the
decisive leadership that could have prevented these problems from
escalating into crises.
While we accept the complexity of some of these issues, decisive
leadership, acting boldly and quickly, could have lessened the impact and
scale of the problems. I want to agree with the hon Minister of Education
that we must be honest that many things have changed in our country, but we
need to maintain the momentum.

Even now, as some of these problems deepen, we fail to see the leadership
that is needed. For example: What is going to be done to cushion the poor
against the massive increase in food, fuel and other prices? Hon President,
in your state of the nation address this year, you spoke about the war on
poverty. But where and how is this war being waged? We are not seeing and
feeling the impact of this much-needed fight against poverty. In addition
to the inhumanity of poverty, it also, together with inequality, threatens
the social stability of our society. We remain one of the most unequal
countries on this planet and this does not bode well for developing a
culture of human rights and tolerance.

The infighting in the ANC is also severely threatening service delivery.
The media is filled with stories about battles within the ANC. The truth is
that the ANC is at war with itself. But at whose expense are these battles
taking place? As usual, it is the poor and the average South African that
suffers most. It is really sad to see a once proud liberation movement
drift so far from the values and discipline that inspired our struggle
against apartheid. Partly due to political wrangling, we have crucial
government departments hanging in limbo due to vacancies or under acting
heads. More than a year after the Deputy Minister of Health was fired, her
position still remains vacant.
In addition to the farce at the SABC, two crucial services in our fight
against crime, the NPA and the SA Police Service, are both operating under
acting heads. There are even rumours that we have an acting President.

Hon President, while you have said some nice things about an African
Renaissance, this has remained nothing more than talk. The lofty vision of
an African Renaissance is in shreds after the recent wave of xenophobic
attacks. What plan ever existed to build unity amongst our people; to build
the self-esteem of our youth and to give them hope; to repair the social
fabric of our society and to bring the people of our country and continent
together? We are facing tough times but we must not lose hope. What South
Africa needs now is leadership that can inspire us, leadership that we can
trust and that can give us hope. We need to restore to the Presidency the
trust and leadership it should embody, but we cannot restore it without it
being earned. And that, Mr President, is your challenge.

Once again, I made this speech because I care about South Africa, because I
love South Africa and I hope that we can all work together to build this
beautiful country of ours and never give up hope. Once we give up hope, we
will become hopeless and that is not good for our future. The ID supports
the budget.

Mr J J MAAKE: Chairperson, President of the Republic and Deputy President,
Ministers and Deputy Ministers, my fellow parliamentarians, ladies and
gentlemen, not forgetting the deputy president of my movement: Africa has
never at any stage been a better place than we see it today. Though there
are still sporadic wars in some parts of Africa, it is not as we used to
see happening before South Africa was free. Most of the conflicts were in
fact started and fuelled by the notorious and belligerent South Africa,
which would systematically destroy the infrastructure and economies of
these countries in order to render them weak, purportedly looking for
terrorists, finding that the biggest of them all was Thabo Mbeki.

Today South Africa is solidly placed on the world map. Not only did it
manage to place itself on the world map, but also the African continent as
a whole. Credit needs to be given to the ANC government, and especially to
the President of the country for his tireless efforts in this regard.
[Applause.]

Today we talk about the African Union, Nepad, the African Bank, and the
African Peacekeeping Force, to which South Africa is the main contributor
in all its endeavours. We have peacekeepers in Burundi, the DRC, Sudan,
etc. We are involved in peace efforts in Zimbabwe, not forgetting our
previous involvement in Northern Ireland and Palestine. South Africa, as a
member of the AU, is also involved in peace efforts in Western Sahara, the
last colony in Africa. All this is thanks to the efforts of the President
of South Africa, President Thabo Mbeki. Whoever can’t see all this good
work must be blind.
It was easy for Western countries to orchestrate coups in Africa as they
wished, but it is not as easy as it used to be, since South Africa has
become one of the players in the African landscape.

I once said in this House that there was war in this country. When there is
war, it stands to reason that there will be people who would be engaged in
this war, and these people are called veterans, veterans of the liberation
struggle. In some countries they are visible for everyone to see and be
proud of them. The last ANC conference clearly stated that these people
must be looked after. We are happy about the Special Pensions Bill which
will be coming before Parliament in this regard. Areas such as medical aid,
funeral schemes and public transport for the veterans, etc also need to be
addressed as a matter of urgency. The ANC government is surely in the
process of correcting some of the above concerns.

There is a lot of moaning and howling from the opposition about crime in
this country. No amount of this howling will solve this problem. Instead,
we need to put our heads together and try very hard to make South Africa a
better place to live in for everybody, including our grandchildren in the
future to come. No one can deny the fact that there is crime in our
country, whether high or low. But the most objective way of dealing with
this state of affairs would be to look at the causes and how we can reduce
crime levels, going into the future together. Avoiding referring to the
past will make us have no backbone.
During the apartheid era, it was obvious, given the circumstances, that
crime would be extremely low or maybe even nonexistent for some sections of
the population. If one section of the population had their own bus stops
and parks, and in banks were the only ones allowed inside the building
whilst some of us had to use a window, and were the only ones allowed
inside restaurants, post offices, police stations, etc, the possibility of
being a victim of pick-pocketing were surely very slim for that section of
the population. I needed a “nagpas” [“night pass”] just to take a stroll in
town during the night because I was a potential criminal. When just walking
in town was a criminal offence in order to protect certain sections of the
population, it becomes very clear that this previously protected section of
the population will never fully understand what crime really is in this
country. Everything for them is a crisis, and they want to convince
everybody that our country is in a crisis, perhaps because they find
comfort in numbers.

Even though perhaps at a lower rate, crime has always been prevalent in the
townships and villages. We are therefore bound to have a different
perception and understanding of crime and its levels. Without justifying
the levels of crime at the moment, that section of the population was and
still is spoilt. They behave as if they are still protected by the
apartheid laws. The opposition seems terribly nostalgic about the days when
even the lowest stratum within the white community was queen or king over
the highest and esteemed members of the black community, including our
President. Reconciliation still seems one-sided. The opposition fails to
understand that the world has opened up for everybody. We are in a
globalised world and everyone needs to behave that way. Behaving as if we
are still under apartheid won’t help; you need to wake up to the realities
of today. Even with the levels of crime that we have, South Africa is still
a peaceful and stable country, comparatively speaking, in the whole world.
Research has shown that the more unequal a society, the more violent it
would tend to be.

People know their communities and can easily protect themselves against
criminals if afforded the appropriate skills and police community
relations. “The year of mass mobilisation” - what does that mean? It means
having structures at the grassroots that are responsible and cover all
spheres of their lives, structures for poverty alleviation, for creating
employment for themselves, for their protection, and all in all for the
betterment of their lives. We can proudly talk about community policing
forums, which we can proudly say involves the masses of our people, in
partnership with our police, in their own protection against the monster
criminals, as my comrade, hon Bloem, said.

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: What was the million men march all about?

Mr J J MAAKE: When I grew up in the village of Shiluvane, we had people
from other countries, notably people from Blantyre in Malawi, whom we used
to call Maplantane, because of Blantyre of course. They were the best
tailors you could get all around the villages. We had students from other
countries studying in this country.

We had people from different countries working in South Africa, helping to
build this country into what it is today. We had almost the whole of
Southern Africa singing Nkosi Sikelel’ as their national anthem. Some
examples of these people we are talking about, some as students and some as
workers, are: Eduardo Mondlane, Joshua Nkomo, Toivo ja Toivo, Samora
Machel, etc.

Never at any stage during these times was there ever anything of what we
saw in the recent past. And praise must be given to our security structures
for having managed to stamp out the violence in no time. Again, we must not
forget that when we lost four policemen in the Jeppestown shoot-out, those
that were arrested in this regard were illegal immigrants.

I always stand on this podium and try to teach the opposition the right
ways, the right way of listening when people talk to them, the right way of
behaving in response to events in our country, but they never listen. The
ANC supports the Vote. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Chairperson, hon President, hon Deputy President ...

Mohlomphehi ntate Motlanthe, re ya o amohela le rona ba mokgatlho wa ACDP.
[Hon Motlanthe, we from the ACDP also welcome you.]

Yesterday I received a surprise visit from a man I had never met before in
my life. He drove from Witbank to Parliament, not knowing who he was going
to meet. When he arrived at the visitors’ centre, he told officials that he
was on a mission from God, but did not know who to see. He was directed to
my office to relate to me what his mission was about. [Interjections.]

This gentleman then asked me to relay a short message to the President and
the government. What he said struck a chord with me, and for that reason,
I’m going to inform the President about what this gentleman said. He asked
me to tell the President that government would not be able to solve the
huge problems facing us as a nation without God’s help and wisdom. He
continued to say that our nation was overwhelmed because this Parliament
sidelined God and His Word when a decision was made to replace prayer to
the Almighty God with a moment of silence. This man from Witbank, who is a
carpenter by trade, said that this Parliament should acknowledge God in all
the ways for government to be able to solve the complex problems and
challenges facing this nation. I trust that the President will heed this
wise, godly counsel, particularly because of the challenges facing the
President personally.

For a few weeks now, calls have been coming from different quarters for the
President to resign, because of increasing unhappiness with his attitude
and inaction whenever there was a need for action. Under his leadership,
the South African government chose to pursue an ineffective quiet diplomacy
policy, even when the Zimbabwean police were beating protesters and leaders
of the opposition with steel pipes and iron bars, breaking their bones and
cracking their skulls in the process. This government refused to condemn or
publicly voice their disapproval of the brutality of the cruel and inhumane
Zimbabwe government.

The ACDP believes that liberation struggle leaders who become tyrants and
brutalise the very people they helped to liberate should not be supported
by peace-loving Africans. While we acknowledge and respect the role they
played during the liberation struggle, they must understand that they will
not rule forever in a democratic dispensation. Those who came from the bush
must accept that the time will come when they will be replaced by those who
were not in the bush.

When some members of the United Nations Security Council proposed sanctions
against Zimbabwe, it was the South African government and the President who
opposed the sanctions. The Washington Post, under the headline “Rogue
Democrat”, commented in an editorial, and I quote:


  The government of President Thabo Mbeki has consistently allied itself
  with the world’s rogue states and against Western democracies. It has
  defended Iran’s nuclear programme and resisted sanctions against it. It
  has shielded Sudan and Burma from the sort of pressure the United Nations
  once directed at the apartheid regime. Now Mr Mbeki’s policy is reaching
  its nadir in South Africa’s neighbour, Zimbabwe.


The ACDP believes President Mbeki has to ensure that, this time round, when
the UN Security Council meets in New York tomorrow to discuss the crisis in
Zimbabwe, South Africa should not deny there is a crisis in Zimbabwe. Our
country must support the dispatch of a UN convoy to Zimbabwe to get first-
hand information of the atrocities that have been perpetuated by the Zanu-
PF militia against members of the opposition.

Whilst the ACDP supports calls for a government of national unity or
transitional authority in Zimbabwe, we nevertheless believe that it should
not be led by brutal grandpa Robert Mugabe, who must be told to retire as
soon as possible.

The President should also make time, we believe, to visit displaced foreign
nationals who are victims of xenophobic attacks that embarrassed and shamed
us as a nation. As the Presidency knows, there was a lot of criticism
levelled against the President for not visiting any scene of violence or
even speaking to the nation about what government was doing about the
attacks within the first two weeks of the elections. Some even said that
because of this “I-don’t-care” attitude, he did not even offer condolences
to the family of the man whose burning body was seen on the front page of
all the major newspapers and on television networks. I believe it is not
too late for the President to offer condolences to the traumatised Nhamuave
family and, better still, to visit them in Mozambique. Some of those who
say the President does not care might have a softening of attitude if he
makes that visit.

In conclusion, as this is the President’s final Budget Vote, the ACDP
wishes to commend him and his economic dream-team, led by the Finance
Minister, for achieving sustained economic growth. This will be a lasting
legacy of your term of office. The ACDP will support this Budget Vote, with
the hope that the President will be at home more to guide our nation
through the storms that are ahead of us. Thank you.

Ms B N DAMBUZA: Chairperson, hon President, hon Deputy President, Ministers
and Deputy Ministers, hon members, directors-general, distinguished guests,
and Comrade deputy president of the ANC, the ANC supports the Budget Vote.

During our political transition, South Africa also experienced a dramatic
increase in violent crime. Between 1994 and 1999, violent crimes increased
by 22%. Multiple factors contributed to the exacerbation of bloodshed,
crime, specifically inequality, the ever-increasing wealth gap between
poverty-stricken communities and the rich, and the proliferation of
unlicensed firearms ... kodwa namhlanje sibona umahluko omkhulu
nongaphezulu kunalaa meko kwakuyiyo ngaphambi kowe-1994. [... but today we
see a huge difference which is far better than before 1994.]

After a decade of freedom and transformation, the ANC-led government
continued to embark upon a programme of action to strengthen our democracy
and to put the country on a faster growth and development path. The
progressive realization of peace and stability rights contained in the
South African Constitution distinguishes this country as a developmental
state. In the absence of the realization of such rights, South Africa
becomes a neo-liberal, market-driven capitalist state, in danger of
promoting an unsustainable model of development that widens inequalities
and entrenches poverty. The rich become richer, and the poor poorer.

What is unique about the peace and stability rights in the Constitution is
that they provide the basis for citizens to hold the government to account.
The government clearly has a firm historical base that is the political
mandate, and the constitutional and normative imperatives to expand social
security to provide comprehensive social protection, of which the ultimate
purpose is to increase capabilities and opportunities, and thereby, human
dignity will prevail. Moreover, public participation has been a very
significant vehicle to reach out to the poorest of the poor across the
country.

This has also prompted new thinking and innovative responses to the ideas
underlying security, peace, conflict and stability. It must also be noted
that the Constitution also provides the powers and functions to the
Presidency. It gives the Presidency the mandate to co-ordinate and monitor
the different state organs to ensure effective service delivery, as the ANC
mandate stipulates. In this debate, Parliament could be portrayed as an
organ of people’s popular power.

Let me indicate, amongst other things, one of the most important strategic
objectives under the leadership of the hon President is to facilitate a
developmental state through: fostering nation-building and bringing the
Presidency closer to the people and co-ordinating planning policy and
executive management functions in support of the President to ensure
harmonious and integrated service delivery throughout the state system.

The 52nd National Conference resolutions in Polokwane called for the
finalization and implementation of all resolutions on peace and stability
adopted at the 51st National Conference, namely: the accelerated
transformation of the judiciary system; the need for Correctional Services
to introduce a new system to cater for juvenile detainees; the introduction
of a regulatory framework within which private security companies operate
so as to allow oversight by the Departments of Safety and Security and
Intelligence; and the alignment of all structures of the Justice cluster
system. Another important issue to emphasize is the strengthening of the
current legislation that deals with child poverty, ongoing murders,
disappearances, abuse and neglect.

In response to that, the Justice, Crime Prevention and Security Cluster is
following a two-pronged strategy in the fight against crime. The strategy,
while confirming the central role of law-enforcement agencies in the fight
against crime, also focuses on community involvement and establishment of
partnerships as the key instruments of crime prevention and combating.

I just want to remind the members of this august House that the ANC
government has embarked on a number of monitoring and evaluation processes,
especially around public safety. For example, we have the Ten-Year Review,
the Mid-Term Review and the African Peer Review Mechanism assessment, of
which the mid-term publications were made in June 2007.

Andizi kuya ke kuzo. Okubalulekileyo kuyo yonke le nto kukuba thina
singamaLungu ale Ndlu sibambisane sisonke, singachasani ngokwemibutho
yethu, ukuze siqinisekise ukuba abantu bakuthi bafumana ukhuseleko
kangangoko nangendlela efanelekileyo. Thina singala malungu umsebenzi wethu
kukuqinisekisa ukuba ubunkokeli bethu sibenza ngendlela enentembeko
nenkuthalo ukwenzela ukuba abantu bethu bafumane iinkonzo ezibafaneleyo.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[I am not going to talk to them. What is important in all this is that we,
as the Members of this august House, should all work together, and not
oppose one another according to our party affiliations, in order to ensure
that our people get proper and effective protection. As members, our duty
is to ensure that we perform our leadership with diligence and trust for
our people to get the service delivery that they deserve.]

On the subject of correctional services, in 2002, the hon President, in his
state of the nation address, announced the building of four new-generation
centres, which included Kimberley, Nigel, Klerksdorp and Leeuwkop. The
Kimberley prison is the first of the four to be built, with a capacity to
hold 3000 offenders. The centre faces a number of challenges, including
delays in the completion date, which has been extended twice so far. The
debate around the building of the prison has been in the public domain
since 2001, with the date of these prisons being shifted annually. There
may be genuine or other reasons, but what impact do these delays have on
the objectives of national priority the President announced?

Comrade President, in his 2006 state of the nation address, referred to the
additional construction of four new-generation centres, which were to be
built in Allandale, East London, Port Shepstone and Polokwane. In 2007, he
again reaffirmed the construction of the mentioned centres, and further
emphasized the realization and implementation of the objectives of the
White Paper on Corrections, which provides strategic direction that places
rehabilitation at the centre of the department’s activities. He further
called for adherence to the new laws and regulations regarding imprisonment
of juvenile delinquents.

I would like to commend our ANC government, under the leadership of Comrade
President Thabo Mbeki, for taking forward the transformation of this
country to create a better life for the citizens of our country. A lot of
work has been done in transforming justice, state and society.

Oko kukubala nje ezimbini nezintathu. [That is just to count a few.]

These are some of the advances that have been made: Transformation of the
justice system, state and society; the criminal justice system of the
country is renewed; new service centres have been launched; numerous Bills
have been passed, aiming to improve judicial transparency and promote
gender law, reduce human trafficking and strengthen constitutional
democracy; and case flow governance structures were established and are
fully functional in six provinces.

The ANC supports the Budget Vote. Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Business suspended at 17:08 and resumed at 17:25.

Dr P W A MULDER: Chairperson, because I have known President Mbeki for more
than 14 years and was convinced that he was making a mistake by again
standing for presidency at the ANC’s Limpopo conference, I honestly tried
to give him some advice in an article, which appeared in Die Burger a
couple of weeks before the conference. I would like to quote from that:

   Mbeki has to be given recognition for the important role which he played
   to lead South Africa economically into a realistic policy direction.
   Harold Wilson, British Prime Minister, wrote: “Most political careers end
   in tears.” If previous South African political leaders’ careers are
   considered, it held true for many of them. For democracy in South Africa
   and for the dignified treatment of Mr Mbeki, it would be a pity if his
   career ends like this. A solution for this situation must be found.

Now, it was not found and we know more or less where we are today.

Just as the Limpopo conference radically changed the position of President
Mbeki, the xenophobic attacks radically changed South Africa. Photos of
foreigners being burned shattered the dream of South Africa showing the
world how people should live in harmony with each other. The government was
warned timeously.

In the African Peer Review Mechanism Report, the government was seriously
warned, more than a year ago, about xenophobia and racism in South Africa.
Paragraph 956 says:

  Xenophobia against other Africans is currently on the rise and should be
  nipped in the bud in South Africa.

Why did the government not do something? It’s because they started
believing in their propaganda and myths. If the gap between a myth and
reality becomes too big, unrealistic decisions are made. What are some of
these ANC myths?

The first myth is that tribalism and ethnicity are the result of
colonialism and apartheid and would in time disappear. The hon Buthelezi
wrote, and I quote:

  Our ethnicity was not invented by apartheid, only used by it. I did not
  create Zuluness; Zuluness created me and would last long after I’m gone.
  I never had difficulties recognising myself as entirely Zulu, entirely
  South African and entirely a citizen of the world. These are different
  levels of expression, not contradictions.

The second myth is the belief that black-on-black violence is not possible
in South Africa and in Africa.

The third myth is that racism is the preserve of whites. Black people
cannot be racist. The xenophobic attacks in South Africa and events in
recent times in Africa have proven all these myths to be wrong.

The sad truth is that racism and xenophobia are universal phenomena. They
are found all over the globe and in all societies. Their extent and
intensity vary with time and circumstances.

I remember how Nigeria, in 1985, ordered the expulsion of 700 000 illegal
African immigrants. We saw the recent conflict in Kenya and Rwanda, and the
antiwhite/black racism in Zimbabwe.
Last year, in this debate, I warned against racism and mentioned examples
of xenophobia in Germany and Australia. What should we do now? Firstly,
drop these myths and start treating the realities of diversity in South
Africa honestly. Then diversity will be an asset and not a threat.

The Bible says: “Love the stranger, for you were strangers in the land of
Egypt.” But, then you must be realistic as well.

Accommodating a few thousand ANC exiles in Africa during the struggle years
is something totally different from allowing five million foreigners to
compete with poor South Africans for scarce resources and thinking that it
would not create conflict.

As long as articles are written, as recently in the City Press, that black
people cannot be racist but only white people can, then we are not
realistic and are not getting anywhere.

What we saw recently was blatant black racism and xenophobia. White racism
is condemned by the FF Plus. But we also condemn black racism.

Mr Mandela addressed this Parliament on 10 May 2004, and he said that the
guiding principle for him in his life had been that there were good men and
women to be found in all groups and from all sectors of society, and that
in an open and free society, those South Africans would come together to
jointly and co-operatively realise the common good.

In the eighties, two Comrades athletes, Manie Saayman and Louis Harmse, saw
the talent in Samuel Tshabalala as he participated barefoot in a Sasolburg
marathon. They bought him shoes, got him work and started training him for
the Comrades Marathon without any compensation. In 1989, Tshabalala won the
Comrades Marathon. However, he did not pitch at the prize-giving ceremony
because Saayman, who also participated, had suffered kidney failure and he
had preferred to go to the hospital with his trainer in the ambulance.
Today they are still friends and hope again to participate in the Comrades
Marathon this year.

Why am I telling the story? It’s because I, like Mr Mandela, believe that
in all groups in South Africa there are good and bad people. There are good
Afrikaners and bad ones. But, there are good Xhosas and bad ones. The big
problem is generalisation. As long as there are white people who say that
all black people are bad, we are not making any progress at all. But as
long as there are black people who say that white people are bad, and
whites do not belong in Africa, we are also not making any progress at all.
If the good people from the different groups can work together, we can
surely resolve all our problems.

If we can learn this only from the recent events, then we are making
progress in creating a place in the sun for everyone, and together we can
start resolving Africa’s problems. I thank you.

Ms L L MABE: Ke a leboga, Modulasetulo. [Thank you, Chairperson.]

I hope that hon Mulder is not racist; I just hope you are not and if you
are not, you are welcome to be part of this august House.

Chairperson, the ANC supports the Budget Vote. Good governance and
monitoring in government and by organised, politicised civil society can go
a long way to improving the lives of its citizens even where resources, for
example, financial and human, are limited.

In a country with a long history of skewed empowerment of minority groups
and marginalisation of majority groups, it is crucial for the state to be
interventionist in approach. Without decisive state intervention in various
sectors of the society and economy, inequalities may instead widen and
disrupt stability that has already been achieved by a democratic state.
Intervention does not equate to totalitarianism.

Huge basic service backlogs that are a product of the apartheid grand
system of exclusion pose serious challenges that require precise and timely
state intervention. Therefore, Parliament’s oversight and monitoring by
national government of other spheres of government and sectors of society
and business are critical.

With transformation challenges faced by a democratic government, democracy
would be meaningless to the majority who can be marginalised to the fields
of poverty without central planning, co-ordination and state intervention
in critical and strategic areas.

Despite many achievements that have already been realised by this
government, the ANC government will not rest when people coexist with
poverty. Some fundamentals on which to build a democratic developmental
state are in place in South Africa and must be harnessed to enhance and
improve the lives of our people. This view, as hon Turok impressed on this
House earlier, was expressed by economists attending an international
conference on South Africa and its possibilities of being a developmental
state.

I will now refer to a few of the 24 Apex Priorities referred to by the
President of the Republic in his state of the nation address in February.
Firstly, government or the Presidency would ensure that there is integrated
planning across all spheres of government and alignment among planning
instruments. Central planning for the maximisation of available resources
cannot be overemphasised, because planning in isolated form compromises
service delivery to our people.

Parliament has continuously called for integrated planning and
implementation of government projects and delivery of services. With the
implementation of this priority, government can double the pace of service
delivery. It is possible that as the ANC government, we can double the
pace, provided that planning is done centrally to ensure much better co-
ordination. We can still do a lot to serve our people much better.

Let me categorically state that the ANC government has done a lot for those
who were marginalised in the past but even for those who were privileged,
and who continue to be privileged. They cannot pretend not to have
benefited from democracy. They have benefited more and I think it’s time
that they acknowledge and admit that they have benefited more than they
were supposed to benefit. Mind you, there is no other party in this House
that can perform better than the ANC has done.

Another priority was to regularise performance and employment contracts of
senior managers in the Public Service. There is no reason why this cannot
reach completion because 11 years ago, at the 50th ANC Conference in
Mafikeng, we resolved this matter as the ANC.

It can’t be business as usual. I believe that the passive skills that are
outside the economy can go a long way to addressing the problem of the
skills shortage. There are people who’ve got skills but don’t have the
experience or relevant skills for the economy but they can be retrained to
be active in the economy.

Go botlhokwa thata gore ba bagolo mo pusong ba ye kwa tlase kwa bathong go
iponela se se diragalang fa batho ba fiwa ditirelo le boleng ba tsona. A e
re fa puso e lebelela kgwetlho ya bokgoni mo ditirong, e gatelele moono wa
Batho Pele, gore e nne setlwaedi sa fa go fiwa ditirelo tsa puso kgotsa tsa
kgwebo. Go fetoga ga tlhaloganyo ya motho kgotsa mokgwa o motho a
golaganang le ba bangwe ka ona ke gona go laolang gore o tla ba thusa ka
mokgwa o o jang.

Fa o gopola gore ka 1994 bophelo bo ne bo le jang, gore Aforika Borwa e ne
e le mo mojakong wa ntwa ya selegae, o tla bona gore nnete tota ANC e
dirile go tlala seatla.

Go botlhokwa gore puso e thuse bomasepala gore fa batho ba fiwa ditirelo,
ba fiwe ditirelo tse di botoka ka lebaka la gore bomasepala ba na le
kgwetlho ya gore bafe batho ditirelo tse di kgotsafatsang. Mo go nang le
bokowa, a puso e tsereganye go sa le gale gore batho ba seke ba itseela
molao mo matsogong ka go lemoga gore e kete ga ba tsewe tsia. Go naya
sekai, maemo kwa masepaleng wa Rustenburg ga a jese diwelang, Rre
Mopresidente. Dilo di senyegela pele mme batho ba tlaa tloga ba dira tse ba
sa tshwanelang go di dira gore puso e tle e ba neele ditsebe. Ka na tota
nnete ke gore, tsebe ntlha e a ikutlwela. (Translation of Setswana
paragraphs follows.)

[It is very important that leaders in government should visit people at
grassroots level in order to see for themselves what really takes place
when quality services are delivered to the people. In addressing its skills
challenges government should consider emphasising Batho Pele principles, so
that it becomes government’s culture of offering services or doing
business. A person’s mindset, or how he or she interacts with other people,
determines how far he or she will go in addressing the plight of the
people.

I think you still remember how life was in 1994. South Africa was on the
brink of a civil war; you might have noticed that the ANC has indeed
outdone itself.

It is important that government should assist municipalities so that when
services are delivered to the people, it should be of good quality because
municipalities are faced with a challenge of delivering quality services
that meet the needs of the people. In cases where there are flaws,
government must intervene in time to prevent people from taking the law
into their own hands upon realising that they are ignored. For example,
conditions in the Rustenburg Municipality are quite appalling. This
deteriorating state of affairs might lead people to do what they are not
supposed to be doing, as a means to ensure that government listens to them.
Remember it is at times wise to listen.]

The Constitution of the Republic, section 41(1)(h), states that all spheres
of government and all organs of state must co-operate with one another in
mutual trust and good faith by co-ordinating their actions with one another
and avoiding legal proceedings against one another.

To that extent, does the Cape Town Metro understand the section and that
South Africa is not a federal state? This metro can undermine other spheres
of government. Maybe it’s because Cape Town’s climate changes from time to
time, that is why they can change so easily and undermine other spheres of
government.

Hon President, when will we receive the report by the Department of
Provincial and Local Government on the relevance of provinces? We are
waiting so that we can start engaging on that report. The implementation of
intergovernmental relations creates unnecessary bottlenecks in our march
towards the eradication of poverty.

In conclusion, Parliament is empowered by the Constitution to provide
mechanisms to ensure that executive organs of state are accountable to it
and to maintain oversight over the executive.

I think I must make it clear that corruption, to some people, is something
to engage on and be lively about. I know those people who are victims, but
I just want to indicate through the House that corruption ...
[Interjections.] [Time expired.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson, President and hon members, South Africa, like
many other countries of the globe, finds herself in a tight corner: food
prices are rocketing; the fuel price is immobilising the nation; escalating
inflation is staring the nation in the face; and unemployment figures and
numbers of poor people increase daily. Surely Charles Dickens would say:
“it is the worst of times”, “it is the winter of discontent”, as much as it
is “the age of incredulity”. Fourteen years of plenty seem to have gone by.
All that stares at us as a nation is hunger, poverty and starvation.

The teenage South Africa behaves like a real teenager. Like a typical
teenager, the nation is impatient, intolerant, rebellious and aggressive.
One is set aback by some apparently angry teenage members of the ruling
party who sulk and fight at the drop of a hat. They speak with forked
tongues: They say the President of the country must leave office, and then
again, no, he is not leaving office before the end of his tenure. We in the
UCDP state, as we did during the state of the nation address, that the
President should remain in his post up to the end of his term.

The continued harping on the shortcomings of the current government is
reminiscent of those of 1993 to early 1994 when people set themselves the
task of making the country ungovernable. The high crime rates that appear
to have been well-thought-out and executed, the recent acts of xenophobia
and even the poorly thought-out labour strikes at the 2010 soccer stadiums
are, in our book, antics designed to discredit the government and humiliate
the President of this country. Those who engage in these antics do so at
their own peril – really cutting off their noses to spite their faces
because whatever will result from this will affect us all.

The news that two South African men from Nelspruit were recently pushed off
the road, kidnapped and driven around in Maputo with guns held to their
heads, is a clear xenophobic retaliation. How many such incidents we are to
live through is the big question. This country’s flourishing foreign policy
has been tarnished by these senseless acts.

The fact that we, as a country, are a teenage state can also be noted from
organs of state rising up against each other - the SA Police Service versus
the Directorate of Special Operations; Ministers of state differing openly
on which policy to follow in order to improve the economy; and Members of
Parliament showing their strength - “amandla wabo” - by strangling organs
and members of the executive. This will prove very costly in the long run.
We should also bear in mind that teenagers have suicidal tendencies.
Therefore, as this country awakes and becomes aware of itself, it should be
nurtured to avoid self-destruction.

We in the UCDP pray for strength for all South Africans not to exaggerate
the mistakes of others, because, if put in the same position, they could
even be worse.

There are things that need unity of purpose by all South Africans - black,
white, brown, young and old. These things are fighting crime, poverty,
sexism, racism and similar evils such as xenophobia.

However, the Presidency will have to hone its communication strategy. The
unfortunate handling of the Pikoli issue during the Ginwala Commission of
Inquiry and the issuing of the letter from the MDC to President Mbeki stand
out as very disastrous. I keep hoping that the day will come when we shall
be in tandem and pray that God will help us in this situation.

Finally, we accept that the Presidency is the cog around which the wheels
of government revolve. Programmes have to be integrated and come out as
those of the government and not in silo-like fashion, as the hon Minister
of Education indicated earlier, where each member of the executive is seen
to be guarding their turf instead of ensuring that government succeeds. I
thank you.

Mong K M KHUMALO: Modulasetulo, Mopresidente wa naha ntate Thabo Mbeki,
Motlatsamopresidente wa hae mme Phumzile Mlambo-Nqcuka,
Motlatsamopresidente wa ANC, Ditho tsa Palamente, bomme, bontate le
makhomoreiti kaofela ke ya le dumedisa.

Ke ka bomadimabe hore ntate Meshoe o se a tswile, ke ne ke batla hore ke re
ho yena, ke utlwile are, ANC ena e etelletseng pele e utlwisa batho bohloko
le ho theola botho ba bona. Ntate Meshoe ke motho wa kereke, hape ke motho
e moholo eo ke mohlomphang, nkeke kare o bua leshano, nkapa kare o bua
nnete e makatsang. O tseba hantle hore ANC ke yona e ntseng e emetse batho
nakong e telele. (Translation of Sesotho paragraphs follows.)

[Mr K M KHUMALO: Chairperson, President of the country Thabo Mbeki, his
Deputy President Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Deputy President of the ANC,
Members of Parliament, ladies, gentlemen, and comrades, I greet you all.

It is unfortunate that Mr Meshoe has already left. I would have liked to
say to him that I heard him say that the ANC-led government is causing
misery for the people, and it is also undermining their dignity. Mr Meshoe
is a religious man, and he is also a respectable person. I wouldn’t say
that he is telling lies, I would rather say he is being economical with the
truth. He knows very well that the ANC is the one that has been
representing the people all along.]

It is also important to note that the president of the UDM, who is not
here, said the ANC is recycling leadership. Mr President, it is unfortunate
that the person who said this was a military ruler of the former Transkei.
He was the Deputy Minister of Environmental Affairs. He is also the
president-for-life of the UDM, and nobody objects to that. So, it is
unfortunate that he can say that we are recycling leadership.
It is also unfortunate, Comrade President, that we are told that there is
no crisis of leadership in the country – I am responding to this because it
is the party that I represent that is being attacked. There is a crisis of
leadership in government. This does not make sense. It does not make sense
because of the fact that the ANC provides the leadership, and the ANC is
government. The ANC is in charge and runs the government. The ANC is
dealing with the challenges that we face as a country, and we are dealing
with these things all the time.

Dr Mulder, there is a distinction between xenophobia and racism. Xenophobia
is when people are attacked on the basis of them hailing from other
countries, not on the basis of race, colour or creed. Racism is practised
on the basis of race. But sometimes these things come to a state where they
become completely unacceptable, all of them. They are unacceptable! So, we
are dealing with these things and we are attending to them.

Mr President, the unfortunate thing is that there is confusion between the
state of the nation address and the Budget Vote. The people who have spoken
have done so as if this is the state of the nation address. This is the
Budget Vote debate. It’s part of a process. I must just say that my focus
will be on communication, particularly the international arena. I want to
focus on the Zimbabwean situation and lastly on social cohesion.

Mr President, it is important that we note that government has used various
platforms of communication. Internal newsletters, electronic bulletins,
annual reports and broadband are vital to achieving maximum participation.
It is also clear that in order for us to create an information society, we
must unlock the potential of government to deliver services efficiently and
encourage development.

While it is important to move with the changing ICT environment - from
fixed-line to mobile, from mobile to broadband, from broadband to private
and from private to virtual private networks - we must not leave
communities behind. We might find ourselves not moving with the ordinary
people in the manner in which we communicate government decisions because
they might not be linked up in terms of broadband Internet and many other
means of communication. So, it is something that we must deal with as we
proceed.

Secondly, our spending patterns in terms of communication should indicate
that in terms of the Living Standard Measure, LSM 1 to 5, which is normally
rural areas, and LSM 6 to 10, which is urban areas, these two worlds should
be taken into consideration when we spend money on advertising and engage
with the masses. Now, it is also important for us to make sure that we use
various platforms. For rural communities and many others, radio,
television, newsletters, Vukuzenzele and many others are quite important.
But when we address LSM 6 to 10, then we deal with broadband, infomercials,
billboards and stuff like that.

The izimbizo that we normally hold have been quite good and quite
successful. However, as Members of Parliament, we should participate in
them, because quite often we are not there or we are not called so that we
can engage with the masses. These izimbizo should also be able to attract
sections of the community that have not been part of them, be they Indian
or white. They should be held during weekdays and at weekends because
sometimes it is difficult for those who work to attend. These are the
issues we have identified and think must be addressed.

Lastly, in terms of communication, it must be noted that it has been
difficult for us to achieve what we call universal service obligations,
universal access, and bridging the digital divide. This must be done
speedily. We are happy that the Presidency has engaged with various
committees in terms of izimbizo and many others, and that has been good.

We need to congratulate the President on the role he has played in dealing
with the Zimbabwean situation. After the 2002 elections, the President of
the country and the then president of Nigeria, President Olusegun Obasanjo,
dispatched two eminent men, the then secretary-general of the ANC, Mr
Kgalema Motlanthe, and Prof Adebayo Adedeji, to go and resolve two
particular issues. Firstly, at that point in time, there was a case against
the president of the MDC - allegations of a plot against the president of
Zimbabwe and working for a particular company of Ari Ben-Menashe. Secondly,
there was the issue that the president of the MDC had lost against the
Zimbabwean government and that he wanted the results to be declared null
and void because he felt that there had been cheating. From that point in
time, six years ago, up until today, we as South Africans and as the ANC
have made attempts to ensure that the problem is resolved.

Ambassadors indicate that there are a number of problems that we must
attend to in terms of Zimbabwe. Firstly, there was a drought that ravaged
the country from the late 1980s to the 1990s. Secondly, commercial farmers
engaged in hoarding agricultural products away. This then created a
problem. Then the government started to come with tax burdens and a lot of
other things against the commercial farmers.

Thirdly, just after the 1999 constituent assembly, the MDC managed to
retain 48% of the votes in 2000. It was quite clear then that the
Zimbabwean government was getting a bit worried. They introduced two laws
that we were also not happy with, namely the Access to Information and
Protection of Privacy Act, and the Public Order and Security Act. Those who
don’t know these laws must go and check what they are. Now, it was quite
clear that those laws were going to be problematic because they are
draconian laws. They are going to give difficulty for proper political
platforms to proceed. I must say that these are the problems of Zimbabwe
that have been there. They are not our own creation.

Fourthly, there was a problem of the externalisation of the Zimbabwean
currency. Zimbabweans themselves participated in undervaluing their
currency by using foreign currency when buying goods and services. In this
way they undermined their own currency. That matter must be attended to.
When you go to Zimbabwe today, you have a parallel market in terms of the
currency - international and local. That is also a Zimbabwean problem which
must be attended to. This is the Zimbabweans’ fault, and these are the
issues that we must attend to.

Fifthly, there is an issue, perceived or real, that there are serious
problems with regard to how government deals with issues of the opposition
and whether they are able to achieve a government of unity. You have done
what you could in that regard too, Mr President. We expect and hope that
they will be able to deal with it as Zimbabweans.

Lastly, in terms of the Zimbabwean situation, we hope and believe that the
27 June elections, when they come, will give an opportunity to Zimbabweans
to sit down and find a way to resolve their issues, as we have been
assisting and helping. We are interested in a peaceful transition situation
in Zimbabwe, where we are not going to be affected as we are today. The
President of the country has done his part. The Harare Declaration, which
led partly to the success of the South African government leading, was
actually concluded there.

The fundamentals for the creation of a conducive climate and removing all
obstacles ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon member, I thought you were
concluding. Your time is over.

Mr K M KHUMALO: I thought I had two extra minutes, Mr Chairperson. The ANC
supports the budget. Thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Those minutes do not exist.

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: Chairperson, Comrade President, Comrade
Deputy President, hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers, hon members, hon
deputy president of the ANC Comrade Kgalema Motlanthe – welcome -
distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, undeniably one of our most
successful achievements as a country has been to replace a system reviled
as a crime against humanity with one based on the ideals of nonracism and
nonsexism. Since 1994 we have endeavoured to build a socially inclusive and
socially cohesive, democratic South Africa through a process of
socioeconomic and political transformation.

The triumph of this idea and ideal, the triumph of the reality of democracy
and social justice over tyranny, authoritarianism, apartheid and
colonialism is a testimony to leadership. It was Thomas Jefferson who said:
“God grant that men of principle shall be our principal men.” We in South
Africa have been blessed. We have had men and women of principle,
stretching from the precolonial times to the present. And our movement,
which today forms the governing party, has had men and women of principle,
including Pixley ka Isaka Seme, Chief Albert Luthuli, J B Marks, Lilian
Ngoyi, Gertrude Shope, Moses Kotane, Walter and Albertina Sisulu, Dr Dadoo,
Govan Mbeki, Chris Hani, Joe Slovo and Ruth First, Oliver Tambo, Nelson
Mandela, and Thabo Mbeki.

The idea and the ideal triumphed because South Africa embraced democratic
citizenship and social inclusion as transformative tools and as normative
ideals in the continuing struggle against racism, sexism, xenophobia and
related intolerances. In this endeavour, the role of the Office on the
Rights of the Child, the Office on the Status of Women and the Office on
the Status of Disabled Persons is critical. It falls on them, including the
Youth Desk, to oversee mainstreaming of gender, disability, child and youth
concerns into all our government’s policies and programmes.

One of the significant steps we took was to place the needs of vulnerable
groups – women, children and youth and people with disabilities - at the
very heart of our institutions and our policies by locating them in the
Presidency. We did this to ensure that the issues of critical importance to
vulnerable groups and communities are not left to a single line department
but are dealt with in a holistic, integrated fashion. This is about
democracy and accountability and it is about ensuring cross-cutting
responsibilities in good governance.

The offices and the Youth Desk all engage with civil society organisations
in their respective sectors and interact with their provincial and local
counterparts to ensure that national policies are translated into action in
the other spheres of government. Continuous interface with community-based
organisations and with the other two spheres of government ensures that
national government stays alive to the issues and challenges facing
vulnerable communities so as to ensure that the quality of life of members
of those communities improves.

June is Youth Month, and we remember with sadness and pride the enormous
sacrifices our youth made in 1976 during the Soweto and related uprisings.
Youth make up 41% of our population and they face challenges of poverty,
marginalisation in the rural areas, unemployment, unacceptably high school
drop-out rates and health issues, including HIV and Aids and other
communicable diseases and infections. All of these are exacerbated by
conditions of poverty.

A well-resourced, streamlined National Youth Commission is an essential and
indispensable adjunct to the work of government in its efforts to improve
the wellbeing and conditions of life of youth in our country. The NYC is
autonomous and its engagement with the Presidency is limited to the
execution of its mandate - to facilitate, co-ordinate and monitor policies
and programmes that promote youth development.

Last week, the Presidential Youth Working Group met to exchange views on
the important challenges faced by the youth of South Africa. A Draft
National Youth Policy was presented. The draft policy is being finalized
and will be presented to Cabinet very soon.

In March 2008, we established an inter-departmental task team to address
one of the resolutions from Polokwane, which called for the merger of the
National Youth Commission and the Umsobomvu Youth Fund, and the
establishment of a National Youth Development Agency.

The Youth Desk, working in close co-operation with the National Youth
Commission, will complete work on the National Youth Development Policy
Framework, develop an Integrated Youth Development Strategy based on the
policy framework, and ensure the co-ordination of the National Youth
Service Programme. The Youth Desk will integrate youth development issues
in the government’s programme of action.
The Office on the Status of Women, in order to continue to advance women’s
empowerment and gender equality, will complete the Convention on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women Report covering 1998 to 2008
for submission to the United Nations; conduct a review of the national
gender machinery; track the implementation of Cabinet’s decision that by
2009 50% of all senior managers in the Public Service will be women; and
engage in dialogue with the relevant stakeholders on gender-responsive
budgeting and financing.

The Office on the Status of Disabled Persons will work assiduously to
strengthen the important work of the national disability machinery; to
finalize the Draft National Policy Framework and develop a draft
implementation plan; to work with the joint monitoring committee to host a
Disability Parliament; to deliver on South Africa’s obligations in respect
of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities; and to
establish a database of professionals for the labour market.

This year, the Office on the Rights of the Child will continue to
consolidate cohesion in the sector on the national children’s rights
facilitation, co-ordination and oversight programme. In addition to
carrying out its core functions and mandate, the Office on the Rights of
the Child will host the National Children’s Day and the Joint Day of the
African Child, and the Joint Monitoring Committee, the Office on the Rights
of the Child and the Children’s Parliament.

A very successful Children’s Parliament was held this morning with children
representing all provinces as well as children from Rwanda, Mozambique and
Kenya. I would like, along with all of you, to extend a very warm welcome
to the children who participated in the Children’s Parliament and who are
present with us in the gallery.

The Office on the Rights of the Child will also undertake a much-needed
situation analysis on the status of children in South Africa. The office
will also host the regional conference on international co-operation on
cross-border protection of children in southern and eastern Africa.

Hon members, I stand before you today knowing that this is the last Budget
Vote speech I will present before this august body. So I would like to
thank all members of the opposition, especially their leaders, for the
robust debates we have engaged in, and to anyone whom I may have offended,
I want to extend my sincerest apologies.

To the hon member Chief Buthelezi, a very special word of thanks for your
kindness and unfailing courtesy - thank you very much. [Applause.]

To the presiding officers, past and present, thank you for your co-
operation and assistance. To members of the Joint Monitoring Committee on
the Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Women and the Joint
Monitoring Committee on the Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of
Children, Youth and Disabled Persons, I say thank you for exercising your
responsibilities with diligence and vigilance, and thank you for the
principled manner in which you have continually engaged with me. You are
having a qualitative impact on improving the lives of vulnerable groups in
our society.

To my comrades in the ANC, it has been a pleasure and an honour to have
served with all of you. To our Deputy President, who is also the Leader of
Government Business, I want to say thank you for all your hard work and
your dedication to issues of gender, disability, children and youth.
[Applause.]

Our government, with courage and conviction, is committed to improving the
wellbeing of all South Africans and especially of those who are vulnerable,
disadvantaged and marginalized. This is the essence of leadership. Jean-
Jacques Rousseau in the Social Contract drew the link between the social
condition of human beings and the role of a leader. He argued that because
of the prevalence of inequality, poverty and social injustice, “Man is born
free, and everywhere he is in chains.” Under these conditions, the role of
a leader is to recognise the extent of the problem and articulate the need
for a just society based on a “general will” and create a sense of
community and cohesion.

Socially responsible leaders recognise that poverty, inequality and all
forms of discrimination, and, critically, gender discrimination and
oppression, are the key fault lines nationally and globally. Leaders have a
responsibility to establish the “general will” for the creation of a
nonracial, nonsexist, socially just South Africa. The leader of the ANC is
part of a collective leadership steeped in its political culture, its
values and its openly stated vision for progressive politics to dominate
the global, continental and national agenda.

This past weekend the president of the ANC and President Mbeki, in a joint
letter to the public, said, and I quote:


   The ANC has no camps. It does not function as a double-headed monster. It
   has one common membership. It has one leadership. It has one policy. It
   has one government. It leads one people, united in its diversity. It has
   no tricks up its sleeve. It will contest the 2009 election as one united
   movement.


And I daresay that the ANC will undoubtedly win the next election with an
overwhelming majority. [Applause.]

Leadership in the public sphere derives from a commitment to serve the
people of our country. Leaders must, in the Weberian sense, live for
politics, not off politics. They must work to realise the vision of the
movement, lead by example and by consensus, have integrity, and act as a
role model to ANC members and nonmembers alike.

Such leaders must eschew all forms of chauvinism and sexism and must
promote a vision of unity in diversity and gender equality, respect and
tolerance, and must promote democracy and strengthen responsibility and
accountability in all the institutions of democracy.

Comrade President, you have demonstrated in practice that you possess these
attributes. We first met in 1960 - I hope you haven’t forgotten - and since
then our friendship and comradeship has strengthened. It has been a rare
privilege and honour to serve under you, first as a parliamentary
counsellor, later as Deputy Minister in the Deputy President’s Office, and
since 1999 as Minister in the Presidency. Thank you for your support,
kindness and generosity. You are a mentor, a teacher and an exceptional
leader with a “lekker” sense of humour. You are a wonderful listener; you
hear what people say and you have the patience of Job – my wife told me to
pronounce it as “Job” as others do the same. You have been a loyal,
dedicated, committed and fearless cadre of our great movement for over 50
years. This movement, this country, this Parliament is the better for your
involvement and leadership.

President Alhaji Umaru Musa Yar’Adua of Nigeria, in his address to the
Joint Sitting of Parliament, said, and I quote:


   My brother President Thabo Mbeki has steadfastly and courageously carried
   on the torch of democratic consolidation alongside economic prosperity.
   He has constantly promoted and defended the African cause. He deserves
   our commendation for his efforts at peacemaking and conflict resolution,
   not only within the South African region, but beyond.

President Mbeki, to all of us who have worked with you over the decades,
you embody the qualities of sound democratic leadership. Your reason and
judgment about creating a just society and a good society are beyond
reproach. You are courageous in the face of enormous pressure; you fight
for and uphold the rule of law in the face of authoritarianism; you live by
your principles; you speak truth to power and listen to truth from the
dispossessed and the marginalised.

Goethe, in one of his poems about the relationship between leadership,
freedom and human existence, wrote, and I quote:


   Yes, to this thought I hold with firm persistence;
   The last result of wisdom stamps it true;
   He only earns his freedom and existence
   Who daily conquers them anew.

What we have learnt from you is that leadership is indivisible from the
fight for freedom and human existence, and only has meaning when we are
free from want and poverty. Leadership does not stand apart from freedom
and human rights, from social justice and morality. You have shown that the
basis of morality, including political morality, is to demonstrate courage
of conviction in the face of obstacles and danger and in spite of personal
consequences.

Your leadership has brought to our country peace and stability, including
macroeconomic stability. You have an unwavering commitment to equality,
including gender equality and empowerment. Through your appointments, the
overall representation of women in Cabinet, including the Deputy President,
is 43,33%. There has been a threefold increase in the number of women
Ministers appointed from 1997 to 2008. Cabinet has also taken the decision
that, by 2009, 50% of all senior management in government should be women.

Your commitment to peace and security on our continent has you work
tirelessly to resolve conflicts in the DRC, Burundi, Sudan, the Ivory Coast
and Zimbabwe.

You are a democrat and an ardent proponent of good governance, and thus
your commitment to the African Renaissance, the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development and the African Peer Review process.

Your leadership style is based on the principles of respect and consensus.
You have always valued the input of your peers and always seek to build
consensus.

Under your leadership and personal involvement, we were successful in our
bid to host the 2010 Fifa World Cup of Soccer, and I can assure you it will
be one of the best ever held. [Applause.]

You have taken positions on the global stage that have gone beyond self and
country and have been based on principle. You have, for example, been
consistent on the need to find a just and lasting solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict for the establishment of an independent and viable
Palestinian state.

You fit into the tradition of the intellectual who revels in a good debate
on issues of vital importance. You are a humanist who cares deeply about
the condition of the marginalised and excluded in Africa and the world. You
are an intellectual and a philosopher in the sense that Marx meant when he
wrote, and I quote:


   Philosophers have only interpreted the world in various ways; the point
   is to change it.

You are a formidable and - even the opposition would agree - an honourable
adversary, who wants his ideas debated and scrutinised. You are a practical
politician who delights in the pleasure of literature and poetry; you are a
philosopher and your narrative encapsulates simultaneously the particular
form of South African exile and displacement, our national liberation and
our bold and audacious step into the fraternity of democratic nations.
The recent storm of hostility and vituperative commentary surrounding your
leadership has unfortunately and unnecessarily sought to polarise our
society. The commentaries seek deliberately to obfuscate and obliterate,
but they cannot, for history will record the successes of our government
and will point to your real achievement, which is to have undertaken the
historic project of massive socioeconomic, political and administrative
transformation of an authoritarian system into one that is democratic,
representative and stable.

You have situated the politics of dispossession and oppression at the heart
of the most far-reaching project of transformation to have been undertaken
in the postcolonial era. So, to fully understand the significance of your
leadership and its successes is to understand the recent history of South
Africa.

As the government of the day and as Members of Parliament, we must claim
our successes and acknowledge our failures. Under the leadership of
President Thabo Mbeki, the ANC has won successive elections with
evergreater majorities.

Since 1998, the economic policies we have pursued have allowed our
government to utilise the revenues generated to invest in improving the
wellbeing of our people. Political stability, coupled with macroeconomic
stability, have created an environment in which we have witnessed increased
public spending on housing, water, electrification, sanitation, education
including early childhood education, health care, physical infrastructure
and strengthening of the delivery capacity of the developmental state.

To the naysayers who say our economic policies have been a failure, let us
point out that our economy is in its longest and most sustained period of
economic growth - nine years straight. This is unprecedented in the history
of South Africa. In the past three years alone, we have created
approximately 500 000 new jobs per annum.

South Africa has made great progress in addressing the country’s twin
challenges of poverty and inequality. Basic services have been extended to
ever-increasing numbers of formerly disadvantaged people. The total number
of grant beneficiaries is 12,4 million, and expenditure on social
assistance will be R75,3 billion next year. The provision of social grants
is just one of the important interventions we are undertaking to alleviate
and eradicate poverty.

We point to these significant and unparalleled achievements not for
partisan political purposes, but to state for the record that we can all
take pride in these achievements. We can, in the face of untruths, point
out that this government, this executive, this legislature and this
administration, whatever else their shortcoming, did in a period of 4 years
make a positive impact on the lives of the poor in our country. [Applause.]

That we have the resources to pursue pro-poor socioeconomic development
strategies is testimony to the vision of our President, who argued that
poverty constitutes one of the contemporary era’s gravest fault lines and
needs to be eradicated.

Ours remains a dual strategy of short-term poverty alleviation and long-
term poverty eradication. And if there is an achievement we can be proud
of, it is that the poor in our country are not getting poorer, even if the
wealth and gaps between the rich and poor are increasing. We still see
poverty and unemployment as major challenges and we have established a Anti-
Poverty War Room headed by the Deputy President, and we will not rest until
our dual strategy is completely successful, that is, until we eradicate the
last vestiges of poverty in our country.

I want to concur, in the strongest possible terms, with our President,
Deputy President, other Ministers and Members of Parliament that, as a
government, we extend our deepest sympathies and condolences to the
families of those who have been injured and killed in dastardly acts of
violence. Among those killed were many South Africans. In a liberated South
Africa, where we cherish the values of pluralism and diversity, we condemn
chauvinism and xenophobia, and acts of violence.

While these attacks mark a shameful moment in our young history, we also
need to acknowledge that the overwhelming majority of our people condemn
xenophobia and xenophobic violence. The outpouring of generosity, both of
spirit as well as of much-needed resources, including food, clothing and
shelter, reflects and represents the true virtues of our people. As a
country, we have now entered a new phase where reintegrating displaced
persons into the communities from which they were displaced has become a
priority.

In conclusion, I would like to express my deep appreciation and gratitude
to the staff in my office, including Mr Louis du Plooy, who no longer works
in the office; the director-general, Rev Frank Chikane; the head of the
Policy Co-ordination and Advisory Services, Mr Joel Netshitenzhe; the COO
Mr Trevor Fowler; Ms Anne Letsebe of the Cabinet Office; the advisers in
the Presidency; the staff and commissioners of the National Youth
Commission as well as the entire staff at all levels in the Presidency, for
their dedication, commitment and hard work over the past year. Once more,
Comrade President, thank you for everything that you have done. [Applause.]

Ms M M MDLALOSE: Chairperson, hon President, the executive and my
colleagues, ...siyabonga, sihambe kuhulumeni size sifike kulesi sikhathi
lapho sesithi senza isabelo mali sokugcina. Sithi sibonga sifise ukubeka
ukuthi siyi Joint Monitoring Committee ngokolusha, abantwana kanye
nabakhubazekile, omama, siyafisa ukuthi kube khona indlela yokuthi ihhovisi
likaMongameli liqhube lishiye umlando ngodaba lolusha. Ngizobeka isibonelo
ngenyakatho KwaZulu Natal esifundeni u 25 nesifunda u 24 ngimdidiyele
ngokuthi inyakatho ne KwaZulu Natal, ngimdidiyele ngokuthi iningizimu
nempumalanga,  impumalanga yeFree State. Kuleyondawo uma ubala abantu
abakhona, abantu abangaphezulu kwesigidi.

Uma ubala inani lamadolobha, amadolobha ayishumi nambili. Kuleyondawo
abantu bayasebenza, bayaya ezikoleni, izikole ziningi zikhona, abantwana
bayakhula kodwa siyafisa ukuthi siyibike ukuthi uMongameli siyamfisela
ukuthi ashiye umlando endaweni.

Abantwana uma bekhula bahamba baye kwamanye amadolobha bayofunda khona
baphinde basebenze khona, bangabe besakhona ukubuyela ekhaya ngoba alukho
uhlobo lomsebenzi abangawenza ekhaya. Intuthuko yendawo isemuva.

Kunezimayini, kunemboni enkulu ka Iscor osebizwa ngo Mittal Steel kodwa
umuntu okwazi ukusebenza khona owenza umsebenzi angawufundelanga. Umntwana
ofundile uhamba aye phandle angabe esekwazi ukubuya, kuthi uma kufuneka
amakhono endaweni kudingeke ukuthi kulandwe abantu eRichardsbay, kulandwe
abantu ePitoli.

Uma ngabe ke sikwazi ukuthi sisebenzela inqubekela phambili yomnotho,
inqubekela phambili yomntwana, inqubekela phambili yendawo, siyafisa ukuthi
ihhovisi lika Mongameli ishiye umlando wesikhungo esiphakeme I Technikon.

Ngiyi National Democratic Convention ngize nje naleso siphakamiso ukuthi
isabelo mali sisimukele kodwa futhi ake sibonelele kulendawo. Ithe noma
ifika inkululeko awangaba khona umehluko omkhulu endaweni. Sicela ukukubeka
njengenselelo, sicela ukusho ukuthi indawo nayo iyafuna ukuthi iphumelele.
Siyabonga. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[... we are truly grateful to the government for we have reached a stage
where we are doing the last Budget Vote for this session. We are really
grateful and, as the Joint Monitoring Committee, we would like to say that
on behalf of the youth, children, people living with disabilities, as well
as women, we trust that the Office of the President will press on thus
leaving a legacy with the youth issues.

I will just make an example with regions 24 and 25 which I will refer to as
northern KwaZulu-Natal, and then there is the eastern Free State that I
will refer to as the south eastern area. When you look at the numbers of
people living in these areas, you find that they are more than a million in
total.

And when you look at the number of towns in these areas, you find that
there are only twelve. People have jobs in these areas and the youth do
attend school, and there are many schools. Children are growing up but we
would like to plead with the President to leave a living legacy in these
areas.

The problem in these areas is that when children grow up, they go to study
in other towns and end up working there as well. As a result, after
completing their studies, these children do not go back home because the
kinds of jobs that they were trained to do, are not available in their
areas since the areas are not developed.

One of the areas that I have mentioned above boasts mines and a very big
Iscor company which is now known as Mittal Steel, but people who work there
are people who do odd jobs which do not need formal training. Educated
youth leave their areas to look for work elsewhere and they do not come
back, and when there is a need for specific skills in the area, they are
reckoned to be acquired from areas like Richard’s Bay and Pretoria.

If we say that we are working for the development of economy, the youth and
the area, we therefore trust that the Office of the President leaves a
legacy by building an institution of higher learning, a technikon.

That is the proposal we are putting forward as the National Democratic
Convention. We support this Budget Vote but we would like to propose that
we should consider that area. There was no significant difference in that
area even after the achievement of democracy. Therefore, we would like to
put this as a challenge to government that that area needs to be developed
too. Thank you.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Order! I would like to call upon the
hon N C Mfeketo. The member will be delivering her maiden speech.

Ms N C MFEKETO: Thank you, Chairperson, whatever that means!

Chairperson, President of the Republic of South Africa Comrade Thabo Mbeki,
Deputy President, Ministers, Deputy Ministers, the deputy president of the
ANC, hon members, the ANC supports the Presidency’s Budget Vote. We support
it with the confidence that no one can deny that the ANC-led government has
made substantial progress since 1994 on all fronts. We have created
conditions for a strong foundation for a developing country.

In the 14 short years of our democracy, we are able to reflect on the
transition from an inhuman society characterised by racism, division,
inequality and injustice, to a society that is caring, open and democratic,
committed to the ethos of nonracialism, nonsexism and freedom. We have
indeed broken with the past, a past that did not have regard for women and
children. The dark night of minority political domination is only a distant
memory.

We know, and I am sure all freedom-loving South Africans know, the progress
made under your leadership, President. Since 2004, the number of employed
people has been increasing by about half a million each year. This,
together with the extension of social grants to children, has led to some
reduction in the level of severe poverty. The intervention you made in co-
ordinating improved service delivery through Project Consolidate and
intergovernmental relations is recognisable.

We will be the first ones to acknowledge that there is still much to be
done, as identified by the President himself in his state of the nation
address in February, hence the Apex Priorities. In this regard, I want to
focus on local government as the sphere of government closest to our
people. Its successes and failures have a direct impact on our communities.
The challenges of poverty, unemployment and inequality must remain high on
our agenda, not only in our sphere, but more particularly in the local
government sphere. We therefore need to strengthen co-ordination across the
three spheres as well as the institutions that provide and set the tone for
transformation.

Emphasis must be placed on how different spheres arrange and structure
their programmes and allocate their budgets. There must be a way of
facilitating what happens in all organs of state as far as the improvement
of people’s lives is concerned. This transformation agenda cannot depend on
the political party that is in office. If we do not attend to this, the
development of sustainable human settlements by 2014 will be a pipe dream,
particularly in other provinces.

As stated earlier, local government is the sphere closest to our people and
the one that often finds itself at the forefront of delivery. In recent
times, we have witnessed civil society actions that illustrate the
importance of local government beyond any doubt. When expectations are not
met, people direct their frustration at the door of local government.
Providing an intergovernmental framework that strengthens rather than
burdens local government is therefore critically important. The
Intergovernmental Relations Framework Act and the mechanisms that the Act
provides go some distance in this process. However, mechanisms are as
effective as the people who participate in them allow them to be.

In building on the solid foundation laid by this government, our challenge
now is to monitor the structures that have been created to give effect not
only to co-operative governance, but to the interdependence that exists
between the spheres of government, more specifically between local
government, its civil society partners and the state-owned enterprises that
play such an important role in our local, regional and national economies.

With regard to monitoring and evaluation, those in local government should
know that the intent of our monitoring and evaluation processes is not to
lay blame, but to identify delivery pitfalls early on and to facilitate
corrective measures in a proactive manner. The credibility, effectiveness
and efficiency of our system of local government are a reflection of our
total system of governance and administration. Failure in this sphere means
failure in the system of governance as a whole.

This year marks a number of important milestones that has brought us to
where we are today as a country: The 90th anniversary of the formation of
the Bantu Women’s League of South Africa, the 60th anniversary of the
formation of the ANC Women’s League and the 25th anniversary of the
formation of the United Democratic Front. The founders of all these
formations were motivated by one common objective - to break the shackles
that trap them and their communities in poverty, unemployment and
inequality. These challenges are still present today. The only way to pay
tribute to the achievements of these founders is to continue where they
left off. We dare not fail them. We need to invest more in programmes that
will mobilise and inspire our masses to participate in building the country
and the society in which they want to live, and in building a better
tomorrow for their children and their children’s children. This is the
responsibility of all peace-loving South Africans and not only the
government. I thank you.

Mr R B BHOOLA: Chairperson, hon President, hon Deputy President and hon
deputy president of the ANC, the department of the Presidency was born in
1996 with our democracy and has successfully served the governance of South
Africa by providing executive management and overseeing the co-ordination
of the executive and its basket of departments.
We acknowledge that as a country our greatest challenge has been poverty
and that government has worked endlessly to overcome this.

Under the auspicious leadership of our hon President Thabo Mbeki, the MF is
pleased to note that today unemployment has decreased by 2,5%, that 89% of
households have access to piped water and that 80% have access to
electricity. Within two years the Fifa World Cup will kick off, and indeed
we are not just going to be another country hosting the Fifa World Cup, we
will simply be the best!

If anything, one of the challenges has been that the labour force has
outgrown the economy. The MF applauds the hon President for his foreword to
the South Africa Yearbook 2007-08, where he highlights that our economy is
now growing at a faster rate than the country’s population, but also
acknowledges that poverty and underdevelopment remain as challenges.

The MF honestly believes that we need to look at our achievements to
inspire the road forward. The MF notes that over the past few terms women,
children and the physically challenged have been a focal point for the
Presidency, and we are curious indeed as to the progress made in this
regard and as to whether these groups remain a priority for the Presidency.

Our hon President has played a pivotal role on the continent,
internationally and in the UN, in building strong relations and creating
new ones. Many of the ill-informed public have blindly criticised the
Presidency for its choices in handling a number of critical issues but it
is evident that the diplomatic stance our country has taken on a number of
global concerns has been safe and in the best interests of a developing
nation.

What we so often note is that South Africa is still a Third World country
and we are still in the early walking stages of our democratic infancy.

The MF has often come under fire for its support for the Presidency and has
been accused of being the puppets of the majority, but I assure you that it
takes intelligence to note what is best for a country that has inherited a
major debt of inequality and retardation.

Our opposition knows how much they contributed to that state and they find
it way too easy to blame our current situation on today’s government. Our
people need to be educated on the current state of the nation and they need
to be educated as to who really placed them in these circumstances.

Yes, it has been a long wait and a hard road to travel for transformation
but government has not stopped and our President has never stopped.

Hon President, the MF salutes you. We remember your sacrifices as a young
boy. We remember your sacrifices and commitment to your comrades as a young
man. And, hon leader, we stand by you through your commitment and sacrifice
to our people over the three terms that you have led us and we would stand
by you through another 100 years to come.

Change has come about because of leaders such as the hon Thabo Mbeki and it
is the opposition that drives our people astray and causes them to believe
in a failing government, a doomed future and a promised land in their
claws.

We have had constructive nation-building but unfortunately we have been
made to play with the DA and they have slashed our building blocks in the
hope that they would be made the kings of the crib. The MF strongly
believes that ignorance causes one to lose power.

Mongameli, ngikufisela impumelelo ekulweni nobumpofu. Izandla ziyagezana.
Singakhohlwa baba Mongameli ukuthi umuntu umuntu ngabanye abantu. [Hon
President, I wish you well in your fight against poverty. And as the old
adage goes: one hand washes the other. We do not have to forget, however,
hon President, that a person is a person through other persons.]

Hon President, under your impeccable leadership, South Africans have
advanced from the dark days of apartheid and oppression into the light of
democracy and development. Mahatma Gandhi once said in relation to those
who embark on a journey of revenge, that an eye for an eye makes the whole
world blind. When a man is at peace with himself then he is at peace with
his family. Only when all South Africans are at peace with themselves, will
the hon President of the Republic of South Africa, Thabo Mbeki, be at
peace.

The MF will support the Budget Vote. Enkosi. [Thank you.][Applause.]

Mr F T MASERUMULE: Chairperson, the previous speakers have recognised the
protocol on my behalf, so I shall jump headlong into the debate. My speech
is actually not a debate as such, it is just a contribution, because one
would understand that, as a rural boy, my issues are simple and practical,
straightforward and concise.

But, before I come to that, let’s remind each other, because if we forget
it will be a criminal offence: South Africa, this country as we know it -
unless we don’t know it - fought in its lifetime until this moment - and I
am still fighting but the terrain is different now, and the strategy and
tactics are different; the ideas are different but the battlefield is still
the same - has fought 850 wars, skirmishes, conflicts and battles over the
past three centuries.

When you took office, Mr President, you said “lest we forget”. When Madiba
took office, he reminded us “never ever”, and that statement was heavily
loaded. Now, if one goes back a little, the most painful moment for me was
the moment when the arms struggle was suspended. And it is still painful
for me. There was a time when I wanted to break rank and become a lone
rebel without a mission, because it was very painful. I could not
understand why the ANC compromised on the armed struggle. I was suspicious
as to whether the leadership was beginning to sell us out. But later I
realised that it was actually a life-and-death matter. If we did not
compromise, the country was actually going to go down. It was part of the
package of facilitating the establishment of permanent peace and stability.
But it is still very painful for me, because reasons were never given. We
are trying to grapple with understanding the reasons. Here we are 14 years
down the line, but for me it is still painful.

If one goes back a little one would remember the massacres, some which I
saw with my own eyes: the Boipatong massacre, the Gugulethu seven, the
Matola massacre, the Lesotho massacre, Shobashobane. Do you remember the
killings that took place towards the elections in 1994? We went to the
elections under fire, and here we are today and we cannot understand why we
should be harping on xenophobia, homophobia, racism, etc! Why are we
harping on these things? We have seen enough in this country. We have seen
enough bloodshed. It should not surprise anybody if there is an influx of
foreigners into the country, because South Africa is the southernmost
country. So everybody who feels pain will run towards South Africa. There
is nothing strange about that.
To my own comrades: You know very well that the only secret that we have is
the people. We do not have any secret other than the people. The only
weapon we have as the ANC is the people.

Now as we go out here, everybody is going to sleep - even the night is
going to rest. The country is going to be left with the ANC only. You can
imagine the compromises that the ANC has made. Can you show me one
organisation here that has made these sacrifices: Talks about talks, the
Convention for a Democratic South Africa, Codesa I, Codesa II, multiparty
agreements. One can imagine what the ANC has lost amongst its own key
principles and policies to bring ...

Mr J P I BLANCHÉ: Stick to this afternoon’s Budget Vote!

Mr F T MASERUMULE: If I were you, I would be wiser. Unfortunately I am not
you.

Comrades in the ANC tripartite alliance and the SA National Civic
Organisation, comrades, please! We were expecting these things, even if we
did not know when or how, but there are weaknesses in our communication
down there. We need to look into that and establish how we can be proactive
even before things happen. We should not be reacting to these things,
because we knew that they were going to happen - South Africa is the end of
the line.

All sorts of characters and personalities, including warlords and
syndicates, are going to come here. It should not surprise anybody. I don’t
know why we are getting worried and wondering where they come from. I
myself was able to cross from country to country without any papers, and to
come back. So what? It is about the ANC, comrades. If there are people
amongst us whose lives started in 1994, I am sorry. You need to realise
that there was life even before 1994. Our lives did not start in 1994.

I just wanted to remind members where we are coming from. It is necessary,
because history can repeat itself.

For me as a rural boy, the key questions are health, land, education and
infrastructure. Comrade Jeff, with due respect and with a sense of
responsibility, in terms of recapitalisation, when you talk to the bosses
of industry you should also talk to the Department of Education and to
Comrade Naledi. We are seeing an increase of movement of children at taxi
ranks. This is a worrying factor and we need to do something about it.
Comrade Naledi, we need to do something. We should be moving with the
necessary speed towards the amalgamation of schools in the rural areas, so
that we move away from this mainstreaming of education. We need to be
specific now. [Time expired.]

Mr N T GODI: Thank you, Chairperson, comrades and hon members. Comrade
President, may I state from the outset the APC’s support for this budget.

It is a fact that under your tenure a lot was done to realise the promise
of freedom. More could have been done, and still more needs to be done for
our people. During the state of the nation address, Comrade President, you
spoke about “Business Unusual” in the provision of services to our people.
Leadership is a determinant, both political and administrative, of how well
we respond to the challenges of agrarian reform, housing, sanitation,
education, job creation, poverty eradication, etc. One of the key issues
relates to how provinces and municipalities respond to these challenges, of
how national departments put provinces and municipalities to the sword for
being impediments to service delivery within the current constitutional
prescripts.

Business Unusual must unblock the bottlenecks that stifle service delivery,
from the complex challenges to the ridiculous. Here is a ridiculous case:
Tinyiko Phyllia Shingange of Petanenge Village has been waiting for an RDP
house since 2004. The Mopani/Tzaneen Municipality/Realeboga construction
project began in May 2004 with about 200 beneficiaries, including Tinyiko.
To date, only 33 houses have been built; 17 houses are under construction
and 150 houses have not yet been started. Of the total project budget of
R6,475 million, R3,497 408,47 has thus far been used in the construction of
these 33 houses and for the other 17 houses. Comrade President, can Tinyiko
get her house before you leave office?

The APC would like to raise a pertinent issue relating to traditional
leadership. It is the conviction of the APC that more needs to be done to
enhance the standing and capacity to function properly of this important
indigenous African institution. The current policy approaches are
fragmentary and not sufficiently thoroughgoing. The APC is referring
specifically to their remuneration, in particular that of headmen and
headwomen.

As you will be aware, the Moseneke Commission report makes no
recommendation on their remuneration, although there is a determination for
kings, queens and senior traditional leaders. This is despite the fact that
the Remuneration of Public Office Bearers Act of 1998 categorises
traditional leaders as public office bearers, and that the Traditional
Leadership and Governance Framework Act of 2003 defines traditional leaders
as including headmen and headwomen.

The APC is making a case, after numerous meetings and presentations by
headmen and headwomen in Limpopo, that the lack of determination on their
remuneration by the Moseneke Commission is not legal and is a political
disgrace. They are the motive force, the underclass of the system of
traditional leadership. They are the men and women who serve their
communities on a daily basis, have families to feed and clothe, and
children to send to school.

In the case of Limpopo, there are headmen and headwomen who have been
earning R1 085 for the past 10 years without any increment. This cannot be
right. The fact that some headmen and headwomen in Limpopo have taken
government to court is a sign of desperation and a cry for help. Also, is
the composition of the House of Traditional Leaders legal or
constitutional?

Section 2 of the Limpopo House of Traditional Leaders Act specifically
excludes headmen and headwomen from electing or being elected to the house.
This needs to be changed to have an inclusive process. That is why these
houses have failed to fight for the cause of the underclass forces within
their system.

The APC believes that under your leadership our country’s foreign policy
has been positive, principled and progressive. South Africa has thus far
served with distinction on the United Nations Security Council, despite
spirited attempts to embarrass her chairmanship.

The APC fully supports and congratulates you on your mediation and role on
behalf of SADC in Zimbabwe. We wish to see a speedy and peaceful resolution
of the political and economic challenges of that sister country in the
interests of Zimbabweans and not outside forces.
Africa remains a continent of challenges and opportunities. The APC fully
supports your efforts and South Africa’s contribution in finding solutions
to the various developmental challenges facing Africa. Indeed, without
unity or integration, Africa will neither achieve its developmental
imperatives nor withstand the winds against change blowing from the North
to the South.

Comrade President, never mind the vilification by the liberals,
neocolonialists and vulgar Marxists; they are a vindication of the
correctness of your line. Mangaliso Sobukwe taught us: “We are nothing but
tools of history. When we are gone, history shall find new tools.” Thank
you. [Applause.]

Ms N C MADLALA-ROUTLEDGE: Chairperson, President of the Republic Comrade
Thabo Mbeki, Deputy President Mlambo-Ngcuka, deputy president of the ANC
Comrade Kgalema Motlanthe, hon members, improving the quality of life for
all people is a fundamental principle of the ANC for which many have given
their lives. Since the birth of our movement, we have fought to establish
the rights of all and, since coming to government, to improve the lives of
all, irrespective of race, ethnicity, gender or political divides.

The ANC supports the Budget Vote of the Presidency. I will focus on the
threats and obstacles we face as we build our new social and economic
order. In these trying times, the role of the Presidency in driving the co-
ordinated response of government and in mobilising society in the task of
nation-building becomes central. In this context, the role of the
Presidency is to provide leadership, vision and direction to the nation.

Since 1994 our government has reflected, consulted and planned extensively
for the transformation of our country from a repressed and racially divided
society to one in which we have a Bill of Rights and in which all are equal
before the law, irrespective of the colour of their skin.

But the events over the past month have shown us, much clearer than any
statistical exercise, the threats we face. The society that we want to
build faces the very real enemies of poverty and inequality. The colour of
that poverty remains black. In response to hon member Mulder – he’s not in
the House – who spoke about black racism and about good and bad people, I
want to say that nobody is born a racist. And it is our responsibility –
all of us – as parents to teach our children not to be racist. [Applause.]

The economic growth we have seen so far in South Africa has perhaps served
to divert attention from the task of reducing inequality. The African Peer
Review Mechanism has reported that, “South Africa remains one of the
countries with the most unequal societies in the world”. Now, global
pressures, the cost of oil and the credit squeeze are turning up the heat
on our own pressure cooker. The catastrophic rise in fuel prices has seen
an across-the-board increase in the costs of food production and its
transportation.

The issue of peak oil will inevitably lead to higher prices as the more
difficult reserves need to be extracted. For our country and our continent,
this spells disaster. According to McSmith, Morris and Taylor, writing in
the Business Report of The Sunday Independent, on 8 June:

  Africa is at the sharp end of the oil shock and the interrelated surge in
  food prices. With millions living on the tiny margin between subsistence
  and starvation, fuel costs can quickly become a matter of life and death
  ... In South Africa, the government hiked petrol prices by 5% this month,
  bringing the increase in regulated petrol prices so far this year to 33%.
  The price of diesel, used extensively in farming and heavy industry, has
  leapt 49%.

The City of Cape Town recently announced increases in water, electricity,
rates and refuse collection averaging out at 7,5%. These will be followed
by other municipalities. As the cost of living rises, so too does the cost
of borrowing.

The increases in interest rates are hurting those earning less than
R100 000 per annum the hardest. With food budgets eating up over 50% of
earnings, there is nothing left to save. Among the so-called luxuries
people are shedding is domestic help. This will hit hard the many women-
headed households in our townships for whom domestic work is their only
source of income.

It is no wonder that the lid should blow off our pressure cooker. South
Africans do not hate other Africans. We do, however, need to acknowledge
the desperation that generations of inequality and poverty have engendered.
Our duty as elected public servants is to improve the quality of life of
all people.

The President has outlined our achievements. We cherish these gains which
we have made in the short time since our democratic transition. The
transformation and prosperity of our country face many threats, not least
of which is the violence felt by many on the streets, on the buses, in
restaurants, in their homes – anywhere. We must not forget that it is the
poor who are most vulnerable, who have less access to the police, and who
do not have private security armed response or burglar-alarm systems in
their homes. A mother and child living in a shack in Khayelitsha, walking
alone in the dark to and from the taxi rank to get to work or school, are
the most vulnerable.

As we pause to reflect with honesty and clarity on the threats facing us,
let us acknowledge the ordinary citizens who have come out in numbers to
provide assistance to the tens of thousands of displaced people around the
country. Public servants can draw inspiration from the courage, generosity
and can-do spirit of the many people who left their comfort zones to drive
people and goods, to cook food and to volunteer to do anything that needed
to be done.

Inasmuch as we are seething with moral outrage at the burning of Ernesto
Alfabeto Nhamuave, the 35-year-old Mozambican man made famous by the manner
of his death, we should also be heartened by the many people willing to
take the opportunity to serve. The goodwill of the people is a national
asset and one of our unlimited resources.

We celebrate the ruling of the Constitutional Court to confirm Comrade
Tinyiko Nwamita-Shilubana as the rightful traditional leader of the Vhaloyi
people. [Applause.] She is in the House and I want to say that she has won
this right not only for herself and her people but for all African women.
[Applause.]

Yet there are still reasons to be concerned. We have had shocking reports
about men attacking women for wearing pants or miniskirts and women being
killed for loving other women. We must campaign to end sexism and
homophobia.

I am concerned about the pace of implementation of the National
Strategic Plan on HIV and Aids. Aids is having the greatest impact on the
youth. Needless to say, this impacts negatively on the economy and the
social wellbeing of our people, and poses a great threat to our ability to
rebuild our society.

Our attempt to heal the divisions of the past and build a prosperous nation
hinges on our ability to pull together to close the many inequalities
clearly prevalent that pose a threat to all our efforts. Comrades, as I
said earlier, inequality and poverty are the real enemy. If there are other
threats, they feed off the poverty in our midst. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, hon President, Deputy President, deputy
president of the ANC, Ministers and members, our nation needs, now more
than ever, to come together and tackle the challenges we face. The hon
Routledge has alluded to many of those challenges. The road may have seemed
less difficult in 1994, but subsequently we are still a nation divided in
our aspirations and uncertain of our collective vision.

The President earlier this year alluded to a number of Apex Priorities
government will focus on to accelerate the promises made in creating a
society to benefit all. One of the key strategies within the Presidency is
to strategically position South Africa’s global image as a nation that
inspires stability, to market us as a place that instils peace and
stability for all who live in it and that we are a country blessed with a
collective intelligence in conflict resolution, willing to mediate in
countries engaged in conflict.

There is nothing wrong with this image as it is in large part true and
speaks volumes of our potential to be a respected global player. There are
however a few things we need to bring back on track if we want to remain an
effective and respected player.

The first step is to look inward and get our own house in order. Primarily,
people are showing a general lack of trust in the institutions of state.
State institutions have systematically alienated people where services
targeted for delivery do not always measure up to the expectations of the
people. What has further added to the disdain people have for government is
the lack of severity in clamping down on those guilty of corruption and
nepotism.

There is a general impression that the nation is governed in absentia and
that the promise of a better life for all, if it is to be successful,
requires far greater economic growth to raise the living standards of all
people, that crime and violence be tackled by the best prosecutorial
agencies of the state, and to ensure that the future of this land will be
equipped with skilled and talented people to build a united nation. There
is a sense that people are left to tackle the difficult political problems
by themselves. A case in point is the xenophobic attacks on fellow
Africans.

With reference to the Zimbabwean crisis, Mr President, you recently stated
the following:


   We are at one with SADC and most of the international community that the
   incidents of violence and reported disruption of electoral activities of
   some of the parties are a cause for serious concern and should be
   addressed with all urgency.

The question I raise today, Mr President, is: If we all acknowledge that
the matter in Zimbabwe is most serious, what urgent steps will be taken by
you as SADC’s chief mediator to bring an end to the state-sponsored murder
and mayhem orchestrated by Mr Mugabe and his lawless thugs?

Your reluctance to criticise Mr Mugabe publicly has caused the situation in
Zimbabwe to deteriorate rapidly. More than 60 MDC supporters have been
killed in Zimbabwe since the first round of elections at the end of March,
and as the chief mediator ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Order! Hon members, your noise level
is too high. Once I see Babe Mlangeni tilting his ear to hear, I know that
your noise level is too high. Please watch him. Once he starts tilting his
ear this way, you must know that your level of noise is high. Thank you.

Mr L M GREEN: Thank you, Chairperson. As the chief mediator, Mr President,
do you not have sleepless nights about this? Do you not feel partly
responsible for the killings in Zimbabwe? Is your loyalty to Mr Mugabe
worth the lives of 60, if not more, innocent Zimbabweans? I don’t think so.
It is therefore understandable for Mr Morgan Tsvangirai to call for the
President to be stripped of his role as chief SADC mediator.

You were recently asked, Mr President, what legacy you would like to leave
after you have left office. Zimbabwe’s crisis must be resolved. This has
been your Achilles heel to date. You cannot have your legacy tied to a
despot like Mr Mugabe. Zimbabwe and nations further afield in Africa ...
[Time expired.]

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chairperson, Mr President and Deputy
President, colleagues, as serious members of this Parliament and as leaders
of our own people we must claim our successes and also acknowledge our
shortcomings. We are very proud of what our President has done and a number
of our colleagues have not shied away from declaring where we were
successful and also acknowledging where we had shortcomings.

President Rolihlahla Nelson Mandela concludes the epic drama of his pre-
1994 life, Long Walk to Freedom, with the now famous words:

      I have tried not to falter; I have made missteps along the way. But I
      have discovered the secret that after climbing a great hill, one only
      finds that there are many more hills to climb. I have taken a moment
      here to rest, to steal a view of the glorious vista that surrounds me,
      to look back on the distance I have come. But I can rest only for a
      moment, for with freedom come responsibilities, and I dare not linger,
      for my long walk is not yet ended.

President Mbeki, you have done your bit and you have done it very well. It
is time now to look back and prepare for the second phase of the leadership
that you have discharged so exceptionally. [Applause.] We who have ears
have learned so much from you. We have learned so much from the principles
that you instilled in this House and in our government, and we have learned
so much from the way you have dealt with crises.

These words from Comrade Madiba capture a profound dynamic in the process
of social transformation. Structural inequality is very deep in our country
and in our society and it has the great potential to damage nation-building
if not carefully handled, and I dare say that you have handled it very
carefully and very sensitively.

The past lives in ubiquitous ways in the present, grappling to pull the
present back but also spawning forces that push it forward. In addition,
the present marches to the future not in linear fashion, but it has to
zigzag around many obstacles. Ours is a long walk, precisely because in
1994 we arrived only at the end of the beginning. And I dare say, we have
had a very good journey to this point.

Inspired by the Freedom Charter and the principles enshrined in the
Reconstruction and Development Programme and, of course, guided by the
Constitution of our beloved country, we continue unabated with our social
transformation programme. Informed by the democratic principles of the
people-centred and people-driven state and a value system based on human
solidarity, we have soldiered on. These pillars are an attribute of a
caring society and beckon us to forge a social compact, made up of all
South Africans, that has as its central objective of social policy the
preservation and the development of human resources and ensuring social
cohesion.

As observed in the Macro-Social Report, our society is undergoing dynamic
changes partly due to the state of transition and partly due to factors
that are beyond our control. In such a context our task of social
transformation requires standing firm in the face of constant changes while
continuing with our resolve to challenge underdevelopment and the
eradication of poverty. How to do it is the constructive debate in which
all of us must engage. We should try to develop a national consensus about
what needs to be done to transform our country for a better life.

Chairperson, you may not think that we have made great progress in this
respect, but if you look back to where our opposition was in 1994
ideologically, and where they are in 2008 on these issues, it seems to me,
Mr President, that there is developing consensus on what needs to be done.
What is not clear though is how it should be done.

The social transformation agenda that we have embarked on is broad and
seeks to bring about change in areas such as comprehensive social security,
promotion of national identity and social cohesion, comprehensive health
care, meeting the increasing challenges of housing and human settlement,
etc.

However, we are also committed to bringing a just dispensation to
vulnerable groups such as children, women and people with challenges and
disabilities. For these reasons we congratulate ourselves and the world on
the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities by the UN recently.

We are also very proud of the support we gave to Oscar Pistorius and his
team of managers who won a historic victory for athletes with disabilities
in the whole world. [Applause.] We have climbed a few hills already and
nothing should stop us now.

I have not elaborated on the progress that we have made in our steps up
this hill, precisely because I knew, Mr President, that you would do that
yourself and that my colleagues would follow in your tracks. However, the
point that I want to make is to emphasise that there is clear evidence of
the progress we are making. It is only the people who are in mental asylums
... abantu abasezindumangeni nabantwana abancinane [people in mental
institutions and young children] ... who will not understand this, who do
not have the capacity to differentiate between progress and stagnation.

At any given moment, and in response to pressing demands that may present
themselves, government is paying attention to certain areas of priority.
Our moral responsibility as public representatives is to repudiate “maak-
vir-baba-bang” [frighten-the-baby] politics that create the false
impression that we have differences that are impossible to surmount. Such
propaganda is simply used to revive alliances and racial solidarities that
are as unhelpful in the present as they were unhelpful in the past.

In combating these things change elements must be addressed vigorously at
the level of language coexistence. The hon Khumalo raised the question of
izimbizo. Some of our communities, Mr President, don’t attend these
izimbizo. They claim that the language is a major barrier and so they stay
away. We must deal with this and deal with it without wavering.

We must also address the legacy of the Group Areas Act and the Land Acts of
the past. Unless we deal with these things the cohesion of our people is
not going to be effectively achieved.

However, government cannot do this alone. Thus the core organisational
principle for the second decade of freedom is to pursue a social compact of
partnership of the government, the community sector, business and labour,
with a clear task that each of these sectors must carry out, severally and
collectively, to attain social transformation from which all can benefit.
In the words of the late Oliver Tambo: “We must take our common destiny in
our own hands.”

Logic suggests that what is needed is a partnership among confident rather
than weak actors, more certainty rather than uncertainty. Indeed the
greater danger in the coming period is the spectre of an indecisive and
weak government. We cannot risk being indecisive. We must march forward
with confidence and inspire hope in our communities irrespective of what
perceptions are being developed. In the end it will determine how to
respond to what has been done. The task of building a nonracial, nonsexist
and democratic society must inspire our people with a feeling of hope, an
unyielding resolve in promoting national reconciliation, social cohesion
and a shared national identity. The ANC is ready and able to lead this
process because you have taught us how. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr S SIMMONS: Chairperson, hon President, Deputy President, Ministers and
colleagues, for the past three years I have been consistently trying to
alert government, Cabinet and the hon President to the adverse effects that
vital transformation legislation, notably the Employment Equity Act, has on
previously disadvantaged people. In doing so, I’ve stated clearly that the
principle of transformation is not in dispute, but rather the model
applied.

The hon President agreed to meet to discuss the concerns I’ve raised around
coloured people. Needless to say, this never took place. This leads me to
wonder whether, other than PR exercises, the Presidency also has an
attitude like that of the hon Minister of Labour, who said, “this thing
about coloureds is your problem and not ours”.

The attitude is the result of the belief that the concerns I’ve raised
regarding coloured people are merely perceptions. I wish to point out to
the hon President that these concerns are not perceptions but stem from
policy implementation by the ANC government.

The most startling and blatant attempts by the ANC government to
marginalise coloured people manifest in the form of the regulation of the
Employment Equity Act issued in August 2006 by the hon Minister of Labour.
This regulation adds a forced designated group or variable named
“Africans”, this despite the fact that African candidates are already
provided for within the designated group “blacks”. The effect of this
regulation, Mr President, is that for every coloured employee, an employer
is obliged to employ two Africans. The further implication is that the
labour demographics of the Western Cape effectively have to be altered to
the detriment of the coloured labour in this province.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Order! Hon members, your noise
levels again, please.

Mr S SIMMONS: Worse, Mr President, is that all attempts to achieve cohesion
between our different peoples are shattered by this racist policy.

The National Alliance has taken legal advice and has been advised that this
regulation is ultra vires and open to legal challenge. I have forwarded
today to the Office of the hon President a copy of a letter to the hon
Minister of Labour requesting him to effect the necessary revisions to the
aforementioned regulation. I trust that the hon President will deem this
matter important enough to initiate proper remedial action. Thank you.

Die ADJUNKHOOFSWEEP VAN DIE MEERDERHEIDSPARTY: Voorsitter, agb President
Thabo Mbeki, agb Adjunkpresident Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, agb
adjunkpresident van die ANC, Kameraad Kgalema Motlanthe, agb lede, kamerade
en vriende, ek wil begin deur hulde te bring aan die duisende jongmense wat
hul lewens opgeoffer het in die stryd om ’n demokratiese samelewing te
skep.

Ek staan vandag hier ter ondersteuning van die Presidensie se
Begrotingspos. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, hon President
Thabo Mbeki, hon Deputy President Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, hon Deputy
President of the ANC, Comrade Kgalema Motlanthe, hon members, comrades and
friends, I would like to begin by paying tribute to the thousands of young
people who sacrificed their lives in the struggle to establish a democratic
society.

Today I stand here in support of the Budget Vote of the Presidency.]

This is a Presidency that has provided overall strategic leadership and co-
ordination of government and society broadly. It has consistently executed
the overwhelming mandate given to the ANC to create a better life for all.
It is assisted in mobilising all sectors of society to create a caring
society.

I would like to touch briefly on some of the themes and issues that have
arisen during the debate, in particular the assessment of the state of our
nation and the concept of leadership. The hon Sandra Botha starts off by
characterising the past year as “a tumultuous period of shock and
uncertainty”.
The hon Patricia de Lille engages in a very fashionable exercise of
cataloguing failures, real or perceived. The hon Kenneth Meshoe refers to
so-called “liberation leaders from the bush”. The hon Botha says in passing
that it would be dishonest to say that the Presidency achieved no successes
over the past four years, but proceeds quickly to elaborate a hypermarket-
long list or inventory of shortcomings and failures, and presents this as a
balanced assessment of government policies and programmes.

After the stocktaking exercise she answers a question - “what kind of
Presidency do we deserve” - with reference to an American presidential
candidate. Without in any way reflecting negatively on Mr Barack Obama and
his remarkable achievement, one is struck by the fact that Ms Botha finds
it necessary in a nation that produced leadership of the quality of Mahatma
Gandhi, Albert Luthuli, Walter and Albertina Sisulu, Bram Fisher, Ahmed
Kathrada, Oliver Tambo and Nelson Mandela to cross the Atlantic to find a
leader that exemplifies “change we can believe in”.

Our country has experienced 15 years of change we can believe in because we
see it happening every day. We see it in the restoration of our dignity; we
see it in the millions of houses that have been built; the hundreds of
thousands of jobs that have been created; and the millions of people
receiving social grants. This is change that millions of South Africans
believe in, not only because they see it but because they participate
actively in it.
The ANC has always sought the active involvement of the greatest number of
people in the process of governance. The culture of criticism and self-
criticism is integral to our organisational culture and practice. We
welcome honest criticism and robust debate. However, we need to see some of
the interventions here today for what they are: They are not attempts to
provide honest assessments of the Presidency, of the state of our nation or
government policies and programmes. They attempt, against overwhelming
evidence to the contrary, to portray a nation, a government and an ANC in
crisis, a government and an ANC that is incapable of leading society.

The second issue that I want to touch upon very briefly, because I am sure
that the House will debate it at length later at an appropriate time, is
that of Zimbabwe. Ms Botha, Rev Meshoe and Mr Green all call upon the
President, in his capacity as a mediator mandated by the Southern African
Development Community, to break his bonds with Mugabe, to distance himself
and to condemn. I don’t know whether I understand or don’t understand the
concept of a mediator, but it would seem to me like a logical contradiction
for a mediator who is tasked with bringing two or more parties together to
break ties with one of them. I don’t understand how one mediates under
those circumstances. Perhaps someone can explain. [Applause.]

The process of fundamental social transformation is indeed a marathon. It’s
a long and arduous journey. Many runners do not have the stamina to
complete the race and fall by the wayside. Others are inexperienced or do
not understand the challenge posed by the marathon. They sprint ahead
quickly only to collapse later. Others enter the race without training
sufficiently. Others run in the sun without hats and start hallucinating.
[Laughter.]

The ANC is a movement of comrades. We understand that we are in a long
race. We understand that this race will have portions when we will run
comfortably on a level road. We understand that there will be uphills that
will tax our ability to the maximum. We understand that there will be
downhills where we will be tempted to overstretch ourselves. We understand
that we need to run as a team. We understand that we need the moral and
material support of all of those next to the road. We understand that there
will be spoilers standing next to the road with false signs pointing us
away from the finishing line, but we will stay on course and complete this
marathon leading to a better life for all. Mr President, we thank you for
your leadership. We support this budget. [Applause.]

Debate interrupted.

The House adjourned at 19:26.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM on 10 June 2008 in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified
         the following Bills as section 75 Bills:

          a) Protection of Information Bill [B 28 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).

          b) Special Pensions Amendment Bill [B 29 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).

          c) South African Police Service Amendment Bill [B 30 – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).

2.    Introduction of Bills

     (1)    The Minister for Intelligence


          a) Intelligence Services Amendment Bill [B 37 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
             prior notice of its introduction published in Government
             Gazette No 31126 of 5 June 2008.]
          b) National Strategic Intelligence Amendment  Bill [B 38 – 2008]
             (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of
             Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
             Government Gazette No 31126 of 5 June 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Ad Hoc Committee on
             Intelligence Legislation of the National Assembly, as well as
             referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
             classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.


3.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)    Mine Health and Safety Amendment Bill and National Energy Bill,
         2008, submitted by the Minister of Minerals and Energy.  Referred
         to the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy and the Select
         Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs.

National Assembly

Referral to Committees of papers tabled

 1. The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance
    and the Joint Budget Committee for consideration:

      a) Submission of the Financial and Fiscal Commission on the Division
         of Revenue Bill for 2009-10, tabled in terms of section 9(1) of the
         Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act, 1997 (Act No 97 of 1997).

 2. The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Minerals
    and Energy for consideration:


      a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Minerals and Energy for 2008 to
         2011.

 3. The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice
    and Constitutional Development:


      a) Government Notice No R.391 published in Government Gazette No
         30953, dated 11 April 2008: Regulations prescribing the tariff of
         allowances payable to witnesses in criminal proceedings in terms of
         the Criminal Procedure Act, 1977 (Act No 51 of 1977).

      b) Government Notice No R.392 published in Government Gazette No
         30953, dated 11 April 2008: Regulations prescribing the tariff of
         allowances payable to psychiatrists and clinical psychologists who
         appear as witnesses in court in terms of the Criminal Procedure
         Act, 1977 (Act No 51 of 1977).


      c) Government Notice No R.393 published in Government Gazette No
         30953, dated 11 April 2008: Tariff payable to psychiatrists or
         clinical psychologists for an enquiry into the mental condition of
         an accused in terms of the Criminal Procedure Act, 1977 (Act No 51
         of 1977).


      d) Government Notice No R.394 published in Government Gazette No
         30953, dated 11 April 2008: Tariff of allowances payable to
         witnesses in civil cases in terms of the Magistrates’ Courts Act,
         1944 (Act No 32 of 1944), and the Supreme Court Act, 1959 (Act No
         59 of 1959).

 4. The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Arts and
    Culture for consideration. The Report of the Auditor-General on the
    Financial Statements is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts
    for consideration:

      a) Report and Financial Statements of the Nelson Mandela Museum for
         2006-07, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2006-07 [RP 242-2007].

 5. The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Public
    Service and Administration for consideration:

      a) Strategic Plan of the Public Service Commission (PSC) for 2008 to
         2011.

 6. The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on Defence
    and the Joint Standing Committee on Defence:


      a) The Acting President of the Republic submitted a letter dated 9 May
         2008 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, informing members  of
         the Assembly of  the  employment  of  the  South  African  National
         Defence Force in the Democratic Republic of the Congo  for  service
         in fulfilment of the international obligations of the  Republic  of
         South Africa to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
      b) The President of the Republic submitted a letter dated 23 May  2008
         to the Speaker of the National Assembly, informing members  of  the
         Assembly of the employment of the South  African  National  Defence
         Force for service in co-operation with  the  South  African  Police
         Service.

 7. The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Sport and
    Recreation for consideration:


      a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Sport and Recreation for 2008
         to 2012.
 8. The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice
    and Constitutional Development for consideration:


      a) Strategic Plan of the Office of the Public Protector for 1 April
         2008 to 31 March 2012.


      b) Regulations made in terms of sections 39 and 53 of the Criminal Law
         (Sexual Offences and Related Matters) Amendment Act, 2007 (Act No
         32 of 2007).

 9. The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
    Agriculture and Land Affairs for consideration.

      a) Report of the Commission on Restitution of Land Rights for 2007-08
         [RP 30-2008].


10. The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Trade and
    Industry for consideration and report and to the Portfolio Committee on
    Finance, Portfolio Committee on Public Works, Portfolio Committee on
    Transport, Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs and
    Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises:

      a) Report and Financial Statements of the Accelerated and Shared
         Growth Initiative for South Africa (Asgisa) for 2007.

11. The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Labour
    for consideration and report and to the Portfolio Committee on
    Education, Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology, Portfolio
    Committee on Public Service and Administration and Portfolio Committee
    on Trade and Industry:
      a) Joint Initiative on Priority Skills Acquisition (Jipsa) – Report on
         Activities in 2007 [April 2008].


12. The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
    Provincial and Local Government for consideration:

      a) Business Plan of the Department of Provincial and Local Government
         for 2008-09.


      b) Strategic Plan of the Department of Provincial and Local Government
         for 2007 to 2012.

      c) Report on the Implementation  of  the  Intergovernmental  Relations
         Framework Act for 2005-06 and 2006-07, tabled in terms  of  section
         46 of the Intergovernmental Relations Framework Act, 2005  (Act  No
         13 of 2005).


      d) Municipal Performance Report for 2005-06, tabled in terms of
         section 48 of the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000
         (Act No 32 of 2000).

      e) Report of the National  Disaster  Management  Centre  for  2006-07,
         tabled in terms of section 24 of the Disaster Management Act,  2002
         (Act No 57 of 2002).

13. The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Arts and
    Culture for consideration:

      a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Arts and Culture for 2008 to
         2011.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister of Correctional Services

    (a)    Report of the Judicial Inspectorate of Prisons for 2007-2008 [RP
         26-2008].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Communications on the filling of
   vacancies on the Council of the Independent Communications Authority of
   South Africa, dated 10 June 2008:
   The Portfolio Committee on Communications, having considered the request
   of the National Assembly to submit a shortlist of candidates to the
   Minister of Communications for appointment to the Council of the
   Independent Communications Authority of South Africa (Icasa), referred to
   it on 2 April 2008 and on 14 May 2008, reports as follows:


   The Committee invited the public to nominate persons for consideration
   and recommendation to the Minister.


   The Committee considered the nominations and agreed that the following
   persons be interviewed on 3 June 2008:


   Ms N Batyi, Mr T Dlamini, Prof B Dumisa, Mr T Makhakhe, Mr FK Sibanda and
   Ms LS Somo.


   After having considered the shortlist, and after having interviewed the
   candidates, the Committee recommends, in order of preference, that the
   House, in terms of section 7 of the Independent Communications Authority
   of South Africa Act (Act No 13 of 2000 – as amended) submits to the
   Minister a list of suitable candidates at least one and a half times the
   number of councillors to be appointed, namely:


   Mr FK Sibanda, Ms N Batyi, Mr T Makhakhe, Ms LS Somo and Prof B Dumisa.


Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs on
    Budget Vote: 23 Department of Agriculture, dated 20 May 2008.
   The Portfolio Committee, having been briefed and having considered Budget
   Vote: 23 Department of Agriculture for 2008/09 financial year in terms of
   rule 201 (c) of the National Assembly, reports as follows:

   Introduction and Overview

   The Director-General of Department of Agriculture briefed the committee
   and provided an overview of the department’s goals and objectives and of
   the budget for 2008/09 financial year on 12 March 2008.  The main
   strategic aim of the department is to lead and support sustainable
   agriculture and promote rural development through ensuring access to
   sufficient, safe and nutritious food; eliminating skewed participation
   and inequality in agriculture; maximizing growth, employment and income
   in the sector; improving the sustainable management of natural
   agricultural resources and ecological systems; ensuring effective and
   efficient governance; and ensuring knowledge and information management.


   Land and Agrarian Reform Project

   The Land and Agrarian Reform Project were established to address the
   failure to provide adequate post settlement support to land reform
   beneficiaries. The Director-General highlighted the Department of
   Agriculture's response to the Apex Priority 7, as outlined by the
   President in his 2008 State of the Nation Address, relating to land and
   agrarian reform which will be the department's key focus area for the
   2008/09 financial year.


   The key objectives to LARP are as follows:


        • Redistribution of 5 million hectares of white-owned agricultural
          land to 10 000 new agricultural producers;
        • Increase black entrepreneurs in the agri-business industry by
          10%;
        • Provide universal access to agricultural support services to the
          targeted groups;
        • Increase agricultural production by 10-15% for the target groups
          under the LETSEMA-ILIMA Campaign;
        • Increase agricultural trade by 10-15% for the target groups;
        • Biosecurity; and
        • Governance.

   Programme Analysis:
   The Director-General provided details of the key performance indicators
   (KPIs) of each programme, for the Department of Agriculture.


   The Director-General tabled the department’s budget for the 2008/09
   financial year for each of the five programmes i.e. Programme 1:
   Administration, Programme 2: Livelihoods, Economics and Business
   Development; Programme 3: Biosecurity and Disaster Management; Programme
   4: Production and Resources Management and Programme 5: Sector Services
   and Partnerships.


   Budgetary Breakdown




|Programme                      |Budget                     |
|Administration                 |R300 364 million           |
|Livelihoods, Economics and     |R901 814 million           |
|Business Development           |                           |
|Bio-Security and Disaster      |R311 721 million           |
|Management                     |                           |
|Production and Resource        |R259 900 million           |
|Management                     |                           |
|Sector Services and            |R760 872 million           |
|Partnerships                   |                           |
|TOTAL BUDGET                   |R2 534  671 billion        |

   The activities of the Department are organised into five programmes:


   The department has been restructured and its programmes have been reduced
   from nine to five. The purpose of the restructuring is to strengthen the
   Department’s capacity to provide oversight over the implementation of
   national programmes and to focus on priorities.


   Programme 1: Administration


   The programme provides the department with political and strategic
   leadership and management, and also manages capital investments. The
   allocation for the 2008/09 financial year amounts to R300 364 million as
   compared to R283 335 million for the 2007/08 financial year. The
   allocation reflects an increase of 6%.


   Programme 2: Livelihoods, Economics and Business Development


   The programme promotes equitable access to the agricultural sector, the
   growth and commercial viability of emerging farmers, food security and
   rural development.  It also facilitates market access for South African
   agricultural products nationally and internationally by developing and
   implementing appropriate policies and targeted programmes. It promotes
   BEE in the sector and provides information for developing and monitoring
   the sector.  The programme allocation for the 2008/09 financial year is
   R901 814 million compared to R886 951 million for the 2007/08 financial
   year. The allocation reflects an increase of 1.7%.


   Programme 3: Bio-Security and Disaster Management


   The programme is responsible for managing risks associated with animal
   and plant diseases and ensuring food safety. The programme also develops
   the agricultural risk and disaster management policy framework for
   providing early warnings and post-disaster support to farmers. Within
   this programme are the sub-programmes of Plant Health and Inspection
   Services as well as Food, Animal Health and Disaster Management. For the
   2008/09 financial year allocation for the programme amounts to R311 721
   million, a decrease of 28% compared to R243 611 million for the 2007/08
   financial year.


   Programme 4: Production and Resource Management


   The programme focuses on creating an enabling environment for increased
   and sustainable agricultural production, promoting sound management and
   use of land and water resources through appropriate policies,
   legislation, norms and standards, technical guidelines and other
   services. This programme is divided into the following two sub-programmes
   which include Agricultural Production as well as Engineering, Energy,
   Resource Use and Management. The programme allocation for the 2008/09
   financial year is R259 900 million compared to R247 780 million for the
   2007/08 financial year. The allocation indicates an increase of 4.9%



   Programme 5: Sector Services and Partnerships


   The programme manages and co-ordinates stakeholder and international
   relations, education and training, and the Grootfontein Agricultural
   Development Institute. It supports agricultural research and extension
   and advisory services. The budget allocation to this programme amounts to
   R760 872 million for the 2008/09 financial year compared to R619 489
   million during the 2007/08 financial year. This allocation also reflects
   an increase of 22.8%

   Therefore, the total allocation to the department for the 2008/09
   financial year amounts to R2 534 671 billion compared to R2 281 166
   billion for the 2007/08 financial year. This reflects an increase of
   11.1%.

   Having deliberated and having sought clarity with respect to Budget Vote
   23, the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs raised the
   following concerns:

          • The apparent lack of co-ordination between the Departments of
            Agriculture and Land Affairs in terms of support to the Land
            Redistribution for Agricultural Development (LRAD) and other
            land reform beneficiaries. Land had been allocated but support
            from the Department of Agriculture was delayed which resulted in
            project failures.
          • The high vacancy rate within the department and the measures
            taken to address this.
          • The underspending by Provinces, by 50% or less, of their
            allocated budgets.
          • Given the high numbers of commercial farmers leaving the
            agricultural sector, the prospects for emerging farmers to
            survive in this sector.
          • How the rehabilitation of 100 000 hectares of land could be
            achieved given the country's water shortage.
          • The Land Bank was responsible for the disbursement of MAFISA
            funding. Due to the current state of the Land Bank there have
            been flaws in this process. The Department of Agriculture needs
            to investigate alternative options for the disbursement of
            MAFISA funds and look at the creation of a special purpose
            vehicle for this purpose.
          • Measures in place to address changing climatic conditions and
            the adverse effect it is having on the agricultural sector.
          • The extent to which the Department of Agriculture prevents
            threats to local industry through contamination from imported
            agricultural inputs such as fertilizer. An example of this was
            the negative impact that cadmium from imported fertilizer has
            had on the local pineapple industry. The extent to which such
            occurrences can be prevented and the measures taken by the
            Department to address this.
          • The country's progress in respect of the Maputo declaration,
            committing 10% of the government's budget towards support in the
            agricultural sector.
          • The impact of bio-fuels on food security.
          • The lack of capacity of extension officers and the measures
            taken by the Department to address this.
          • The delayed response by the Department in addressing the
            outbreak of disease and natural disasters. In addition, what
            measures are taken by the Department to prevent reoccurrence?

   Conclusion
   The Portfolio Committee expresses its appreciation to the Department for
   its presentation.

   Extension officers play a pivotal role in the post settlement support of
   emerging farmers and land reform beneficiaries. The committee would like
   to highlight the need for increased training of existing extension
   officers and the need to fill vacant posts.


   The committee sees a need for increased intergovernmental stakeholder
   partnership and co-ordination in realizing the objectives of LARP.
   Members note with concern the failure of the Land Bank to administer
   MAFISA funding and recommend that alternative mechanisms be sought to
   address the administration of these funds.


   The budget of the department should be incremental in line with the
   Maputo Declaration target of 10% of national budget allocation to support
   agricultural development. These budget increments would facilitate the
   creation of a more productive agricultural sector. The committee feels
   that the budget of the department does not sufficiently address or
   respond to major issues on the ground, particularly in terms of poverty
   alleviation, food security and support to emerging farmers.


