---
title: 'National Assembly - 10 June 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2008-06-10
---

TUESDAY, 10 JUNE 2008
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

House Chairperson Mr G Q M Doidge took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

  Mr J P I BLANCHÉ: Mr Chairman, I hereby give notice that on the next
  sitting day I will move:


     That the House resolves that –


        1) from 2009 onward Hansard no longer be printed in its hard copy
           form and that it only be made available on Parliament’s website
           and on electronic disks; and

        2) all other tiers of government be requested to follow this
           example of modernising and cutting the cost of documenting
           parliamentary debates.

Mr G R MORGAN: Chair, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move, on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates the progress that South Africa has made in
   attempting to achieve sustainable development while taking into account
   that it has been six years since South Africa hosted the World Summit on
   Sustainable Development and the challenges of aligning a growing economy
   with the capacity of our environment.


                 GOOD WISHES TO BAFANA BAFANA AND SPRINGBOKS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Mr Chairman, I move without notice:

   That the House –


   (1)      notes that Bafana Bafana beat Equatorial Guinea 4-1 on Saturday,
        7 June 2008;

   (2)      further notes the Springboks’ 43-17 victory over Wales in
        Bloemfontein on the same day;

   (3)      recognises that both these sports teams are great ambassadors
        for our country and instil a sense of pride in all South Africans;


   (4)      further recognises that both these victories inspire all our
        young South African sports men and women to develop themselves so
        that they excel in their chosen field of sport in the future; and


   (5)      wishes Bafana Bafana well in their away match against Sierra
        Leone and the Springboks well in their match against Wales on
        Saturday, 15 June 2008.

Agreed to.

            WELCOMING OF MEMBERS OF KNESSET AND MAYOR OF NAZARETH

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! I wish to acknowledge the
presence in the gallery of a delegation which includes three Arab
Palestinian members of the Knesset and the mayor of Nazareth. You are most
welcome at our proceedings today. [Applause.]

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Debate on Vote No 2 – Parliament:

The SPEAKER: Chairperson, Deputy President of the ANC, hon Members of
Parliament, people of South Africa from all walks of life, honourable
ladies and gentlemen, may I also extend a special word of welcome to the
learners from the Intshukumo High School and the Lehlohonolo Primary School
from Guguletu, as well as residents from my constituency. [Applause.]

Today is the last time in the life of the third Parliament that we will be
considering the moneys allocated in Vote No 2, which are resources that
enable us to execute our duties as public representatives and ensure that
this institution fulfills its crucial constitutional mandate. It would
therefore be appropriate to reflect on our work since 2004 and the
achievements and challenges that remain. I am, unfortunately, limited by
time in what I will be able to cover.

On the morning of the inauguration of the President in 2004, I met with
representatives of all parties at the Union Buildings to begin to identify
and prioritise the matters that would go into starting a new Parliament, as
it has to be done each time the country goes to elections.

Shortly thereafter we restarted a broad consultative process towards a
common vision for the institution. Finally, in February 2005, we agreed
that our vision was to build an effective people’s Parliament that was
responsive to the needs of the people and driven by the ideal of realising
a better life for all the people of South Africa. This vision puts people
at the centre and speaks to Parliament’s intent to change the lives of
people for the better.

We also agreed that the parliamentary structure would be reviewed, allowing
the Joint Rules Committee to reclaim its rightful place as the senior
committee in charge of the core business of Parliament, as provided for in
the Constitution. In the first decade, the Joint Rules Committee had ended
up devoting much of its time to issues of micromanagement, while the core
business was relatively sidelined.

During this third Parliament, four very important policies were adopted to
help improve our work in the areas of security, international relations,
financial management and the parliamentary budget, among other things.

At the start of the second Parliament, it was acknowledged that the
regulatory framework for the financial management of Parliament was
unsatisfactory. We had consequently decided to create a regulatory
framework for the financial management of Parliament in a separate Act, in
line with the principles of the Public Finance Management Act and
consistent with the separation of powers. Much work has already been done,
including intensive consultation with National Treasury. We anticipate the
completion of the Bill within this year.

One of our core objectives is to exercise scrutiny and oversight over the
executive. The traditional model of parliamentary oversight emphasises the
notion of the separation of powers and checks and balances. This
traditional model is a form of compliance auditing, focusing on the
discovery of error. We have, however, begun moving away from this and have
developed a model that promotes co-operation between the executive and
Parliament in a manner that complements rather than hampers the effective
delivery of services.

Earlier this year we adopted, in principle, the oversight model as proposed
by the Joint Rules Committee’s task team on oversight. Instead of an
approach of confrontation between Parliament and the executive, the model
attempts to redefine Parliament as a central component in Public Service
delivery. The document still requires some refinement and the challenge
remains, of course, to ensure its effective implementation.

The presiding officers have been concerned about our capacity to ensure and
monitor compliance, especially our own compliance with the constitutional
imperatives driving the institution. To boost the capacity of our legal
services office we have restructured, to draw together, all elements of the
parliamentary service involved in the legislative process into a section
called Constitutional and Legal Services.

In addition to boosting our litigation and legal drafting capacity, the
section will attract and develop the capacity to measure Parliament’s
outputs against the requirements of the law and the Constitution in
particular.

The African Peer Review Mechanism’s Country Report No 5 was recently tabled
in Parliament. Parliament, through its participation in the African Peer
Review Mechanism, envisaged that its process would assist in defining the
active and independent participation of African parliaments in this
important continental mechanism.

Eleven overarching issues have been identified in the report from the
African Union as requiring attention, namely capacity constraints and poor
service delivery; poverty and inequality; land reform; violence against
women and children; HIV and the Aids pandemic; corruption; crime; racism
and xenophobia; and, managing diversity.

Regarding international relations, Parliament’s traditional roles of
passing laws and conducting oversight remain part of its important core
objectives. However, there is clear evidence to suggest that Parliament has
evolved beyond that and has begun engaging in other strategic areas, such
as international relations. Global economic forces and political
developments impact significantly on South Africans.

At a political level, the Joint Rules Committee formed the Parliamentary
Group on International Relations, the PGIR, which aims to help give effect
to core objective no 5 in Parliament’s Vision and Mission.

The International Relations Section manages Parliament’s relationships with
multilateral and bilateral partners and other stakeholders and facilitates
the important international relations work our Parliament engages in.
However, much still needs to be done to elevate this entity to a level that
will adequately facilitate Parliament’s international participation.

We remain committed to working towards the consolidation of the African
agenda through our participation in regional multilateral structures, in
particular the Pan-African Parliament and the Southern African Development
Community Parliamentary Forum.

The third Parliament saw us hosting – in 2006 - the International Women’s
Conference on “Women and the Economic Recovery of Africa”, the SADC
Parliamentary Forum, and the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association -
Africa Region - Conference in 2007. In these rare interactions we, as
African parliamentarians, explored issues of climate change and its impact
on the continent, among other things.
We also explored the role of parliamentarians in building strong democratic
institutions for promoting development in the 21st century. At a global
level, the 118th Inter-Parliamentary Union Assembly was the largest and one
of the most successful conferences ever hosted by the South African
Parliament. [Applause.]

Section 231 of the Constitution clearly states that the negotiating and
signing of all international agreements is the responsibility of the
executive. It goes on to state that an international agreement, with the
exception of a technical or administrative agreement, is only binding once
it has been ratified by Parliament.

A broader interpretation of this section suggests that if Parliament is
allocated the responsibility of ratifying international agreements, then
surely it should be consulted during the negotiation phase of that
agreement so that it understands what it is ratifying later.

In building a people’s Parliament that is responsive to the needs of the
people, acting as a voice of the people, the work of Parliament and that of
members, collectively and individually, is increasingly more focused on
strengthening linkages between the people and their elected
representatives. The third Parliament has adopted a focused approach to
public participation in that it hosts sectoral parliaments for youth and
women. The People’s Assembly and the NCOP’s “Taking Parliament to the
People”, on the other hand, give meaning to the concept of Members of
Parliament engaging with people within their communities on issues that
affect their lives.

Participants – especially the ones representing the sectoral parliaments -
are selected from district and provincial activities from all over South
Africa. They are also selected from urban and rural areas to ensure the
maximum possibility for voicing issues from all sectors of society. The
objective is to provide a platform for grassroots issues to be heard and
deliberated on at the national level where workshops are held with MPs from
specific portfolio committees.

With regard to the legislative sector, the Speakers’ Forum, an association
consisting of all presiding officers of the national Parliament and
provincial legislatures, has taken proactive action to strengthen the
legislatures to ensure that they continue to be the backbone of a
successful representative democracy. Although there is respect for the
constitutional responsibilities delegated to the legislatures, there is a
need for the sector to fortify its domain and to continually assert itself
against potential or actual threats to its independence.

The sector policy and strategy will be implemented through the European
Union-funded sector policy support programme. The new programme is worth
R150 million and will be implemented from 2009 to 2013. The Speakers’ Forum
has set up a secretariat to implement and co-ordinate all its programmes
and decisions to ensure that there is sustainability and that the co-
ordination of the legislative sector is strengthened. The secretariat is
located in the national Parliament.

As one of the national strategies for enhancing public participation,
oversight practices and other processes within the legislative sector, I
would like to highlight the installation of video conferencing facilities
in Parliament and the provincial legislatures. Use of video conferencing
will enable effective co-operation within the legislative sector and
increase the efficiency and effectiveness of communication within the NCOP
cycle for processing Bills. It will also reduce the time and costs of
travel. The second phase will look at linking elected representatives with
our South African communities, especially in remote areas.

The Parliamentary Millennium Project, PMP, was initiated in 2001 by Dr
Frene Ginwala and our own Mrs Naledi Pandor, the Minister of Education,
when she was still the Chairperson of the NCOP, as a short-term
intervention to highlight the importance of critically assessing the impact
that the differing experiences of South Africans had on our identity as a
nation in the making. This was done within the context of the African
Renaissance. It became a mechanism through which ongoing work within the
context of nation-building has been pursued.

The presiding officers of the third Parliament broadened the mandate of the
project to include provincial legislatures. Moreover, the reach of the
project was extended to include greater co-operation between all spheres of
governance nationally as well as international partnerships. Currently, the
PMP oversees and participates in 16 projects throughout South Africa.

A key project undertaken for the current financial year is the
commemoration of the 20th anniversary of the battle of Cuito Cuanavale.
This project is being undertaken in partnership with the parliaments of
Namibia, Cuba and Angola, as well as various South African government
departments, academic institutions and civil-society organisations. The
focus of this project is on reaffirming the importance of global solidarity
and instilling a new patriotism amongst the youth that recognises the
interdependence of Africans, both on the continent and in the diaspora.

Whilst we consider the budget, we also reflect on the many achievements
made by this Parliament in reaching its vision of building a people’s
Parliament. The launch of Parliament’s new emblem was celebrated on 27
March 2007. On this joyous occasion the old emblem was replaced with the
new, representing our democratic dispensation, embodying the true values
and spirit of our people’s Parliament.

We are always conscious that members require more support to capacitate
them to do the immense work to realise the objectives arising from our
vision and mission. This support ranges from secretaries and content
specialists to appropriate training, for example, to oversee the national
budget under their relevant portfolio work.

The recently agreed to parliamentary budget policy begins to respond to
these needs. One challenge continues to loom large and this is the physical
space for parliamentarians to be able to do the work expected of them. We
continue to make some progress in this regard.

Work that is under way includes construction at Africa House, that is the
former British High Commission, which will house the Joint Standing
Committee on Intelligence - who continue to tell us that the circumstances
under which they work are illegal - and Parliament’s Protocol Services.
This will be completed by November 2008. We expect construction of the
other buildings to commence in 2009.

I now come to Vote 2 of the 2008-09 financial year. The budget for
Parliament, Vote 2, continues to make provision for the implementation of
our vision to build an effective people’s Parliament. The total budget
increased from R702 million in 2004-05 to R1,15 billion in 2008-09.

In Programme 1, which is about administration, the budget grew at an annual
rate of 2,4% between 2004-05 and 2007-08 to a total of R191 million owing
to the implementation of Parliament’s master systems plan, the introduction
of the Oracle enterprise resource planning system, the new travel system,
the unified communications system, and the parliamentary content management
system to centralise electronic management of all documents and records
whilst also initiating the automation of the core business processes.

Programme 2, legislation and oversight, increased from R98 million in 2004-
05 to R165 million in 2007-08 mainly owing to the “Taking Parliament to the
People” programme, additional oversight capacity, and the implementation of
the language policy project. Over the medium term, the budget for Programme
2 has grown by 6,5% owing to further improvements to the capacity of
committees, especially in the area of research and content specialists.

Programme 3, public and international participation, increased from R38
million in 2004-05 to R60,9 million in 2007-08, at an average annual rate
of 16,4%. The most significant increase was in 2006-07 in public affairs -
the new parliamentary communication services.

The international relations budget, however, increased marginally to R12
million in 2007-08. A review of the international relations budget is
currently being undertaken to ensure sufficient resources are allocated for
members’ international participation.
Over the medium term, the budget has increased to R64 million in 2008-09
owing to increased capacity in the areas of media and public relations and
events management aligned to the parliamentary communication services. Of
this amount, R15 million is allocated to international relations.

With regard to Programme 4, members’ facilities, there was an increase from
R107 million in 2004-05 to R173 million in 2007-08 and it makes provision
for facilities including telephone, travel and other logistical facilities.

Programme 5, associated services, increased from R73 million in 2004-05 to
R245 million in 2007-08 and it makes provision for constituency allowances,
leadership support and administrative support.

With regard to future challenges, the reach of democracy and good
governance increases day by day. The context within which Members of
Parliament fulfil their work has changed dramatically over the past decade
and continues to do so.

At least four different fronts provide some of the future challenges for
the work of Parliament. Firstly, our representative and participatory
democracy provides for the active involvement of our people in the
processes of Parliament, thereby requiring us to provide public education,
information and access to Parliament’s processes.

Secondly, legislation and other instruments reflect an increasing
complexity in the work of government as we regulate matters such as
communications, the use of technology, the protection of the environment
and many more. As Parliament oversees the work of the government, these
complexities demand of members high levels of expertise, knowledge and
capacitation in the relevant areas.

Thirdly, whereas members fulfil the vital role of communicating information
about governance and other important matters, the expansion of information
technology has provided greater access to information to citizens. In
addition, and also assisted by the expansion of information technology, the
role of the media has become more prominent in our society. These shifts
necessitate a re-focus on how Members of Parliament use various mechanisms
in reaching out to communities.

Lastly, the role that Parliament plays in international relations, as said
before, and participation in global governance structures has increased
significantly. Decisions around matters such as trade, energy supply and
environmental affairs have moved to global governance platforms and
therefore necessitate a review on how Parliament monitors the
representation of the people at global and regional level. It is these and
other trends that tell us that the future will bring many challenges that
will necessitate that Parliament keeps on evolving as it continues to build
on its capacity to respond to new challenges.

In conclusion, I wish to thank my colleagues the presiding officers from
both Houses. I wish to thank yourselves, hon members; the broad
parliamentary service under the Secretary to Parliament; and, of course,
the staff of the Office of the Speaker under Adv Cetywayo. I also thank the
Table Office first led by Kasper Hahndiek and now by Kamal Mansura. I thank
and congratulate the Speakers’ Forum on a difficult journey well travelled
together in the service of our people.

Lastly, but most importantly, I thank my children and broader family for
their support, with special mention of my youngest child Neo Kgositsile
sitting with his aunt in the gallery there. [Applause.] Hon members, I
present to you Vote No 2, the budget of Parliament, for your adoption. I
thank you. [Applause.]

USOSWEBHU OMKHULU WEQEMBU ELIBUSAYO: Somlomo, Phini likaMongameli
kaKhongolose, mhla zi-13 kuNhlangulana, le Ndlu yesishayamthetho
yazibophezela ngesinqumo odabeni lokudlula emhlabeni kukababa uWalter
Sisulu ngale ndlela, ngicaphune:

  Leli shanhlinziyo ebelithanda izwe lalo lichithe impilo yalo yonke lilwela
  iNingizimu Afrika esiziqhenya ngayo namuhla, futhi ubelidwala lesibindi
  nombonongqangi ophusile nokuyinto ebingumfanekiso kokumelwe abantu
  abaningi bezwe lakithi.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson and the Deputy President
of the African National Congress, on the 13th of June, this House agreed to
a motion about the passing away of Comrade Walter Sisulu, which had the
following words, and I quote:

  This struggle veteran loved his country, he spent his whole life fighting
  for the South Africa that we are proud of today, he was a rock of
  fearlessness and sound vision which was the vision shared by many people
  in our country.]

In Baba Sisulu South Africa produced a leader of profound quality,
disciplined and responsible; a father to all, whose life represents all
that is good and beautiful in our beloved country. He remains our model
hero. He remains our model father, and he will always be our model human
being. And when we sing the praises of Father Sisulu, it is not of our own
choosing; it is because his life obliges us to sing only good things about
him. [Applause.]

And thus, limited by our own as well as human language’s inability to
capture in articulated form the totality of the objective matter, we,
however, did our best to express how Walter Sisulu impacted on our minds
and our nation’s life. When in March this year the President of the ANC,
Comrade Jacob Zuma, spoke of the renewal of values, he spoke of the need to
strengthen the tradition of selfless service to the people, to be humble
and always be prepared to listen as was the case with uTata Sisulu.

He spoke from an understanding that in order for us as a people to succeed
in the effort to give birth to a just society, not only in codified form
but also in lived experience, we would have to match and follow the lofty
standards and heroic examples set by Tata Walter Sisulu, Chris Hani, Bram
Fischer, Lillian Ngoyi, Helen Joseph, Solomon Mahlangu and many amongst the
masses of the people of our land who acted together to ensure the defeat of
injustice and who thus presented us with the opportunity to contribute to
the creation of a peaceful and prosperous country.

When, in April 1994, the sun rose to cast light over the beautiful shores
and mountain ranges of our country, the people of our land took it upon
themselves to kick into the dustbin of history the life of political strife
and confrontation.

The freedom we enjoy today holds a great promise, but it behoves us to act
in unity to realise the beautiful and shining collective good. The Freedom
Charter contains the people’s injunctions and vision that steer our efforts
as we work for the creation of a society based on democratic values, social
justice and fundamental human rights.
Over the past 14 years, Parliament has passed numerous pieces of
legislation not only to address the legacy of the past but, more
importantly, to lay a policy foundation for the birth of a South Africa
able to take its rightful place in the family of nations. As we
progressively unshackle ourselves from the past and march along the journey
to realise the better day as visualised and codified in our Constitution,
it is indeed correct that at particular moments we pause to evaluate the
kind of progress we are making.

The cause for the pursuit of humane aspirations has made great progress in
our country. We cannot and should not allow the challenges of the time to
blind us to the immediate strides we have made together. We firmly agree
with the Speaker in the adoption of the Parliament’s mission and vision. We
have indeed laid a solid foundation in locating the institution at the
heart of the process of transformation.

The Constitution enjoins Parliament to facilitate public involvement. Our
committees allow for public involvement, and participatory aspect of
democracy therefore exists to a limited extent. By and large, the output of
committees is good.

However, public participation in committees is impacted upon by broader
social and economic factors. The fact that large sections of our
communities are poor and live in underdeveloped areas while a minority is
well off and owns the means of livelihood, defines which section can, in a
sustainable way, consistently take part in the committee public hearings
and exert meaningful influence on the general course of the evolutionary
process.

To realise fully the demand that “The people shall govern” is a complex
process that requires Parliament to make its contribution through finding
creative ways to reach out to the people. In this regard, I believe we
still have some extensive ground to cover.

One of the challenges relates to the issue of expanding the capacity of the
institution’s detailed programmes further to solidify the link between all
the people and Parliament. We acknowledge the work that has been done as
well as the ongoing efforts to deepen contact with the people. This
includes the People’s Assembly, the Women’s and Youth Parliaments, and
similar endeavours.

Nevertheless, I believe we need a paradigm shift in this regard. I think
that the capacity of these programmes to have a lasting impact on the lives
of the poor is limited. A lot of resources are provided to support a Member
of Parliament on the benches and in the committee rooms of our Houses.
However, the work of a member in a constituency receives inadequate
support, generally, in resources and tools of the trade. [Applause.] In so
doing, it is not just a member we are underresourcing, but such inadequacy
extends the life of the marginalisation we aim to end.

Over and above the strengthening of human and material support to
parliamentary constituency offices, let us reshape constituency work to
build an active populace so that all the people in our country, rich and
poor, can develop the sense to view themselves not only as subjects of the
country but, more importantly, perceive themselves to be, feel and live as
citizens of the country. [Applause.]

Our detractors at times accuse us of what they refer to as “a lack of
confrontation” in Parliament. The proponents of this approach seek to
persuade Members of Parliament to present stage-managed stunt shows.
Shouting and hurling thinly veiled insults against the executive in the
hope that this theoretical conduct will convince the electorate that the
executive is being held to account, does not wash.

There is no doubt that we are not here for that. Whilst we continue to
robustly engage the executive without any favour and apology to anyone,
including the executive and those detractors, our approach to oversight is
not, however, a liberal one. Much as we want to hold the executive
accountable, we as Members of Parliament must also be held accountable. In
this regard, we should not and must never think that constituency work is
not important.

Within this context it should be expected and indeed welcomed by all that
we shall continue to perform our functions dutifully and express our views
openly without fear or favour. This is not only part of fulfilling the
mandate our people have bestowed on us, but also contributes to the
national effort aimed at building a culture of free, open, meaningful and
vibrant societal debate as a fundamental element of a democratic life.

Comrade Walter Sisulu was passionate about justice. He was unpretentious in
his humility, resolute in his pursuit of freedom, a patient listener and a
unifier. We need leaders like him. We need to strive to emulate the
inspirational example he set as we march on to new battlefronts, armed with
unwavering conviction and belief in the certainty of victory as we pursue
the goal of a better life for all.

We must persist in endeavours to find creative ways to address our
challenges, which in many ways contain aspects of both newness and
uniqueness. Parliament has passed the legal framework to lay the foundation
for the reconstruction and development of our country. We have adopted an
oversight model to begin the process of strengthening the oversight
function. We hold regular debates on matters relating to scrutinising and
overseeing executive action.

We have succeeded in placing our Parliament at the centre of humanity’s
international affairs. We now need to strengthen the participatory aspect
of our democracy. We need to take deliberate action to ensure the
involvement of the poor, the vulnerable and the marginalised as part of
deepening democracy and democratic practice and strengthening social
cohesion. I support the Budget Vote of Parliament. I thank you. [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Mr Chairman, this
is my first Budget Vote on Parliament as Chief Whip of the DA, and, as
Chief Whip of the Opposition, I am an officer of this Parliament. I am,
indeed, honoured to fill this position.

I bring with me a set of values that has become imbued in me throughout my
political career. These values are honesty, integrity, trust, service to
the community and, in such service, accountability, transparent government
and, with this, the need for vigorous oversight, and tolerance of
differences, but an absolute rejection of discrimination of any kind.

Yet, the irony is that in coming to the office, I find many of these
fundamental values being challenged. The festering sore of Travelgate still
casts a long shadow on this Parliament, and with the honesty and integrity
of certain members being questioned, so is the honesty and integrity of all
of us impugned, as is indeed the institution itself, as well as the trust
of the people.

I am not sure whether Travelgate is symptomatic of the moral crisis facing
our nation or just a major public relations disaster. I say this because
amongst the 200-odd MPs that are reportedly on the list, I realise there
are innocent individuals; MPs who have unknowingly been victims of
deception and fraud by corrupt travel agents. There are those who were
naive, who believed what corrupt travel agents said that they could do in
respect of their travel vouchers. But there are also those who set out with
deliberate criminal intent to defraud this Parliament and, in so doing,
defraud the people of South Africa.

Madam Speaker, this sore continues to fester under your watch. You must
take responsibility and move to restore Parliament’s integrity as well as
the trust of the nation. The only way to do this is for us to come clean,
to be transparent, to publish the names on the list and allow for
explanations to follow. Those who can explain, must explain. Those who
cannot, must face prosecution or censure by this House. It is in this light
that the DA has invoked the Promotion of Access to Information Act.

But there are other values that are also being challenged, and those are of
oversight and accountability. The challenge, paradoxically, reached its
height when the parliamentary oversight authority was approving
Parliament’s oversight and accountability model. It was at the very time
that we were debating that very good document that the lights went out all
over South Africa and yet Parliament, notwithstanding that model, refused
to bring Minister Erwin to account.

Parliament and the Minister hid behind the notion of collective
responsibility, and yet section 92(2) of the Constitution makes it quite
clear that Ministers are both collectively and individually responsible to
Parliament for the exercise of their powers and performance.
[Interjections.] Here Parliament failed.

But this is not the only occasion on which Parliament has failed in this
respect. There are others. Firstly, Ministers continually fail to answer
written questions submitted to them within the 10-day timeframe stipulated
in the Rules. Some questions go entirely unanswered. As at December last
year, some 233 of the near 1 700 questions posed by the DA were unanswered.
The President himself had failed to answer a single question by November of
last year, only answering some of them when this failure was publicised.

Secondly, in respect of oral questions, many a time the relevant Minister
simply fails to attend, leaving the question to be answered either by an
ill-prepared Deputy Minister or by another Minister who has little or no
knowledge of the subject. At one question session, seven out of the 12
Ministers failed to appear. All this exhibits contempt for this
institution.

Likewise, there is disdain for Parliament when the answers to questions are
nothing more than an exercise in obfuscation. Similarly, statements to the
House lose their impact and relevance when the Ministers’ benches are
almost entirely empty. As a result, Ministers’ responses are either
nonexistent or, quite frankly, vague and embarrassing as other Ministers
respond outside of their line functions. I think that it is time that we
seriously contemplated reintroducing the whole concept of interpellations
in this House.

What has also surprised me, listening to the various Budget Vote debates,
is the complaint by both sides of the House as to how seldom Ministers
actually appear in the committees. This, likewise, is a failure of
Parliament.

There is also a failure of Parliament when motions tabled by members on
current issues, which are important and of vital interest to the nation,
are often ignored. I can cite here the whole question of challenges to the
criminal justice system, the whole skills crisis in the country, the high
levels of violence in our schools, the South African government’s response
to the crisis in Zimbabwe, etc.

Parliament’s impotence in respect of oversight and accountability was
further exacerbated when the Rules Committee recently adopted a new
framework for the parliamentary programme for the rest of this year. The
framework reduced the sitting days of Parliament to just 15 days after 30
June, effectively meaning that our ability to exercise oversight and demand
accountability over the executive will be shut down for around 10 months –
that is, until after the next election.

Finally, Parliament’s role as a watchdog was severely compromised when the
Speaker assumed the Office of Chairperson of the ANC and, even more so,
when she became chair of the ANC’s political committee – the body that
defines its strategy in Parliament. This is not a problem of filling more
than one job; it is one of being player and referee at the same time. It is
an issue of impartiality which goes to the very core of the role of the
Speaker.

Let me end on a positive note. The oversight and accountability model
passed by the Rules Committee is a good one. What we need to do is give
real and sustained commitment to both the letter and the spirit of the
model, not just in the dying days of the Mbeki government, but in the
future days of the Zuma era.

We need to restore the values I spoke of - restore Parliament’s integrity
and the trust of the people in this institution, ensure unhindered
oversight and vigorous accountability, make this Parliament a vibrant place
by making it the centre of real political debate in this country, by making
this once great institution great again.

Finally, let me thank all the officials of Parliament for their commitment
and dedication to service. In particular I would like to thank the Table,
led by Mr Mansura, who have been outstanding in their support of all
political parties. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Chairperson, I think Mr Davidson has made an
excellent speech. There were many questions that he put that, I think,
should be answered honestly. On behalf of the IFP, I take this opportunity
to thank all the people who have played a part in making such a success of
our Parliament during this year.

I remember vividly the time when this new Parliament kicked off in 1994. It
was the then Chief Whip of the now dead National Party who predicted doom
and chaos. I was one of a few from the old dispensation who firmly believed
that we would make a success of this Parliament, and I have been proved
right.

Today, we manage our Parliament in accordance with the highest
international standards. In fact, I think we rank among the highest in the
democratic world. Much of this success, Madam Speaker, must be credited to
you. We appreciate your ... Oh, there is a point of order.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Thank you, hon Van der
Merwe. Yes, Minister?

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Hon Chairperson, I want to know
whether it is in order for a member of this House to deliberately mislead
this House about another member who is present in the House?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon Van der Merwe, did you mislead
the House? [Laughter.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: I have no idea what Minister Stofile is talking
about.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Could you elucidate, hon Minister?

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Hon Chairperson, the hon Van der
Merwe alleges that I, as Chief Whip at the time, had prognosticated doom
and he had prognosticated success ...

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Awuhlale phansi ubambe umthetho. [Ubuwele-wele.]
[Uhleko.] [Just sit down and abide by the House Rules. [Interjections.]
[Laughter.]]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Order!

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: ... and I argue that this is a total
distortion of the facts, then and now.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): I think Mr Van der Merwe can
clarify what he said, but I heard differently, hon Minister.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Stoffie, I said that of Hennie Smit. I said “the then
Chief Whip of the now dead National Party”. Are you saying the National
Party is still alive? Are you the National Party? [Interjections.]
[Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Indeed, I heard him incorrectly, but
as to whether the National Party is dead or alive: in many ways it is very
much alive on the other side. [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Please continue, hon Van der
Merwe.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Chairperson, if I may continue. Madam Speaker, we
appreciate your creativity, your insight and your intellectual capacity to
properly understand the deep challenges of this Place and how to manage
them. We thank you for performing your duties on a strictly nonpolitical
basis.

Mhlonishwa, Somlomo siyabonga siyaziqhenya ngawe. [Hon Speaker, we are
grateful and we are proud of you.]

I wish to also deal with the Travelgate matter. The reputation of this
Parliament and its members has been terribly damaged by Travelgate, much
more than meets the eye. Members have been portrayed as crooks, thieves and
fraudsters. Seventeen members have been convicted by our courts, receiving
heavy sentences. Allegations were made and are still rife in the media of
Ministers who were involved in Travelgate and are repaying huge sums but
who have not been exposed and prosecuted.

Disciplinary action is still pending against 12 members; several travel
agents are being charged with criminal offences; a number of travel
agencies have been liquidated; dozens of civil summonses have been issued
against Members of Parliament; the furniture and cars of MPs have been
attached and removed by the sheriff, causing massive humiliation and
expense. The list of embarrassments is very long. Indeed, a dark cloud
hangs over Parliament because of Travelgate.

What is our duty? I say our duty is to ensure that the truth is established
- the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth about Travelgate
must be known. And the truth must surface before next year’s election,
because the problem is ours. It is not the problem of the new team of MPs.

Thanks to your intervention, Madam Speaker, I have been briefed on some
aspects of Travelgate by the Secretary and by Parliament’s lawyers. I was
deeply shocked to learn that dozens of civil summonses issued against our
members by the liquidators were wrongly issued; that the MPs did not owe
the moneys for which they were taken to court. I also serve on the
parliamentary disciplinary committee investigating complaints against the
members who were convicted and against a further 12 against whom
disciplinary action has been pending now for many months.

Based on information, I am of the opinion that some of our colleagues who
entered into plea bargains and were then convicted by the High Court may
have been convicted unnecessarily. It is strange also that 12 of our
colleagues who were accused, basically, of the same charges as those who
were convicted are not being prosecuted.

The truth must be told. South Africa has a right to know which MPs, if any,
are guilty and which MPs are not guilty. The truth will set the innocent
ones free, free from contamination by the guilty ones. Therefore, let the
guilty ones be punished and the innocent ones be liberated from the
scandal.

I therefore propose that a judge of the High Court be appointed to lead a
commission of inquiry into Travelgate to establish and publish the truth,
the whole truth and nothing but the truth about Travelgate. That is the
only way we will be able to protect the integrity of Parliament as an
institution and the integrity of the innocent members. We cannot pass the
buck to the next Parliament. The truth will set us free; nothing else.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms J L FUBBS: Hon Chairperson, indeed it is a privilege for me to
participate in this parliamentary debate on the budget of our Parliament of
which we are all members because, indeed, Parliament is not this House as
such. Parliament consists of the Members of Parliament acting collectively,
either to legislate or to exercise their oversight, to ensure that the
executive is indeed held accountable.

Parliament, I believe, is the institutional expression of the will of the
people. The people’s will is given fresh expression every five years, or it
could be even more frequently during an electoral process. Since the dawn
of a people’s democracy in 1994, the people of South Africa have continued
to identify the ANC as the party that should rule in government and provide
the legislation and the service delivery which it believes needs to be
provided in our country. [Interjections.] Frankly, I am not into space
travel. I have no time for that at the moment.

A strong, democratic Parliament is one of our best instruments in defence
of our democratic state and our dynamically evolving society. Indeed,
Parliament is the primary institution of democracy and it is the voice of
the people. It must ensure that the people’s contract, which gave the ANC-
led government an electoral mandate, is effectively implemented. And, in
this way, the words of the Freedom Charter, “The people shall govern”, gain
further substance.

The ANC’s policies continue to transform institutions of democracy. But,
indeed, in reading and listening to our own speakers’ inputs here this
afternoon and in reading the various documentation and research we have
produced, it is quite clear that we are simply at the beginning of the
journey of parliamentary transformation. I would much rather that members
of this House focus on this journey of transformation than get themselves
tied up at gates of whatever kind.

Parliament’s priority constitutional function, yes, is to legislate. But
legislation is not worth the paper it is written on unless Parliament also
exercises its constitutional function to scrutinise and hold the executive
accountable. Because, indeed, it is the actions of the executive that bring
life to the legislation that is passed in this Parliament.

The third Parliament is focused on results-based budgeting; budgeting that
engages the executive and the committees, which is the engine room in
Parliament, and in this House through questions, motions, statements and
debate. But more and more we realised - I think we have passed over 1 000
laws; is it 800, 900 or so? – that we needed to repeal discriminatory
legislation. But the time has also come to exercise our oversight as to how
effectively the intentions of that legislation are being implemented by the
executive.

Oversight, indeed, has many meanings. I think many of us in Parliament, and
I don’t excuse myself, believe that it means a little site visit with a bit
of shopping on the side. Members, that is a very simplistic approach to
oversight. What we mean when we talk about oversight is really scrutinising
- not overlooking, forgetting, missing out - and applying our minds to the
work being done by the executive and the bureaucracy.

Indeed, in this third Parliament of democracy there is an unequivocal
injunction for the people to govern and for the implementation of these
several resolutions that have been adopted at ANC conferences, because it
is these resolutions that will govern our country in one form or another.
We are and we have been elected to govern this country. And, in fact, there
was an acknowledgement from the Chief Whip of the DA when he spoke about “a
Zuma era”. So, really, thank you very much, Ian. Yes, I have served with
the hon member for many years in Gauteng.

On another issue, though: What is oversight? Oversight is constitutional,
it is political, it is an electoral mandate and it is implementing that
electoral mandate. It is, indeed, the Freedom Charter; it is participatory
democracy. That, I think, is the word one needs to focus on - “democracy”.

What drives oversight? What is driving oversight is our mission and vision
to ensure that this is not just any kind of democracy, but that this
democracy is one in which good governance prevails on a broader scale
without referring to parochial interests every five minutes - being able to
see the broad vision rather than just one little step ahead. We are all
engaged in oversight. But when members of the ANC are engaged, they will be
motivated by constructive oversight; oversight that will provide useful
information to ensure that the executive can improve their performance.

So, oversight is driven by the need to encourage sustainable measures that
will more efficiently, effectively and equitably deliver targeted services
within that critical phrase “acceptable time parameters”. The executive
will be responsible for the outcomes and the administration, Public
Service, for the outputs that strategically execute these outcomes. In this
way, oversight ensures that policy becomes a reality in people’s lives.

We do need to contextualise what we mean by this accountability and so on.
You know, when people talk about accountability, they see it as requesting
the executive to make an appearance and engage them over something – that
is accountability. The executive are accounting. If we do see that as
accountability, we will pave the way for nonservice delivery; for no-
service delivery. That is not what accountability is about.

Accountability is a long chain that includes Parliament. Now, the chain
begins with the engagement: yes, prioritisation, planning, implementation
and spending; the adjustments, the quarterly reports, annual reports. Yes,
indeed, we must scrutinise this. But it also requires that we engage the
executive here on site visits and, indeed, in their parlours and ask them
to unpack their business plans. Exactly how do those business plans
translate into service delivery in the communities, and how are they co-
ordinated?

So, it is pointless for Parliament to be so critical of the executive that
we exclude ourselves from poor performance. If we do not exercise our
oversight robustly, we can expect poor performance.

One of the things we must, in fact, insist on in this House is that we are
provided with what we could call “accessible documentation” - not those
with all kinds of colours and charts. It must be accessible in that the
information is unpacked from these huge books and that it tells us, in
simple terms, how your budget, resources, people,  money and the like
translate into the delivery of your identified targets that link policy to
delivery.

As I come to the end of my input here, let me just say that oversight puts
a face on the budget. As such, we would ask ourselves how effectively we
have all delivered together; how Parliament has performed its
constitutional function of oversight to ensure that indeed this is a
people’s Parliament and a people’s democracy that cares about the people
who elected it. Thank you, hon Chair. [Applause.]

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Chairperson and hon members, for the third year running I
am obliged to note that the Travelgate scandal continues to cast a shadow
over the proceedings of this institution. A month ago we were shocked to
learn that Parliament had set in motion a process to write off the debts
incurred by those hon members and former members who were alleged to have
abused their travel vouchers.

We had to learn of this development from the media, which immediately
created the impression that decision-makers at this institution were
attempting to effect a clandestine amnesty for those who were alleged to
have committed fraud with taxpayer money. Even more disturbing is the
implication that fraud is being condoned and that punishment for wrongdoing
is a principle that does not apply to hon members of this House. This
protracted scandal undermines the structure of this institution and calls
into question Parliament’s ability to oversee the executive’s spending of
taxpayer money.

Allow me to turn to matters of detail relating to the Budget Vote before
us. As far as the new policy initiatives in Parliament are concerned, we
are especially pleased with the intention to significantly expand human
resource support to committees. At this point, one can only express the
hope that these resources will be to the benefit of the committees as a
collective.

We continue to believe that each individual member should receive
considerably more support, especially in terms of human resources, for this
institution to be on a par with the best examples of parliaments across the
world. There can be no denying that the average South African Member of
Parliament has to fulfil a wide range of tasks representing the diverse
groupings, and the quality of his or her democratic work will depend on the
amount of support provided to him or her.

Parliamentary performance, measured in terms of Bills passed, is half of
what it was a few years ago. Numerous factors influence this, many of them
outside the control of Parliament. But we must, nevertheless, guard against
a drop in productivity.

Finally, allow me to note that in terms of the budgeted expenditure and
policy pronouncement, it seems as if public participation is not a very,
very high priority. As parliamentarians, we would be making a grievous
mistake if we failed to recognise the signs of disquiet in many communities
that feel marginalised.

There are vast numbers of people who resort to violence and protest in
frustration against a system of governance that they feel does not consult
them and is unaccountable to them. This highlights what a long way we still
need to go to give proper expression to the constitutional ideals of proper
public participation in decision-making processes and in holding the
executive to account.

Finally, allow me to thank all staff members for their dedication and
commitment towards the wellbeing of this institution. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr B M KOMPHELA: Chairperson, hon members and comrades, this year’s
Parliament Budget Vote, which the ANC supports, is put forward during this
month of June, which is a very historic month in the life of many of our
young people who were of school-going age at the time.

The morning of 16 June 1976 dawned crisp and cold in Soweto. It was a
Wednesday. Smiling parents waved goodbye to their children, caught in the
belief that they were sending their children to school, not knowing that
something was going to happen on that unfortunate day.

They had no idea of the events that would unfold later that same day.
Protest marches had been planned. Students had prepared themselves to rally
against the legislation of the apartheid white racist regime, which
stipulated that for all learners the medium of instruction was Afrikaans.

Over a few weeks from 16 June, 700 black children lost their lives in that
unfortunate incident. Today this budget must pay tribute to those heroes
who sacrificed their lives in making this Parliament a democratic
Parliament and a Parliament of the people of this country. It would no
longer be a certain exclusive right for a particular grouping of people.

This budget must accelerate robust oversight support - that is, the pieces
of legislation passed in this House - and it should demonstrate and advance
a better life for all our people as a tribute to those heroes who died in
this month, in 1976.

The ANC’s policies to transform this institution of democracy have as their
core objectives the speeding up of service delivery to create a
developmental state in order to create jobs, the speedy eradication of
poverty and the building of a caring society for all our people.

Modulasetulo, ntumelle ke hlahise ka tsela ena e latelang. Ditekanyetso
tsena tse behwang kajeno, di behwa le hona ho tshetlehwa ke mokgahlo o
moholo wa ANC, hore Palemente ena, enne e tswele pele e etse melao e tla
tlosa bofuma le bomorabe, e tla ntshetsa batho ba rona pele. Re kopa hore
ha dikomiti tsa Palamente di ntse di etsa mosebetsi, re ke re tlohele ntho
ena e bitswang ka sekgowa: “One size fits all”.

Hobane Modulasetulo, dikomiti tsena di na le diphephetso tse fapaneng, mme
ka tsela e jwalo le ditekanyetso tsa rona ha di ya tlameha ho lekana.
Hobane hona jwale, ho etsa mohlala, komiti ya tsa dipapadi e shebane le
mosebetsi o moholo wa 2010, mme o keke wa kgona ho e thibela ho potoloha
hore e kopane le batho, hore batho ba tle ba bone hore ba tla una eng
mohopeng ona wa lefatse, o re o fuweng ke matjhabatjhaba.

Motlatsamodulasetulo, ha re ntse re tsamaya le dikomiti tsena diprofensing,
ka nako tse ding re kopa batho hore ba re etsetse mosebetsi, mme batho bao
ha ba re etseditse mosebetsi ba re etsetsa dijo le ditho tsohle. Ka mora
dikgwedi tse 6 o fumana mohala o reng ba se ba o isitse maqwetheng. Jwale
re ya kopa Modulasetulo, hore ha re ke re ba lefeng ka nako, hore ha ba re
bona re tla ba se ka ba baleha, ba tsebe hore re tlo sebedisana le bona,
hobane re etsa hore e be karolo ya participatory democracy ena e re buwang
ka yona Palamenteng mona. (Translation of Sesotho paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, allow me to explain in the following manner: The budget that
is being tabled today has been proposed and supported by a big organisation
like the ANC, so that this Parliament should continue to introduce
legislation that will help to eradicate poverty and racism, and to ensure
the progress of our people. We would like to ask that, when parliamentary
committees carry out their duties, they should do away with what is called
a “one size fits all” mentality.

I say this because these committees have different kinds of challenges, and
therefore, their budgets should also not be the same. For example, the
sports committee is currently faced with the huge responsibility of the
2010 World Cup. Therefore, you cannot stop it from visiting communities and
meeting with people in order to make them aware of what they stand to gain
from the World Cup tournament, which was given to us by the international
community.

Chairperson, as we go around the provinces with these committees, sometimes
we ask people to provide some services for us. When they do, they also
prepare food and everything for us. After six months you get a call that
tells you that you are being sued. Therefore, Chairperson, we would like to
make a plea that such people should be paid on time, so that when they see
us coming they should not run away. They must understand that we are there
to work together with them, because we would like them to be part of the
participatory democracy that we always talk about in this Parliament.]

The outcome of the 52nd national conference of the ANC demonstrated in
clear terms that our movement is ready and willing to respond the face of a
national democratic revolution. ANC policies identify Parliament as the key
institution through which all state institutions should transform. The
restructuring and interrogation of how to strengthen Parliament’s function
are in line with the ANC conference resolution.

The analysis is that, whilst we have reached certain objectives of the
national democratic revolution, such as the democratisation of the state,
we still have to rearrange the functions of these institutions, such as
Parliament, to give effect to the ANC policies that all of us supported.

The ANC national conference noted the following: The need for all
legislation to exercise oversight responsibility more comprehensively by
holding government accountable for nonfunctional and financial performance;
to inform the public of the accountability system of the performance of the
public sector; and, in addition, to note that Parliament has a special role
to play in that all legislation furthers the transformation of the state
and sets the tone for the transformation of all state institutions. This is
according to the ANC. We will pursue these aspects to make sure that the
aspirations and resolutions taken by the ANC make this Parliament part of
what makes this country a better country for all of us to live in, black
and white. We shall pursue this to the fullest.

I have been asked by Yunus Carrim to say that the capacity of the committee
secretaries, the personal assistants and the researchers has to be
strengthened – this is an observation made by all chairpersons. The calibre
of the personal assistants, the committee secretaries and the researchers
needs to be strengthened. I do know that their main challenge in Parliament
is that Parliament cannot match the private sector in attracting the same
quality of personnel and researchers.

The solution to this is that Parliament should continue to attract and
retain quality researchers by matching the private sector’s remuneration.
Moreover, it should seek to have motivated researchers and motivated
personnel because they cannot effectively pursue their support function if
they are not motivated.

Parliament, by its nature, is the highest institution in the land and it
should always produce a high quality output of world class standard through
recruiting and retaining staff and through the quality of its work. All the
people in this country are looking to Parliament as the highest output in
this country. If we are to have Parliament respected, we must match the
private sector and be able to outmatch them so that Parliament will be
viewed respectfully.

In our oversight, for example, regarding the Department of Minerals and
Energy, the department comes with consultants and many other people who are
well equipped. In your committee you have one researcher who is not
necessarily specialising in the area. And when you interact with the
department, you will find that that kind of capacity is not there.
Parliament must have this capacity, and Parliament deserves to be the equal
of everybody in this country. It must also be idolised by everybody as far
as human resources are concerned so that we at least retain better human
capital forever. I thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Chairperson, in 2006 Parliament
adopted the “Policy perspective and operational guidelines for Parliament’s
involvement and engagement in international relations”. This is a very
progressive piece of work and the most advanced as we are one of the few
parliaments, if not the only one in Africa, which has such a policy to
guide parliamentary work in international relations.

The policy says:

  In an age where the line between the domestic and the international is
  becoming blurred, and when there is globalisation of problems, it is no
  longer conceivable that parliaments can only focus on national policy and
  leave it to governments to take decisions with wider implications. To do
  so, would amount to relinquishing their role as the people’s
  representatives and doing no more than ratifying decisions while
  excluding themselves from the real problems. However, parliaments must
  ensure that they do not encroach upon the executive responsibilities in
  doing so.

We cannot achieve the new world order unless we are all there - actively.
By all, I do not mean everybody in Parliament here. I am referring to those
who are assigned and delegated from time to time.

Since the adoption of the policy, what has happened and what is not
happening in Parliament? The parliamentary body called the Parliamentary
Group on International Relations that the Speaker alluded to, was
established as a necessity and a tool to be utilised in guiding Parliament
and parliamentarians in the execution of the broad mandate of creating a
better world for all.

International relations is not just about travelling but how to shape the
globalising world to be a better place for all humanity, for a better, just
and equitable world order for all, and not just a few.

Parliament being the people’s voice and the people’s representative must
shape and play a role in international politics through its parliamentary
bodies such as the Southern African Development Community parliamentary
forum, the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, the Inter-Parliamentary
Union, the Pan-African Parliament and others such as the African, Caribbean
and Pacific-European Union.

Some of the bodies need to be transformed. And I know that the hon Job
Sithole always quotes the example of the Commonwealth Parliamentary
Association. What is it? Why are we still bowing to the Queen, in this age
and era? Those are the challenges and the politics that we need to engage.
However, the balance of forces is not always in our favour. You will find
that people like it the way it is, and each time you raise issues of a
particular ideology or challenging issues, people will say that you found
it this way and you will leave it this way.

Also, Parliament has not been able to participate in bodies such as global
legislative oversight bodies on the environment. Parliamentarians for
Global Action is having its 30th congress this year, and we have been
refused permission to attend. There are so many other networks that
Parliament is not involved in: the World Bank committee, the International
Monetary Fund committee, the New Partnership for Africa’s Development
committee and many others in which parliamentarians are beginning to shape
and influence policy through those particular networks and it is policy
that governs relationships worldwide. If we don’t influence policy, then it
will be dominant over a number of issues.

We still have to establish the IBSA – India-Brazil-South Africa -
committee, because in the convention which was signed and agreed to, there
is a role for Parliament as there should be a parliamentary committee. We
do have an European Union-South Africa committee because in the trade and
co-operation agreement, which was signed with the EU, the parliamentary
role is defined and that body has been in existence and meeting twice a
year. Regarding the Russia-South Africa bilateral agreement that we signed,
the role of Parliament was also defined, and we have not acted on this.

The only country that we have signed an agreement with is China, and that
is the only one. We are sitting with 30 applications of parliaments that
want to enter into formal relations with our Parliament, but the resources
are not there to establish such committees or friendship groups in order to
be able to respond to the request.

Also, these requests are being made because we are South Africa. Because of
our stature in the world, the leadership role we have been playing so far
on the continent, in the region and in the world, people expect us to play
a similar role. That is why there is so much demand on the friendship group
arrangements and so forth. But the budget allocation is nonexistent. It is
not there and we cannot really engage with some of those issues.

International politics are complex. They are ideological in nature and very
robust, and the balance of forces, as indicated earlier, is fluctuating and
tilting either way. It needs people who can think. It needs strategists,
internationalists, and people with diplomacy to execute the work, and most
parliamentarians are not yet orientated in that particular direction. We
need to have programmes in Parliament to orientate, to train and to focus
on producing as many parliamentarians as possible who can represent
Parliament in all these bodies, so that it is not only a few that are
continually seen engaging in those particular bodies.

Are we winning in as far as our role in Parliament is concerned? We are
just there. I can’t say we are winning and I can’t say we are losing, but
we are doing our best.

Currently, we are faced with a situation next door in which the Pan-African
Parliament, which is hosted in our country, is facing its own challenges.
It is supposed to be a legislative body by the year 2009. How ready is it
and how ready are we to make sure that we shape it into that legislative
body? The report that has been produced says something else. I don’t think
we are ready. So, that is the issue that we still have to engage with and
challenge. Therefore, the budget allocation has to be looked at differently
if we are indeed to participate maximally in international relations.

The second area I will speak about is the oversight model, as was mentioned
by many other speakers. I want to deal with an issue on a Bill which was
presented when we were adopting the model. The Bill is on the procedure for
the amendment of the money Bills. Since it was introduced, it has not gone
through the processes of Parliament. It has not yet been tagged or whatever
the mechanisms are. In the next session, when we come back from recess, it
cannot go through those particular procedural elements for Parliament to
adopt it. It will be one of the instruments that will give power to
Parliament to engage in oversight.

The third area which has been delegated to me but has not yet been assigned
is human resources in Parliament. Quite good skills do exist and reside in
Parliament and, indeed, there are quite good men and women who are doing
their best to ensure that the mandate of Parliament is fulfilled. They are
doing their best to go the extra mile. The challenge is the issue of skills
that keep on departing - being poached by the executive or going to greener
pastures. I think the hon Komphela has already spoken about that particular
matter.

Parliament also has a situation in which there are permanent people or
temporary people who have been working for four years on a temporary job in
certain sections of Parliament. There are very useful and good people
there. I think we need to do an audit. In August, when we come back, that
audit report must be given to you to show how many people are permanent,
how many are temporary, and how long they have been, temporarily, in their
jobs. I think that is a big challenge. We are glad that a new manager has
taken over human resources in the past six months. We hope, therefore, that
we will then begin to fix that. Parliament is the worst employer if one has
to look at that particular situation.

The other area is the issue of the public participation model, which is
still being developed. We hope therefore that it will begin to respond to
the constitutional judgments so that, in the future, when Parliament
engages in public participation, it does not go through the challenge of
being taken to court and the legislation being returned to Parliament or to
the legislatures in that people were not adequately consulted. We hope,
therefore, that in August, when we launch the model, the public
participation model will also be there so that we can then have all the
instruments together.

Finally, I would want to engage the role of the media as agents and people
who are supposed to be informing and educating the public at large. The
Parliament press gallery is an organised entity that needs to be welcomed.
However, they are not adequately resourced themselves. There aren’t enough
of them. They can’t cover all the meetings of the portfolio committees if
the meetings take place at the same time. As parliamentarians, as leaders
here, we need to develop relationships with the media, understand them and
they should also understand us. They must remain objective, obviously;
report without fear or favour, but do so, however, in a responsible way.
Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chair, Madam Speaker, the primary role of Parliament, as we
know, is to represent the people of South Africa and ensure government of
the people by the people under the Constitution. Making laws and oversight
of the executive are key functions. However, public access to Parliament,
to parliamentary processes and, of course, to Members of Parliament through
their constituencies is of critical importance.

Parliament’s budget must ensure that the support services required for it
to fulfil its constitutional duty are provided for, that political parties
receive administrative support and that Members of Parliament are able to
provide a meaningful service for their constituents.

The ACDP supports Parliament’s objective to improve and strengthen both
service delivery and oversight by employing an additional 29 researchers,
six support staff, and 30 content specialists for committees by March 2009.
The building of a new people’s Parliament will also better accommodate the
business of Parliament and improve public access, consultation and
participation.

The Speaker invites us to “take a closer look and a moment to reflect”;
well, here goes: A vibrant, adequately resourced legislature where MPs are
free to debate issues and truly hold their political seniors to account has
seemed, for many years, like only a fantasy. While we are currently
catching a brief glimpse of what this could be like, we all know that
should the majority party president, whoever that might be when the time
comes, take office as President of the country, we will be back to the same
predictable situation where instructions are taken and obeyed; no questions
asked. We have all experienced it and I have done so for the past nine
years.

Proportional representation has been instrumental in facilitating minority
representation and buy-in to the constitutional process on the one hand,
but, unfortunately, also creates the potential for a party stranglehold on
members whose seats belong to the party and not the member; a small detail,
of course, which is conveniently overlooked by many for the purposes of
floor-crossing.

The power of parties over Members of Parliament has led directly to the
tragic years of HIV/Aids denialism and the hundreds of thousands of lives
lost as majority party MPs looked the other way. It has allowed for the
unchallenged nontransparency of the highly questionable arms deal, third
cellular licence and Oilgate, to mention just a few - old issues, maybe,
but when not satisfactorily resolved skeletons in the closet.

Clearly, when one party has a significant majority, the party system
renders Parliament’s oversight role impotent and the integrity of
Parliament wanting. At the very least, key parliamentary oversight
committees like the Standing Committee on Public Accounts, Scopa, and the
ethics committee should be insulated from political influence on members to
allow them to take tough decisions in terms of real accountability, putting
public interests above party interests.

At the time of the muzzling of Scopa over the arms deal, the question was
asked of the then speaker Frene Ginwala: How easy is it to sit on the inner
counsel of the party, to hear and take part in its most sensitive strategy
debates and remain impartial in Parliament? And, of course, the same could
be asked of the present Speaker and ANC Chair, if it weren’t for the
unusual dynamics being played out in the ANC right now. The reality is,
however, that the Speaker appears to be using this window of opportunity to
strengthen Parliament to at least make it practically possible, if not
politically possible, for the legislature to hold the executive accountable
in future. The ACDP will support this Vote. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs W S NEWHOUDT-DRUCHEN: Chairperson, hon Speaker, hon members: The people
shall govern. The Freedom Charter adopted at the Congress of the People in
Kliptown on 26 June 1955 states that:

  The People Shall Govern!
  Every man and woman shall have the right to vote for and to stand as a
  candidate for all bodies which make laws;
  All people shall be entitled to take part in the administration of the
  country;
  The rights of people shall be the same, regardless of race, colour or
  sex;
  All bodies of minority rule, advisory boards, councils and authorities
  shall be replaced by democratic organs of self-government.

The dream of the Freedom Charter was therefore realised when we all voted
in 1994.

In the ANC’s 51st national council resolutions, it’s stated that where
people are not involved in the decisions that affect their lives, social
policies and political interventions are less likely to succeed.
Participatory democracy should therefore complement and enhance their
representative democracy.

Considerable advances have been made by the ANC in transforming our system
of governance into one in which the people are able to actively
participate. This has been done through structures and mechanisms such as
school governing bodies, community policing forums, ward committees,
izimbizo, constituency offices, the committee systems in Parliament and the
legislatures’ integrated development plans, amongst other things.

The ANC has taken steps in promoting participatory democracy by creating
opportunities for the effective involvement and participation of men and
women, of those who are not literate, the rural poor, the working people,
people with disabilities and other targeted groups to gather and express
themselves on matters relevant to their basic conditions.

The ANC has taken various initiatives on participatory democracy to create
an integrated system of participation, including the identification of
needs and priorities and the implementation of decisions affecting society.
The aim is to increase our efforts to bring Parliament, legislatures and
councils closer to the people.

Section 42 of the South African Constitution states that:

(3)   The National Assembly is elected to represent the people and to
        ensure government by the people under the Constitution. It does this
        by choosing the President, by providing a national forum for public
        consideration of issues, by passing legislation and by scrutinising
        and overseeing executive action.

In terms of section 57(b), the National Assembly may also make rules and
orders concerning its business, with due regard to representative and
participatory democracy, accountability, transparency and public
involvement. The Constitution also mentions public access and involvement
in the National Assembly, meaning that “The National Assembly must
facilitate public involvement in the legislative and other processes of the
Assembly and its committees; and conduct its business in an open manner,
and hold its sittings, and those of its committees, in public” and “to
regulate public access, including access to the media, to the Assembly and
its committees”.

The vision of Parliament is to build an effective People’s Parliament that
is responsive to the needs of the people, and that is driven by the ideal
of realising a better quality of life for all the people of South Africa.
For this to be realised, Parliament is conducting programmes and projects
about Parliament in the form of outreach activities, publications and
television and radio broadcasts, continuing the annual events which provide
a platform for public participation in the process of Parliament, including
“Taking Parliament to the People” through which the National Council of
Provinces has two sittings a year in designated provinces.

The People’s Assembly Programme in which Parliament hosts an annual sitting
in South Africa also has the annual Women’s Parliament focusing on specific
topical issues, and the annual Youth Parliament focusing on education and
participation of the youth.

Parliament assists its upper provincial parliamentary democracy offices. It
holds public hearings and public dialogues. It has study tours and
oversight and democracy road shows. It provides the information about
Parliament through its In Session, Spotlight on Parliament, the NCOP News,
A Day in Parliament which is in comic form, through radio and television
and through an updated website.

It is my hope that by the end of this parliamentary term, Parliament will
be able to host the Disabled People’s Parliament, because people with
disabilities are waiting to use Parliament as a platform to voice their
issues as well.

Let me pause to show by way of statistics that our South African Parliament
is really and truly a people’s Parliament, following and living out its
vision. The statistics show that in 2004, about 27 000 people passed
through our Parliament’s doors; in 2005 approximately 29 000 came to
Parliament; in 2006 approximately 30 000; and in 2007 approximately 23 000.
I know that in the years to come, more people will pass through the gates
of Parliament.

In terms of section 59 of our Constitution, the National Assembly must
facilitate public involvement in its legislative and other processes. It
also obliges the Assembly to conduct its business in an open manner and
hold its sittings and committees in public.

To facilitate public involvement, the legislatures must provide meaningful
opportunities for public participation in the legislative process and take
measures to ensure that members of the public are able to take advantage of
these opportunities that are provided. These can include the dissemination
of information concerning legislation, inviting the public to participate
in the process, public education and consulting with the public on
legislation.

Parliament does face many challenges to facilitate transparency. Therefore,
the key challenges are the cost of making information available to the
public, especially to the socially vulnerable - they are the ones who are
less likely to have access to information, for example through the Internet
- thereby ensuring that members of the public are able to engage with
information produced by Parliament in a meaningful way. Parliament has to
develop ways to communicate effectively in the language that is understood
by the public.

I just want to add here, an example would be where we take Parliament to
the people and at those meetings we record events and record what is being
said at those meetings. But the process of recording is not brought back to
Parliament; it is not recorded. The resolutions that are made there are not
effectively brought back here and then taken to the various committees. And
that, in itself, is a fault of Parliament and I think we need to work out
some system where those resolutions can then be taken to the various
committees.

All this will be done through the development of an integrated public
participation model, which will work on an effective public education
programme.

As we can see, Parliament continues its work as required by its
constitutional mandate. As I said at the beginning, the People’s Charter
states that the people shall govern. Today I can say that, yes, we the
people are governing and we are trying and we are making a better life for
all. I thank you, Mr Chairperson. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Thank you, hon member. Speaker, when
you go to your constituency you need to invite her with you because the
children were fascinated and taken up with her. So, they would be asking
about sign language. I hope the hon Druchen will go with you to address
them.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, Speaker, Parliament has reached its third term
of fulfilling its duties as a voice for South Africa by amending
legislation to meet democratic values and the purport enshrined in the
Constitution, to oversee that the government is acting positively on this
and the policies and further maintaining international agreements and
relations.

In respect of Parliament’s budget for 2008-09, it is clear that the budget
has been well aligned in consideration of the priorities. Looking at
Parliament’s 2004-09 strategic plan, the MF acknowledges great
transformation over this period, but would like a report on progress made
in regard to all intentions of this strategy and how close we are to
closure of this in 2009.

Parliament has a pivotal role to play in oversight and our state of the
nation address clearly highlights South Africa’s focus points and
initiatives needed to be prioritised in oversight by Parliament.
The MF honestly believes that our oversight visits give us a bird’s eye
view of the South African situation, and the regular oversight visits will
certainly pressurise departments to step up their service delivery and
remain on track in accomplishing priorities.

These oversight visits further enhance the accountability that needs to be
exercised in line with our policy of transparency. It is very important to
secure “Taking Parliament to the People”. Many South Africans are not aware
of the access they have to Parliament and that we invite their
participation.

Parliament also plays a great role in enhancing co-operative governance and
the integration of women, the physically challenged and the youth in
parliamentary programmes and facilities that have been well endorsed, as we
may find here.

While we realise that the National Assembly operates on a system of
proportional representation, we deem it necessary that the House considers
giving smaller parties more time to express their needs, views and
reservations from the podium. We believe that having one or two minutes to
speak in debates seriously compromises our ability to represent our people.

Secondly, while we note that the budget allocation to our constituencies
may have been largely improved, our office allowance limits us from
acquiring adequately skilled support staff with suitable salaries. So, in
this way we feel that the smaller parties are compromised.

We are, however, proud of the Parliament of South Africa and are proud to
be part of it. We strive on a daily basis, with both sides aching, to
achieve the desires of our voters. We are a people’s government and we
remain answerable and accountable to the people, for the people.

We applaud the Chairpersons of both Houses, the committee chairs, the
Speaker, the Deputy Speaker, the Chief Whips, Mr Mansura who is always
ready to help us, members of both Houses, the administration of both
Houses, all Parliament staff and our support staff for coming together and
turning the wheel of democracy to another successful term of governance,
transformation and a great step closer to growth, development and equality
for all. The MF supports this Budget Vote. I thank you, Chairperson.
[Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Mr Chairman, Madam Speaker, hon
Members of Parliament, the general wellbeing of Members of Parliament is a
fundamental and supreme prerequisite for the efficient operation of the
institution. It is therefore an imperative for the institution of
Parliament itself to nurture and enhance, without any measure of doubt, the
social, political and economic support systems that must underpin the
performance of the Members of Parliament both inside and outside the
institution.

It is also important not only to strengthen the structures and bodies
created by Parliament, but also to enable members to fulfil their
constitutional mandate as elected members and the voice of the people.
The Rousseau Contract, which is the Social Contract with Parliament, is in
essence a contract between Members of Parliament and the people. On 3
November 1774, after being elected as a representative for Bristol, Edmund
Burke said:

  Parliament is not a congress of ambassadors from different and hostile
  interests, which interests each must maintain as an agent and advocate
  against other agents and advocates. But Parliament is a deliberative
  assembly of one nation with one interest - that of the whole: where not
  local purposes, not local prejudices, ought to guide, but the general
  good, resulting from the general reason of the whole.

Therefore, Members of Parliament will always share, individually and
collectively, in the success or failure of service delivery. A healthy,
mentally alert, well-trained, skilled and well-resourced member becomes an
effective vehicle in realising the mission and vision of Parliament.

The mandate of the internal arrangement is, among other things, to mobilise
some of the facilities in working with the relevant offices to enhance and
support the performance of the Members of Parliament. For instance, our
strategic objectives include to ensure that members’ needs are taken care
of, to align all structures dealing with members’ interests and facilities,
to ensure the wellbeing of all members, to enhance the capacity of members
to discharge their constitutional objectives, to receive and report on
issues related to members’ interests, and to facilitate the implementation
of special projects as directed by the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker.

The following projects are in progress, in consultation with the various
functional departments. In the Speaker’s Office the French language classes
are ongoing. Well, people say that French is the language of love. Some say
it is the language of diplomacy, depending on why you are taking French
classes.

We are embarking on an official languages training project. The Chief
Whip’s Forum requested us to look at the official languages in that members
ought not to be trained in French only but also in other official languages
of this country. We are looking into that.

We are also embarking on an artworks project depicting the leadership of
the three previous Parliaments. Here we have suggested that a wall be
devoted to this kind of history where one has the President, the Vice
President, the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker of all these Parliaments and the
heads of political parties in Parliament during that period.

We are also embarking on designing home-grown presiding officers’ robes. I
am sure members are aware that it is only the Table which wears the
traditional robes, while the Speaker and the Chairperson are not doing so
at this point in time. The Speaker has allowed the project to go ahead so
that we look at what kinds of home-grown robes there are for the Speaker,
the Deputy Speaker and the Chairpersons.

The equality review debate is pending. Now this debate ought to look at
questions of justice, equal rights, gender, people living with
disabilities, the youth and the whole idea of freedom. We are also
negotiating with the Office of the Secretary to Parliament about the issues
in the villages where members are living - their conditions. We are also
negotiating with him on the question of security in villages and also in
Parliament.

In terms of institutional support, we are improving the catering services,
and this project is ongoing. We are also trying to improve the parking
facilities for members.

The members’ facilities handbook review is pending because there is a
committee which is also working on issues with Judge Moseneke and which is
dealing with some aspects of the handbook review. So, we have left that
responsibility to them and to the Secretary to Parliament’s unit.

The SAA gold voyager cards were issued to members. I think members will
have some privileges here as they now have a gold card. They can go into
the reserved facilities at airports and also take someone with them. So
they will be treated with respect. Members have been issued with parking
cards for the Johannesburg, Cape Town and Durban airports so that they can
park in different areas using different cards.

The refurbishment of members’ offices is ongoing, and I am sure that by
tomorrow we will get a report on how far the refurbishment of members’
offices is. Much has been done in the last three Parliaments, from 1994 to
date, to improve the working conditions of members. However, a lot more has
to be done to meet the emerging challenges.

Most of the members’ interests we are currently dealing with have also
occupied the attention of my predecessor, the hon Sandra Botha, who is
here. Only a fool would say, when they occupy an office, “I am doing well.
My predecessor did not do well.” Only a fool would say that. She did well.
[Interjections.] [Laughter.] Somebody is saying “obviously”.

We have periodically made reports to the various structures of Parliament,
including the quarterly consultative forum and the Chief Whips’ Forum. On
the progress and the challenges we face in dealing with the interests of
all members, we trust that the party Whips of all parties will update their
members on these matters and provide us with feedback continually – not to
have members joking about the Rules ... [Inaudible.] They must be informed
by their party Whips.

We believe it behoves all Members of Parliament to assert themselves to
turn this institution and its bodies and Chambers into a place where the
members of the public say: This is the place where men and women of honour
of all political persuasions deliberated over important matters of state
for the betterment of all citizens, and where our children say: This is
where I want to make a contribution to South Africa one day - in Parliament
- because I know they care.

Assertiveness: yes; robustness: yes; vibrancy: yes, but that does not mean
blatant disregard for the conventions of Parliament or disrespect for the
House decorum, or undermining the integrity of other hon members. Anything
contrary to this sends conflicting messages to the already troubled human,
ethnic and race relations in our country.

Human relations, race relations, ethnic relations are troubled in our
country at present and the kinds of things we say here send a message. One
way or another, they also influence the activities of even these young
people who are sitting here. So I think we need to maintain this dignity
and decorum.

I would like to express my sincere thanks to the presiding officers, to
yourself, Madam Speaker, to the Deputy Speaker and to my fellow House
Chairpersons, to members of the quarterly consultative forum, to the
Secretary to Parliament and his deputies, to the heads of departments and,
finally, to all managers and support staff, the Table included, in the
Speaker’s Office for their unwavering support. I thank you, Mr Chairman.
[Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Thank you, hon member. You saved me
from saying your time had expired, because you are going to come back to me
one day.

Ms M V MERUTI: Chairperson, hon Speaker, hon members, ladies and gentlemen,
I would like to start by saying to all fathers, as Sunday is Father’s Day,
“Happy Father’s Day”. [Applause.] I hope you love, honour and respect your
women.

The ANC supports this Budget Vote. Our policies on the transformation of
institutions of democracy have, at their core, the objective of speeding up
delivery in order to push back the frontiers of poverty, create employment
and build a caring society for the people. At the heart of advancing this
agenda is a participatory model on which the South African Parliament is
premised.

Parliament is one of the primary institutions of democracy as it legislates
and oversees executive action, facilitates and promotes the people’s
participation and involvement in governance and policy issues, and deals
with issues cutting across the three spheres of governance through which we
co-operatively manage and govern the sustainable transformation of South
African society.
Parliament brings its influence to bear quite effectively in its
legislative work. We must understand Parliament as a part of the interplay
of democratic institutions. This is quite different from the notion of the
United States Senate and the British House of Commons. Members would be
surprised to learn that our Parliament is far more robust in many respects
than these parliaments which are much older and viewed by some as more
effective.

In forging the participatory democracy model in our legislative arm of
governance, the ANC resolved the need for all legislatures - Parliament,
provincial legislatures and municipal councils - to exercise their
oversight responsibility more comprehensively by holding government
departments and organs of state accountable for both nonfinancial, that is
service delivery, and financial performance, and to inform the public of
the accountability system for performance in the public sector.

In addition, it is noted that Parliament has a special role to play in
ensuring that all legislation furthers the transformation of the state and
sets the tone for the transformation of all state institutions.

The ANC’s 52nd conference resolutions on governance, as a pillar of
democracy and development, further provide direction to strengthen the
capacity to hold cadres deployed in executive positions accountable. They
emphasise governance and the state as an important pillar in the overall
transformation of society. They correctly recognise Parliament and
legislatures as the important spaces within which democracy comes alive
through engagement with the people on activities that make this a people’s
Parliament.

The work in committees, as well as the programmatic activities, have to be
informed by programmes focused on the broad objective of pushing back the
boundaries of poverty and creating better employment. The Constitution is
very clear about this as a key pillar of our democracy.

As the ANC-led government, we do not take these policy issues lightly.
Therefore, we commend Parliament’s stated objective to improve public
participation in all parliamentary processes as set out in the
Constitution, and its commitment to be responsive to the electorate,
especially its commitment to improve its public education, the provision of
information and access to its processes in striving to increase the
involvement of people.

Parliament aims to do this through the development of an integrated public
participation model. Through this project, it aims to address this issue
programmatically and to ensure line functions for the allocation of
budgetary items.

Alongside this project, public participation is being developed as the core
function of Parliament. The model will inform all public participation
programmes of Parliament, as well as all supportive communication
initiatives. Parliament still needs to provide adequate information to
South Africans on the many avenues in which they can participate in
parliamentary processes.

The challenge remains to develop systems and processes in line with
Parliament’s oversight and public participation models to ensure that the
public participation inputs received are correctly channelled and utilised
by the committees in their oversight and legislative work.

Given the geographical spread of the country and the challenge to bridge
the urban-rural development gap, we have to ensure access, opportunity and
space for all people to engage continually with people who are ordinarily
outside national debates in society.

Om hierdie uitdaging aan te pak, het die Parlement die parlementêre kantore
vir demokrasie – dit is die “parliamentary democracy offices” – as ’n
loodsprojek in die plattelandse provinsies soos die Noord-Kaap, Noordwes en
Limpopo van stapel gestuur. ’n Deurlopende sleutelaktiwiteit in die
parlementêre kantore vir demokrasie sal wees om plaaslike politieke debat
aan die gang te sit; om ons mense se oogpunte aangaande sake van nasionale
belang, belangrike beleidsrigtings, en wetsontwerpe voor die Parlement, aan
te spreek.

Parlementêre kantore vir demokrasie sal ook help om die Parlement se
oogmerk van publieke deelname te bereik; om ’n sigbare parlementêre
teenwoordigheid in die provinsies te skep; om groter doeltreffendheid te
verseker in die verkryging van toegang tot plaaslike gemeenskappe; en om
plaaslike bystand vir parlementêre programme te skep. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[In taking up this challenge, Parliament has launched the parliamentary
democracy offices as a pilot project in the rural provinces such as the
Northern Cape, North West and Limpopo. An ongoing key activity in these
parliamentary democracy offices will be to initiate local political debate;
to address people’s views regarding matters of national interest, important
policy directives, and Bills before Parliament.

Parliamentary democracy offices will also assist in achieving Parliament’s
objective of public participation; creating a visible parliamentary
presence in the provinces; ensuring greater efficiency in gaining access to
local communities; and creating local support for parliamentary
programmes.]
It is crucial that we engage in a debate on what the difference is in
functionality and role between parliamentary constituency offices and
parliamentary democracy offices. Given the challenges of underdevelopment
and the need for people’s voices to be part of transformation processes,
there are key roles and functions for each to fulfil. We cannot allow
structures to exist that can be misused for purposes that could derail the
ongoing project of transformation and development as driven by the ANC-led
government.

In addition, we are aware of the fact that as an institution of democracy
and a key driver of processing transformation, there is a need for
Parliament to promote a positive image of the institution to South
Africans.

The establishment of an enabled, sufficiently resourced, comprehensive and
proactive communications service to execute an appropriate – that is,
internal and external - communications strategy on the work of Parliament
and parliamentarians is essential. Further work must be done towards
promoting a better understanding of the role of Parliament, both internally
and externally, and raising awareness in the public domain.

Programmes such as the People’s Assembly, “Taking Parliament to the
People”, the Women’s Parliament and the Youth Parliament need to be
monitored and assessed, as has already been said. This is to speed up the
reporting and adoption process of reports so that issues raised in these
participatory processes find their way into the programme of Parliament.
This is an important aspect of oversight and engagement, and our view is
that it should inform the programmes that are advanced by government. I
thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]
Mr N T GODI: Chairperson, Madam Speaker, comrades and hon members, may we,
at the outset, express the APC’s support for this Budget Vote.

We take note of the fact that the annual audit reports for this third
Parliament have been progressively improving with the last one actually
being an unqualified audit opinion. Though with some emphasis of matter, we
congratulate the accounting officer and hope that dialectically we will
move to a clean audit.

This improved financial management state has one blind spot: it is not
underpinned by a legislative framework as required by the Constitution. The
draft financial administration of Parliament Bill needs to be finalised.
This is a constitutional obligation which will help to regulate the
financial administration of Parliament, and ensure that all revenue,
expenditure, assets and liabilities of the institution are managed
effectively and efficiently.

We also note that underexpenditure, though it has progressively declined
over the years, remains a challenge that must be tackled. According to the
Estimates of Expenditure, Parliament’s unspent funds are retained by
Parliament to use according to its priorities. However, there are no
explicit specifications of where and how these roll-over funds will be
utilised.

It should be noted that Parliament’s surplus account increased by almost
68,9% over the period 2004-05 to 2007-08. There is almost R400 million in
that account, and yet Parliament’s operational budget over the medium term
is expected to gradually increase by about 6,7%.

We understand that this increase is due to capacity needed for the
oversight functions of committees and for the international participation
models being developed and implemented. Yet, over the medium term, the
legislation and oversight programme’s budget only increases by 0,91% in
real terms, contrary to what is stated in the Estimates of Expenditure
which is that this programme has grown annually by 6,5%.

The APC raises these issues, because, correctly so, the third Parliament’s
strategic focus, unlike before, has been on enhanced oversight and we know
that this has always been hampered by capacity and the need to finalise the
new oversight model.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I do want to state that your assistance, when we
were faced with the rank insolence of the SA Wine Industry Trust, Sawit,
has led to better understanding and co-operation. Sawit is coming to appear
before the Standing Committee on Public Accounts on 24 June. Thank you very
much. [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, Madam Speaker, hon Ministers and members, a few
years ago there was much talk about moving Parliament elsewhere. The reason
mainly given at the time was the saving on costs and travel time. It is
good news to know that the Mother City will retain Parliament, and there is
no longer any loose talk of moving this great institution somewhere else.

Since then, Parliament has structurally undergone some facelift reforms. It
also adopted a new emblem and acquired its own website. Through maintaining
its institutional stability Parliament has been strengthened to focus on
its core objectives, such as building democracy and developing its
oversight functions.

Parliament’s expenditure trends have steadily increased over the past few
years, especially with regard to functions such as “Taking Parliament to
the People”, and improving its oversight functions and the implementation
of Parliament’s master systems plan.

Parliament’s website it still a work in progress, but the FD is happy to
see that, in an attempt to keep the public better informed, the Hansard
proceedings of the House are now timeously put online for public scrutiny.

However, parliamentarians need to be informed about how the process in the
implementation of Parliament’s Content Management System is taking shape.
The cost of the system is estimated to run into millions, yet it is not
adequately communicated whether the system is successful in meeting its
objectives or whether the process flow of information is reaching and
benefiting the users.

For instance, at a very general level of encouraging public participation,
where do the public go when they need up-to-date minutes or committee
reports on issues of the day since such reports are not readily available
on Parliament’s website? However, the Parliamentary Monitoring Group is the
obvious answer. Should there therefore not be a public-private partnership
between Parliament and the PMG?

One of Parliament’s other key strategic objectives is to develop an
institution that is transparent and responsive to the electorate.
Transparency is only the first step in the right direction; the follow-up
is to act against anyone found to have brought the institution into
disrepute. Unfortunately, with regard to the Travelgate issue, Parliament
has yet to prove that it will enforce its oversight authority with a firm
commitment.

In days gone by, Parliament was used as a means to an end for the interests
of a minority. It is now an institution with an identity encapsulating the
values of a democratic society. For Parliament to succeed in bringing
people closer to Parliament, it should invest in buying more selected time
slots in which to televise debates in the House.
Finally, we have no doubt that Parliament’s service ethic to support all
members and the public is generally of an acceptable level, but the
broadening of its democratic mandate and oversight functions within society
is a way to enhance the institution’s public status. The FD, therefore,
supports this Budget Vote. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr B MTHEMBU: Chairperson, hon members, I rise on behalf of the ANC in
support of the Budget Vote for Parliament.

The ANC has consistently articulated a very clear vision for democratic
governance institutions and their transformative role as legitimate
platforms for representing the aspirations of the people. It is a vision
inspired by the Freedom Charter, adopted by the Congress of the People in
1955, which states that the people shall govern and that government must be
based on the will of the people.

In essence, Parliament represents the voice of the people through their
elected representatives. Parliament expresses the will and preferences of
the people, and transforms those into policy. In this context, Parliament
has a developmental role towards its broader constituency, the people, on
issues of human capacity development, eradication of poverty, social
justice and the creation of a caring society, especially for the poor and
the vulnerable.

It is not a mere happy coincidence that, in 2004, Parliament formulated a
vision that it wants to build an effective people’s Parliament that is
responsive to the needs of the people and that is driven by the ideal of
realising a better quality of life for all the people of South Africa.

Parliament as a people’s representative is constitutionally mandated to
exercise oversight and accountability over the executive and other organs
of state. In implementing the oversight and accountability functions,
Parliament seeks to ensure that the national development priorities are
being implemented as well as assessing whether the intended policy outcomes
are being realised.

The adoption of the new oversight model in April 2008 by Parliament is an
important development in the evolution of Parliament as a learning
organisation and as a people’s Parliament. In essence, the new oversight
model constitutes a strategic paradigm shift with the potential to enhance
the status and role of Parliament as one of the key organs of state, not
just a junior partner, but an equally important partner with a specific
mandate. It constitutes a strategic paradigm shift because it will
necessarily lead to the reconceptualisation of the function and role of the
parliamentary committees.

In terms of this model, parliamentary committees will be expected to
develop their oversight programme in alignment with the vision of
Parliament of building an effective people’s Parliament. In so doing,
parliamentary committees will move from a narrow focus on monitoring
departments’ compliance with their strategic operational plans to a more
expansive view of oversight in realising the ideal of a better life for all
people by focusing on issues around service delivery, and the impact or
effect of policy implementation.

The ANC welcomes the envisaged increase in researchers and content
specialists as part of strengthening the oversight role of committees. Much
has been said about the need for this. One needs to add that this envisaged
step is welcomed because we believe that it will improve the quality of
reporting in particular.

Parliamentarians deal with a massive amount of information. We need it to
be processed by people with the requisite research capacity and, therefore,
we hope that in future we will be able to have reports that will be
presented in the form of actionable recommendations which will produce
results rather than mere bureaucratic rituals for simple noting.

The Constitution has created three spheres of government, namely, national,
provincial and local. All these spheres of government are distinctive but
interrelated and interdependent. The Constitution enjoins the three spheres
of government to co-operate with one another in mutual trust and good faith
by fostering friendly relations, assisting and supporting one another on
matters of common interest, and co-ordinating their actions and legislation
with one another.

In carrying out its oversight and accountability mandate, it is of critical
importance that the oversight processes of Parliament must seek not only to
adhere to but, equally important, to actively promote the values and
principles that underpin co-operative governance.

South Africa is one sovereign state and its indivisibility and the question
of national unity need to be preserved as a matter of priority. All spheres
of government are required to provide an effective, transparent,
accountable and coherent government of the Republic as a whole.

In terms of the Act, we are enjoined as Parliament to make provision for
structures that will enable us to promote that, and we are happy that
Parliament has done that by enacting the Intergovernmental Relations
Framework Act. In terms of this Act, we are expected to ensure that it is
effectively implemented.

I am saying this because, much as the Act itself refers to the executive,
what is important is that there is no Act or law that can just go to the
executive without Parliament processing and passing it. We confer powers on
the executive and the administration and, therefore, we’ve got the
responsibility to exercise oversight; there can be no excuse. It is
important that Parliament, especially the NCOP, which is a custodian of
intergovernmental relations, is seen to be doing that.

In terms of the Act, the provinces and municipalities exercise their
distinctive powers within the regulatory and oversight framework as set by
national government. The national government therefore has a responsibility
to monitor compliance with those frameworks and, if need be, it can
intervene decisively if there is no compliance. Although the NCOP as a
custodian of intergovernmental relations provides a mechanism for improving
interaction and co-operation between government spheres, in this regard it
plays a very crucial role in terms of executive action.

I want to point out that the African Peer Review Mechanism has listed the
intergovernmental framework as a best practice. Parliament, especially the
NCOP, is in a better position to oversee effective implementation of this
system and, in so doing, can accelerate service delivery to our people.

Although we have a policy framework, legislation and other structures to
facilitate co-operation, there are, however, some challenges. These
challenges centre on turf battles and overemphasis on distinctiveness over
and above the interrelatedness and interdependence of all spheres of
government and organs of state. We do have cases where some departmental
officials refuse to co-operate.

The ANC wants to call on all organs of state to internalise the values that
underpin the public service and administration, as enshrined in our
Constitution. We are, first and foremost, servants of the people. The
interests of the people come first rather than our distinctive spheres of
fiefdoms. We need to develop a political culture of co-operation, mutual
respect and trust as a prerequisite for effective intergovernmental
relations. I thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr S SIMMONS: Chair, hon Speaker and colleagues, Parliament is certainly
one of our constitutional democracy’s most important pillars. I therefore
have to thank and congratulate the hon Speaker and the hon Chairperson of
the NCOP and presiding officers on their hard work and dedication to ensure
that this institution fulfils its constitutional mandate. Also, the
diligence of parliamentary staff cannot go unnoticed. Thank you all.

This does not mean that there is no room for improvement. One such area is
that of support to the smaller parties. Parties may differ in terms of
number of representatives but their primary function in this institution
remains the same. Therefore, I wish to call on the hon Speaker and all
other role-players to consider the current regime of support for parties
based entirely on the number of representatives in those parties in
Parliament.

The NA proposes that a minimum allocation system be introduced in order for
all parties to deliver the same quality of oversight work. One of the most
important aspects is access to quality research staff remunerated by
parties. The current allocation is of such a nature that if a small party
wishes to appoint a good researcher, a significant portion of that party’s
budget will be exhausted. Also, an adequate allocation should be made for
office infrastructure.

I would be failing in my duty if I did not question the manner in which the
Travelgate saga was concluded. This concern stems from the reluctance to
explore the sworn statements made in a court of law, implicating hon
members of this House. One would expect that a greater degree of
transparency would be shown in this matter, because we are answerable to
the electorate and the taxpayer. The NA supports this budget. I thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon Chairperson, Madam Speaker,
Deputy President of the ANC, members of the executive, hon members and our
guests in the gallery, this Parliament is founded on the will of the people
and, in terms of our Constitution, is a formal gathering of elected
representatives in a forum designed to deliberate and legislate on issues
affecting the electorate.

The National Assembly is a deliberative assembly with the democratic power
to create, amend, redraft and pass legislation, with an added mandate to
oversee the transformation of our society.

In modern-day government, Parliament’s role and functions have advanced to
oversee and scrutinise executive action and to hold the executive
accountable to the representatives of the people in a spirit of co-
operative governance. In the South African context, Parliament is an equal
arm of government, of equal constitutional standing, is independent from
and is interdependent with other arms of government.

Parliament has the exclusive authority, in passing the budget, to provide
the necessary resources to the government to execute the mandate they were
elected on and to ensure delivery to the people. It is therefore the
central role of Parliament to ensure that the democracy of which they are
the custodians is in the 21st century by ensuring government by the people,
and by being accountable to the electorate by providing access to
information on what government is doing in a progressive and transformative
legislative framework.

On the issue of the legislative framework, the presiding officers have
appointed a task team, under the leadership of the hon Fatima Chohan, which
will begin working and looking at our legislative process in terms of
Constitutional Court rulings and other High Court rulings as well as
interpreting our Constitution and drafting a guideline document for
committee chairpersons when considering legislation.

Parliament must ensure that when we carry out our oversight function, we
utilise the best available information and tools of the trade within the co-
operative governance model that our Constitution prescribes, with mutual
respect for the three arms and spheres of government. Parliament must
ensure that we encourage and entrench participatory democracy by being
accessible, responsive, and open to consulting those that elected us.

On this note, I think an area of work that we have not done in the past 14
years is that we have not defined the relationship between the legislature
and the executive. I think there is a serious misreading of accountability
in terms of how we understand the PFMA.

Parliament must also ensure that our legal, technical and administrative
support and the elected representatives buy into the modern-day information
society, and that the tools that are available to enhance our all-round
accessibility and core business functions are implemented. An example in
this Parliament is that 412 Members of Parliament are currently utilising
the unified communication system, which is still in its infancy but will,
in future, become the absolute communications facility for elected
representatives in Parliament.

We commend Parliament and the parliamentary service on this initiative,
which, at present, is a world leader in a communication solution for
Members of Parliament. Members of Parliament need to network with other
parliaments and colleagues around the globe, as outlined by hon House
Chairperson Bapela. They need real-time information and access to
international best practice at all times. Access to information is key to
legislators and the electorate, as we all need to be held accountable. We
need a transformed information society to craft and make good laws and to
carry out effective oversight to enhance the development of our country.

There are currently 26 portfolio committees. There is a committee of
chairpersons, six joint committees, a committee on public accounts, a
committee on the Auditor-General, a subcommittee on international affairs
that is part of the Foreign Affairs portfolio committee, and a committee on
private members’ legislative proposals and special petitions. This brings
to 37 the total number of committees. The functioning and co-ordination of
these committees and of their work and planning in the National Assembly is
facilitated through the committee of chairpersons.

Parliament has, in the past financial year, provided additional capacity to
the research unit to provide at least one researcher for each committee in
both the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces. Some
committees such as the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
Development, the Select Committee on Finance, the Committee on Public
Accounts, the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, and
the Joint Budget Committee are provided with two researchers each.

The recent improvement in committee support introduced substantive content
support to committees. In addition to dedicated research capacity, each
committee is provided with the following support, namely a content adviser,
a committee secretary, a committee assistant and a secretary to the
chairperson in addition to the researcher I mentioned. The content
advisers, who provide strategic advice to committees on content, will
provide analysis of information required by committees. The support
structure to committees will bring the support level up to at least five
support staff per committee, and in some committees with heavier workloads
up to six or seven staff members for each committee.

Members of Parliament and committees have had access to a fully functional
special library, the library of Parliament, including a full reference
service, interlibrary loans, a specialised clipping service, electronic and
hardcopy journal subscriptions, a comprehensive law section focusing on
South African law, processing and indexing acquisitions and special
services. However, since 2005 the library has increased its acquisition of
electronic sources of information and the provision of electronic
information products such as blogs.

The enhanced support to committees project also includes the appointment of
subject-specialist librarians per cluster of subject-related committees.
This is intended to improve the quality and relevance of information,
resources and products provided by the library of Parliament. Subject-
specialist librarians will also be required to provide proactive,
customised information to members and committees in specific areas of
interest.

Due to financial constraints, the appointment of subject-specialist
librarians has been held in abeyance until sufficient resources can be
secured in the budget. We call on the Secretary to Parliament to expedite
the availing of adequate resources, and the recruitment of these specialist
librarians to enhance the support to all committees of Parliament. From
2005 to date the budget for support to committee work in relation to
research and the library has increased by at least R6 million, and, in
terms of committees’ operational budgets and their support staff, by at
least R11,5 million.

In addition to the support already mentioned, the constitutional and legal
unit has assigned a legal adviser to provide legal and procedural advice to
each cluster of committees. We applaud the additional resources allocated
through the different divisions and sections of Parliament to support the
constitutional mandate of committees. This office also has the mandate of
ensuring that the use and deployment of ICT in Parliament is in the 21st
century. The House Chairperson of Committees and ICT is the representative
of Madam Speaker, who is a board member in the Global Centre for ICT in
Parliament.

This centre has done extensive work in developing the Africa
i-Parliament’s knowledge and information project, which is currently
benefiting a number of African parliaments. With me here are the reports
that have been recently released. Some of them were circulated at the IPU.
They are also available on the website. You will see the contribution that
the South African Parliament has made in this Global Centre for ICT in
Parliament.

Officers have been mandated to serve on the following structures of
Parliament, namely the Quarterly Consultative Forum, the Chief Whips’
Forum, the National Assembly Programme Committee, the National Assembly
Rules Committee, the Joint Rules Committee, the Budget Forum of Parliament,
the Focus Group on Committees - and a more recent development for the past
two years, Mr Davidson, has been the convening of the task team on the
remuneration of public office bearers.

All this is possible as I am supported by a very able and dedicated team of
personnel, who have only recently joined the Office of the Speaker. The
team is led by Ms Chenille Jales, executive assistant and head of the
office of the House Chairperson: Committees and ICT; Ms Kwanele Mashiyi,
committee co-ordinator; and Ms Nomusa Ntuli, executive secretary. I wish to
extend my sincerest gratitude and appreciation to this exceptional team of
dedicated people for the commitment that they have displayed to the many
challenges that we are faced with on a daily basis, including a very moody
boss, I am told. [Laughter.]

I wish to thank all the presiding officers, and you in particular, Madam
Speaker, for your wise leadership, as well as the Office of the Chief Whip
of the Majority Party, and all other political parties in Parliament, the
Secretariat, and in particular the Secretary and the Deputy Secretary to
Parliament, divisional managers and the entire parliamentary service, and,
last, but not least all the chairpersons of committees for their co-
operation and support in carrying out the mandate of this office.

A very special word of appreciation goes to the former Legislation and
Oversight Division manager, Mrs Keswa. I remember the old name of the
division, LOD. I give a special word of thanks to you and your division
and, in particular, Ms Zanele Mene and her colleagues Albert Mamabolo and
Gadija Abdullatief, as well as the NA Table led by Mr Mansura. I thank you
all very much. [Applause.]

One last commercial, Chairperson, which I am sure you won’t mind: with me I
have two publications, the new NA Rules and the Joint Rules of Parliament.
I only have one problem, Mr Mansura, which is that you have changed the
colour of the Joint Rules from blue to brown. I see you have maintained the
green. [Laughter.] But that is the new Rules book that all members will be
given. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mrs S A SEATON: Madam Speaker, Chairperson, given my time constraints today
I will not deal with the strategic plan or reflect on the many achievements
which I know we have made over the past years but, rather, I will
concentrate on a few important issues that require urgent attention.

I want to look at our budget process. The present preparation process is
totally unacceptable. We have a parliamentary Joint Budget Committee, which
rarely meets; when it does, the members are either not informed or are
informed at the very last minute, rendering the committee a committee in
name only, unable to adequately participate in crucial preparations for our
budget. This committee has to be given a new set of teeth and be allowed to
use them.

I would like to talk very briefly about computers, and the House
Chairperson Mr Skosana has said that well-resourced members make an
efficient Parliament. Many months ago a decision was taken that all members
would receive a laptop and a portable printer as well as a desktop and four-
in-one printer fax-scanner copier. It was also decided at the time that
management would investigate refunding those members who had diligently
been paying or refunding Parliament all along for their computers. It was
also decided that full responsibility would be taken by Parliament for
these computers until they became the property of members.

We are now well into our third term and nothing has yet happened and one
wonders why. There is still a lot to be sorted out. This begs the question:
Who is in control of Parliament - parliamentarians or officials? It seems
to me that we still have the tail wagging the dog, and it is high time that
Parliament was in full control of its members through the presiding
officers. It is time for us to ensure that the decisions taken by Members
of Parliament are carried through expeditiously.

Madam Speaker, I now come to an issue you would have expected me to raise
today: the issue of members’ pensions. This matter has been outstanding for
a very long time and it is most unfortunate that 14 years into our
democracy, in the last year of our term of office, we’re still struggling
to secure a decent, livable pension for Members of Parliament.

There is a private member’s proposal for a Bill dealing with the issue of
pensions. We need to speed up the processing of this Bill and conclude this
matter by the end of this month, ensuring that those members who are to
retire at the end of this term of office, which is next year, can do so
with dignity. Madam Speaker, I appeal to you not only in your capacity as
Speaker today, but also when it comes to the other hats you wear that
members have been referring to, as well as to the leadership of the ANC, to
see that we members have a decent pension at the end of this term of
office. [Applause.]

When it comes to the issue of House Chairpersons – the title - I would
strongly recommend that the title of “House Chairperson” be changed to that
of “Assistant Speaker” as the existing title confuses outsiders
tremendously. I think, at times, our own members are confused. They refer
to them as deputy chairpersons and the like, and I really think the time
has come for us to accept that they are, in fact, assistant speakers.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, this is the last Budget Vote for Parliament
in this term of office. I would like to express my appreciation to you in
particular for always being open to exchanging ideas and views, and
listening to the needs of members. I know that that is a concern of yours,
and it has been a pleasure working with you. I sincerely hope that on the
issue of pensions, you are going to work very hard with us over this next
little while. [Laughter.]

To my colleagues in the Whippery across party lines: thank you for your co-
operation and comradeship. Together we have achieved a great deal in the
past few years, and that is a fact. Because we’ve stood together and worked
together, we’ve achieved things, and I thank you all tremendously for that.
We can win when we work together.
To management, to heads of departments, to Mr Mansura and the Table
assistants who work with us on a daily basis, especially those of you
giving untiringly of your time and effort in the best interests of
Parliament at all times, I thank you all most sincerely. I really do hope
that we are going to move forward in a positive manner, that this
Parliament will leave something really wonderful for members that come
after us, and I sincerely hope that one of those will be a decent pension.
I thank you all. God bless you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Thank you, hon member. I don’t know
whether the hon Seaton realised that the hon Minister of Education said
“it’s a doek” when you said “hats”. [Laughter.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I must say that when you look at the
speaker’s list, when you participate in a debate of this nature, and you
see the hon Sybil Seaton’s name on the list, you know that one thing you
don’t have to mention is salaries, pensions and members’ interests –
anything - because she is going to do it for us. But I want to say, at the
same time, that that doesn’t mean that we disagree with what the hon Seaton
has said. We certainly do, and we thank her for the effort she has made in
this regard.

I want to say too that when you look at the speakers’ list that the ANC
presents at debates of this nature, you are often intrigued as to what
process they must have followed in choosing their speakers. I must say that
it was particularly noticeable to me this year that the hon Andries Nel was
not speaking. Normally, he makes a remarkably good input. I want to say to
the hon Nel that I hope that you haven’t been dropped, that maybe you are
just being rested for this debate. [Laughter.]

Madam Speaker gave a very thorough overview of our Parliament and what we
have and what we have been achieving and what we are achieving at present.
Other speakers such as the hon Chief Whip of the ANC, the hon Q – I’ve
forgotten what his initials are – the hon Mr Doidge and others certainly
did exactly the same thing. But they painted a very rosy picture of the way
we conduct ourselves in this institution. It’s “G Q M” Doidge; that’s
better, Geoff. Now I remember. Thank you very much indeed.

Certainly, many mechanisms have been created for Parliament to fulfil its
three key objectives, which are, and I name them: to pass laws, to oversee
and scrutinise executive action, and to facilitate public participation and
involvement. In other words, it is elected to act as the voice of all South
Africans, a point that the ANC Chief Whip made very clearly.

But, despite what many ANC spokespersons have said, including here the hon
G Q M Doidge, over the years one has tended to note that Parliament has
tended to transform itself into an institution that largely contradicts how
it is portrayed on paper. Many people begin to question more and more the
extent to which it does serve the interests of all our citizens or just the
interests of the majority party.

These contradictions play themselves out in many areas. Perhaps it was best
demonstrated by a point made by the Chief Whip of the Opposition, the hon
Davidson, earlier in this debate on the dual role currently held by the
Speaker of the National Assembly. I want to say, Madam Speaker, we really
have nothing against you as a person, and I really mean that very
sincerely. But the question has to be asked again and again: How is it that
a person mandated to protect the independence and integrity of our
legislature meant to fulfil this duty if she also serves on two of the
highest decision-making bodies in the majority party, namely that of ANC
Chairperson and Chair of the ANC’s political committee?

While it appears that Parliament is achieving the objective of passing
laws, there are two important points to be made in this regard. The first
is that the legislative powers of Parliament have, and we believe this very
sincerely, been largely undermined by the majority party.

The ruling party has largely attempted to turn the legislature into a
rubber stamp to further its own political interests, which are set not in
this Parliament but in Luthuli House. This is made evident by a number of
pieces of legislation that are currently being rushed through Parliament,
including the General Laws Amendment Bill, which will disband the
Scorpions, the Expropriation Bill, and the Protection of Information Bill.
All of these are a great indictment of this Parliament, but also of the ANC
as to how it intends to run this country.

Secondly, it has taken Parliament over three years for the Financial
Management of Parliament Act to be introduced to a parliamentary committee,
and for this committee to deliberate and consult stakeholders. How is
Parliament expected to pass Bills that must be implemented by government
departments when it cannot even adopt a Bill meant for itself? This is a
very important piece of legislation that is, at this stage, all but lost.
The hon Bapela also raised this matter, and it is essential for this
Parliament that this Bill is resurrected and this must happen soon.

In the same vein, while we are under enormous pressure to pass these and
many other Bills, we find our work drastically reduced for the rest of this
year. I want to remind you, Madam Speaker, of what you said in this debate
last year.

  Hon members, I have raised the matter of the changing patterns in the
  functioning of Parliament as we move further away from the beginning of
  the democratic dispensation with its attendant institutions. Previously
  during informal discussions on drastically cutting down the time spent by
  MPs in Cape Town, a caution was raised. This related to concerns from the
  executive council cutting the time down could immobilise the institution
  when important legislation needs to be passed.

This is a valid concern you said, Madam Speaker, that requires our
collective careful consideration.

But, suddenly, as we get to the end of this particular Parliament, we find
that the amount of time set aside for debate for the rest of the year, has
been drastically reduced. We are going to spend only 15 days from the end
of June through to the end of the year trying to process 60 pieces of
legislation in an almost impossible amount of time. So, Madam Speaker, I
urge you, even at this stage, to go back and read what you said to us last
year in Parliament and see, even at this stage, if we cannot make
Parliament infinitely more credible as we move towards the end of the year.
Thank you very much indeed. [Applause.]

Mrs M M MADUMISE: Chairperson, allow me to leave the hon Ellis in the hands
of our capable Speaker. Please deal with him, and deal with him
effectively! [Laughter.]

I stand here, Maureen Madumise, to support this Budget Vote. I am
supporting this Budget Vote simply because it is going to make the lives of
parliamentarians different from all the other years. Unfortunately, I will
not be able to be part of this, but I would like the Speaker to honestly
take her cue from the hon Seaton about our pension. [Laughter.] Thank you
very much. [Applause.]

Parliament is one of the arms of government and is the highest lawmaking
institution in the country. Therefore, our role as parliamentarians is an
important and varied one as we are involved in processing legislation,
exercising oversight and working in our constituencies. In order for
Members of Parliament to do their work effectively, Parliament has to
ensure that members are adequately resourced.

When I look back, it is clear that we have made considerable progress, but
more has to be done. One of the areas in which we have made progress is
with ICT. But we are still not using what we have to great effect. It is
envisaged that Parliament be made a paperless institution, and we need to
reflect on how far we have come in this regard. Are we using the technology
at our disposal to achieve this paperless dream? I think a great deal more
effort must be put in by all of us to make the kind of progress we desire.

At my age - and I want to challenge you, hon Dr Buthelezi - I can receive
and send e-mails using my laptop, even to you. [Laughter.] I can even use
the new cellphone that I carry in my pocket as a computer. I can use that
effectively to communicate with you. [Laughter.] I refuse to be intimidated
by technology. That I am not going to allow, not at my age. [Laughter.]
As Parliament is not a corporation that has an endless stream of money,
this does place a great deal of strain on the resources we have available
to us to be effective. Of course, we do not expect everything to be
resolved overnight. Parliament’s budget has to therefore strike a balance
somehow to accommodate its different responsibilities so as to fulfil its
constitutional mandate to the people of South Africa. We are truly
privileged to be here representing the aspirations of our people. While
there are shortcomings, I am sure Parliament will address those as we
progress towards ushering in our fourth Parliament in 2009.

Parliament should ensure that members’ travel entitlements are adequately
provided for. Very often, the allocation is not sufficient because we find,
at the beginning of every year, that there are a number of MPs who come to
us pleading for entitlements or vouchers to go and do work. One of them is
Dorothy Ramodibe. [Laughter.] When you have used up all your vouchers you
come to me for more. [Laughter.] So, the Speaker must see to it that the
entitlements are enough for all the members so that they are able to do
their work in the constituencies they belong to and do not have to come to
me to give them entitlements to be able to do their work. I am not
Parliament. I am Maureen Madumise. [Laughter.]

On that note, Madam Speaker, in your absence ... [Interjections.] Where are
you?

The SPEAKER: I am here.

Mrs M M MADUMISE: Oh, thank you very much. You are listening to me. On that
note we welcome the new travel system that you will introduce soon and it
will enable Parliament to close the gap that was greatly abused by some of
us, although not me in particular. [Laughter.]

An issue under discussion involves the assignment of staff to members. When
are we going to get one secretary per member so that the members of this
Parliament can be effective in doing their work? This is an issue I am sure
will be resolved as Parliament proceeds with its strategic plan. A major
obstacle in finalising this is the lack of space. But, I believe, progress
is being made in this regard, as you said.

Ideally, members should be provided with a secretary, a researcher and an
administrator. Fortunately for me, I have an assistant who does all three.
But that is the exception rather than the rule, because I am me.
[Laughter.] I wish to take this opportunity to thank him – that is Keith
Woodman, my secretary – for the wonderful support he has given me, which
makes my life as a member so much easier.

Parliament, of course, provides members with administrative support as far
as it is able, and we are very grateful. But there is a question of work
ethics – absenteeism. Madam Speaker, I have never seen a thing like this in
my life. When you phone an office – not my office, Keith is very reliable
... [Laughter.] – looking for the secretary of a member, the secretary is
not there, the administrator is not there and the researcher is nowhere to
be found to help me develop my speech to speak in your Budget Vote debate,
Madam Speaker. [Laughter.]

One is aware of the activity taking place with respect to the refurbishing
of offices. I urge this House to pass a resolution right now, Madam
Speaker, to put my office at the top ... [Laughter.] ... because I won’t be
here next year, so that I can at least enjoy comfort for the couple of
months that I will be here.

This is, however, an important process as we receive guests from faraway
places. We should be able to make people who visit our offices comfortable
during their time here. It will also add to the decorum of Parliament and
instil greater pride in this august House.

The refurbishment must be accompanied by cleaning - I don’t know when last
my office was cleaned, ooh, uh uh ... [Laughter.] - and maintenance. I am
aware that there are efforts in this regard. I think a great effort should
be made to provide a well-maintained air-conditioning system and lifts that
work all the time. Most of the members are late for their committee work
because of the lifts around here. They get stuck all the time. I remember
that you, hon Mangosuthu Buthelezi, were once stuck in a lift for hours on
end. You were rushing to a meeting. You were still a Minister then. You
remember? [Laughter.]

As a member of the Portfolio Committee on Health, it is appropriate for me
to speak about the healthy lifestyle programme implemented by the
Department of Health.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Is that a point of order, hon
Buthelezi?

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Yes. I didn’t quite hear what the lady wanted to know
from me.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon Madumise, the hon Buthelezi
wants to know what you asked him.

Mrs M M MADUMISE: Do you need a hearing aid? Are you like me? [Laughter.] I
said that you were once delayed in a lift that got stuck. It got stuck. You
were still a Minister then. Now, I’m saying ... [Interjections.]

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: I didn’t know you were behind that, madam.
[Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon Madumise, could you conclude?
Your time has expired. Just conclude, please.

Mrs M M MADUMISE: A ko mphe nakonyana e nngwe hle! [Just give me a little
more time, please!]

Parliament is required to support the operational activities of the members
of both the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces by
providing the necessary operational facilities. It has to do this within
the budget. I am not going to waste my time on the budget allocations. A
lot has been said thus far.

As members, we made a conscious decision not to determine our own salaries.
Moseneke, do something about it. [Laughter.] And, in doing so, please
include the thirteenth cheque, hle mme [please ma’am]. [Laughter.]

Members, as instruments in the entrenchment of parliamentary democracy,
should be appropriately remunerated. We are here to serve the people of
South Africa. The facilities provided by Parliament are to be used for the
benefit of the people.

In conclusion, I wish to remind us all that as members we should take the
lead in preserving the decorum of this august House at all times. Thank
you. I support this Budget Vote. [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, I rise on a point of order. The hon Madumise
made a very important speech. But during the course of it, she put forward
a resolution to Parliament that her office goes to the top of the list in
terms of refurbishment. We’ve just had a quick meeting of the DA and want
to second that proposal. [Laughter.] We believe that this very important
item should now go to the vote, sir. [Laughter.]

Mrs S A SEATON: Chairperson, I rise on a point of order. The DA has already
got theirs for their top people, we haven’t. [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Well, let this then go back to the
Chief Whips Forum to be decided on there.

The SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairperson. Thank God I left myself some
minutes earlier, so maybe I could go through most of the issues, even if it
is not all of them.

I’ll start with the travel voucher issue. Just for the information of the
House, this issue has been on the agenda and there have been briefings at
the Parliamentary Oversight Authority, as well as the Chief Whips’ Forum on
the latest developments. Briefly just to say that unfortunately the
liquidation process has been very slow, as well as erroneous – as hon Van
der Merwe has pointed out. It is a matter on which one would need more than
what I am able to say here. We believe that in particular because of the
countless cases where members were wrongly targeted in the liquidation
process, to a point where a lot of what resulted in litigation against
members was then rescinded by the courts.

We believe that these matters have to be brought to a close. I agree with
Mr Van der Merwe that it is not something that we intend leaving for the
Fourth Parliament. We should try and bring it to a close and we are in
discussion now – and this is the latest development – with the liquidators
about how best to wrap up the matter as quickly as possible, including all
the matters that were raised by hon members.

The next issue is the capacity to implement resolutions of the House. It is
a matter that in fact presently we are looking into because what we
normally do, whether it has been the People’s Assembly or resolutions that
emanate from the House, we always forward them to the relevant offices of
the Minister. The question that I have just recently posed to us internally
as Parliament is: To what extent are we following up to make sure that
there has been implementation, and that is a matter on which I have to come
back.

An issue was raised, I think by Mr Davidson, relating to Mr Erwin. I want
to say that on 17 August there was a statement delivered by the Minister on
issues relating to a particular incident at the electricity generator and
members had an opportunity to respond to that statement.
On 19 September 2006 there was again a debate on a motion that was moved by
the then Chief Whip of the DA relating to statements reportedly made by Mr
Erwin. Again on 30 January 2008 there was a joint sitting debate on the
national energy challenges and Mr Erwin participated in that debate. It
can’t be correct to say that he has never been held to account. He has
actually appeared before this House. [Interjections.]

On constituency work, I can only report that the money allocated to each
member has increased from R77 000 per member per year in 2004 to R414 000
per member per year. That is all that I am going to report.

As regards the set of issues raised by hon Godi relating to roll-over
finds, one set of these we inherited from the Second Parliament. The second
reason why we accumulated these moneys was that there would be lots of
vacancies that would not be filled and that money would stay there. The
other aspect was in the budgeting process and that was the issue of
overbudgeting. That is what accounts for the accumulation of roll-over
funds, which, as Mr Godi said, have now been brought down to an increasing
extent.

The question is: What has happened to that money? Some of that money went
into starting the space utilisation project. I don’t have the amount here
but it comes to about R300 million, for instance for the work that I
referred to earlier that is happening in Africa House and the executive
suites, as well as in the Speaker’s Offices. A total of R130 million was
allocated to operations and this was because a request by Parliament for
additional funding was declined. In fact, we were referred back to the
rollover funds and so the amount of R130 million was used in that respect.

We wish to report that Parliament has spent all of its voted funds for 2007-
08 and that is the financial year that is currently being audited. A point
was made, I think by hon Davidson, that Parliament must go back to its
former glory. Where was the former glory? What we know is what the record
tells us and that is that this Parliament has been steadily developing its
capacity and has been improving along the lines that have been put before
the House.

As regards the points raised by Ms Seaton about the budget process and the
budget forum meetings, we do need to look into that and the forum needs to
start meeting. It should have started meeting. I agree with your points.

The computers issue is on the agenda of the next POA meeting. You heard Mr
Skosana indicating that it is a matter that is being dealt with as we
speak. As regards members’ pensions, the Bill is in the process and there
is a lot of discussion. There is a process and, in fact, a delegation is
going to see the President in order to engage with him before he makes his
final determination on how to respond to the recommendations made by the
Moseneke Commission. We will engage with him next week. We are finalising
the date with the President’s Office so that the delegation, that will
include hon Seaton and hon Ellis, will go and interact with the President
in this respect.

As regards the question of the terminology for the House Chairpersons, it
was actually originally Assistant Speakers but then, with engagement and
consultation, it ended up as House Chairpersons. Now there is a proposal
that it should go back to Assistant Speakers. Like every other matter in
Parliament, it will be subjected to a process of engagement and put through
the mill and then we will see what the outcome is.

I really enjoyed hon Madumise’s speech. I think I have covered most of the
points ...

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: It was entertainment for all of us.

The SPEAKER: Yes, it was indeed, especially for Baba Buthelezi. Thank you
very much, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

                       PALESTINIANS COMMEMORATE NAKBA

                            (Member’s Statement)
Ms K R MAGAU (ANC): Chairperson, this year the world marks the 60th
anniversary of the Nakba, which commemorates the 1948 events that saw the
mass deportation of a million Palestinians from their cities and villages,
the massacre of civilians and the razing to the ground of hundreds of
Palestinian villages.

It is an irony of history that the Nakba occurred in the very year, 1948,
that the international community declared with one voice, through the
adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, that “Everyone has
the right to a nationality. No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his
property. No one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment.”

The international community represented by the United Nations General
Assembly has expressed itself on this tragedy many a time. One of the most
important pronouncements on this matter is UN General Assembly Resolution
194, which was passed on 11 December 1948 and has been reaffirmed every
year since then.

Nakba was not a once-off event. It continues today with the confiscation of
Palestinian land and the expansion of settlements. And 60 years on, refugee
camps still exist in different parts of Palestine.

The ANC believes that a peaceful settlement of the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict, in line with the UN resolution, will bring lasting peace between
Israel and Palestine as well as the whole of the Middle East. I thank you.
[Applause.]

                    CONDITIONS IN REFUGEE CAMP IN MIDRAND

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr D T GEORGE (DA): Chairperson, last Monday I visited the Midrand refugee
camp and place of safety, located in my constituency, for 350 people
previously sheltered at the Rabie Ridge police station. Although the DA
supports the relocation from the police station, it is clear that the
disaster management plan was not implemented effectively.

The tents were erected on a barren intersection on private land without the
owner’s knowledge or permission and without regard for the dignity of the
human beings who must live there. There was no food or cooking equipment
and the water tank had run dry. There were no medical facilities or shower
facilities. There was no fence and security was minimal.

On Sunday I visited again. Although conditions had improved significantly,
with the assistance of the local community and nongovernmental
organisations, the water supply remained inadequate and only the local
authority can resolve this.

The South Africans at the camp and those who originated from Zimbabwe and
Mozambique want to be reintegrated. The 27 Malawians at the camp want to be
repatriated to Malawi. This process has not been initiated nor has there
been any communication in this regard.

The DA calls on government to act to resolve this humanitarian crisis by
ensuring that there is a sufficient supply of water to the camp and that
the reintegration process is initiated and properly managed to prevent any
further violence. Thank you.

                              GOVERNMENT BONDS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr N SINGH (IFP): Chairperson, the South African government and a variety
of public enterprises have embarked on a massive infrastructure spending
programme to enable our country to achieve higher rates of growth and to be
in a position to meet the challenges of tomorrow head-on.

Obviously, someone has to pay the hundreds of billions of rands needed for
this expansion programme. Some of the costs will be funded directly from
the fiscus via tax revenue, and some of the costs will be borne by
companies such as Transnet and Eskom by raising finance from their balance
sheets in the equity markets. Another funding avenue for government is to
issue bonds.
Currently, South Africa is running a budget surplus and no new government
bonds have been issued for a while, meaning that there is a shortage in the
market. However, the infrastructure programme may necessitate new
government bonds being issued in the short term. It is therefore of the
greatest concern to the IFP that existing government bonds are taking a
beating at the moment due to the weak rand, high oil prices and the general
edginess ahead of the forthcoming monetary policy committee decision on
interest rates.

The yields for the R153, 157 and 186 bonds climbed in trading on Monday,
and we are aware that yields move inversely to bond prices. Last week
foreigners were net sellers of more than a billion rands in local bonds.
Should this trend continue, it means that government will have to pay out
much higher amounts when these bonds mature, placing pressure on national
revenue and spending capacity. It would have been an advantage if the hon
Minister of Finance were here so that we could hear his views on these
worrying trends. Thank you.

                   SERVICE DELIVERY IN MOKWAKWAILA VILLAGE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Manana C NKUNA (ANC): Inkomu eka Mutshamaxitulu, hi ku yimela vaaki va le
ka Mokwakwaila eLimpopo, thekinoloji ya tsotsomba. Hambiswiritano, hi
tsakela ku khensa Ndzawulo ya swavuhlanganisi mayelana na hofisi ya poso
leyi simekiweke masiku lama hundzeke leyi nga ka korhokela miganga ya 63.
Vaaki va ta posa na ku amukela mapapila, va ta pfula tiakhawunti, va ta
veka na ku teka mali. Vutomi byi antswela tolo eka Mokwakwaila.

Hi kombela ku hatliseriwa hi vukorhokeri bya “Information Technology”. Xa
vumbirhi, eka Department ya Home Affairs eGiyani hi kombela mi engetela
nkarhi eka vukorhokeri bya nwina leswaku mi nga siyi vanhu mi nga va
pfunanga.

Xo hetelela xikontiri lexi sukaka eka Matipane xi ya eGiyani xa karhi xa
hela vanhu va kota ku famba kahle va ya vona “Multipurpose Community
Centre” leyi nga kona. Inkomu. [Phokotela.] [Va phokotela.] (Translation of
Xitsonga member’s statement follows.)

[Ms C NKUNA: Thank you, Chairperson. I am speaking on behalf of the
residents of Mokwakwaila in Limpopo who feel that technological advancement
in their area is slow. However, we would like to thank the Department of
Communications for the post office which has been established a few days
ago to service 63 villages. Residents will now be able to send and receive
mail, and even open savings accounts. Life is indeed getting better in
Mokwakwaila.

We are, however, firstly asking for the speedy delivery of information
technology services. Secondly, we would like to request that the Department
of Home Affairs in Giyani extend their service times so that no one is left
without being attended to.
Lastly, the construction of the tarred road stretching from Matipane to
Giyani is in its final stages. This will give people access to the existing
multipurpose community centre. Thank you. [Applause.]]

                              MILLION MEN MARCH

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N C NKABINDE (UDM): Chair, today the Million-Man March took place in
Pretoria. South Africans from all walks of life marched peacefully to the
seat of government to express their concern about crime in this country. To
show the UDM’s support for this initiative, party leader Bantu Holomisa
joined the march. The UDM views this march as part of bolstering efforts to
combat crime in South Africa.

It will send a strong message to the would-be perpetrators of crime.
Government should take this march seriously. It is not just a once-off
event, but an expression of deep-seated concerns. Crime in this country is
killing and maiming our brothers, sisters, parents and children. It takes
from our midst the people we love and the people we depend on.

Crime has affected all of us, from the rural areas to the suburbs, from the
President to the homeless. It has cost our economy dearly as well, thereby
contributing to unemployment and general suffering. Unfortunately, it has
impacted on service delivery too with senior government officials being
involved in white-collar crime.

We salute the initiatives taken by the organisers of this march and by all
those who participated in it. I thank you, Chairperson.

                      RACISM PRACTISED BY UNIVERSITIES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr C P MULDER (FF Plus): Hon Chairperson, racism is alive and well in South
Africa and is being nurtured and developed by some of our universities.
What is even more upsetting is the fact that those who are participating in
or practising racism are relying on the Constitution and legislation from
this Parliament.

Here in my hand I hold the guidelines for admission to the University of
Cape Town for 2009 for holders of the National Senior Certificate. This is
for this year’s Grade 12 pupils in our schools. The University of Cape Town
has its own racial classification on its campus. Students have to indicate
whether they are black, brown, Indian or white. What a disgrace! But that
is not all. They then go on to blatantly discriminate between black, brown,
Indian and white people internally.

If you wish to study medicine at UCT in 2009, as a black student you have
to obtain 74%; if you are brown you have to obtain 78%; if you are Indian
you have to obtain 88%; and if you are white you have to obtain an average
of 91%. That is not happening in 1950s apartheid but is happening in the
democratic South Africa of 2008.

For this, UCT relies on the founding principles of our Constitution and on
the Higher Education Act of 1997. Who are these children who are being
treated in this way? My own daughter is one of them. She was born in May
1990. This is after Mr Mandela was released. All of them - black, brown,
Indian and white - were only four years old in 1994 when the ANC came into
power. They were all seven years old in Grade 1 when the ANC had already
been governing for three years. They were all in the same schools with the
same educational frameworks and opportunities. The University of Cape Town
is a racist institution and a disgrace to our Constitution.

               BUS ACCIDENTS IN DIFFERENT PARTS OF THE COUNTRY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Nk M D NXUMALO (ANC): Sihlalo, uKhongolose ufisa ukwedlulisa ukudabuka
okukhulu emuva kwemibiko yezingozi zamabhasi ezenzeka ezindaweni ezehlukene
ezweni lakithi. Lezi zingozi yilokhu ziqhubeka nokuthatha izimpilo zabantu
bakithi. Okubuhlungu kakhulu ukuthi phakathi kwabashonayo kukhona
nabantwana abancane kakhulu kanjalo nabazali abashiya abantwana
sebeyizintandane. Sinokwesaba okukhulu mayelana nokwenyuka kwenani labantu
abashonayo kulezi zingozi. Siyazwelana kakhulu nemindeni eshonelwe
ngokunjalo nemindeni yalabo abalinyalelwe yizihlobo zabo.

Siyazi ukuthi ukujula kwamanxeba esinawo kungefaniswe nawezihlobo zegazi
ngokunjalo nemindeni yabo abalimele kulezi zingozi. Siyabonga kwabosizo
lokuqala ngemizamo yabo futhi siphinde sibonge abasebenzi basezibhedlela
ezamukele abalimele kulezi zingozi ngokuzikhandla kwabo. UKhongolose wenza
isicelo kuzo zonke izimboni zamabhasi ukuthi ziqaphele izimo abashayeli
bamabhasi abasebenza ngaphansi kwazo, njengamahora abawasebenzayo futhi
kumele kube khona abengeziwe abazophumuzana nomshayeli uma kuhanjwa ibanga
elide. Lokhu kuzonciphisa izingozi ezibangwa ukukhathala kwabashayeli.
Siyacela siwuKhongolose ukuthi uMnyango Wezokuthutha nohulumeni
abangenelele ukuze kuncishiswe le nkinga engaka yezingozi.

Thina njengoKhongolose sithi ayiqine imthetho elawula izimo zamabhasi
namatekisi athutha imiphakathi yakithi. Siyayikhalisa kakhulu imiphakathi
eyakhele izwe laseNingizimu Afrika. Emindenini elinyalelwe nabalimele uqobo
sithi uNkulunkulu abe nabo futhi belulame emoyeni nasezinhlungwini.
Emindenini nasezihlotsheni zabedlulile emhlabeni sithi, “Dudu, akwehlanga
lungehli”. Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu member’s
statement follows.)

[Ms M D NXUMALO: Chairperson, the ANC wishes to express its deepest shock
at the reports of bus accidents happening in different parts of our
country. These accidents claim the lives of our people. It further saddens
us that amongst the casualties, there are young children as well as parents
who leave their children orphaned. And we are very concerned about the
increasing number of people who are killed in these accidents. We convey
our heartfelt condolences to the bereaved families and we sympathise with
the families whose relatives are victims.

We understand that the pain that we feel cannot be compared to the pain
felt by the blood relatives and the families of the victims of these
accidents. We thank the first aiders for their attempts and we also thank
the employees from the hospitals that admitted the victims of these
accidents for their tireless efforts.

The ANC is making a plea to all bus companies to revisit the conditions
under which bus drivers work. Conditions such as working hours and the
question of co-drivers for long distances should be addressed. This will
minimise accidents caused by driver fatigue. We, as the ANC, ask the
Department of Transport and government to intervene so as to diminish this
major problem of road accidents.

We, as the ANC, say that the laws that regulate the bus and taxi
industries, which transport our communities, must be strictly enforced. We
sympathise with the communities in this country. And to the families of the
victims and the victims themselves we say: May God be with them and we wish
them a speedy recovery both spiritually and physically. To the bereaved
families and relatives we say that what happened is a matter of destiny;
may they find solace in accepting it as such. Thank you. [Applause.]]

                               REFUGEE CRISIS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S SIMMONS (NA): Chair, the NA has, for a long time, suspected that the
ANC government and its officials are not always honest with the South
African people.

It was reported in the media on 5 June that Dr Lionel Louw of the Office of
the Premier of the Western Cape had told civil society organisations that a
decision had been made at national Cabinet level to formally ask the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to intervene in the refugee crisis.
It was then established that this was not the case.

This is indicative of the ANC government’s modus operandi. The ANC
government is further increasing the lack of trust between itself and the
electorate, and it is a disgrace that nongovernmental organisations are
unable to take the word of government in good faith. I thank you.
                        RAND WATER BOARD WAGE DISPUTE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs D VAN DER WALT (DA): Chairperson, it is unfortunate that the majority
of residents in Gauteng, North West, the Free State and Mpumalanga could be
without water for the rest of this week because of a wage dispute between
the Rand Water Board and the SA Municipal Workers Union.

Water is a source of life and no individual can live without it. Therefore,
the DA urges the Rand Water Board to meet Samwu’s demand for a proper
increment to avoid the chance of residents going for days without any
water.

Rand Water is not the only water board that is confronted by disillusioned
and underpaid staff. Earlier this year the DA released a document
containing the enormous skills challenges that prevent water boards from
supplying healthy drinking water to the public. We also highlighted that
the majority of water boards are experiencing an exodus of staff in pursuit
of better working conditions. Their departure to greener pastures leaves
water boards without the necessary skills for healthy water provision. The
challenging conditions that water board staff work under justify their
demands for better remuneration. Thank you, Chair.

                           HEALTH OF AFRICAN WOMEN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D C MABENA (ANC): Chairperson, the head of the United Nations Population
Fund has noted that the health of African women is lagging behind the rest
of the world. As a society, we need to move this to the top of our agenda.

Of all the Millennium Development Goals, goal number 5, which is preventing
women’s death during pregnancy and childbirth, is generating the least
resources and lagging the furthest behind. The ANC believes that, as a
country, we need to work to eradicate all manifestations and consequences
of patriarchy, including the feminisation of poverty, physical and
physiological abuse, the undermining of self-confidence, and open and
hidden forms of exclusion from positions of authority and power.

Critical in this regard is the creation of the material and cultural
conditions that would allow the abilities of women to flourish and enrich
the life of all humanity. The ANC remains committed to the struggle for the
emancipation of women, the combating of sexism and ensuring that the voice
of women is heard fully in the running of the affairs of our country. I
thank you. [Applause.]

           IMPASSE BETWEEN PRIVATE HOSPITALS AND HEALTH DEPARTMENT
                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr R RABINOWITZ (IFP): Chairperson, in view of the current impasse between
private hospitals and the Department of Health and 14 years of mistrust
that has prevailed between the agents delivering private health and the hon
Minister of Health, the IFP calls for more transparent consultations
between representatives of private hospitals, private pharmaceutical
manufacturers, private medical schemes, pharmacies and doctors, on the one
hand, and government regulating bodies, namely the Council for Medical
Schemes, the Board of Healthcare Funders, the Medicines Control Council and
the Department of Health, on the other.

Failing this, we are concerned that shotgun legislation, based on mistrust
and incomplete evidence, will be counterproductive to building a bridge
between the public health sector and the private health sector so that they
work together to achieve the Millennium Development Goals. Thank you.

                       CHILD MORTALITY RATES IN AFRICA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs W S NEWHOUDT-DRUCHEN (ANC): Chairperson, on the occasion of the Fourth
Tokyo International Conference on African Development on 28 May 2008,
Unicef globally launched the “State of Africa’s Children, 2008” on child
survival.

The executive director of Unicef pointed out that every year nearly 10
million children die before their fifth birthday, and half of these deaths
occur in Africa. In sub-Saharan Africa the mortality rate for children
under the age of five decreased by 14% between 1990 and 2006. However, with
one in every six children dying before their fifth birthday, sub-Saharan
Africa still remains the most difficult place in the world for a child to
survive.

The recent attacks on foreign nationals and South Africans have also had a
negative impact on the survival status of children in South Africa. South
Africa is a signatory to the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of
the Child, and the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. We
need, as a nation, to remain cognisant of the millions of children across
the world and on our continent who battle for survival on a daily basis.

The campaign on the protection of children and the promotion of their
rights must not be limited to a week, but must be part of our daily
commitments. Thank you. [Applause.]

                             POACHING OF RHINOS

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr G R MORGAN (DA): Chair, the DA notes that there has recently been a
significant increase in the poaching of rhinos in South Africa.

A recent reply to a DA parliamentary question by the Minister of
Environmental Affairs and Tourism revealed that over the past four calendar
years, 44 white rhinos were killed by poachers in the Kruger National Park.
I am told by park officials that already this year more than 10 white
rhinos have been killed.

It is for this reason that the DA welcomes last week’s announcement by the
Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism that there will now be a
national moratorium on the trade in individual rhino horns. This will allow
the necessary time for all conservation authorities to ensure that the
procedures for the legal export of rhino horns are consistent, enforceable
and not undermined by loopholes. It has been found that some individuals
had been applying for permits to hunt rhino, but that the legal hunts never
happened, and that these individuals holding permits were then legally
exporting illegally obtained horns.

The strengthening of our protocols will, hopefully, make it tougher for
poachers to operate in South Africa. Nevertheless, owing to the fact that
many of our protected areas are now effectively transboundary parks, that
is, they span our borders, it is important that our neighbouring countries
enact a similar moratorium while they get their own houses in order.
The horns of rhinos that are poached in the Kruger National Park, for
example, are not just exported out of South Africa, but are also exported
out of Mozambique. I trust that the Minister will engage with his
counterparts in our neighbouring countries to ensure that the relevant
protocols that were signed before the establishment of the transboundary
conservation areas are fully enforced. I thank you. [Applause.]

                       SOCIAL INEQUALITY AND SCHOOLING

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr B G MOSALA (ANC): Chairperson, according to a report released on
Wednesday last week by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organisation, Unesco, social inequality has a major impact on the
kind of schooling children receive and it poses a significant challenge to
providing all children with equal learning opportunities.

The data reveals how social inequality affects a child’s opportunity to
learn and, clearly, no country, rich or poor, is immune to these
disparities. The report reveals a particularly glaring gap between
resources available to urban and rural schools.

Education is a foundation of democratic societies and globally competitive
economies. It is the basis for reducing poverty and inequality, improving
health, enabling the use of new technologies and creating and spreading
knowledge.

The ANC believes that education must be elevated from being a departmental
or governmental issue to a societal issue - one that occupies the attention
and energy of all South Africans. Education is fundamental to the
achievement of the society envisaged in the Freedom Charter. Thank you.
[Applause.]

                              OPERATION ISONDLO

                            (Member’s Statement)

Nk B T NGCOBO (ANC): Sihlalo, uMnyango Wezobulungiswa siwushayela ihlombe
ngokuthi ubhekelele ukusabalalisa uhlelo lokondliwa kwabantwana olubizwa
nge-Operation Isondlo. Lolu hlelo luqale eLimpopo ngo-2005. Kulo nyaka ka-
2008 lusabalalele KwaZulu-Natal, lapho obaba babantwana bephoqeleka ukuthi
bondle abantwana. Njengamanje uMnyango KwaZulu-Natal uqashe laba okuthiwa
abaphenyi kanye nalabo futhi abaqeqeshwe ngokomthetho abangabasebenzi
bezesondlo ukuthi kube yibo abazokwenza umsebenzi ubukade wenziwa abantu
besifazane abawomama.

Siyakuncoma-ke lokhu ngoba uyakwazi ukulandelela labo baba abangondli.
Waphinda futhi waqoqa obaba bezingane ukuthi kuxoxiswane ngoba nabo
baneqhaza okufanele balibambe njengabazali. Kuwo lo nyaka abantu abayizi-
5009 balandelelwe yilezi zakhiwo kwaze kwagcina kutholakale imali eyisigidi
esi-1.5 zamarandi enikezwe labo mama obekufanele banikezwe. Lolu hlelo-ke
lunikeza obaba nomama nezingane amandla. SinguKhongolose sithi obaba
abadlala umacashelana amahlathi aphelile sizobabamba. Ngiyabonga.
[Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu member’s statement follows.)

[Ms B T NGCOBO (ANC): Chairperson, we applaud the Department of Justice for
facilitating and spreading the programme called Operation Isondlo. This
programme started in Limpopo in 2005. This year, 2008, it has spread to
KwaZulu-Natal where the fathers are compelled to pay maintenance for their
children. Right now the relevant department in KwaZulu-Natal has employed
investigators and maintenance prosecutors who would do the work that was
done by the women.

We applaud this initiative because it will make a follow-up on those
fathers who do not pay maintenance. The department also called together the
fathers of these children in order to engage them, because they also have a
role to play as parents. Just this year alone, at least 5 009 fathers were
investigated through this programme and this led to the recovery of R1,5
million which was given to the women who were the beneficiaries. This
programme gives the mothers, fathers and children power. As the African
National Congress, we say to the fathers who play hide and seek, there is
nowhere to hide, we are going to catch them. Thank you. [Applause.]]
                    CONDITIONS IN REFUGEE CAMP IN MIDRAND
                              MILLION MEN MARCH

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, members of this House, I
am part of a joint task team which was put together in order for us to
respond to the issue of people who have been displaced as a consequence of
the violence that erupted in our country recently. We had to act and act
quickly to address the problems of the people. Obviously, we were bound to
make mistakes with regard to that, but everything we did was well
intentioned.

As people, therefore, who are dealing with the matter, we had certain
experiences. Firstly, members of the ANC who went to the areas where
displaced people had been accommodated went there to help. But there are
other people, hon George, who went into those areas simply because they
wanted to nit-pick. I hope you are a medical doctor, hon George, Dr George,
because if you are, there is ample space for medical doctors to go into
those areas and help, and not nit-pick.

The issue of the land we have been using is, of course, a matter in which,
unfortunately, we went onto land that was private. That land is owned by a
thoroughgoing South African who said to us: Yes, you came onto my land.
But, as a South African, I am giving you time. Let these people live here
while you are looking for alternative accommodation for them. As a South
African, I am happy to allow you to use this land at least for the next two
months. This came from a South African who did not want to nit-pick.

The issue which was raised by the hon member of the UDM is a matter that we
support. We support all ventures and campaigns by South Africans who raise
the matter of the high levels of crime in South Africa. We appreciate that.

Therefore, we are also happy that there are people who came out today and
participated in the march in Tshwane. We hope that everybody who was there
- and all other people who become part and parcel of campaigns similar to
the one that happened today - will also one day say that they are elevating
their participation in the project against crime in South Africa to a point
at which they themselves will join the community policing forums, where
they themselves will be reservists and participate in sector policing in
South Africa, and where they themselves will volunteer so that they work
with law-enforcement agencies to ensure that they rid our country of crime.
Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

                   SERVICE DELIVERY IN MOKWAKWAILA VILLAGE

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Chairperson, with regard to the statement
given by hon Nkuna, I would like to say thank you very much for bringing
the fact that 63 villages are able to access the services of the post
office to the attention of this House.

If we just think about the number of people that might be living in such
villages and what has happened to make them bankable in South Africa, it is
quite an achievement. This is what the ANC has been saying all along. We
don’t have to just do things where the media is, but we should also deliver
where the media is not present because many people now became bankable.

We believe in people who have hitherto been excluded, for example, if we
look at the Post Office’s accounts such as the Mzansi account, the Post
Office has the bulk of them. The Post Office has about 40% of them as
compared to other banks. The next bank that follows is at 20%. It shows you
how the Mzansi account has really tapped into the resources that we have
for savings and so on. We would like to say, thank you very much for
alerting us to that.

With regard to the fact that communication technology should also be
deployed, we would certainly look into the area of not only bringing
technology equipment into those post offices, but also to see to the
training, so that we can extend this in the spirit of the Thusong Centres,
which we are rolling out with multipurpose centres, as well as with the
post offices. We hope you would see that sooner, rather than later.

I would also like to say, with regard to the multipurpose centres that you
have also mentioned, we would certainly look into the roll-out of
Information Communication Technology equipment within them; again in the
spirit of turning them, into Thusong Centres.

Finally, I would also like to thank the Speaker, hon Doidge and their teams
for Parliament’s improvements in bringing it into the information society
and for sharing their experience with other African countries. But also
particularly in helping to further liberate Comrade Maureen Madumise and
bring technology into her life. [Laughter.] You can see it has improved
your lives here as well. If it could improve her life, what more can it do
to the lives of the 60 villages that have been connected to the post
offices. I thank you very much. [Applause.]

                       PALESTINIANS COMMEMORATE NAKBA
                      RACISM PRACTISED BY UNIVERSITIES
                              GOVERNMENT BONDS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, I rise with a bit of trepidation to
speak in response to members’ statements, given the opinion of the Chief
Whip of the Minority Party that Ministers who are unintelligent with
respect to other portfolios, sometimes respond to statements. I think that
at some point, the House must guide us, so that if we should only speak
with respect to our portfolios, we would do that.

However, we respond on a broad number of statements because, as the
executive, we regard ourselves as having collective responsibilities for
all matters of government. Therefore, I rise in that regard and hope that
the hon Chief Whip of the Largest Minority Party would accept that.
[Applause.]

I wish to welcome the statement of the member of the ANC, concerning the
60th Anniversary of the Nakba uprising. I think that the invasion of the
territory of Palestine and the fact that the people there still do not
enjoy rights to their own land is a matter that this Parliament should give
consistent attention to. We tend to remember the people of Palestine only
when important anniversaries arise.

Yet, as parliamentarians, given our membership of the United Nations,
Resolution 194 should be one that we are actively ensuring is implemented.
As the ANC, we stand with the people of both Palestine and Israel in
ensuring that the peaceful solution to this particular problem is found.

With respect to the statement made on the University of Cape Town, I think
if anyone were to call it a racist institution, all we could say is that
the particular person is guilty of terminological incertitude. The
University of Cape Town is appropriately addressing the years of inherited
negative discrimination that this country has experienced. And I would want
to say that we would like to examine whether the University of Cape Town
... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon Minister, just wait for a
moment. Is that a point of order?

Dr C P MULDER: No, Chairperson, I would like to enquire if the hon Minister
is prepared to answer a question.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon member, I thought maybe you were
rising on a point of order.

Dr C P MULDER: Chairperson, in terms of the rules, I thought it was up to
the Minister to indicate if she would be prepared to answer a question.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): No, no, it is now time for the
responses, not questions.

Dr C P MULDER: Chairperson, I know it is not question time.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): We are now dealing with responses.

Dr C P MULDER: I know.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): But, what do you want to do?

Dr C P MULDER: I would like to ask if the hon Minister is prepared to
answer a question. She is free to indicate if she would be prepared to
answer a question during her reply time. I would like to know if her answer
would be a yes or a no.

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: I thought maybe it would be useful for the hon
member not to jump up nervously, but allow me to complete my response.
[Laughter.] The University of Cape Town is an institution that is extending
efforts to address the decades, if not the centuries, of discrimination
that there were against the entry of particularly black people of African
descent to universities, specifically to medical education in South Africa.


There isn’t exclusion, but there is entry based on particular criteria that
the university has developed, taking into account the history that existed
in this country. The hon member can shout, and point his finger at me. If
he had been prepared to point at Verwoerd, Vorster, and others, we would
not be such a long way down the line in development. [Applause.]
Finally, I would agree with the hon member Singh that certainly, we should
look at innovative ways of developing instruments for financing and
infrastructure, both in South Africa, and I think you would agree, on the
continent as well. Therefore, the recent decision of heads of state of the
African Union, with respect to the utilisation of some of the pension funds
towards our infrastructure development, is certainly a very important
decision on their part.

Secondly, I am sure that he would agree that all of us as Members of
Parliament should participate in the purchase of government bonds that have
recently been made available through very accessible pay points such as
post offices and so on. This is to make sure that we contribute to ensuring
that there is funding available through savings in the public purse, to
engage in the very necessary infrastructure development that our country
needs.

I think the sale of bonds could not be the primary source of funding for
infrastructure development, given its structure of a promissory note.
Therefore, it is very necessary for government not to rely only on that
source, but to look at a range of flexible sources of financing for
infrastructure.

Of course, we should congratulate our government on putting aside R60
billion towards infrastructure development in the next ten-year period. I
think that should be a positive development, but it is key for us as
Members of Parliament to purchase government bonds ourselves, and become
South African savers. I thank you.

                               REFUGEE CRISIS
                   SERVICE DELIVERY IN MOKWAKWAILA VILLAGE

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson, with regard to the Midrand
Refugee Camp, I don’t believe there is any truth that there are Malawians
who would like to be repatriated or who have been refused permission to go
back home. Those displaced persons who have indicated that they would like
to be repatriated have been repatriated.

Hon members may be aware that we have scores of Mozambicans who have since
gone home precisely because they have indicated an interest in returning to
their country and they have since been sent back to their country, of
course with the help of their own government and international
organisations on migration. If you know of any Malawians who would like to
go back to their country but who were refused permission to do so, please
let us know so that we can facilitate their repatriation to their country.

With regard to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, UNHCR, I
couldn’t understand the issue you were raising hon member - quite honestly.
But during this period we are all of us, both nationally and provincially
in Gauteng and in the Western Cape, working very closely with the UNHCR to
deal with the challenges which are confronting us in relation to the plight
of the displaced.

So, if there has been any statement to the effect that the government of
the Western Cape is working very closely with the UNHCR in relation to the
displaced persons, obviously there would be truth to that. But I couldn’t
understand the issue you were trying to raise.

Lastly, with regard to the allocation of more service time to Mokwakwaila
Village, obviously, hon members, we would welcome the opportunity to
interact with local communities and to be advised by the people in that
area. If there is need for an extension of hours or more days for the
visits by the mobile units in that area, that would obviously be considered
by our regional or district offices in that area. Thank you very much.

       PROHIBITION OR RESTRICTION OF CERTAIN CONVENTIONAL WEAPONS BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mnu F BHENGU: Impilo yam inkenenkene namhlanje. Kodwa ngamafuphi, lo
mthetho uyilwayo yile Ndlu nakukhumbula ukuba sasivumelene ngawo siyile
Ndlu ngomhla we28 ka Agasti kulo nyaka uphelileyo. Inkqubo ke ithi sithi
sakuwuphumeza lo mthetho siwuse kwiBhunga lamaPhondo leSizwe. IBhunga
lamaPhondo leSizwe liwuphononongile labuya neziphakamiso. Ziphakamiso ezo
esithe sakuzijonga savumelana nesiphakamiso esikwisahluko sesibini icandelo
lesihlanu, isahluko sesibini icandelo lethoba, isahluko sesibini icandelo
leshumi, isahluko sesithathu icandelo leshumi elinanye, njalo isahluko
sesine icandelo leleshumi elinesihlanu, isahluko sesine icandelo leshumi
elinesixhenxe.

Masikhumbuzane ke ukuba lo mthetho uthini, unqanda ntoni ukwenzela ukuba
singalibali. Kaloku silelo lizwe elivumelanayo nomdibaniso  wamazwe
ekunqandeni ukusetyenziswa kwezixhobo nokuthengiswa kwazo. Ezo zixhobo
zigqaliwe kwavunyelwana ngazo ukuba mazingasetyenziswa kuba zinobungozi
nobuzaza. Ezinye zezo zixhobo zezo ezithi zakusetyenziswa iingceba zazo
zingakwazi ukuba zibhaqeke ngeX Ray xa zithe zibe ziyangena emzimbeni.

Ezinye zezo zixhobo zezo ezisetyenziswa zibeyimigubo etshisayo nezimphekayo
umntu, esisetyenziswe ngalo mazwe ke angabuxabisanga ubomi bomntu nalo
mazwe axhasa ubugrogrisi. Ndithetha ke nonooxhaka aba abasetyenziswayo
enibabiza ukuba ziBooby-Traps. Zezo ezisetyenziswa ngendlela ekhohlakeleyo
ezifakwa ezidumbini zabantu abaswelekileyo  ezinkomeni njalo njalo. Uze
uthi wena xa ufika pha utsho nawe itshoba lilale umbethe.

Indawo enye ke Mphathiswa esingakhange sivumelane neBhunga lamaPhondo
leSizwe lisolotya apho abathi imimiselo maze lithi isebe lakho lakugqiba
ukuyiphonononga nokuyibhala ize kule Ndlu yoWisothetho uMongameli
engakayisayini njengomthetho, sathi ayinakuvuma le Ndlu ukuba siwulandele
loo mgaqo. Kodwa ke izise nto esiyiphawulileyo siyikomiti. Ngelithi
siphawulile siyile komiti ukuba imimiselo ayiyifumani indlela ebuyayo ukuba
ize kuphononongwa kwayiNdlu le ekubeni amasebe eyenzile. Loo nto inikize
ukuba xa ujonga ukusetyenziswa kemithetho esiyiphumezileyo phaya ekuhlaleni
kubekhona ukusilela kuba kaloku asiyenzi le nto ikukuhlola ufumanise ukuba
nemimiselo ayithethi nto inye nomthetho lo esiwupasisileyo.

Ithi ke lo nto siyile komiti siyafuna ukuphakamisa ukuba ngokubhekisele
kwimimiselo makathi amasebe akuphuma nayo alandele laa nkqubo yeengxelo
zonyaka zamasebe. Andithi zizekuzithi thaca kodwa azekufika apha ePalamente
ukwenzela ukuba ikomiti zikwazi ukuyithatha imimiselo ziyiphonononge
ziyijonge zibone ukuba zithetha ncakasana laa nto iphaya emthethweni.
Ndiyabulela. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa speech follows.)

[Mr F BHENGU: I am not feeling well today. But, in short, you will remember
that on 28 August last year we all agreed on the Bill that we are debating
in this House. The procedure is that once we have passed the Bill, we then
refer it to the National Council of Provinces. The NCOP has scrutinised the
Bill and came up with recommendations. After looking at those
recommendations, we agreed with the recommendations in Chapter 2 section 5,
9, 10, Chapter 3 section 11 and Chapter 4 section 15 and 17.

Let us remind one another about the content of this Bill, so that we do not
forget what it is preventing. By the way we, as a country, support the call
by the UN Convention to curb the use of and the trade in conventional
weapons. Those weapons have been inspected and it was agreed that they
should not be used because they are too dangerous. Some of the fragments of
those weapons, when used, cannot be detected, even with the use of an X-
ray, when they happen to pierce the body of someone. Some of these weapons
are used as burning powders to burn a person.

These weapons are used by those countries that do not respect the value of
human life and countries that support terrorism. I mean even those
complicated ones, that you refer to as booby traps, are being used. These
are used in a brutal manner as they are injected into dead bodies, cattle
etc. Once you get there, you die as well.

Minister, there is one area where we could not reach an agreement with the
NCOP, and that is the regulations which state that after your department
had finished scrutinising and writing them, they should send them to the
National Assembly before the President signs them into an Act, but we said
as this House we are against such a ruling. But they came up with something
that we have noticed as the committee. What we have noticed as the
committee is that these regulations do not come back, so that they could be
scrutinised by this House when the departments are done with them. When you
monitor the implementation of the laws we passed at community level, you
will notice that there is some inconsistency between them and the
regulations because we do not inspect as to whether the regulations are
talking to the laws we have passed.

Therefore, as the committee we want to propose that, as for the
regulations, the departments must follow the procedure of the annual
departmental reports. I do not mean that they should come and table them,
but they should be sent to Parliament so that the committee can scrutinise
them and make sure that the regulations are in line with the Act. I thank
you. [Applause.]]

There was no debate.

USOSWEBHU OMKHULU WEQEMBU ELIBUSAYO: Sihlalo ohloniphekile, bengithi:

   Asiwamukele lo Mthethosivivinywa njengoba uchitshiyelwe nje.

Ngiyabonga. (Translation of isiZulu motion follows.)

[The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Chairperson, I move:

   That we adopt the amended Bill.
Thank you.]

Bill, as amended, accordingly passed.

                        RENAMING OF HIGH COURTS BILL

                          (Consideration of Report)

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

  That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

                        RENAMING OF HIGH COURTS BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

Mr G SOLOMON: Thank you, Chairperson. Chairperson, the Renaming of High
Courts Bill is part of the process of transforming the judicial system to
create a single integrated, accessible and affordable court system, with a
High Court in each province to be situated in the capital of such province.


The Bill is an interim measure aimed at establishing certainty and
uniformity as to the names of all High Courts, pending the promulgation of
comprehensive new legislation in respect of a restructured court system.
The High Courts are to be named after the respective provinces in which
they are situated, thus doing away with outdated and inappropriate
references such as Bophuthatswana, the Transvaal Provincial Division and
the Cape of Good Hope Provincial Division.

This Bill will bring these courts in line with the new boundaries that came
about after the scrapping of the former homelands and the establishment of
nine provinces in terms of section 103 of the Constitution.

Since the coming into force of the Constitution, there is no longer a
Supreme Court in South Africa, with its appellate, provincial and local
divisions. Instead, a provincial or local division of the Supreme Court of
South Africa, or a Supreme Court of a homeland, or a general division of
that court must be construed as a reference to a High Court.

Thus the Constitution provides for the Supreme Court of Appeal and a
number, namely thirteen, of discrete High Courts. This is set out in the
Constitution, specifically in Schedule 6. Item 16(6)(a) of Schedule 6 to
the Constitution provides that as soon as it is practical after the new
Constitution comes into effect, there should be a comprehensive
rationalisation of the structure, composition, function and jurisdiction of
all courts, in order to establish a judicial system suited to the
requirements of the Constitution.

Originally, back in 2003, the Superior Courts Bill had sought to address
discrepancies and legacies around the names, seats and jurisdictions of the
High Courts as part of the realisation process described in schedule six of
the Constitution. The Superior Courts Bill was, however, later withdrawn,
following a government decision to consult more widely with concerned
stakeholders. This consultation process is continuing.

The Renaming of High Courts Bill is an interim measure in the unfolding
rationalisation process. Consultation in respect of this Bill, involved the
Chief Justice, who conferred with the Heads of Courts. The Bill was also
considered by the Judicial Service Commission. The only point of concern
was that expressed by the Judge President of the North West Division, who
requested that the High Court should be known more appropriately as the
North West High Court Mafikeng, rather than the North West High Court
Mbabatho.

This renaming process does give rise to anomalies in jurisdiction, for the
High Courts as well as for Statutory Law Societies. The jurisdiction issue,
however, which is also part of the ongoing rationalisation process, is
addressed through the interim Rationalisation of Jurisdiction of High
Courts Act, Act No 41 of 2001. This Act was passed as a matter of urgency
to enable the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development to alter
the area of jurisdiction of any High Court.

Chairperson, why do we want to rename the High Courts? The renaming of High
Courts is considered important because it is mandated by the Constitution.
Although the Constitution does not prescribe how the High Courts should be
named, it was undesirable to preserve and use the names of certain High
Courts, some of which still retain their apartheid origins. It was felt
that the enactment and implementation of the Bill will go a long way
towards clearing up the uncertainty and confusion about several of the High
Court names.

Chairperson, the consequence of the Bill is that 13 High Courts in eight
provinces will have new names. Currently there is no High Court in
Mpumalanga. I understand it is in the planning stage. The Witwatersrand
Local Division becomes the South Gauteng High Court Johannesburg, while the
Transvaal Provincial Division becomes the North Gauteng High Court
Pretoria, Durban and Coast Local Division and Natal Provincial Division
Pietermaritzburg become KwaZulu-Natal High Court Durban and KwaZulu-Natal
High Court Pietermaritzburg.

There are four High Courts in the Eastern Cape Province which will be named
Eastern Cape High Court Bisho, Eastern Cape High Court Grahamstown, Eastern
Cape High Court Mthatha, and Eastern Cape High Court Port Elizabeth. The
High Court located in Bloemfontein becomes Free State High Court
Bloemfontein. The Cape of Good Hope Provincial Division becomes Western
Cape High Court Cape Town. The High Court located in Kimberley becomes
Northern Cape High Court Kimberley. The High Court located in Thohoyandou
becomes Limpopo High Court Thohoyandou.

Originally, the Bill provided for the Mbabatho High Court to become North
West High Court Mbabatho. The Department of Justice, however, informed the
portfolio committee that a request has been made to amend the Bill to
reflect the fact that as Mbabatho is a suburb falling within Mafikeng
Municipality the court should more appropriately be renamed North West High
Court Mafikeng. The committee agreed that the Bill should be amended
accordingly.

In conclusion, Chairperson, given their role and status, the High Courts
deserve to have fit and proper names. It must be understood, however, that
these are interim measures, until such time as the Superior Courts Bill of
2003, which was withdrawn for further and wider consultation with
stakeholders, returns to deal comprehensively with the process of
rationalisation of High Courts in order to rectify discrepancies and old
legacies around the names, seats and jurisdictions of High Courts, as
required in Schedule 6 of the Constitution. Thank you, Chairperson.

There was no debate.

Bill read a second time.

        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
  CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT - JOINT OVERSIGHT VISIT TO POLLSMOOR PRISON TO
              CONSIDER THE POSITION OF AWAITING-TRIAL PRISONERS

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON CORRECTIONAL SERVICES -
    JOINT OVERSIGHT VISIT TO POLLSMOOR PRISON TO CONSIDER THE POSITION OF
                          AWAITING-TRIAL PRISONERS

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, I rise on a
point of order. The correct terminology is awaiting-trial detainees, not
prisoners. They’ve not been convicted yet. So, can the table assistants
help us with that in terms of the correct terminology. It’s awaiting-trial
detainees.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Alright, we’ll have to look at that
in terms of the law and the terminology and everything and so we will duly
correct it, should it be that way.

        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
  CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT - JOINT OVERSIGHT VISIT TO POLLSMOOR PRISON TO
             CONSIDER THE POSITION OF AWAITING-TRAIAL DETAINEES

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON CORRECTIONAL SERVICES -
    JOINT OVERSIGHT VISIT TO POLLSMOOR PRISON TO CONSIDER THE POSITION OF
                          AWAITING-TRIAL DETAINEES

Mr J B SIBANYONI: Chairperson, I am going to talk on the report of the
Justice Portfolio Committee and the Committee on Correctional Services as
well as the select committee. This visit took place on 23 October 2007 and
the purpose or the aim of the visit was to look at the situation of
awaiting-trial, I will say “detainees”, although the report says
“prisoners”. Now there were also representatives from the Magistracy, the
National Prosecuting Authority and the Judicial Inspectorate of Prisons and
our focus was to establish the rate of overcrowding.

It is unfortunate that I am speaking now after the learners have left
because what shockingly came out was the number of juveniles or children
who are in detention. Now the Department of Correctional Services hosted us
and then it gave a briefing to the committees I have mentioned and
thereafter there was extensive discussion, that was followed by a visit to
the places of detention and the Members of Parliament had an opportunity to
interact or to speak with awaiting-trial detainees. Amongst them there were
juveniles, there were children and there were also pregnant women. But let
me just immediately say that conception, we established, occurred before
they were detained.

Pollsmoor Prison is overcrowded. I must emphasise, Pollsmoor is
overcrowded. Maybe, to use the language of hon Skosana, it has been the
case even previously and we will never say the people who were there
previously didn’t work. The present occupancy rate is 168%. One hundred and
sixty eight percent, while Pollsmoor is designed to accommodate 4 252
offenders, by the time we undertook the visit, we found that there were 7
296 offenders. A total of 4 823, that is 66,8%, were awaiting-trial
detainees. At the female centre there were 397 offenders and there 47% were
awaiting trial. The occupancy rate there is 162%.

The department also provided information on the number of successful
conversions to correctional supervision in terms of the Criminal Procedure
Act, and that was in respect of the period 1 March 2007 to 30 March 2007.
Now section 62(f) of the Criminal Procedure Act empowers the court to
release an accused on bail under the supervision of a probation officer or
a correctional official and then section 71 thereof provides that awaiting-
trial juveniles may be placed in a place of safety under supervision, and
section 72 refers to the release of an accused person on a warning, what is
normally referred to as free bail.

Now there are also interventions which we were asked to address regarding
the overcrowding at Pollsmoor Prison. Among others, these were the
appointment of four additional court officials to assist with the reduced
bail applications and alternative placements for awaiting-trial detainees,
and then also heads of centres attend monthly case-flow meetings to address
the management of overcrowding.

Furthermore, a list of awaiting-trial children is provided to various
courts and at case-flow meetings on a monthly basis and the names of
awaiting-trial children are given to the Department of Social Development
on each Friday. There is constant interaction between in-house social
workers and the Department of Social Development for available bedspace at
places of safety.

Chairperson, the MPs were also told about the concern that the majority are
juveniles and they are held there for aggressive offences. We were told
that their parents do not always want them at home for reasons that include
being unable to guarantee that they would be able to bring their children
to court on their appointed dates. Pollsmoor officials also explained to
the MPs that there were many awaiting-trial detainees who could not afford
bail, even if it was below R1 000.

Chairperson, I want to talk about the legal facilities. We were told that
the Legal Aid Board visits there on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Fridays and
that officials from the Department of Justice also visit Pollsmoor to
explain about plea bargaining. However, on further discussion, we were told
that the Legal Aid Board officials sometimes do not consult with detainees
before these people appear in court and that the consultations are
conducted at court.

We came away with certain recommendations. The report comes with certain
recommendations that there should be incremental improvements in the
position of awaiting-trial detainees at Pollsmoor and further that this
report will be referred to the Department of Justice to await a written
response. A further recommendation is that the committee will convene a
joint meeting of the relevant departments, the Pollsmoor management and
other stakeholders within six months to monitor progress. A further
recommendation is that for awaiting-trial detainees to constitute 66,8% of
the Pollsmoor offender population is altogether unacceptable.

The committee is further concerned about the number of awaiting-trial
detainees who are being detained in prison simply because they are unable
to meet bail, especially when the bail is below R1 000. We were also told
about the report that the Criminal Procedure Act allows for the release of
awaiting-trial detainees who have been granted bail, but are unable to pay
bail. I must further say, Chairperson, that the committee felt that the
judiciary should make use of alternative sentencing so as to ensure that
those who have committed petty offences are not sent to the already
overcrowded prisons.

Further, the committee will refer the report to the Legal Aid Board and
request a report within two months. In so far as this is concerned I must
say there have been some ad hoc interactions with the Legal Aid Board and
some of the issues that were raised are being, and some of them have
already been, addressed.

The committee feels that magistrates should seek to visit correctional
facilities, particularly in respect of awaiting-trial detainees. There
should be greater collaboration between all role-players, ensuring better
conditions for and the speedy sentencing of awaiting-trial detainees.

Now the committee notes that while sentenced children and juveniles take
part in education, sport and developmental programmes, we were told that
awaiting-trial children and juveniles are not allowed to take part. Why?
Because awaiting-trial detainees are the responsibility of the Department
of Justice while the sentenced ones are the responsibility of the
Department of Correctional Services.

The committee is of the opinion that an integrated justice system should
apply. All children and juveniles, both those that have been sentenced and
those awaiting trial, should be allowed to take part in the abovementioned
programmes.
Chairperson, the committee believes that more should be done to ensure that
pregnant women who have committed petty crimes are not detained in prison,
but are diverted to community correction or other appropriate
interventions. The committees which have visited the prison commit
themselves to working with the relevant departments and other stakeholders
and we hope that the committee on Safety and Security will also be on board
in future when these are taken forward.

In mid-August there will be a report relating to the Child Justice Bill.
The Justice Committee has visited one-stop centres and it will indicate the
matter of capacity so as to contain children in conflict with the law.
Thank you, Chairperson.

Mr D V BLOEM: Good afternoon everybody and let me greet you all in the name
of the African National Congress.

It is very good to hear that a member of Justice has tasted the bitter pill
of overcrowding in the prisons. We took them as a Portfolio Committee on
Justice to Pollsmoor to say to them: “Come and drink of this bitter water
of overcrowding”. And I am happy that Comrade J B knows at least what is
going on in Correctional Services.

But, Chairperson, this joint oversight visit by these three committees was
a clear indication that Parliament is very serious in addressing the
ongoing problem of overcrowding in our prisons. The aim of the visit was to
look at overcrowding in Pollsmoor, especially for those awaiting trial. The
Deputy Minister is correct. It is awaiting-trial detainees. You are
correct, Deputy.

The Department of Correctional Services provided us with a breakdown of
awaiting-trial detainees in Pollsmoor who either have not been granted bail
or who have been granted bail but could not afford to pay this bail.
Chairperson, I must say that all three committees are not happy with the
state of affairs when it comes to awaiting-trial detainees in Pollsmoor.

I am not going into the details of this report because Comrade J B is very
good at that. The report is there for anybody to read and I will urge the
members of this House and the public at large to read this report. This is
the report. It is a very good report from the three committees.  And I will
agree with the previous speaker of the department, or rather the Justice
Portfolio Committee.

But, Chairperson, I think I must address something that happened – a very
painful matter. All of us know that yesterday the High Court in
Johannesburg or in Gauteng sentenced the murderer, the rapist of seven-year-
old Sheldean Human, to a life sentence. I have said it before, and I want
to repeat it here today: These monsters belong in C-Max in Kokstad. And the
Department of Correctional Services must make sure that this monster serves
25 years.
Life means 25 years behind bars. You cannot spend 10 years or 15   years in
prison for committing such dangerous crimes. The Parole Boards must make
sure he serves the 25 years there. And after that, then he can be
considered to be placed on parole. He is a very dangerous person. He is a
threat to women and children and the whole of society. He must sit in
prison until his 25 years have expired. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the first Report be adopted.

Thank you.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the second Report be adopted.


Thank you.
Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

      INDIA, BRAZIL, AND SOUTH AFRICA (IBSA) SUMMIT IN BRASILIA, BRAZIL
              UNITED STATES OF AMERICA AFRICA COMMAND (AFRICOM)

    (Consideration of Reports of Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs)

Mr D J SITHOLE: Chairperson, the first report of the India, Brazil and
South Africa, IBSA, summit deals with the fact that the portfolio committee
went to attend the summit in Brazil. We recommend to Parliament that
oversight over that particular engagement will be difficult for the
portfolio committee to undertake.

In our recommendation to Parliament, we want to propose that Parliament
sets up a mechanism to do oversight on IBSA, specifically. We suggest that
a multiparty forum be created to deal with oversight on IBSA and that it be
located within the structures of Parliament that deal with international
relations. We felt that this would not be adequately attended to if it were
within the portfolio committee itself.

On the Africa Command that the United States of America has proposed, they
have been looking for a place on the continent to set up this command.
Currently, the command is structured in such a way that it is spread
between three command centres. They want to centralise the Africa Command
within the continent. We have been briefed by all the structures that are
involved - Defence and Foreign Affairs. We also called on the NGOs that
made a presentation.

It became apparent to us that if we or any member of our region agreed to
host the Africa Command it would create very serious problems for us over
both the short term and the long term. We want to suggest that we stand
firm as a country and, in fact, communicate our opposition to hosting such
a command on the continent and within our region to other member states in
the region. We recommend, in that report, that South Africa rejects this
with contempt and then mobilise and lobby all other member states on the
continent to reject hosting such a command.

We are, however, aware that other countries may have an interest in hosting
the command. Liberia has expressed such an interest. But our government
persuaded the Liberian government to realise that hosting that command
would actually have a negative impact on our continent because it would
militarise the continent over the long term and create problems for us.

The other aspect that we have warned about is what we call mission creep.
That is, once we agree to this command that comes with ideas, it will,
however, over the long term have other implications that the continent
might not be able to deal with. We, therefore, want to suggest to
Parliament that we communicate to our executive that under no circumstance
should we consider any request of that nature. Thank you, Chairperson.

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:


  That the report on India, Brazil and South Africa Summit in Brasilia,
  Brazil be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:


  That the report on United States of America Africa Command be
  adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

        HEARINGS ON THE STRATEGIC PLAN AND BUDGET VOTE 34: DEPARTMENT
                        OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY
 PUBLIC HEARINGS ON FORESTRY TRANSFORMATION CHARTER, NATIONAL FOREST ACTION
                         PLAN AND INDUSTRIAL POLICY

                         (Consideration of Reports)

Ms C C SEPTEMBER: Chairperson, hon Deputy President of the ANC, in the 20
minutes that have been allocated to me, which I am obviously going to take
and speak for 20 minutes ... [Interjections.] No, hon members, you can’t be
“moeg” [tired].

I will deal with the two reports before us. The one report deals with the
strategic plan and budget of the department and the second report deals
with the public hearings that were held on forestry, in particular,
subsequent to that. We are asking, in particular, on the strategic plan and
budget of the department, that what we need to focus on here is that the
committee emphasised that the department needs to give an updated report on
their asset management. Secondly, the committee asked that the water
services strategy comes to the portfolio committee.

On public hearings, in the main, the committee was seized with listening to
various communities coming from, in particular, the Eastern Cape, Knysna,
George, Plettenberg and so on. Here we had to deal with the mitigating
effects of when government commercialised and privatised forestry and the
net effect that this had.
The committee, in this regard, asked that we engage with regard to this net
effect and obviously the consequences of having sold forests and the
privatisation thereof. The committee recommends that we engage in this.
Policy reviews need to also be conducted in this regard because it cannot
be the intention that we impoverish people. Our intention is to make sure
that we improve people’s lives and give them access to the economy in
forestry. We urge that you accept this report. Thank you very much.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

  That the reports be adopted.

There was no debate.

Motion agreed to.

Reports accordingly adopted.

The House adjourned at 18:36.


