---
title: 'National Assembly - 29 May 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2008-05-29
---

THURSDAY, 29 MAY 2008
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:00.

House Chairperson Mr G Q M Doidge took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Mr G R MORGAN: Chairperson, on behalf of the DA, I will move:

   That the House discuss the newly released Long-Term Mitigation Scenarios
   for South Africa while taking into account –


   (1)      that South Africa is currently contributing to the formulation
         of the post-2012 climate framework;


      2) that South Africa has one of the highest per capita emissions
         figures in the world; and


      3) the concept of historic and differentiated responsibility.


                      BUS ACCIDENT IN THE EASTERN CAPE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the House –


   (1)      notes that on Tuesday morning, 27 May 2008, 24 people died and
         many others were injured in the Eastern Cape when a bus careened
         down an embankment into a river;


   (2)      further notes that the ill-fated bus was from the settlement of
         Mvanyane on its way to Cedarville when the accident happened and
         that the bus is believed to have been carrying eighty passengers at
         the time of the accident;


   (3)      commends the efforts by the South African Police, the South
         African Air Force, Netcare 911 and other paramedics, as well as the
         ordinary people who helped those injured;


   (4)      urges the authorities to investigate the cause of the accident;
         and
   (5)      conveys its condolences to the families and friends of the
         deceased.

Agreed to.


                        XENOPHOBIC ATTACKS IN DU NOON

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D K MALULEKE (ANC): Chairperson, the distortion and misleading statement
made by the DA on Tuesday about hon Lumka Yengeni cannot go unchallenged
and should be condemned. It was an irresponsible attempt to politicise, and
score cheap political points from, the misery of others. The meeting
referred to in Du Noon was organised by hon Lumka Yengeni and other
community leaders in response to the recent spate of xenophobic attacks in
Gauteng ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order!

Mr D K MALULEKE: ... to sensitise the community against the xenophobic
attacks on fellow Africans residing in Du Noon, which is part of her
constituency.

The noble intention of the organisers was informed by cognisance of similar
attacks in the Western Cape in 2006. The response of the community to the
call was overwhelming, testifying to the interest communities show in
issues directly affecting them. Though the ANC does not condone the looting
of shops belonging to Somalians, one can take comfort in the knowledge that
there was no burning, violence or murder of anybody.

To make inferences that the meeting was aborted and that hon Lumka Yengeni
never showed up was dishonourable for someone who said the same of the hon
Manuel on the very same day. The meeting was convened by the ANC and
therefore the DA couldn’t have received an invitation, let alone bother
themselves with matters which do not affect them, except as a pastime. It
would also be interesting for hon Mark Lowe to tell us where their public
representatives were ... [Time expired.]

                    AID FOR VICTIMS OF XENOPHOBIC ATTACKS

                            (Member’s Statement)

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (DA): Chairperson, the national government’s
delay in inviting international aid agencies such as the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees to assist in dealing with a looming crisis
at a number of makeshift safety sites for victims of xenophobic violence
around the country needs to be explained. As it is, the impression is
unavoidable that the government is stalling on this issue so that President
Thabo Mbeki and his Cabinet can save themselves from further international
embarrassment, so that they may escape the indignation of aerial
photographs of white tents and blue helmets being beamed to the rest of the
world.

The reality is that this is what South Africa needs right now. The extent
of the disaster is such that we do not have the systems or resources in
place to do this on our own. The government must call on all available
assistance.

In the midst of this vacuum, DA councillors mediating in the crisis at the
chaotic Onderstepoort facility were meeting independently with
representatives from the United Nations in Pretoria yesterday, while Cape
Town Mayor Helen Zille has also indicated that the city would warmly
welcome any assistance from international aid agencies. We therefore urge
President Mbeki to pick up the phone and to make that call without any
further delay. Thank you. [Applause.]

              DROP IN ECONOMIC GROWTH AND INCREASE IN INFLATION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr N SINGH (IFP): Chairperson, there is an old saying: it never rains but
it pours. It seems to me that this saying can be applied to the two pieces
of very bad economic news we have had over the past two days.

First we heard that first-quarter economic growth had dropped sharply, to
only 2,1%, on the back of sharp slow-downs in mining and manufacturing due
to power supply problems. This is the lowest growth rate we have had in six
and a half years and contrasts sharply with 5,3% rate in the last quarter
of 2007.

Secondly, yesterday Statistics South Africa informed us that the CPIX had
reached 10,4%, while headline inflation had climbed to 11,1%. In doing so,
the Reserve Bank’s inflation target has been breached for the 13th month in
a row, prompting the Governor to threaten a 2% increase in the repo rate.
Add all of this bad news to the already high fuel price and high food
prices and the picture for South Africa Incorporated looks very bleak.

All we can do is ask the hon Minister of Finance: What next and quo vadis?

                  XENOPHOBIC STATEMENTS BY MEMBER OF THE DA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms D G NHLENGETHWA (ANC): Chairperson, yesterday during the budget hearings
of the Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security, when the committee was
being briefed by the SA Police Service on border control, a member of the
DA uttered the following words:

  The police are failing to control and prevent the influx of illegal
  immigrants into our country. These people are coming here to our country
  to eat our food, go to our clinics and hospitals, and attend our schools.
  That is the reason why our budget is always insufficient for our own
  people.

The issues that she raised are the same issues that are being raised by the
perpetrators of violence against foreign nationals. A number of African
countries are engaged in peace processes and others are in the process of
reconstruction and development following standing conflicts. As a result
South Africa is receiving an increasing number of people from our
continent. The human rights of these people must be observed in accordance
with the policies of the United Nations. The utterances by the hon Kohler-
Barnard are racist and deplorable. The DA should be ashamed that there are
such views and statements emanating from its ranks. Thank you. [Applause.]

              COMPASSION SHOWN TO VICTIMS OF XENOPHOBIC ATTACKS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N C NKABINDE (UDM): Chairperson, over the past three weeks all of us
have been shocked and horrified by the violence and brutality that erupted
in certain communities, aimed primarily at foreign nationals from other
parts of the continent. We have been shamed by the actions of criminals and
thugs. We have also been frustrated by the slow response from government
and the haphazard nature of that response, when it finally came. And more
recently, we have been dismayed to hear that there had been intelligence
reports indicating signs of trouble long before the worst violence
occurred.

But whilst these things transpired, another series of events unfolded.
South Africans, in their individual capacity and also under the auspices of
businesses, unions, civil society groupings and churches, have been
extending a hand of support and kindness to the victims of the violence and
to the thousands of displaced people. Today we must salute all South
Africans who have responded to the barbaric acts and violence of a few
amongst us, with gestures of compassion and tolerance. We are proud of you.
You have shown that ubuntu is still part of what makes us a great nation.
Thank you.

     ESTABLISHMENT OF PERMANENT DEPARTMENT OF HOME AFFAIRS OFFICE IN THE
                              HELDERBERG REGION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr F BEUKMAN (ANC): Voorsitter, die behoefte aan ’n permanente dienspunt
vir die Departement van Binnelandse Sake in die Helderberg is in die
verlede as ’ n prioriteit in die gebied geïdentifiseer. Tot dusver was daar
slegs ’n tydelike dienspunt waar die publiek vir beperkte tye twee dae per
week dienste kon ontvang.
Die besluit van die Departement van Binnelandse Sake om vanaf 2 Junie 2008
die kantoor in die Helderberg te Somerset-Wes tot ’n permanente dienspunt
op te gradeer, word allerweë verwelkom. Die opgradering beteken dat die
publiek ses dae per week toegang tot die departement se dienste sal hê en
nie meer na Kaapstad of Bellville vir sekere dienste sal hoef te reis nie.

Die bring van burgerlike dienste so na as moontlik aan die publiek is ’n
belangrike doelwit van die regering en lei tot beter dienslewering en
doeltreffendheid.

Die inwoners en gemeenskap van die Helderberg wil die Minister,
Adjunkminister van Binnelandse Sake, en die departement bedank vir hul rol
om hierdie permanente dienspunt moontlik te maak. Dankie. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Mr F BEUKMAN (ANC): Chairperson, the need for a permanent service point
for the Department of Home Affairs in the Helderberg region has been
identified as a priority in this area in the past. Thus far there has only
been a temporary service point where the public could access services twice
a week for limited periods.

The decision by the Department of Home Affairs to upgrade the Helderberg
office in Somerset West to a permanent service point, as from 2 June 2008,
is welcomed in all respects. The upgrading means that the public will have
access to the department’s services six days per week, and they no longer
have to travel to Cape Town or Bellville for certain services.

Locating public services in close proximity to the public is an important
goal of government and it leads to better service delivery and efficiency.
The residents and community of the Helderberg would like to thank the
Minister and Deputy Minister of Home Affairs and the department for the
role they played in making this permanent service point possible. Thank
you. [Applause.]]

                        CORRUPTION IN MIDVAAL REGION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr W D SPIES (VF Plus): Voorsitter, in Gauteng is daar ’n plaaslike
munisipaliteit wat vasgevang is in ’n greep van verdagte transaksies,
onreëlmatige tenderprosedures en persoonlike bevoordeling van die
burgemeester uit raadsfondse en–bates. Ek noem graag enkele van die
bewerings wat deur ’n besorgde inwoner en sakeman aan die VF Plus deurgegee
is.

Die burgemeester het teen ’n koste van minstens R20 000 palmbome wat aan
die raad behoort het, in die tuin van haar privaatwoning laat aanplant met
raadsfondse en met raadstoerusting. Die regerende party se plaaslike
voorsitter, wat ruimskoots aan die regerende party skenk, is die enigste
prokureur, die enigste afslaer en nou ook die enigste baksteenverskaffer
wat, teen ’n R10 miljoen-kontrak, die middedorp moet opknap. Terwyl die
raad se prokureur inderhaas ’n baksteenfabriek begin het, litigeer hy
namens die raad om plaaslike baksteenverskaffers toe te maak.

Die raad weier om sekere slegte skulde af te skryf en betaal eerder sy
prokureur herhaaldelik om dieselfde skuldenaars vir dieselfde skulde te
dagvaar. Aan die ander kant, laat die raad se enigste prokureur weer na om
die seun van ’n voormalige raadslid van die regerende party te dagvaar vir
duisende rande se uitstaande skulde. Besorgde sakemanne en inwoners het hul
plaaslike LP en die voorsitter van die party genader om die saak op te los,
maar sonder sukses. Maar waarom is die amptelike opposisie so stil oor
hierdie saak? Omdat die betrokke raad die enigste DA-beheerde raad in
Gauteng is. Die prokureur, afslaer, baksteenprodusent is die voorsitter van
die DA in die Midvaal-gebied. Die VF Plus het vandag die Openbare Beskermer
daarom gevra om ’n beëdigde verklaring in ons besit wat deur die
vooraanstaande inwoner en sakeman, mnr Corrie Pypers, gemaak is, te
ondersoek.

Suid-Afrika gaan gebuk onder korrupsie. Ons het vir seker ’n beter regering
nodig, maar, Voorsitter, ons benodig ook vir seker ’n beter amptelike
opposisie. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement
follows.)

[Mr W D SPIES (FF Plus): Chairperson, there is a local municipality in
Gauteng which is trapped in the grip of questionable transactions,
irregular tender procedures and a mayor who derives personal gain from
council funds and assets. I gladly name but a few of the allegations which
were brought to the attention of the FF Plus by a concerned resident and
businessman.

The mayor planted palm trees, which were the property of the council, in
the garden of her private home at a cost of at least R20 000, using council
monies and equipment. The ruling party’s local chairperson, who contributes
generously to the governing party, is the sole attorney, the only
auctioneer and now also the sole supplier of bricks who has to renovate the
town centre at a cost of a contract worth R10 million. Whilst the council’s
attorney is hastily starting up a brick factory, he is litigating on behalf
of the council to close down local brick suppliers.

The council is refusing to write off certain bad debts, and is rather
paying its attorney repeatedly to subpoena the same debtors for the same
debts. On the other hand, the council’s only attorney is neglecting to
subpoena the son of a former councillor of the ruling party for thousands
of rands of outstanding debts. Concerned businessmen and residents
approached their local MP and the chairperson of the party in order to
settle the matter, but without any success. But why is the official
opposition so quiet about this matter? Because the council concerned is the
only DA-controlled council in Gauteng. The attorney, auctioneer, and brick
producer is the chairperson of the DA in the Midvaal area. Therefore the FF
Plus asked the Public Protector today to investigate an affidavit by
prominent resident and businessman, Mr Corrie Pypers, which we have in our
possession.

South Africa is burdened by corruption. We definitely need a better
government, but without a doubt, Chairperson, we also need a better
official opposition. I thank you.]

                   XENOPHOBIA AND USE OF DEROGATORY TERMS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr S E M PHEKO (PAC): Chairperson, one of the PAC’s slogans, besides “izwe
lethu” [“our land”], is “Africa for Africans, Africans for humanity,
humanity for God”. The hymn that was composed by Enoch Sontonga is, “Nkosi
sikelel’ iAfrika”. One of our liberation anthems is “Morena boloka sechaba
sa Afrika”. These anthems were composed with the reality in mind that
Africa is one, from Cape to Cairo, Madagascar to Morocco. Whether we like
it or not, Africa is one. It has always been one from the time it was
called Alkebulan or Mother of Nations, or “the Land of the Blacks”.

Xenophobia is a disease that can destroy Africa faster than HIV and Aids.
Xenophobia is a step towards reviving tribalism, another disease that was
used by the enemies of Africa to divide Africans.

In our country, derogatory terms such as “kaffer” are taboo. Equally, our
country must put words such as “makwerekwere”, “matswantle”, etc in the
same category as “kaffir”. All 53 African countries belong to the African
Union. They have a Pan-African Parliament; they own Africa and its riches.
Proper terminology must be found for Africans from South Africa to the rest
of Africa. Izwe lethu, iAfrika. [Our land, Africa] [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

                      BUS ACCIDENT IN THE EASTERN CAPE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S B FARROW (DA): Chairperson, in aligning ourselves with the statement
just made by the Chief Whip of the Majority Party, the DA also offers
sympathy to the family and friends of the 22 passengers who lost their
lives in the horrific bus accident which occurred on 27 May near Cedarville
in the Eastern Cape. It further offers to wish those passengers injured in
the accident a speedy recovery.

In my budget debate on transport, I emphasised the need for the Department
of Transport to set up an inspectorate to ensure that buses are checked for
roadworthiness at the source, prior to operating licences being issued. I
further requested the Minister to investigate a more appropriate method of
ensuring the flow of funds for road maintenance so that funds reach the
actual provinces on an equitable basis. Priority should be given to those
roads where traffic volumes dictate upgrading. That stretch of road is
notoriously in bad condition and has been earmarked for tarring for a
number of years now. Every effort must therefore be made to source funds
for this road, which is the only access for the adjoining rural communities
of Mvanyane, which have to acquire all their needs from the closest towns
of Cedarville, Matatiele and Kokstad.

The DA dispatched its councillors in the area to visit the injured and
bereaved, to show their empathy and support. We cannot afford to have our
citizens lost to accidents of this nature any longer. Every effort must be
made to provide bus passengers with the safety they deserve. We have
legislated for safety mechanisms to be incorporated into the new taxi
vehicles, such as seatbelts and roll-over bars. However, nothing has been
done to safeguard bus passengers in the vehicles they are obliged to use.
The DA calls on the hon Minister to investigate this legislative
requirement urgently, in order to ensure that no further unnecessary
fatalities related to bus accidents occur. Thank you. [Time expired.]

          ROLE OF WORLD HEALTH ORGANISATION IN MANUFACTURING DRUGS

                            (Member’s Statement)
Ms R J MASHIGO (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC notes with great interest and
excitement that the World Health Organisation and 193 member states have
reached consensus on the issue of intellectual property. This augurs well
for developing countries and the poor in particular, as far as drug
manufacturing is concerned.

It is now up to the World Health Organisation to finalise its plan of
action that will create incentives for pharmaceutical manufacturers to
produce the drugs that are needed to save lives in poorer countries. This
strategy will change the focus of manufacturers from products for cosmetic
purposes to manufacturing life-saving drugs needed in poor countries and,
at the same time, it will improve access to these drugs by developing
countries.

The ANC commends the World Health Organisation and their 193 member states
that supported this significant milestone and urges them to speed up
implementation. Thank you.

                       CORRUPTION IN THE EASTERN CAPE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr V B NDLOVU (IFP): Chairperson, the IFP is greatly disturbed by the wave
of fraudulent activities committed by health officials and other government
officials. Ten health workers were arrested yesterday for fraud involving
nearly R1 million in the Eastern Cape. Police are claiming that those
fraudsters are defrauding the health department of a lot of money because
they claim that the department has failed to use up its funds.

Recently 22 people, mostly teachers from QwaQwa, illegally obtained social
grants ranging from R7 000 to R50 000. We commend the efforts of the police
and other investigators for arresting these fraudsters.

Furthermore, the IFP strongly feels that the practice of suspending
government officials with full pay whilst they are being investigated is
unethical. Thank you.

        INACCESSIBILITY OF COMMITTEE ROOM TO PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr V C GORE (ANC): Chairperson, yesterday Members of Parliament with
mobility impairments, including wheelchair users, could not attend the
Joint Monitoring Committee on the Improvement of Quality of Life and Status
of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons because a lift in Parliament was
out of service.

The meeting, ironically, was scheduled to adopt the Equality Review Report
on the impact of the Equality Act on the lives of women and people with
disabilities, and the disability sector. The report indicates that one of
the obstacles preventing the inclusion of people with disabilities into
mainstream South African society is inaccessible buildings. Many
architectural barriers prevent people with disabilities from utilising
facilities and exclude them from potential employment and access to
government services, as well as shopping facilities. To this end, for hon
members of the JMC, an inability to attend a committee meeting due to
physical inaccessibility amounts to discrimination.

This incident highlights the ongoing experience of many persons with
disabilities, who on a daily basis negotiate exclusionary barriers. Both
private and public buildings must be made accessible for people with
disabilities. Much work needs to be done in ensuring that all buildings
comply with the National Building Regulations. The responsibility lies with
private landowners as well as government to ensure that this happens. I
thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Thank you for that statement, hon
Gore. May I say that there isn’t a Minister to respond to that particular
statement, but I will certainly take this up with Madam Speaker. We do
apologise for what happened. Thank you for bringing it to the attention of
the House. [Applause.]

       DELAYED FUNDING FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION IN NORTH WEST

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr G G BOINAMO (DA): Dankie, Voorsitter. [Thank you, Chairperson.]

The DA is highly concerned over recent media reports that reveal that
almost six months after the start of the school year around 500 of the 728
schools in the North West province classified as no-fee schools have still
not received funding from the Department of Education. [Interjections.]

While the DA fully supports the introduction of no-fee schools in poor
communities, as it removes the significant burden that school fees place on
underprivileged learners, it is clear that the department is failing to
implement this policy properly.

This has resulted in these schools not being able to buy textbooks, pay
water and electricity bills, and maintain and secure their school
buildings. One of the reasons provided by the department for withholding
funding is that a number of these schools have not submitted their annual
financial statements, showing how they’ve managed their affairs.

However, learners should not be the ones who bear the brunt for this
problem, thereby losing out on the education they so rightly deserve. The
DA calls on the Department of Education to assist no-fee schools in
improving their capacity to comply with the basic financial obligations
required of them, so that these schools can begin receiving the funds they
are entitled to. Thank you.
                    CONDOLENCES ON DEATH OF VUYO MOKOENA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S D MOTUBATSE-HOUNKPATIN (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC would like to take
this opportunity to send its heartfelt condolences to the Mokoena family on
the passing away of Vuyo Mokoena. Indeed, his passing has touched a lot of
South Africans in many ways. Vuyo Mokoena was known for his great talent in
the gospel music industry.

He began his career in music with an amateur Afro-pop group called Melodi,
based on the East Rand in Gauteng. He then became a professional musician,
joining the popular group Pure Magic in the 1990s. He also realised his
dream of becoming one of the country’s leading male gospel singers in the
1990s, when he entered the Super Kurl Talent Search. He further sang with
the South African gospel queen, Rebecca Malope.

He also worked with South Africa’s biggest and top-selling gospel group,
Joyous Celebration. His music remains an inspiration to many South
Africans, most importantly in assisting in social cohesion and nation-
building. His legacy in the gospel music industry will continue to inspire
many.

Re re robala ka khutso, Mokoena, ya gago tema o e kgathile. [Rest in peace,
Mokoena, you’ve done your part.]
                   XENOPHOBIA AND USE OF DEROGATORY TERMS
                        XENOPHOBIC ATTACKS IN DU NOON
                    AID FOR VICTIMS OF XENOPHOBIC ATTACKS
                  XENOPHOBIC STATEMENTS BY MEMBER OF THE DA
              DROP IN ECONOMIC GROWTH AND INCREASE IN INFLATION
                        CORRUPTION IN MIDVAAL REGION
                       CORRUPTION IN THE EASTERN CAPE

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Thank you, Chair. I don’t know how big a rush
there is this afternoon to respond, but just before doing so and outside of
the time: If the gallery is full of girl children who are coming to work
today because today is Taking a Girl Child to Work Day, I think it is
appropriate that we welcome their presence here. [Applause.]

Chair, let me deal with the issues thematically, if I may. The first set of
issues I would like to deal with, relates to the broad theme of xenophobia.
Let me accord with what the hon Pheko says about who we are as Africans.

Perhaps I should comment on just one or two issues about the slogans and
the numbers. I do not think Morocco is a member of the AU yet, because of
Sahrawi, but the AU has 52 members other than that. I think we must accord
with the letter and spirit of what he is saying about who we are, and why
there should be no place for bad terminology against each other or for bad
attitudes towards each other. I think that that is the spirit that should
obtain, and in dealing with the comments of members, I think it is
appropriate that we do it from that background.

In respect of the statement by the hon Maluleke, I think it is wrong. I
know that the hon Yengeni was in Du Noon until two o’clock in the morning.
I know that an initiative was taken because of previous experiences and
that was, in fact, a matter discussed in this House on Thursday afternoon
last week. So the accusations by the hon Lowe must surely be out of place.

In respect of what the hon Botha raised, let me make the following points.
Firstly, the UN peacekeepers are overstretched. To ask that we deploy the
blue helmets in South Africa is probably quite out of place. One has to
look at the scale of the tragedy, measure the number of lives lost, the
tragedy of that, look at the number of displaced people, and ask oneself
whether, two weeks ago, any of us were in a position to have anticipated
the scale of this tragedy.

Even in countries that are large, with enormous resources, that have done
remarkably well – and I think of China’s response to the earthquake – they
are still battling with the housing of people. So to have expected
everything to be ready when the first wave of xenophobic attacks happened
has to be wrong. There will be teething problems about these issues. The
President doesn’t get involved in those kinds of issues; that is the task
of disaster management and it is being done in that way.

Let me turn to the statement of the hon Nhlengethwa. I heard the hon Kohler-
Barnard on the radio this morning; I was appalled. I think she owes South
Africans an apology; I think she owes Africans an apology; I think that we
must term her statements as fundamentally xenophobic and anti-African. They
are wrong; they are unconstitutional; they are undemocratic; and we
shouldn’t ever countenance that kind of behaviour in this House.

In respect of the statement by the hon Singh, hopefully this afternoon we
could deal with this more exhaustively in E249. There is a third bit of
information, and that is that the Producer Price Index came out at 12,4%
this morning. But I think it is important to understand that these are
global trends. Except for a period immediately after the oil shocks of the
early 70s, the world has probably not lived through a period where price
changes have been as rapid as they are and, as one newspaper reports this
morning, the only good news is that South Africa is not alone in this.

If you look at the scourge of inflation across the world now, it is like it
has certainly not been for almost 30 years, and that is the challenge. That
is what we need to think through and I think it is important that we
maintain clear heads and concentrate on ensuring that we have the policy
framework to carry us through.

I would like to tie in the hon Spies’s statement with that of the hon
Ndlovu, because fundamentally it deals with the same kind of issue. I
observed hon Spies, that there were those cries of “skande” on your right
when you spoke about the mayor and the trees and so on, until you mentioned
Midvaal and then there was silence. I think that, as with what the hon
Ndlovu said, none of us should countenance corruption anywhere. I think we
must name and shame individuals. We must demonstrate that they don’t belong
in the Public Service, that they rob the poor, that they have no place in a
democracy, that it’s a diversion of public finances, and this must unite us
across party lines without exception. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

        INACCESSIBILITY OF COMMITTEE ROOM TO PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Ms S C Van der Merwe): Chair and
members of this House, I was present two weeks ago at the United Nations in
support of the coming into effect of the convention on the rights of people
with disabilities.

South Africa was asked to participate in the debate, amongst a few selected
countries, and we did so with a great deal of pride at the work that has
been done in this country on the rights of disabled people. However, I
think it is fair to say that we acknowledge that there are tremendous
difficulties that we still face and we would like to thank the hon Gore for
bringing to our attention the tremendous difficulties that our countrymen
and - women still face.

This is an important matter, your Excellency ... I am still in UN mode!
This is an important matter, Chairperson, that we in fact implement the
spirit and the letter of the convention. I have to say that government will
need to intensify, and will increasingly intensify, its efforts in this
regard. We thank the hon Gore for bringing this to our attention. Thank you
very much. [Applause.]

         DELAYED FUNDING FROM DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION IN NORTH WEST

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Excellency, sorry, Chairperson ...
[Laughter.] I thank you very much for the opportunity. May I at the outset
extend a warm welcome to our children – our girl learners – who are sitting
there in the gallery.

They represent more than 12 million learners who are in our schools, and
more than 5 million of them are beneficiaries at attending no-fee schools.
Whilst we recognise the concern that has been raised - and indeed we would
be most grateful to receive the details of those schools that are having
difficulty in receiving their funds - one must take into account that
thousands upon thousands of schools are receiving their funds timeously as
a result of direct intervention by the national Department of Education.

It is indeed so that schools are compelled by virtue of legislation to
ensure that they provide audited statements to the relevant departments of
education, but we do agree that where there are difficulties, immediate
intervention must take place; support must be provided to the schools so
that our learners in schools are not at all prejudiced.

I should also draw the attention of the House to the fact that, in the
light of these difficulties, we have initiated a strategy or a particular
initiative in order to assist principals and aspiring principals in
ensuring that, amongst other things, they have the capacity and ability to
manage well, administratively, institutions of learning.

Amongst the five areas that have been identified, is financial and
administrative management. This is an enormously important task in ensuring
that our schools function extremely well, that our learners are not at all
prejudiced, and that the management of fees is always done in the best
interests of the learners.
I would appreciate it very much if the hon Boinamo could send the details
to me so that I can check up whether indeed it is as high as all that, but,
at the same time, I remind him that more than five million children are the
beneficiaries of attending no-fee schools. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

              NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

There was no debate.

Declarations of vote:

Mr L ZITA: Chairperson, section 24 of the Constitution grants every person
the right to an environment that is not harmful to their health or
wellbeing, as well as the right to have the environment protected through
reasonable legislative and other measures that prevent pollution and
ecological degradation, promote conservation and secure ecologically
sustainable development and the use of natural resources while promoting
justifiable economic and social development.

In order to give effect to the constitutional right to a safe environment,
the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism developed and
promulgated the National Environmental Management Act in 1998, as an
overarching legislative framework for environmental management. Chapter 5
of the Act introduced the framework for integrated environmental management
and the enabling mechanism for replacing the environmental impact
assessment regulations that were introduced in 1997.

Although titled “Integrated Environmental Management”, the scope and
provisions included in the 1998 Act very much limited integrated
environmental management to one tool only, namely the Environmental Impact
Assessment.

During 2006, the drive towards a more efficient and effective environmental
impact management system for South Africa was initiated. This project of
the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism, together with our
provinces, aimed not only to rationalise the use of EIAs, but also to
introduce a system fully based on integrated environmental management. This
system would include a streamlined EIA process, the introduction of tools
other than the EIA for environmental management, improved co-operation and
co-ordination between organs of state, integrated environmental
authorisation processes, and bringing all economic activities, including
mining, into one central environmental management system.

As a first step in this regard, the 2006 NEMA-based EIA regulations were
promulgated. Although improving on many of the deficiencies identified
through the implementation of the former EIA system, many of the mechanisms
to streamline the EIA could not be introduced, as the principal Act either
by implication prohibited it, or did not enable such provisions in
supporting legislation. It accordingly became evident that amendments to
this principal Act were required.

The amendments referred to above were subjected to a long and extensive
consultation process. After this extensive process, the portfolio committee
is satisfied that the amendments introduced to this Bill are, firstly,
necessary; secondly, will greatly improve the efficiency of EIAs and other
future tools without compromising on effective environmental management;
and, lastly, will, in a pragmatic way, bring mining into the environmental
management system governed by NEMA.

In terms of improved efficiency, this is achieved in four ways, namely:
introduction of new and often more appropriate tools; exclusions and
exemptions; provision for improved co-ordination and co-operation between
government institutions; and provision for integrated environmental or
related authorisation processes.

This improved efficiency can however not be at the cost of effective
environmental management and the protection of the environmental rights
enshrined in the Constitution. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr G R MORGAN: Thank you, Chairperson. All developments, no matter the
scope and nature, impact on the environment. In a growing economy such as
ours, and with the state that is involved in massive infrastructure
building projects, it is imperative that we manage our environment in a way
that allows for appropriate development, denies unacceptable development
and, where necessary, mitigates the effects of development.

The NEMA Bill introduces a range of new environmental management
instruments, including norms and standards, and environmental management
frameworks, all of which, if the associated regulations are drafted in good
faith, will help to speed up approvals for appropriate developments without
compromising the environment.

There are real concerns from some stakeholders about some components of the
traditional EIA, which will now be used “where applicable”. I am pleased
that the committee accepted the DA proposal to have the associated
regulations for the environmental instruments brought back to the committee
for oversight, after the Minister has drafted them.

A remarkable component of the Bill is the fact that the Minister of
Minerals and Energy will, 18 months after the promulgation of the National
Environmental Management Amendment Act and the Mineral and Petroleum
Resources Development Act, have to use NEMA EIA regulations for the
authorising of mines. The exact realities of this new process do need to be
further investigated during the NCOP public hearings. But it is simply not
good enough that the environmental authorisation of mines by a competent
authority other than environmental authorities remains indefinitely. The
environmental degradation caused by more than 100 years of mining is not to
be underestimated. The Department of Minerals and Energy, both pre- and
post-democracy, has not been rigorous enough in its approval of mines and
enforcing the mitigation of impacts.

The major achievement of this Bill is that MPs understand that mines should
not be treated as an exception and have thus written a schedule into this
Bill that effectively means that, 36 months after promulgation, the
environmental authorisation of mines will go to its rightful and logical
place, to the Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism.

May I take this opportunity to thank the chairperson of the committee for
guiding this process.

The reality is that, in the interim period, the vast majority of new mining
applications that will exist for the next 30 years, will be approved in the
next three years. I call on the Minister of Minerals and Energy, with the
active oversight of the Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism, to
proceed carefully in this interim period.

Areas with a disproportionately high number of applications, like the
Mpumalanga Highveld, need special attention. This area could become as
polluted in the future, as the Wonderfonteinspruit area is today.

Mining, despite its positive benefit to the economy, cannot be allowed in
every area, simply because mineral deposits that can be mined, exist there.

Further, I ask that special attention be paid to areas of the unique
Woodbush Granite Grasslands, like the Haenertsburg area of Limpopo, which
are also now coming under threat. Mining should only happen where it is
appropriate for mining operations to exist.

The DA supports this Bill. [Applause.]

Bill read a second time.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon members, I have been advised
that the Second and Third Orders will stand over. Before I adjourn the
House, I think we need to do the following.

On behalf of the Speaker and the Presiding Officers of the National
Assembly, I wish to thank the girl children for coming and joining us in
our proceedings in Parliament today. Some of them started off very early in
the National Assembly Programme Committee. Some of them have been in
meetings where we have interviewed staff and they have participated in that
process.
I trust that you have gained an insight into the workings of your
Parliament, and I hope you will join us in the Extended Public Committees
this afternoon before you leave for your different destinations.

I think they deserve a round of applause. [Applause.]

The House adjourned at 14:42.


