---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 23 October 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2008-10-23
---

THURSDAY, 23 OCTOBER 2008
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:08.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                                 NEW MEMBER

                               (Announcement)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon members, I would like to take this
opportunity to announce the appointment of the hon D R Tsotetsi as a member
of the National Council of Provinces. The hon member was sworn in on 14
October 2008 in the Chairperson’s office. Hon member, you are welcome to
the House. Thank you very much. [Applause.] You can stand up, let them see
you. Hon Tsotetsi replaces Mr Shiceka who is now the Minister of Provincial
and Local Government. Does any member wish to give notice of a motion?

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that at the next sitting of
the NCOP I shall move on behalf of the IFP:

   That the Council –


      1) notes with disgust that four Johannesburg metro police officers
         were caught on camera allegedly taking bribes from hawkers in
         Soweto;


      2) further notes that such corrupt behaviour from police officers, who
         are meant to protect members of the public, is the reason why our
         police officials have lost the confidence of the public;


      3) condemns corrupt behaviour and urges the relevant authorities to
         take harsh action against anybody found guilty of corruption and
         bribery;


      4) calls upon the relevant authorities to investigate the allegation
         against the officers and take the necessary action if found guilty;
         and

      5) realises that corruption in our police services is a problem that
         must be solved if our police are to do their duties properly and
         protect the public.

Mme K A KGAREBE: Modulasetulo, ke kopa go dira tshisinyo gore:

   Khansele:

      1) e ele tlhoko kopano e e neng e tshwerwe kwa Ganyesa ka di 28 Lwetse
         2008;

      2) e amogela gore baemedi ba Porofense le maloko a Khansele ya
         Bosetšhaba ya Diporofense ba dirise puo e e tlhaloganngwang ke
         setšhaba fa ba bua le sona;

      3) e lemoga gore boidiidi jwa baagi ba Bokone Bophirima go tsenyeletsa
         banna, basadi, bašwa le bana bo ne bo tlile ka makatlanamane go tla
         go reetsa le go tlhaloganya molaetsa wa puso mme fela puso ga ya
         fitlhelela maikaelelo a yona ka fa puo e e neng e dirisiwa koo, e
         ne e sa tlhaloganngwe ke baagi;

      4) e kopa maloko gore fa ba isa Palamente kwa bathong, ba dirise puo e
         e dirisiwang ke baagi ba Porofense eo ka gale kgotsa ba nne le
         bafetoledi go thusa batho; le

      5) e lemoga gore batho ba itumelela go utlwa puo e ba e itseng e bile
         go botoka go dirisa puo ya bona go na le go dirisa ya boditšhaba;

      6) e amogela gore batho ba le bantsi ba itumeletse pitso eo.
(Translation of Setswana notice of motion follows.)

[Ms K A KGAREBE: Chairpeson, I hereby give notice that I shall move:

   That the Council -

      1) notes the general meeting which was held at Ganyesa on 28 September
         2008;

      2) acknowledges that provincial representatives and NCOP members
         should take note of the language they use when addressing the
         community and should make sure that it is a language that the
         community understands;

      3) notes that North West residents, including men, women, youths and
         babies came in numbers to listen to and understand the message of
         the government but that the government’s objectives did not reach
         the communities due to their lack of understanding of the language
         used;

      4) requests members when taking Parliament to the people, that they
         use the language predominantly spoken in that particular province
         or that they use interpreters for the people;

      5) realizes that people enjoy hearing the language they understand and
         that it is better to use one’s own language than a foreign,
         unfamiliar language; and

   (6)      acknowledges that many people are grateful to Parliament for
         that gathering.]

                        WOMEN OFFICIALS IN DELEGATION

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr R J TAU: Chairperson, I hereby move a motion without notice:

   That the Council notes that for the first time  in  the  history  of  the
   NCOP, and ever since I have been here, a department has a full delegation
   comprising only of women officials, given that the delegation of Minerals
   and Energy comprises only women officials.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                           2008 WORLD MAYOR AWARD

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms D ROBINSON: Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the Council -

    1) notes that Cape Town Mayor and leader of  the  Democratic  Alliance,
       Helen Zille, was awarded the 2008 World Mayor award on  Tuesday,  14
       October 2008;


    2) further notes that this award, launched by the  international  urban
       affairs think tank City Mayors, is aimed at recognising  mayors  who
       have made long-lasting contributions to their  communities  and  are
       committed  to  the  wellbeing  of  their   cities   nationally   and
       internationally;


    3) recognises that she beat 820  nominees  from  all  over  the  world,
       making this a truly remarkable achievement;


    4) acknowledges the judging panels’ statement that: “The Mayor of  Cape
       Town has dedicated her professional life to further the wellbeing of
       all sections of South African society. She has done so with courage,
       tenacity, and, above all,  a  deep-felt  love  for  Cape  Town,  her
       country and its people”; and



    5) congratulates Helen Zille not only on this  great  honour  that  has
       been bestowed on her but for placing Cape Town and the rest  of  the
       country in the international spotlight and for making the people  of
       South Africa proud.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

  ESTABLISHMENT OF AD HOC COMMITTEE TO PROCESS AND CONSIDER LEGISLATION FOR
                      NATIONAL YOUTH DEVELOPMENT AGENCY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chair, I move the motion without notice printed in the
name of the Chief Whip of the National Council of Provinces on the Order
Paper, as follows:

   That the Council -

      1) establishes an ad hoc Committee that  will  process  and  consider
         proposed legislation on the National Youth Development Agency;


      2) appoints the following members to the Committee:

         ANC
         Hon Ms F Mazibuko
         Hon Mr D D Gamede
         Hon Ms H F Matlanyane
         Hon Ms M P Themba
         Hon Mr R J Tau


         ACDP
         Hon Mr W Douglas


         DA
         Hon Mr A Watson


         IFP
         Hon Mr M A Mzizi


         UDM
         Hon Ms A N D Qikani;


      3) appoints the Hon Ms F Mazibuko as Chairperson of the ad hoc
         Committee with effect from 23 October 2008; and


      4) the Committee to report to the Council upon the completion of its
         task.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                    NCOP OVERSIGHT VISIT TO EASTERN CAPE
                             (Draft Resolution)


Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, I move on behalf of the Chairperson of the
NCOP:

   That, in terms of Rule 21(2) and, in the  interest  of  enhancing  public
   participation,  conducting  oversight  and  providing  a   platform   for
   consideration of issues affecting provinces as provided for in section 42
   (4) and 72(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996 –


     1) the Council resolves to, from 3 to 7 November 2008, conduct  public
        hearings, hold  meetings,  conduct  oversight  visits  and  sit  in
        plenary in the province of the Eastern Cape on 7 November 2008,  at
        10:00 until the conclusion of  business on that day; and


     2) the Council notes that the estimated cost of effecting  the  change
        in venue and maintaining it for the specified period will be R  2.8
        million.

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, it is not a point of order but there is a point
that worries me there. While supporting the motion, the dates from 3 to 10
November do not cover the travelling insurance for members on 2 November. I
wish to propose that the dates be changed although the actual sitting is
from 3 November because we will already be there on 2 November as the
members will not be covered, if it is not part of a formal motion.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mr Watson, we had a briefing meeting yesterday
where you could have raised that.

Mr A WATSON: Yesterday, we agreed to travel on 2 November. It is the motion
that worries me, not what we discussed yesterday.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I am told that your travel is always
covered by insurance.

Question put: That the motion be agreed to.


IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.


Motion  accordingly  agreed  to  in  accordance  with  section  65  of   the
Constitution.

                          SUSPENSION OF RULE 239(1)

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, on behalf of the Chief Whip I move -
  That Rule 239(1), which provides inter alia that the  consideration  of  a
  Bill may not commence before at least  three  working  days  have  elapsed
  since the committee’s report was tabled, be suspended for the purposes  of
  consideration of the Mineral & Petroleum  Resource  Development  Amendment
  Bill [B 10D - 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75) on Thursday,  23  October
  2008.

Question put: That the motion be agreed to.


IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.


Motion accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

    ESTABLISHMENT OF JOINT AD HOC COMMITTEE TO CONSIDER PUBLIC FUNDING OF
                      REPRESENTED POLITICAL PARTIES ACT

                             (Draft Resolution)


Mr M A SULLIMAN: On behalf of the Chief Whip I move -

   That the Council, subject to the concurrence of  the  National  Assembly,
   establishes an  ad  hoc  joint  committee  to  consider  draft  amendment
   regulations  tabled  by  the  Minister  for  Justice  and  Constitutional
   Development in terms of section 10 of the Public Funding  of  Represented
   Political Parties Act, Act No 103 of 1997, the Committee to —


   (1)      consist of the members of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and
        Constitutional Development of the Assembly and the members  of  the
        Select Committee on Security  and  Constitutional  Affairs  of  the
        Council;


   (2)      consider the draft amendment regulations tabled  on  20  October
        2008  and  report  by  not  later  than  5   November   2008   with
        recommendations for the President, as required in terms of  section
        10(1) of the Act; and


   (3)      exercise those powers in Joint Rule 32 that  may  assist  it  in
        carrying out its task.

Question put: That the motion be agreed to.


IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.


Motion  accordingly  agreed  to  in  accordance  with  section  65  of   the
Constitution.

         Mineral and Petroleum ResourceS Development Amendment Bill

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr J M SIBIYA: Comrade Chairperson, hon Members of Parliament, the NCOP
part of Parliament, comrades, colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, one of the
clauses of the Freedom Charter says that the people shall share in the
country’s wealth. That is clause 3. In line with the above clause, the ANC
at its last year’s 52nd National Conference in Polokwane, under the
economic transformation discussion, resolved that the use of natural
resources, of which the state is the custodian on behalf of the people,
including our minerals, should be in a manner that promotes the
sustainability and development of local communities and realises the
economic and social needs of the whole nation.

The Bill before the House today is in pursuance of that resolution and the
clause referred to above. It seeks to harmonise the environmental impact
assessment requirements with national norms and standards set out in the
National Environmental Management Act, thereby making the Minister of
Minerals and Energy the responsible authority for implementing
environmental policy and legislative requirements of the National
Environmental Management Act, as it relates to prospecting, mining
exploration, production and related activities.

The Bill also allows for the effective and efficient administration of our
mineral resources, the enhancement of co-operative governance between
organs of state, and confirms sound environmental management principles. In
this case, the Bill sets the stage for steps to be taken in order to
realise one of the ANC’s beliefs which says that a sustainable economy is a
guarantee for all South Africans, present and future, to realise their
right to an environment that is not harmful to their health and wellbeing.

It is through this Bill that the separation of powers between the Minister
of Minerals and Energy, who levies some fees in terms of the principal Act,
and the Minister of Finance, who determines state royalties in terms of the
Mining Royalty Bill, is confirmed.

It further empowers the Minister to impose conditions as necessary where
the application involves the land occupied by a community. Such conditions
include promoting the rights and interest of the community as well as
participation by those affected communities.

Community involvement in the affairs of the country is one of the basic
pillars of our Constitution; therefore, the Bill is aligning mining
procedure with that provision of the Constitution.

Comrade Chairperson, kindly allow me to refer to some of the experiences
our committee encountered when we visited the Eastern Cape on oversight and
made some suggestions to the Minister. We were taken to a place where we
were told we were going to have an observation on what is called “illegal
mining” - but I prefer to call it “informal mining”.

On arrival, we found a number of people; three of them standing at the
shaft’s entrance, and in front of each one of them there were heaps of coal
with numberings. The ones I encountered were numbered from one to five. I
had a chance to discuss what was happening with one of the people at the
entrance. He told me that he is 63 years old and he spent a period of 30
years in mining, both by virtue of employment and self-employment.

We looked at the shafts and realised that their shafts do not sink
downwards but horizontally. We realised that there were layers of rocks
with coal in between. I asked him why he was allowing people, including
himself, to go into that cracked shaft. Was he sure it was safe for people
to go in there or not? He answered by saying that even though he was not
trained, he is experienced in mining. He further told me that the cracks
were 10 cm deep and there was no possibility of the shaft collapsing.

When I looked around I saw three rocks and one of the rocks was protruding.
I asked him to tell me how safe was he working with that hanging rock. He
said it would take three years before that rock could fall and for that to
happen, it would require the bottom rock and the one next to it to shift;
it is then that the protruding rock could fall.
I was surprised, and called one of our colleagues, Mrs Ntembe - it’s
unfortunate she is not here - to come and listen to what I was hearing from
this man. I asked the old man to repeat, and he did. There was coal in
front of him and I asked him what it was for. He told me that they had
their customers, and a truck would come later for the second load. He
stated that he was in charge of all the heaps, from the first to the fifth.
I asked him how much was paid for a load and he said he was not taking
money but was only responsible for loading. The transactions took place
where the trucks were despatched from.

If a truck had a number, for instance, three, that would mean the truck was
coming for the third load and he would see to it that it was loaded. When I
asked him where the coal was taken to he said he did not know. I asked what
did they use the coal for and he said for making bricks and roofing slates.
I asked why was it not used for energy, and he said that Eskom officials
once visited them and said they could not take that coal because it was not
the kind they use to generate energy.

What Mrs Ntembe and I thought was that if people could work the way they
were doing and getting the supplier of the coal, wouldn’t it be possible
for the department to meet with these people and formalise their work so
that they could get assistance and earn a living?
While we were there a truck came and loaded “heap two”, of which he was in
charge, and we saw how it was done. Perhaps it would be proper to meet with
them and some form of assistance be given to them. I estimated that those
heaps would take three to four years for them to survive on. We went to
some of their shafts. They use lanterns to see what is going on. This is
what we saw. Perhaps if the department could find out what is happening
there, it could assist these people.

The select committee has no doubt that the Bill contributes greatly to the
building of a sustainable and growing economy, to creating a sense of
dignity and the recognition of affected communities as well as a healthy
environment for the present and future generations. It is for this reason
that the committee supports the Bill and urges this House to do the same.
Thank you.

Debate concluded.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I shall put the question in respect of the
First Order. The question is that the Bill be agreed to, subject to the
proposed amendments. In accordance with Rule 63, I shall first allow
political parties the opportunity to make their declarations of vote, if
they so wish. Any political party?
Declaration of vote:

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, up until yesterday the Bill was scheduled to be
debated and not only for a statement to be made about it. A comprehensive
speech was prepared, but I would ask you to note that the DA will oppose
the Bill and remind the hon chair of the committee that the fantastic story
he told still doesn’t make it legal. If that illegal mining is informal
then the illegal cash heisting is also informal banking. Thank you.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: We shall now proceed to the voting on the
question. Before I call the voting, please press button number one to
confirm your presence. There should be lights flashing. Are your lights
flashing?

Those in favour, please press button number four, those against press
button number two and those who abstain press button number three. Have all
members voted?

Hon members, according to the voting, 33 members voted in favour, eight
members against and there were no abstentions. I therefore declare the
Bill, subject to proposed amendments, agreed to in accordance with section
75 of the Constitution.

Bill, subject to proposed amendments, agreed to in accordance with section
75 of the Constitution.

                         BROADCASTING AMENDMENT BILL
                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Ms M P THEMBA: Chairperson, hon members, it gives me great pleasure as the
Chairperson of the Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises to
finalise the Broadcasting Amendment Bill.

During the 2007 National Conference of the African National Congress in
Polokwane, we reiterated our commitment to a public broadcaster that will
play a critical role in shaping opinions of our nation and that the South
African Broadcasting Corporation, SABC, should remain an important role-
player in the national democratic revolution. The current amendments were
as a result of the emergency at the South African Broadcasting Corporation
that manifested in a number of ways.

This culminated in the summoning of the SABC board to appear before
Parliament. Subsequent to these developments, an urgent legislative
proposal to amend section 15 of the Broadcasting Act, Act 4 of 1999, was
filed, so as to align the process for the dismissal of the board members
with the Rules of the National Assembly. The amendment would mean that if,
at any given time, it was felt that the SABC board was underperforming, a
vote of no confidence in the board could then be passed by the House.

In terms of the Broadcasting Act, as it currently stands, members of the
SABC board are appointed by the President on the recommendations of the
National Assembly and hold office for a term of five years. The Act only
provides for the removal of individual members of the board upon the
recommendation of the board itself.

There is no mechanism provided in the Act for the resignation of or removal
of a board member who does not perform his or her obligation in terms of
the Act or for the dissolution of the entire board. The Bill seeks to
address the gaps identified in the Act.

The Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises has considered and
adopted the Bill with certain amendments. The committee rejects the amended
definition of the appointing body and subsequent clauses that refer to the
appointing body. The committee feels that the powers of the President to
make appointments are derived from the tenet of separation of powers
between the executive and the legislature. The committee proposes that a
quorum for any meeting of the interim board be six members.

With the inclusion, and acceptance, of new amendments, the board would
ideally function normally and democratically. However, the Democratic
Alliance expressed reservations about the Bill, but we didn’t get any
explanation. I, therefore, put the Bill before the House for adoption. I
thank you, Chair.

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Hon members, that concludes the
debate. I shall now put the question. The question is that the Bill,
subject to the proposed amendments, be agreed to. In accordance with Rule
63, I shall first allow political parties to make their declarations of
vote, if they so wish.

Declaration of vote:

Mr A WATSON: Chair, once again, as with the previous Bill, we had prepared
a comprehensive speech because it was listed as a debate, but it was
changed to a statement. In regard to that, I will just highlight one point,
namely that the proposition that the entire board may need to be removed,
is offensive and will be seen for what it is: an attempt to get rid of
persons duly appointed prior to the installation of the board.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Order, hon member. Hon member, is
it a point of order, or what?

Mr A WATSON: No, I am making a statement in regard to my vote.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): No, I am not talking to you. I am
talking to hon Windvoël. Please take your seat, hon member.

Mr V V Z WINDVOЁL: Chairperson, actually I was going to ask the very same
question from Mr Watson that you are asking me. Is he rising on a point of
order, or what? He is not part of the speaker’s list.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Hon Watson is making a
declaration on behalf of his political party. Hon Watson, you may continue.

Mr A WATSON: Thank you, Chair. Not all of us understand the rules. An
attempt to get rid of persons duly appointed prior to the installation of
the board, compliant with the new ANC rules, I said, is a bad example. The
Constitutional Court has on one, or more, occasion ruled that appointment,
security, and removal provisions are decisive for an independent body.
Therefore, along with other points that we would have raised, the DA will
oppose the Bill.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Thank you, hon member. Hon
members, we shall now proceed to the voting on the question. Before I call
the voting, please press button number one to confirm your presence. Yes,
all of you. You are voting as political parties. There should be lights
flashing. Are your lights flashing? Those in favour, please press button
number four; those against, press button number two; and those who abstain,
press button number three. Could you please provide the members who, for
certain reasons, have not voted with the forms? If any of the members have
mistakenly pressed the incorrect button, please press the correct button
now. Have all members voted now? The voting is now closed.

The results are as follows: those who voted in favour, there are 29; those
who voted against, there are eight; and there is one abstention. Hon
members, voting is a secret ballot.

I therefore declare the Bill agreed to in terms of section 75 of the
Constitution.

Bill, subject to proposed amendments, agreed to in accordance with section
75 of the Constitution.

                               COMPANIES BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr J M SIBIYA: Chairperson, colleagues, comrades, ladies and gentlemen,
economic transformation, as espoused by the ANC and captured at its 52nd
conference in Polokwane and to be implemented by our government, implies
changes that will not emerge spontaneously from the invisible hand of the
market. People acting collectively in the spirit of human solidarity must
shift the patterns of economic development in this country.

The Bill before us here today is one attempt in the direction of economic
development involving the people. It seeks to reform and overhaul the
rationale behind the Companies Act, Act 61 of 1973. The overhauling and
reforming referred to above became inevitable, so as to replace the 1973
Act, which is outdated, formalistic, creditor-oriented and overtly
criminal, to respond effectively to globalisation and the advent of our
democracy; to circumvent corporate failures and scandals resulting from
weaknesses in corporate governance; to increase market transparency; and to
simplify company registration and maintenance.

In order to strengthen corporate governance and transparency, the Bill
obliges all types of companies to prepare annual financial statements. The
statements are seen as part of modernising and encouraging sound management
and promoting sustainability. As our Constitution, in its Bill of Rights
section demands that the South African citizenry have access to
information, the Bill grants the public access to any company records such
as lists of directors and shareholders of companies.

In conclusion, Chairperson, this Bill comes at an opportune time where the
trend internationally is towards simplification of the law, creating a
culture of corporate governance, reducing the regulatory burden, providing
legal backing for financial reporting standards and increasing market
transparency. What is left for us is to put in place systems for the
successful implementation of the law. The Select Committee on Economic and
Foreign Affairs supports the Bill and invites this august House to do the
same. Thank you.

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Thank you, hon member. That
concludes the debate. Order, please. I shall now proceed and I shall now
put the question. The question is that the Bill, subject to the proposed
amendments, be agreed to. In accordance with Rule 63, I shall first allow
political parties to make their declarations of vote, if they so wish.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. Before I call the
voting, please press button number one to confirm your presence. There
should be lights flashing. Are your lights flashing? Those in favour please
press button number four. Those against press button number two and those
who abstain press button number three. Have all members voted?

If any of the members have mistakenly pressed the incorrect button, please
press the correct button. Have you all voted now? The voting is closed. Hon
members, the results are as follow: 38 members voted in favour. I therefore
declare the Bill, subject to the proposed amendments, agreed to in terms of
section 75 of the Constitution.

Bill, subject to proposed amendments, agreed to in accordance with section
75 of the Constitution.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT ON NCOP VISIT TO TLOKWE, NORTH WEST IN TERMS OF
                PROGRAMME OF TAKING PARLIAMENT TO THE PEOPLE

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Chairperson, hon members, thank you for the
opportunity to open this debate. Before I do so, allow me to congratulate
the following members: Hon Sogoni, who has been appointed as Chairperson of
the Joint Budget Committee; hon Mkhaliphi, who has been elected as Chair
for the Select Committee on Provincial and Local Government; hon Sibiya,
who has been elected as Chair of the Economic and Foreign Affairs Select
Committee; and hon Faith Mazibuko, who has been elected, firstly, as the
provincial Whip of Gauteng and, secondly, as the deputy chair of the Joint
Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Women.
[Applause.] I wish you good luck in your present positions. These are
deployments with many varied and difficult tasks. But I have no doubts that
you will manage well and make it.

This afternoon we present, for consideration by the House, the report on
Taking Parliament to the People – a visit to the North West from 10 to 14
March 2008, as published in the ATCs of 14 October 2008. As you know, this
was the 10th visit undertaken by this House under our public participation
and outreach programme - Taking Parliament to the People. The programme was
initiated to serve as a means through which this House can interact with
communities with a view to promote public education and to enhance public
participation. Since its launch, we have been able to create an opportunity
for people to be informed about Parliament and the kind of service delivery
they would like to see.

Through this programme, we have linked Parliament with communities from
within and around. You would be aware that we have already visited all nine
provinces. We now end this programme by visiting the Eastern Cape, where we
started in 2002. These communities can bear testimony to Parliament’s
attempts, through the NCOP, to fulfil the aspirations of the Freedom
Charter by practically ensuring that “all people shall be entitled to take
part in the administration of the country.” The programme has assisted
Parliament to lay building blocks for the creation of a people’s Parliament
that is responsive to the needs of the people towards realising a better
quality of life for all the people of our country. Some of these successes
of the programme in the Third Parliament will be indicated in this report.

The term of the Third Parliament has seen the intensification of the Taking
Parliament to the People programme through, among other things, follow-up
visits to monitor responses to issues raised by our people, and continues
to focus on key service delivery areas such as education, health, housing,
social development and the public works programme. We have witnessed huge
support given to the NCOP by people during these visits that highlight the
need for this institution to continue acting as a bridge between the people
and government. As a consequence of the success of this programme, we have
the responsibility to remain committed to representing their interests in
the consideration of laws and resources for the betterment of the quality
of lives.

As a true public representative, we cannot afford to create false hope that
the difficulties people continue to experience can be resolved in one day.
The fact is that challenges that face our poor communities have a long
history and are therefore deep-rooted. To address these challenges needs
time and resources. There are no quick—fix solutions to all these problems.
We know, as this House, that addressing service delivery challenges needs
the careful co-ordination of services by the different spheres of
government. On the other hand, we need to move faster in assisting our
people where resources are available. We have the authority to intervene
where there are problems with implementation.

Some of the issues that were raised in the North West province were as
follows: Firstly, under education, school nutrition programme, scholar
transport, shortage of water, school safety and shortage of maths and
science teachers were raised. Secondly, under health, the lack of
medication in public hospitals, long hours that people spend in queues to
get assistance and the need for the expansion of services for TB and HIV
were raised. Lastly, under youth, the lack of sport facilities,
accessibility of services targeting the youth and entry requirements into
formal employment were raised.

The report also notes appreciation by communities of some positive
developments in some of the above-mentioned areas of service delivery and,
more particularly, with regard to interventions being made by government,
such as in the provision of resources for community health needs. This is
important because when looking at service delivery, there is often a
tendency to undermine the positive things that happen in our communities.
This is not only unfair, but it also destroys the hope of those who need
service delivery the most, because of their circumstances that remain
largely unchanged.

Members will certainly agree with me that the issues raised in the report
are not new. We have heard them being raised in some of the provinces we
visited before the visit to North West and during committee oversight
activities. Committees will do their work and check what is happening on
the ground. The question we need to answer is whether, as the NCOP, we are
willing to do all in our power to ensure that the resources that are made
available are deployed and utilised effectively and on time. This is
because if we can do so, we will make a difference in speeding up service
delivery.

We also need to ask ourselves whether we have the necessary capacity to
adequately manage the work of the NCOP that is generated through programmes
such as Taking Parliament to the People. If not, what will it take for us
to ensure that we have the necessary capacity? In this respect, I must
indicate though that we have taken some of the recommendations you made as
a House that are related to this question, especially during last year’s
summit on intergovernmental relations, to relevant political structures for
further consideration. We will continue to engage all relevant structures
on issues we think should be addressed towards strengthening the NCOP for
better service delivery to our people.

In terms of the follow up on the North West visit, given the fact that we
are now nearing the end of the third term of Parliament, the reality is
that as a House, we may not have sufficient time to conduct a proper follow
up on issues we picked up in the North West. Therefore, we need to take up
these issues and find a way of ensuring that we continue to respond to them
beyond the term of this current Parliament. I intend to ask the House when
we come back next year - when we consider the report of the NCOP during
this term of Parliament - to consider this question and to find ways of
ensuring that we process all the issues we would like the next Parliament
to pay attention to. Your views will definitely assist a great deal.

As a House, we have just adopted the resolution to sit in the Eastern Cape
in Lady Frere for a week next month as part of the Taking Parliament to the
People programme. This will surely be our last such activity in the Third
Parliament. You will certainly realise that this is one of the communities
in our country that is deserving of such a visit, given the challenges
caused by poverty. It is my wish that our presence there will bring hope to
this community and add impetus to the developments that are already
planned.

Members will recall that we have often referred to the need for a study on
Taking Parliament to the People with a view to enhance the NCOP’s
interventions through this programme. A lot of work has been done towards
this. As soon as administration finalises all procurement issues, we will
begin this process. Our intention is to have the results ready when we come
back next year in order to be able to reflect on them so that they form
part of our handover report. We will give you the details once a team of
researchers has been appointed to do this work.

On that note, I submit the report on our visit to  North West earlier this
year for consideration by the House. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Hon Chairperson and my colleagues, allow me to also add my
voice in this august House to the report of Taking Parliament to North
West, as was conducted by this upper House. I must also emphasise the fact
that the focus of this round of activity was not so different from the
Polokwane conference resolutions that put more emphasis on the following
categories and priorities: Enhancing the quality of education; improving
the provision of health care, particularly for the poor, so as to reduce
infant, child and maternal mortality; reducing levels of crime and
enhancing citizen safety; expanding rural infrastructure, public transport,
housing, water, electricity and sanitation, with emphasis to labour-
intensive projects; and the support for farmers and initiative to emerging
farmers.

I must indicate, as well, that there were some generic issues raised by
participants during the public hearings. Those issues were: High rate of
unemployment; class discrimination in society at large; poverty and hunger;
social transformation as a process towards poverty eradication; job-
creation through the Expanded Public Works Programme; free education should
be given; skills development should be accessed by poor communities;
fostering co-operative governance; and child support grants should be
extended to the age of 18 years.

I must also put emphasis on some matters that were raised in relation to
the local government. It came out that there was a lack of communication
and consultation between the government, people and the communities. This
point of view was partly based on outstanding progress reports to update
community members on progress regarding some issues affecting them. I think
we have seen that during the TV footage this week around the area of
Lichtenburg. I hope that the opportunity afforded to the community of North
West, the officials and the politicians should have made it possible for
them to address those issues.

When coming to the challenges with the Department of Education, there was a
mention of drug abuse that was noted. It was noted that drug abuse as well
as alcohol abuse are serious challenges in communities and they need the
intervention of the government. The youth were viewed as victims of drug
abuse hence they were dropping out of school before reaching grade 12 and
becoming involved in crime. Some of the children were engaging in such
behaviour within the school premises. Consequently, children and the youth
were encouraged to go back to school. I wouldn’t like to mention the
shortages of teachers. I think the Chairperson has already alluded to that.

I must also mention that the following recommendations were placed before
the House: The school feeding scheme should not be compromised, but rather
be prioritised for the benefit of the children; an audit of infrastructure
investment in farm schools and other schools in the area should be
conducted; and a breakdown of the budget of the provincial departments of
Education should be sent to the delegation. I hope that has been done.

There were, of course, a number of health-related matters and challenges
that were put forward. I would like to indicate that there were some
responses whereby the Minister of Health and the MEC stated that it was a
good exercise that people were afforded the platform to put forward all
those shortcomings. Furthermore, they stated that shortages of resources
and training of professional nurses was an issue that was being addressed.
Nurses were performing tasks beyond their control. It was noted that more
support was going to be employed with the hope that it would assist in
minimising such challenges.

Therefore, I have a hope that with the now revised expenditure estimate of
2008-09 as proposed through the Appropriation Bill during the Medium-Term
Budget Planning, there was a hope that my North West province would benefit
and prioritise challenges like the opening of new nursing colleges, so as
to address all of them. I thank you. [Applause]

Mr A WATSON: Hon Chairperson, let me say from the start so that there would
be no confusion later of us being accused of not supporting the actions of
Parliament. The Democratic Alliance supports everything as prescribed in
the Constitution and especially with regard to our duties in this House
when it comes to oversight and our responsibility to the voters in the
different provinces. Therefore, let there be no doubt that we support the
programme of Taking Parliament to the People.

But having said that let’s not be remiss and think that supporting the
principle means that we support everything that goes along with it. And
that’s where the doubt is sometimes derived from what I say, because I am
normally the one who speaks about this. When I spoke some time ago in
Potchefstroom, in Tlokwe, I referred to the lack of follow-up by provinces
with regard to Taking Parliament to the People in reference to the Western
Cape visit in which we promised to follow-up and which never took place. I
was even called a liar by one very hon member from the floor, but that
follow-up visit still has not taken place. And yet, hon Chair, we are
debating the next visit where I was called a liar, the one to North West.

What I’m saying is that if we go and visit the people and we truly listen
to their problems, and we tell them that we will come back as an
institution and make sure that those things that were promised by their
MECs and by their councillors and mayors are done, then we should do that.
But yet again - and the hon Chairperson of the NCOP has alluded to it -
time possibly does not allow this. But I think that there has been ample
time and there has been too many other things occupying our time, not least
of which were problems in individual parties. But let’s not dwell on that.

Let me just refer to this report which has nine introductory pages and 49
pages. Are there clowns in the House? Sorry, I thought the circus has come
to Cape Town. [Laughter.] Let me refer to just one page out of the 58 pages
and that is the question on the provision of drinking water to the people.
Just one page out of 58 has reference to the complaints and the resolutions
or responses to water. And one of the main responses was that it was
recommended that the Select Committee on Local Government and
Administration, Finance, Safety and Constitutional Affairs, in
collaboration with the relevant committees in the provincial legislature,
should conduct oversight by visiting the communities in order to assess how
the budget allocation impacts on community programmes and to solve the
problems associated with it.

Now let me tell you, hon Chairperson, that at this very moment, I’m just
talking about drinking water, there’s riots in the Zeerust Municipality,
where there is no drinking water ... [Laughter.] Why are you laughing? It’s
not my main language. You shouldn’t be laughing, you should correct me. You
see, that attitude is worrying to me. The substance of the report is not
important, but when the speaker can’t pronounce a Setswana word - that’s
very important. Because of the fact that there is still no drinking water,
the people of Zeerust are rioting and burning tyres in the streets and
obstructing the traffic on the N4 every now and again.

A similar thing is happening in the Tshing township in Ventersdorp, where
there are also riots. In Delareyville in the Tswaing Municipality, a
delegation by the MEC Howard Dembeza had to go and calm the community to
try and solve the problems. In Letsopo in Ottosdal the sewage is running
down the street and contaminating the drinking water. Similar things are
occurring in Naledi in Vryburg, and in Kgetlenrivier Municipality the MEC
had to once again calm the people who were rioting. I would also like to
have some order.

The problem, Chair, is that if we do not follow up with these visits and
solve these problems, then we will not have achieved anything. And if we do
not go and pronounce upon the visits - I’ve had reports, and maybe this is
not official - the word goes out that this is one big ANC rally. Well,
maybe this is the last one. Maybe after next year’s election we’ll have a
different picture. But we must be truthful when we say that we want to
attend to the needs of the people and not make a mockery of this; and to
follow-up is our duty. I thank you, sir. [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Thank you, Chairperson. Hon members, ladies
and gentlemen, when one has to come and oppose or support the report he
must certainly look for other issues that are not there at that particular
time. We must make a follow-up and that is our duty. You must not add salt
unnecessarily, lest your food become so distasteful. You should be extra
careful, Mr Watson.

We are gathered today, two days after one of the outstanding daughters of
Africa and a compatriot of our people, Comrade Albertina Nontsikelelo
Thethiwe Sisulu, celebrated her 90th birthday. Allow me to pay tribute and
pass our birthday wishes on to this courageous hero of our people and a
living symbol of our struggle for liberation. uMaSisulu has been at the
forefront of the struggle for the liberation of the people of South Africa.
I want to say: Her story calls on all of us, particularly the cadres of our
movement, never to waiver in our commitment to the struggle for freedom and
the total liberation of our people. Her story calls on all of us to guard
against those with malicious intentions and to serve the cause of a
principled and value-based movement for a free South Africa, and to free
ourselves from those who only want to plunder and destroy what our
forbearers have built with their blood and their lives.

The idea of a people’s government was also enriched when we went to North
West for the visiting of sites. This reminds me of how we worked in the
1980s; how women’s organisations and civic structures, youth and students
and shop steward councils made sure that we really got our freedom. Chair,
as we emerge from our national conference in Polokwane – I hope Mr Watson
watched that part – we boldly proclaimed the principles of the Freedom
Charter, which continue to burn in the soul of our movement. Over the 95
years of the existence of the ANC the movement evolved into a force for
mass mobilisation; a glue that held our people together and a trusted
leader of the broadest range of social forces that shared the vision of a
nonracial, nonsexist, democratic and prosperous South Africa.

Indeed, our debate today also reflects the firm commitment of our movement
to work tirelessly to put our people first. I hope you are listening. Our
report today of Taking Parliament to the People in North West clearly
attests to the ANC government’s commitment to this historic vision of
popular participation in self-government by our people. I want to say to
our members: Let us not be distracted by a few who have selfish interests
and selfish people who were not there in Kliptown and who do not have the
interests of our people at heart. [Interjections.] Ours has always been
that ideal of a better life for all. The report attests to the very noble
principles and ideals that commit our movement to the legacy of popular
power and a government by the people. It proves without any shred of doubt
our historic resolve to engage with the people of South Africa in the very
communities where they live. It proves that the ANC remains to be a bold
beacon of hope and the only instrument for the continued liberation of our
people from the trappings of the social challenges facing our people in
their daily lives.

The report of our visit provokes another round of earnest assessment of our
commitment to ensure a better life for all our people. We are not denying
anything, Mr Watson. There is not a shred of doubt that in the past 13
years the lives of millions of our people have changed for the better and
that many of our people are better off today than they were yesterday. This
report attests to the historic commitment of expanding the dialogue with
our people on the challenges that they face as we continue to dismantle the
legacy of apartheid and its settlements.

As we visited the people of Tlokwe, which is an area that was historically
reserved for a small minority that enjoyed the protection of the apartheid
regime as the capital of the former Transvaal Republic, many of us were
stunned by the stark reality of the legacy of apartheid settlements that
still prevailed in many of our communities. I wish you could have said
something around that, Mr Watson.

I must reiterate that the Premier of North West assured us during our visit
in March that we will not tolerate any racial attitudes in any of our
government institutions. The functioning of the machinery of government is
particularly important because the overall direction and success of the
democratic journey of our nation rests on its functionality and its ability
to deliver effective services. Therefore, we will not allow any structures
of our government to be blatantly misused to degrade the dignity imposed
upon our people by the Constitution.

The people of Tlokwe also spoke about their daily struggles to access
water, sanitation, employment. That is what you were saying. That is what
we have discovered and that is exactly why we have a provincial government
that has to do its work. [Interjections.] We were indeed humbled by the
commitment of the North West government to address some of these
challenges. I hope you are listening now, Watson. Some of the people of
Tlokwe were not hesitant to share their stories and the hope that has been
reignited by our government. Some told us how some of our government’s
programmes such as the social grant, the Expanded Public Works Programme,
feeding schemes and the National Student Financial Aid Scheme continued to
change their lives. It can’t be that there is no difference.

I remember a woman who spoke passionately about a house that she had
received a few months before our visit – not that it was because we were
going to visit that area. It is these stories that continue to rekindle our
hope and commitment for a better South Africa. We will continue to engage
with the various structures of our government to ensure that the challenges
that our people face are really addressed. As the ANC we will continue to
work tirelessly to ensure that the lives of our people continue to change
for the better.

Chair, because of time, I want to say that we will continue to strengthen
our interaction with them in order to afford them the opportunity to
contribute positively to local development and to increase their democratic
involvement in matters affecting their daily lives. On behalf of the ANC I
move that the Council adopts the report. Thank you, Chair. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Chairperson, I think the hon Chief Whip, hon
Ntwanambi, has actually responded to quite a number of issues. I am sure
you will agree with me that the ANC government has done a wonderful job in
the past 15 years.
In my research, in my study and in everything I have done, I have not heard
of any country that ushered in democracy and has done so many things in 15
years. I have never seen it. They have produced a Constitution which is
accepted and applauded internationally. They implemented that Constitution
in 15 years’ time.

When we took over government in 1994, we were in an economic recession of
1% economic growth. All those who could remember 1994 - I was here. I took
part in the negotiations and I took part in the transitional executive
council, and I have been taking part in Parliament since 1994. The economic
growth of South Africa was standing at 1% and there was an economic
recession. We have built the economy of this country from then up until now
to above 4% towards 5% economic growth in this country. What an achievement
in 15 years! There are countries who have been 20, 30, 40 years in
democracy and they could hardly move to 2% or 3% of their economic growth.
We have managed to bring the debt of this country down, which was caused by
the apartheid government when they were aware that the new government will
come in. That big debt has been brought down and we are now enjoying a bit
of a surplus in our budget in this country. What an achievement beyond
that! That’s the greatest achievement that you could have seen.

All that I am trying to say is that people must not think that we are going
to address all the problems over one day. If the apartheid government,
which separated us into different homelands, could not address all these
problems during the years when they were in government, how do you expect
this government to address all of these issues overnight? I mean, it’s
impossible.

What we should say is that our government has done a lot in 15 years, we
have got challenges to face and we will continue doing those things,
because our people have not achieved all the things that they need to
achieve. So we will continue to do that. I think, if you have been
listening very well, I said there’s one thing that the NCOP should still do
very well and that is follow-ups. That’s what I said in my speech. I can
quote my speech right now; it’s in writing. I raised that because I think
once we go to the people, we raise their expectations, and we must go back
and make sure that those things are happening. We are in charge of
overseeing the implementation of the budget that we are voting for as
Members of Parliament. That is the key issue.

You vote on a budget, so that it can go and be put to work. You heard what
Mr Trevor Manuel said yesterday. What are we doing about some of the
underexpenditure in some departments? That’s our job! We’ve got to say that
money has got to work, because we have allocated it to that particular
department and make sure that we ask questions to those who are in charge
when they come to the House. I am referring to the executive, of course.
What has happened? We must be alive to all the issues that the people have
raised on the ground.
But, Mr Watson, thank you very much today that you have actually come to
the fore and said that you supported this. I am very glad that you are
actually responding to the questions that you are putting. It is impossible
to deal with these issues over a day; it’s impossible; we can’t do so. You
will find those problems, but let’s all stay focused. Our people should not
lose hope down there. Those who have not yet got water, electricity,
clinics - those things will be done. We are committed by the Constitution,
because it’s a constitutional obligation that we have to deliver services
wall-to-wall throughout the South African nation.

Therefore, I want to thank the House for its effective and positive
deliberation in terms of this report. Thank you very much. I hope you will
pass the report.

Debate concluded.
Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report  accordingly  adopted  in  accordance  with   section   65   of   the
Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND CONSTITUTIONAL
          AFFAIRS - PROPOSED RENUMERATION OF JUDGES AND MAGISTRATES

Order disposed of without debate.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report  accordingly  adopted  in  accordance  with   section   65   of   the
Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 15:49.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                          FRIDAY, 26 SEPTEMBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Bill passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly on 26 September 2008:


          a) Refugees Amendment Bill [B 11D– 2008] (National Assembly – sec
             75).

2.    Classification of Bill by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(3) classified the following
         Bill as a section 76 Bill:
          a) Financial Management of Parliament Bill [B 74 – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).

3.    Withdrawal of Bill

    The Minister of Public Works withdrew the following Bill on 23
    September 2008:
    (a)     Expropriation Bill [B16 – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75).

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bill amended by Assembly and returned to Council


    (1)    Bill amended and passed by National Assembly and returned for
         concurrence on 26 September 2008:


         (a)      Consumer Protection Bill [B 19D – 2008] (National Assembly
             – sec 76(2)).


             The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Economic
             and Foreign Affairs of the National Council of Provinces.

2.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


    (1)    Bills passed by National Assembly and transmitted for
         concurrence on 26 September 2008:


          a) Companies Bill [B 61B – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75).


             The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Economic
             and Foreign Affairs of the National Council of Provinces.


          b) Financial Management of Parliament Bill [B 74 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 76(1)).


             The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Finance
             of the National Council of Provinces.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the Financial and Fiscal
          Commission (FFC) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
          Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
          Information for 2007-2008 [RP 206-2008].
       b) Report of the Auditor-General on an Investigation into procurement
          at the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development – June
          2008 [RP 162-2008].


2.    The Minister of Defence

       a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 20 – Department of Defence
          for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
          Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 20 for
          2007-2008. [RP 238-2008].


3.    The Minister of Transport

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the Railway Safety Regulator
          (RSR) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General
          on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
          2008 [RP 130-2008].


       b) Report and Financial Statements of the Airports Company South
          Africa Limited (ACSA) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
          Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.

       c) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Rail Commuter
          Corporation Limited (SARRC) for 2007-2008, including the Report of
          the Auditor-General on the Group Financial Statements and
          Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 230-2008].

       d) Report and Financial Statements of the Road Accident Fund (RAF)
          for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
          Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP
          226-2008].

4.    The Minister of Social Development

       a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 17 – Department of Social
          Development for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-
          General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of
          Vote 17 for 2006-2007 [RP 152-2008].


       b) Report and Financial Statements of the National Development Agency
          (NDA) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General
          on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008 [RP 56-2008].


5.    The Minister of Communications

       a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Electronic Media
          Institute of South Africa for 2007-2008, including the Report of
          the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
          Information of 2007-2008.


6     The Minister of Public Works

       a) Report and Financial Statements of Agrément South Africa for 2007-
          2008.


7.    The Minister in The Presidency


       a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 7 – Government
          Communication and Information System (GCIS) for 2007-2008,
          including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
          Statements and Performance Information of Vote 7 for 2007-2008 [RP
          213-2008].


8.    The Minister of Housing

       a) Report and Financial Statements of Servcon Housing Solutions
          (Proprietary) Limited for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
          Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.


9.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

       a) Report and Financial Statements of the Performing Arts Centre of
          the Free State (PACOFS) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
          Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
          Information for 2007-2008.


      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the National Library of South
          Africa for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General
          on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
          2008 [RP 222-2008].


10.   The Minister of Trade and Industry

       a) Report and Financial Statements of the Small Enterprise
          Development Agency for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
          Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
          Information for 2007-2008.


11.   The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism


      (a)   Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
          and the United Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP) serving as
          the Secretariat for the African Ministerial Conference on the
          Environment (AMCEN) on the hosting of the Twelfth Session of ANCEN
          in Johannesburg from 7 to 12 June 2008, tabled in terms of section
          231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


       b) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
          and the United Nations Environment Programme regarding the Fifth
          Session of the Conference of Parties to the Nairobi Convention and
          the Eighth Session of the Conference of Parties to the Abidjan
          Convention in Johannesburg from 5 to 8 November 2007, tabled in
          terms of section 231(3) of the Convention, 1996.

       c) Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the Republic
          of South Africa and the United Nations Convention on Migratory
          Species on Conservation and Management of Atlantic Ocean Marine
          Turtles, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
          1996.

       d) Global Environment Facility Trust Fund Grant Agreement between the
          Republic of South Africa and International Bank for Reconstruction
          and Development, acting as an Implementing Agency of the Global
          Environment Facility on the Western Indian Ocean Marine Highway
          Development and Coastal and Marine Contamination Prevention
          Project, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
          1996.

       e) Agreement between the Government of the Federal Republic of
          Nigeria and the Government of the Republic of South Africa on
          Cooperation in the Field of Tourism, tabled in terms of section
          231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

       f) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
          and the French Republic on Cooperation pertaining to Tourism,
          tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

       g) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
          and the Republic of Angola on Cooperation in the Field of Tourism,
          tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

12    The Minister of Minerals and Energy

       a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 29 – Department of
          Minerals and Energy for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
          Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
          Information of Vote 29 for 2007-2008 [RP 229-2008].


       b) Report and Financial Statements of Mineral Technology (Mintek) for
          2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
          Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008.


       c) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Diamond and
          Precious Metals Regulator for the nine months ended 31 March 2008,
          including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
          Statements and Performance Information for the nine months ended
          31 March 2008 [RP 179-2008].

       d) Report and Financial Statements of the National Energy Regulator
          of South Africa (NERSA) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
          Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
          Information for 2007-2008 [RP 205-2008].


       e) Report and Financial Statements of the Electricity Distribution
          Industrial Holdings (Pty) Ltd (EDIH) for 2007-2008, including the
          Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
          Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 234-2008].

       f) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Diamond Board
          for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
          Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP
          178-2008].

       g) Report and Financial Statements of the State Diamond Trader for
          the seven months ended 31 March 2008, including the Report of the
          Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
          Information for the seven months ended 31 March 2008.


13.   The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

       a) Report and Financial Statements of the Trans-Caledon Tunnel
          Authority (TCTA) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
          Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.

                          MONDAY, 29 SEPTEMBER 2008

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for the Public Service and Administration

       a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 9 – Department of Public
          Service and Administration for 2007-2008, including the Report of
          the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
          Information of Vote 9 for 2007-2008 [RP 218-2008].


          Please Note: The following 2 items replaces item 1(a) and (b)
          under Tablings of the Announcements, Tablings and Committee
          Reports of 25 September 2008, as published on page 1784.


       b) Report and Financial Statements of the State Information
          Technology Agency (Proprietary) Limited (SITA) for 2007-2008,
          including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
          Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 236-
          2008].


      c) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 11 – South African
         Management Development Institute (SAMDI) for 2007-2008, including
         the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
         Performance Information of Vote 12 for 2007-2008.
2.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy

       a) Report and Financial Statements of the Central Energy Fund Group
          of Companies (CEF) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
          Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial
          Statements and Performance Information of the Central Energy Fund
          Group of Companies for 2007-2008 [RP 155-2008].


       b) Annual Review of the Central Energy Fund CEF (Pty) Ltd for 2007-
          2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
          Statements and Performance Information of the Central Energy Fund
          CEF (Pty) Ltd for 2007-2008.

       c) Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Geoscience
          (CGE) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General
          on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
          2008 [RP 106-2008].

3.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

        a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 24 – Department of
           Agriculture for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           of Vote 24 for 2007-2008 [RP 248-2008].


        b) Report and Financial Statements of the Agricultural Research
           Council (ARC) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
           General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
           for 2007-2008 [RP 227-2008].


                         TUESDAY, 30 SEPTEMBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) Special Pensions Amendment Bill [B 29B – 2008] – Act No 13 of 2008
         (assented to and signed by President on 17 September 2008).


      2) Agricultural Debt Management Repeal Bill [B 24 – 2008] – Act No 15
         of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 17 September 2008).

      3) Human Sciences Research Council Bill [B 16D – 2007] – Act No 17 of
         2008 (assented to and signed by President on 23 September 2008).


      4) Financial Services Laws General Amendment Bill [B 21B – 2008] – Act
         No 22 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 23 September
         2008).


      5) Housing Development Agency Bill [B 1F – 2008] – Act No 23 of 2008
         (assented to and signed by President on 23 September 2008).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The President of the Republic

       a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 1 – The Presidency for
          2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
          Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 1 for
          2007-2008.

2.    The Minister of Defence

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the Castle of Good Hope for
          2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
          Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008
          [RP 165-2008].

3.    The Minister of Finance

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 8 – National Treasury
          for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
          Financial Statements of Vote 8 for 2006-2007 [RP 123-2008].


       b) Annual Financial Statements of the Project Development Facility
          (PDF) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General
          on the Financial Statements Ltd for 2007-2008 [RP 123-2008].
       c) Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Intelligence
          Centre for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General
          on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
          2008 [RP 167-2008].

       d) Report and Financial Statements of the Public Investment
          Corporation Limited for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
          Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008 [RP 223-
          2008].


       e) Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the Ombud for
          Financial Services Providers for 2007-2008, including the Report
          of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
          Performance Information for 2007-2008.


       f) Report and Financial Statements of the Land and Agricultural
          Development Bank of South Africa (Land Bank) for 2007-2008,
          including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
          Statements for 2007-2008 [RP 159-2008].


       g) Address of the Governor of the South African Reserve Bank – 18
          September 2008.

4.    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 5 – Department of
          Provincial and Local Government for 2007-2008, including the
          Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
          Performance Information of Vote 5 for 2007-2008 [RP 255-2008].


      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the Municipal Demarcation
          Board for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General
          on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
          2008 [RP 191-2008].

      (c)   Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for the
          Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and
          Linguistic Communities (CRL) for 2007-2008, including the Report
          of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
          Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 237-2008].


5.    The Minister of Transport

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 33 – Department of
          Transport for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
          General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
          of Vote 33 for 2007-2008 [RP 252-2008].


      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the South African Civil
          Aviation Authority (SACAA) for 2007-2008, including the Report of
          the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
          Information for 2007-2008 [RP 150-2008].

      (c)   Report and Financial Statements of the Urban Transport Fund
          (UTF) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General
          on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
          2008 [RP 216-2008].

6.    The Minister for Public Enterprises

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Denel (Proprietary) Limited
          for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Independent Auditors
          on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.


7.    The Minister of Public Works

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 6 – Department of Public
          Works for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General
          on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 6
          for 2007-2008 [RP 249-2008].


      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the Council for the Built
          Environment (CBE) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
          Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
          Information for 2007-2008.


      (c)   Report and Financial Statements of the Construction Industry
          Development Board (CIDB) for 2007-2008, including the Report of
          the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
          Information for 2007-2008.


8.    The Minister of Health

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 16 – Department of
          Health for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General
          on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote
          16 for 2007-2008 [RP 129-2008].

9.    The Minister of Housing
      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the National Housing Finance
          Corporation Ltd (NHFC) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
          Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.


10.   The Minister of Safety and Security

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 21 – Independent
          Complaints Directorate (ICD) for 2007-2008, including the Report
          of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
          Performance Information of Vote 21 for 2007-2008 [RP 259-2008].


11.   The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of National Prosecuting
          Authority for 2007-2008, including the Reports of the Auditor-
          General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
          for 2007-2008 and on the Financial Statements and Performance
          Information of the Criminal Assets Recovery Account for 2007-2008
          [RP 225-2008].


12.   The Minister of Science and Technology


      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the Africa Institute of South
         Africa for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
         2008 [RP 215-2007].


      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the National Advisory Council
         on Innovation for 2007-2008.


      (c)   Report and Financial Statements of the National Research
         Foundation (NRF) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.


      (d)   Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Scientific
         and Industrial Research (CSIR) for 2007-2008, including the Report
         of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
         information for 2007-2008 [RP 147-2008].

      (e)   Report and Financial Statements of the Human Sciences Research
         Council (HSRC) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
         2007-2008 [RP 112-2008].

      (f)   Report and Financial Statements of the Tshumisano Trust for 2007-
         2008, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for 2007-2008.

      (g)   Report and Financial Statements of Academy of Science of South
         Africa for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.
13.   The Minister of Home Affairs

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 4 – Department of Home
         Affairs for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 4
         for 2007-2008 [RP 258-2008].


      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the Film and Publication
         Board for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
         the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008
         [RP 176-2008].

14.   The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 34 – Department of Home
         Affairs for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 34
         for 2007-2008 [RP 246-2008].


      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the Water Research Commission
         for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP
         180-2008].


15.   The Minister in The Presidency

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Media Development and
        Diversity Agency (MDDA) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2007-2007.


                           FRIDAY, 3 OCTOBER 2008
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Sport and Recreation

      a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 18 – Department of Sport
         and Recreation South Africa for 2007-2008, including the Report of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
         Information of Vote 18 for 2007-2008 [RP 250-2008].

2.    The Minister of Science and Technology

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the South African Council for
         Natural Scientific Professions for 2007-2008, including the Report
         of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-
         2008.

      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
         Energy Research Institute (Pty) Ltd for 2007-2008, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
         Performance Information for 2007-2008.

3.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

      (a)   General Notice No 1052 published in Government Gazette No 31367
         dated 27 August 2008: Nominations for appointment of suitable
         persons to serve as members of the Board of South African National
         Parks, in terms of the National Environmental Management: Protected
         Areas Act, 2003 (Act No 57 of 2003).

      (b)   Government Notice No 916 published in Government Gazette No
         31360 dated 29 August 2008: Threatened or Protected Species: Second
         Amendments Regulation – 2008, in terms of the National
         Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of
         2004).

      (c)   Government Notice No 917 published in Government Gazette No
         31360 dated 29 August 2008: Threatened or Protected Species: Second
         Amendments Regulation – 2008, in terms of the National
         Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of
         2004).

      (d)   Government Notice No 949 published in Government Gazette No
         31380 dated 5 September 2008: Declaration of intention to propose
         extensions from, and a buffer zone for the fossil hominid sites of
         Sterkfontein, Swartkrans, Kromdraai and the environs (Cradle of
         Humankind), in terms of the National Environmental Management:
         Protected Areas Act, 2003 (Act No 57 of 2003) and the World
         Heritage Convention Act, 1999 (Act No 49 of 1999).


      (e)   General Notice No 1138 published in Government Gazette No 31415
         dated 15 September 2008: Second Edition Environmental
         Implementation and Management Plan (EIMP).

4.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the National Nuclear
         Regulator (NNR) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
         2007-2008 [RP 36-2008].

         Please Note: The above entry is amending item 4(b) under Tablings
         of the Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of 25
         September 2008, as published on page 1785.

                           FRIDAY, 10 OCTOBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Classification of Bill by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a section 75 Bill:

           a) Civil Aviation Bill [B 73 – 2008] (National Assembly – sec
              75).

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson
1. Membership of Committees

   (a)      The following changes have been made to the membership of
   Committees:


      Select Committee on Local Government and Administration


      Appointed:       Mkhaliphi, Mr B J


   (b)      Mr B J Mkhaliphi has been appointed as the Chairperson of the
      Select Committee on Local Government and Administration with effect
      from 9 October 2008.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1. The Minister of Finance

   Municipal Budgets for the 2008 Medium-Term Revenue and Expenditure
   Framework (MTREF).


2. The Minister of Agriculture and Land Affairs

   The Report and Financial Statements of Onderstepoort Biological Products
   Limited for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Independent Auditors
   on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.

                           MONDAY, 13 OCTOBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bill


     (1)    The Portfolio Committee on Finance


          a) Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Bill [B 75
             – 2008] (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Draft Bill and
             memorandum setting out its objects published in Government
             Gazette No 31238 of 10 July 2008.]


             Bill initiated by the Portfolio Committee on Finance of the
             National Assembly, and referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
             (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

                          TUESDAY, 14 OCTOBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

     1) Prohibition or Restriction of Certain Conventional Weapons Bill [B
        7D – 2007] – Act No 18 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President
        on 9 October 2008).

      2) Local Government Laws Amendment Bill [B 28D – 2007 (Reprint)] –
         Act No 19 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 9
         October 2008).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

      (a)   Government Notice No R.954 published in Government Gazette No
          31397, dated 3 September 2008: Draft regulations for the
          adjustment of prescribed fees in terms of section 36, read with
          section 40C, of the Pension Funds Act, 1956 (Act No 24 of 1956).

          Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance for consideration.

2.    The Minister of Communications
       a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Broadcasting
          Corporation Limited (SABC) for 2007-2008, including the Report of
          the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-
          2008.

3.    The Minister of Labour

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the Media, Advertising,
          Publishing, Printing and Packaging Sector Education and Training
          Authority (MAPPP-Seta) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
          Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
          Information for 2007-2008 [RP 81-2008].

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

       a) Taking Parliament to the People Visit, Tlokwe (North West).


CREDA INSERT T081014e-insert1 – PAGES 1824-1882

                         WEDNESDAY, 15 OCTOBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Membership of Committees

    (1)     The following members have been appointed to serve on the
       Mediation Committee in respect of the Mandating Procedures of
       Provinces Bill, viz:

       ANC


       Mokoena, Kgoshi L M
       Manyosi, Mr A T
       Ntuli, Mr Z C
       Nyanda, Ms F
       Moseki, Mr A L
       Mack, Mr N J


       DA


       Van der Merwe, Mr D


       IFP


       Mzizi, Mr M A


       FF Plus
       Van Heerden, Dr F

                          THURSDAY, 16 OCTOBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    A copy of the report containing the adjusted recommendations of the
    Independent Commission for the Remuneration of Public Office-Bearers in
    respect of salaries, allowances and benefits of public office-bearers
    for the fiscal year commencing 1 April 2008 was submitted to Parliament
    on 14 October 2008 in accordance with section 8(5) of the Remuneration
    of Public Office-Bearers Act, 1997 (No 92 of 1997).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

   1. Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs
      on the Second-Hand Goods Bill [B 2B-2008] (National Assembly – sec
      76), dated 7 October 2008.

      The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
      considered the subject of the Second-Hand Goods Bill [B 2B-2008]
      (National Assembly - sec s76), referred to it, reports the Bill with
      amendments [B 2C-2008].


                           FRIDAY, 17 OCTOBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and Council of Provinces

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

      1) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour for consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-
         General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
         and Performance Information for 2007-08 are referred to the
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for
             Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) for 2007-08,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 55-
             2008].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Compensation Fund for
             2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-08
             [RP 64-2008].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Unemployment Insurance
             Fund (UIF) for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 [RP 201-2008].


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the National Economic
             Development and Labour Council (Nedlac) for 2007-08, including
             the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
             Statements for 2007-08.

      2) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour for consideration and report and to the Portfolio Committee
         on Minerals and Energy. The Reports of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements and Performance Information are referred to
         the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Chemical Industries
             Education and Training Authority (Chieta) for 2007-08,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 69-
             2008].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Energy Sector Education
             and Training Authority (Eseta) for 2007-08, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 73-2008].

      3) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour for consideration and report and to the Portfolio Committee
         on Provincial and Local Government. The Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information is
         referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:
          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Local Government Sector
             Education and Training Authority for 2007-08, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 80-2008].

      4) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour for consideration and report and to the Portfolio Committee
         on Health and Portfolio Committee on Social Development. The Report
         of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
         Information is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Health and Welfare
             Sector Education and Training Authority for 2007-08, including
             the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
             and Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 77-2008].

      5) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour for consideration and report and to the Portfolio Committee
         on Education. The Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements and Performance Information is referred to the Committee
         on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Education Training and
             Development Practices Sector Education and Training Authority
             for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
             08 [RP 72-2008].

      6) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour for consideration and report and to the Portfolio Committee
         on Environmental Affairs and Tourism and Portfolio Committee Sport
         and Recreation. The Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements and Performance Information is referred to the Committee
         on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Tourism, Hospitality
             and Sport Education and Training Authority (Theta) for 2007-
             08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-08
             [RP 128-2008].

      7) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour for consideration and report and to the Portfolio Committee
         on Science and Technology. The Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements and Performance Information is referred to the
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Information Systems,
             Electronics and Telecommunications Technologies Sector
             Education and Training Authority (ISETT-Seta) for 2007-08,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 78-
             2008].

      8) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Enterprises for consideration and report. The Reports of the
         Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial
         Statements and Performance Information for 2007-08 are referred to
         the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:
          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 30 – Department of
             Public Enterprises for 2007-08, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information of Vote 30 for 2007-08 [RP 156-2008].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Forestry
             Company Limited (Safcol) for 2007-08, including the Report of
             the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-
             08.


          c) Report and Financial Statements of South African Airways
             (Proprietary) Limited (SAA) for 2007-08, including the Report
             of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for
             2007-08.


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the Broadband Infraco (Pty)
             Limited for 2007-08, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-08.

      9) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Communications for consideration and report and to the Portfolio
         Committee on Trade and Industry, Portfolio Committee on Arts and
         Culture and Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and
         Tourism. The Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements and Performance Information is referred to the Committee
         on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the International Marketing
             Council of South Africa (IMC) for 2007-08, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 144-2007].

     10) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Communications for consideration and report. The Reports of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
         Information are referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Sentech Limited for 2007-
             08, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2007-08.


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Post
             Office Limited for 2007-08, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-08.


     11) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Environmental Affairs and Tourism for consideration and report. The
         Reports of the Auditor-General and of the Independent Auditors on
         the Financial Statements and Performance Information are referred
         to the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 26 – Department of
             Environmental Affairs and Tourism for 2007-08, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information of Vote 26 for 2007-08 [RP 53-2008].
          b) Report and Financial Statements of South African Tourism for
             2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-08.


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Weather
             Service (SAWS) for 2007-08, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 [RP 197-2008].


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
             Biodiversity Institute (SANBI) for 2007-08, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2007-08.


          e) Report and Financial Statements of the Marine Living Resources
             Fund for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General
             on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
             2007-08 [RP 190-2008].

          f) Report and Financial Statements of the National Environmental
             Advisory Forum (NEAF) for 2007-08 [RP 101-2008].


          g) Report and Financial Statements of the Air Traffic and
             Navigation Services Company Limited (ATNS) for 2007-08,
             including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2007-08.

     12) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
         report. The Reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements and Performance Information are referred to the
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the Public
             Protector for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 [RP 211-2008].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of Parliament of the South
             African Human Rights Commission for 2007-08, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 89-2008].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Legal Aid Board for
             2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-08
             [RP 97-2008].

     13) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Correctional Services for consideration:

          a) Report of the Public Protector on an Investigation into the
             Causes of Delays in the Administration of Criminal Appeals
             Lodged by Prisoners [Report No 10 of 2008-09].

     14) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Correctional Services for consideration and report. The Report of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
         Information is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:
          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 19 – Department of
             Correctional Services for 2007-08, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information of Vote 19 for 2007-08 [RP 217-2007].

     15) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Provincial and Local Government for consideration:

          a) Report of the Public Protector on an Investigation into an
             Allegation of the Misappropriation of Public Funds by the
             Kungwini Local Municipality in the Gauteng Province [Report No
             12 of 2008-09].

     16) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Home
         Affairs for consideration:

       a) Annual Performance Plan (Revised) of the Department of Home
          Affairs for 2007-08.

     17) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Home
         Affairs for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information is
         referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Electoral Commission
             for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
             08.

     18) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Education for consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information are
         referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 14 -  Department of
             Education for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 [RP 220-2008].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the National Student
             Financial Aid Scheme for 2007-08, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08.


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Council on Higher
             Education for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08.

     19) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Education for consideration and report and to the Portfolio
         Committee on Labour. The Reports of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements and Performance Information are referred to
         the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Qualifications Authority for 2007-08, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 149-2008].
          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Education Labour
             Relations Council for 2007-08, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 and the Report of the Auditor-General
             on the Transformation Fund of the Education Labour Relations
             Council for 2007-08 [RP 136-2008].

     20) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Arts and Culture for consideration and report. The Reports of the
         Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial
         Statements and Performance Information are referred to the
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African State
             Theatre for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 [RP 224-2008].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Msunduzi/Voortrekker
             and Ncome Museums for 2007-08, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 [PR 160-2008].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the National English
             Literary Museum for 2007-08, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08.


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the Market Theatre
             Foundation for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 [RP 102-2008].


          e) Report and Financial Statements of the National Museum –
             Bloemfontein for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08.


          f) Report and Financial Statements of Iziko Museums of Cape Town
             for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
             08 [RP 185-2008].


          g) Report and Financial Statements of the War Museum of the Boer
             Republics for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2007-08.


          h) Report and Financial Statements of the National Film and Video
             Foundation (NFVF) for 2007-08, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 [RP 176-2008].


          i) Report and Financial Statements of Artscape for 2007-08,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 189-
             2008].


          j) Report and Financial Statements of The Freedom Park Trust for
             2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-08.


          k) Report and Financial Statements of the William Humphreys Art
             Gallery for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08.


          l) Report and Financial Statements of Business and Arts South
             Africa (Basa) for 2007-08, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-08
             [RP 166-2008].

          m) Report and Financial Statements of the Natal Museum for 2007-
             08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements for 2007-08 [RP 158-2008].


          n) Report and Financial Statements of the Pan South African
             Language Board (PanSalb) for 2007-08, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 137-2008].


          o) Report and Financial Statements of the National Heritage
             Council for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 [RP 203-2008].


          p) Report and Financial Statements of The Playhouse Company for
             2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-08.

          q) Report and Financial Statements of the Nelson Mandela National
             Museum for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 [RP 202-2008].


          r) Report and Financial Statements of the Afrikaans Language
             Museum and Language Monument for 2007-08, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 161-2008].


          s) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Heritage
             Resources Agency (SAHRA) for 2007-08, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 192-2008].


          t) Report and Financial Statements of the Northern Flagship
             Institution for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 [RP 164-2008].

          u) Report and Financial Statements of the Windybrow Centre for
             the Arts for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08.


          v) Report and Financial Statements of the National Library of
             South Africa for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 [RP 222-2008].


          w) Report and Financial Statements of the Luthuli Museum for 2007-
             08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-08
             [RP 181-2008].

     21) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Arts and Culture for consideration and report and to the Joint
         Monitoring Committee on Children, Youth and the Disabled. The
         Reports of the Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements and Performance Information are referred to
         the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Blind SA for 2007-08,
             including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2007-08.


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Library
             for the Blind for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08.

     22) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Service and Administration for consideration:

         a) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the Fifth
            Consolidated Public Service Monitoring and Evaluation System
            Report: Research Cycle 2007-08 – July 2008 [RP 134-2008].


         b) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the Evaluation
            of the Consistency of Sanctions Imposed for Misconduct in the
            Public Service – April 2008 [RP 135-2008].

     23) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Service and Administration for consideration and to the
         Joint Monitoring Committee on Children, Youth and the Disabled:

         a) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on an Assessment
            of Disability Equity in the Public Service – January 2008 [RP 50-
            2008].

     24) The following paper is referred to the Joint Monitoring Committee
         on Children, Youth and the Disabled for consideration and report:

       a) African Youth Charter, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
          Constitution, 1996.

     25) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance for consideration and report. The Reports of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements are referred to
         the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Annual Financial Statements of the Corporation for Public
             Deposits for 2007-08, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-08.


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Accounting Standards
             Board for 2007-08, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 [RP 109-2008].

     26) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance:

          a) Government Notice No 871 published in Government Gazette No
             31336, dated 15 August 2008: Appointment of board members of
             the Co-operative Banks Development Agency in terms of section
             58 of the Co-operative Banks Act, 2007 (Act No 40 of 2007).


          b) Government Notice No 887 published in Government Gazette No
             31342, dated 22 August 2008: Designation of institution of
             which the activities do not fall within the meaning of “the
             business of a bank” (“Financial Service Co-operative”) in
             terms of the Banks Act, 1990 (Act No 94 of 1990).

          c) Government Notice No 880 published in Government Gazette No
             31342, dated 22 August 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
             1/1/1360) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
             91 of 1964).


          d) Government Notice No 881 published in Government Gazette No
             31342, dated 22 August 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No
             2/305) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
             of 1964).


          e) Government Notice No 882 published in Government Gazette No
             31342, dated 22 August 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
             3/634), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
             91 of 1964).


          f) Government Notice No 883 published in Government Gazette No
             31342, dated 22 August 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
             3/635), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
             91 of 1964).

          g) Government Notice No 884 published in Government Gazette No
             31342, dated 22 August 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No
             4/314), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
             91 of 1964).


          h) Government Notice No 885 published in Government Gazette No
             31342, dated 22 August 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
             1/1/1359), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act
             No 91 of 1964).


          i) Government Notice No 886 published in Government Gazette No
             31342, dated 22 August 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
             3/633), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
             91 of 1964).


          j) Government Notice No 895 published in Government Gazette No
             31342, dated 22 August 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
             1/1/1361), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act
             No 91 of 1964).

     27) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance for consideration and to the Portfolio Committee on
         Provincial and Local Government:

          a) Government Notice No 878 published in Government Gazette No
             31346, dated 22 August 2008: Municipal Asset Transfer
             Regulations made in terms of section 168 of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).

     28) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry for consideration and report. The Reports of the
         Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial
         Statements and Performance Information are referred to the
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Competition Tribunal
             for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
             08 [RP 183-2008].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the National Consumer
             Tribunal for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 [RP 217-2008].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Export Credit Insurance
             Corporation of South Africa Limited for 2007-08, including the
             Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
             for 2007-08.


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
             Accreditation System (Sanas) for 2007-08, including the Report
             of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for
             2007-08 [RP 199-2008].

          e) Report and Financial Statements of the National Credit
             Regulator (NCR) for 2007-08, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 [RP 140-2008].


          f) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Bureau of
             Standards for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 [RP 208-2008].


          g) Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Microfinance Apex Fund for 2007-08, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 111-2008].


          h) Report and Financial Statements of the Companies and
             Intellectual Property Registration Office for 2007-08,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 187-
             2008].


          i) Report and Financial Statements of the National Metrology
             Institute of South Africa for 2007-08, including the Report of
             the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 221-2008].


          j) Report and Financial Statements of the National Gambling Board
             for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
             08 [RP 125-2008].


          k) Report and Financial Statements of the Industrial Development
             Corporation of South Africa Limited (IDC) for 2007-08,
             including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2007-08.

          l) Report and Financial Statements of Khula Enterprise Finance
             Limited for 2007-08, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-08 [RP 210-
             2008].


          m) Report and Financial Statements of the Competition Commission
             for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
             08 [RP 107-2008].


          n) Report and Financial Statements of the National Lotteries
             Board for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-General
             on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
             2007-08.


          o) Report and Financial Statements of the Support Programme for
             Industrial Innovation (SPII) for 2007-08, including the
             Reports of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
             Statements for 2007-08.


          p) Report and Financial Statements of the International Trade
             Administration Commission of South Africa for 2007-08,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2007-08 [RP 207-
             2008].


          q) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Quality
             Institute for 2007-08, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-08.

     29) The following paper is referred to the Committee on the Auditor-
         General for consideration and report. The Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information is
         referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the Auditor-
             General for 2007-08, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 [RP 235-2008].

     30) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Health for consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information are
         referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Medical
             Schemes for 2007-08, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 [RP 96-2008].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the National Health
             Laboratory Service (NHLS) for 2007-08, including the Report of
             the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-
             08.


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Medical
             Research Council (MRC) for 2007-08, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2007-08
             [RP 173-2008].

     31) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Social Development for consideration and report. The Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
         Information is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Social
             Security Agency for 2007-08, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 [RP 108-2008].

     32) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Service and Administration and the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance for consideration:

          a) Report of the Public Protector on a Systematic Investigation
             into the Deficiencies with the Processing of Pension Benefits
             Payable to Former Government Employees and Their Dependants
             [Report No 11 of 2008-09].

National Council of Provinces

               1. Membership of Committees


   1) Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs


         (a)      Mr M J Sibiya has been elected as Chairperson of the
             Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs with effect
             from 15 October 2008.


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance
      (a)   Proclamation No 818 published in Government Gazette No 31292
          dated 1 August 2008: Commencement dates in terms of the Co-
          operatives Banks Act, 2007 (Act No 40 of 2007).

      (b)   Government Notice No 929 published in Government Gazette No
          31381 dated 29 August 2008: Appointment and re-appointment of
          chairpersons of the Tax Board for the hearing of income tax
          appeals, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).

      (c)   Government Notice No 930 published in Government Gazette No
          31381 dated 29 August 2008: Determination of interest rate for
          purpose of paragraph (a) of the definition of “official rate”, in
          terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).

      (d)   Government Notice No 931 published in Government Gazette No
          31381 dated 29 August 2008: Determination of a date upon which
          section 22(1)(b) of the Taxation Laws Second Amendment Act,  2008
          (Act No 4 of 2008).

      (e)   Government Notice No 929 published in Government Gazette No
          31381 dated 29 August 2008: Determination of amounts for purposes
          of the Military Pensions Act, 1976 (Act No 84 of 1976).

2.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

      a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Arts Council of
         South Africa for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
         for 2007-2008 [RP 188-2008].

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson
    (a)     Tabling of the correspondence from Mr Wana of Eastern Cape
        Province.


    (b)     Tabling of the correspondence from Ms L L Ntengo of North West
        Province.

    Referred to the Select Committee on Members Legislative Proposal.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

 1. Report of the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs on the
    Companies Bill [B61B - 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 15
    October 2008:

    The Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs, having considered
    the       subject of the Companies Bill [B61B – 2008] [National
    Assembly – sec 75] referred to it, reports the Bill with proposed
    amendments as follows:


                                  CLAUSE 30

   1. On page 37, from line 11, to omit “is – (i)” and to substitute “is”.


                                  CLAUSE 70


   1. On page 65, from line 43, up to and including “Republic” in line 44,
      to omit subparagraph (iii).


   2. On page 66, from line 15, to omit “or no remaining directors resident
      within the Republic”


                                  CLAUSE 71


   1. On page 66, from line 47, up to and including “Republic” in line 48,
      to omit paragraph (b).


   2. On page 66, in line 52, to omit “non-resident”.


   3. On page 67, in lines 2, 7 and 15, to omit “or non-resident”


                                 CLAUSE 185


   1. On page 145, from line 28, to omit paragraph (b) and to substitute:
           “(b) a person designated by the Commissioner to perform a
           particular function of the Commission, is the certificate,
           notice, decision, determination or ruling of the Commission with
           respect to that matter.”


                                 CLAUSE 203


   1. On page 153, in line 42, to omit “committee” and to substitute
      “council”.

                                 SCHEDULE 3

   1. On page 165, in line 2, to omit “CONSEQUENTIAL AMENDMENTS TO ACTS
      LISTED IN SCHEDULE 4” and to substitute “AMENDMENT OF LAWS”
   2. On page 165, after line 2, to insert “A: Close Corporations Act,
      1984”.


   3. On page 170, in line 24, to omit “auditered” and to substitute
      “audited”.


   4. On page 174, in line 1, to omit “9. CONSEQUENTIAL AMENDMENTS TO ACTS
      LISTED IN SCHEDULE 5” and to substitute “ B: Consequential Amendments
      to certain other Acts listed in Schedule 4”.



2.    Report of the Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises on
      the Broadcasting Amendment Bill [B 72 – 2008], dated 16 October 2008:

      The Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises, having
      considered the subject of the Broadcasting Amendment Bill [B 72 -
      2008] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it, reports the Bill
      with proposed amendments as follows:

                                  Clause 1

Clause rejected.

                                  Clause 2
    1. The deletion of paragraph (a).
    2. The deletion of paragraph (b).
    3. The deletion of paragraph (d).

                                  Clause 4
   1. On page 3, in the line 33, after the second “of” to insert “any or all
      of the following”.

   2. On page 3, in line 40, to omit “or” and to substitute “and”.

   3. On page 3, from line 42 to omit paragraph (b) and to substitute

   “(b) The National Assembly may, by the adoption of a resolution,
   recommend the dissolution of the Board if it fails in any or all of the
   following-
       i) [it fails to] discharging its fiduciary duties;
      ii) [it fails to] adhering to the Charter; and
     iii) [it fails to] carrying out its duties as contemplated in section
          13(11)”.

   4. On page 4, after line 11 to add the following subsection:
      “(5) A quorum for any meeting of the interim Board is six members”.


                                 Long title


1.    To omit “to substitute the definition of ‘appointing body’”.

3.    Report of the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs on the
  National Radioactive Waste Disposal Institute Bill [B41B – 2008] (National
  Assembly – sec 75), dated 16 October 2008:

  The Select Committee on Economic and Foreign  Affairs,  having  considered
  the subject of the National  Radioactive  Waste  Disposal  Institute  Bill
  [B41B – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75) referred  to  it,  reports  the
  Bill with proposed amendments as follows:
  1.  On page 2, in line 19, to omit, “and committee directors”.


                                  CLAUSE 7

  1.  On page 5, after line 54, to insert the following:
      “(5) The board must forward the report referred to in section 17(2(c),
      as approved by it, to the Minister within three months of the end of
      the financial year.”


                                  CLAUSE 9

        1. On page 6, in line 44, to omit, “of directors of board”.

                                  CLAUSE 11

  1.  On page 7, in line 5, to omit, “and committee directors”.

                                  CLAUSE 17


  1.  On page 9, from line 3, to omit, “in accordance with the Public
      Finance Management Act”.

  2.  On page 9, from line 6, to omit, subsections (3) and (4).


  3.  On page 9, in line 11, to omit, “the accounting officer”, and to
  substitute, “him or her”.


  4.  On page 9, in line 12, to omit, “and Public Finance Management Act;”
      and to substitute, “; and”.
                                  CLAUSE 21

  1.  On page 10, in line 17, after “Institute” to insert, “on an annual
  basis”.

                           MONDAY, 20 OCTOBER 2008

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

      (a)   Draft amendment regulations made in terms of Public Funding of
          Represented Political Parties Act, 1997 (Act No. 103 of 1997), and
          submitted to Parliament in terms of section 10 of the Act.

                          TUESDAY, 21 OCTOBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson
1.    Draft Bill submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (a)    Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill, 2008, submitted by the
         Minister of Finance. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and the Select Committee on Finance.


2.    Introduction of Bills


      1) The Minister of Finance


          a) Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 76 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 77)


          b) Eskom Subordinated Loan Special Appropriation Bill [B 77 –
             2008] (National Assembly – proposed sec 77)


          c) Finance Bill [B 78 – 2008] (National Assembly – proposed sec
             77)


          d) Government Employees Pension Fund (Condonation of Interrupted
             Service) Bill [B 79 – 2008] (National Assembly – proposed sec
             77)

          e) Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 80 – 2008] (National Assembly –
             proposed sec 77)

          f) Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 81 – 2008] (National
             Assembly –  proposed sec 75)  [Explanatory summary of Bill and
             prior notice of its introduction published in Government
             Gazette No 31511 of 13 October 2008.]
              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
              Finance of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
              Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
              Joint Rule 160.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the
              classification of the Bills may be submitted to the Joint
              Tagging Mechanism (JTM) within three parliamentary working
              days.


3.    Bill passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly on 21 October 2008:


          a) Competition Amendment Bill [B 31D – 2008] (National Assembly –
             sec 75).

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Membership of Council

     a) The vacancy in the representation of the Gauteng Province, which
        occurred owing to the resignation of Mr S Shiceka with effect from
        24 September 2008, has been filled with effect from 7 October 2008
        by the appointment of Ms D R Tsotetsi.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

     a) Medium Term Budget Policy Statement 2008 [RP 267-2008].


        Referred to the Joint Budget Committee and the Portfolio Committee
        on Finance for consideration and report, in accordance with their
        respective mandates.


     b) Adjustments Appropriation Bill, 2008 [B76-2008].


        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance for consideration
        and report.


     c) Eskom Subordinated Loan Special Appropriation Bill, 2008 (2008/09-
        2010/11 Financial Years) [B77-2008].


     d) Finance Bill, 2008 [B78-2008].

     e) Government Employees Pension Fund (Condonation of Interrupted
        Service) Bill, 2008 [B79-2008].


     f) Revenue Laws Amendment Bill, 2008 [B80-2008].


     g) Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill, 2008 [B81-2008].

     h) Adjusted Estimates of National Expenditure 2008 [RP 266-2008],
        which includes:

         1. Memorandum on Vote No 1 - "The Presidency", Adjustments
            Estimates, 2008-2009;

              2. Memorandum on Vote No 2 - "Parliament", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2008-2009;


              3. Memorandum on Vote No 3 - "Foreign Affairs", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2008-2009;


              4. Memorandum on Vote No 4 - "Home Affairs", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2008-2009;


              5. Memorandum on Vote No 5 - "Public Works", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2008-2009;


         6. Memorandum on Vote No 6 - " Government Communications and
            Information System", Adjustments Estimates, 2008-2009;


         7. Memorandum on Vote No 7 - "National Treasury", Adjustments
            Estimates, 2008-2009;


         8. Memorandum on Vote No 8 - "Public Service and Administration",
            Adjustments Estimates, 2008-2009;


         9. Memorandum on Vote No 9 - "Public Service Commission",
            Adjustments Estimates, 2008-2009;


        10. Memorandum on Vote No 10 - "Public Administration Leadership
            and Management Academy", Adjustments Estimates, 2008-2009;


        11. Memorandum on Vote No 11 - "Statistics South Africa",
            Adjustments Estimates, 2008-2009;


        12. Memorandum on Vote No 12 - "Arts and Culture", Adjustments
            Estimates, 2008-2009;


             13. Memorandum on Vote No 13 - "Education", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2008-2009;


        14. Memorandum on Vote No 14 - "Health", Adjustments Estimates,
            2008-2009;


             15. Memorandum on Vote No 15 - "Labour", Adjustments Estimates,
                 2008-2009;


        16. Memorandum on Vote No 16 - "Social Development", Adjustments
            Estimates, 2008-2009;


        17. Memorandum on Vote No 17 - "Sport and Recreation South Africa",
            Adjustments Estimates, 2008-2009;


        18. Memorandum on Vote No 18 - " Correctional Services",
            Adjustments Estimates, 2008-2009;


             19. Memorandum on Vote No 19 - "Defence", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2008-2009;

        20. Memorandum on Vote No 20 - " Independent Complaints
            Directorate", Adjustments Estimates, 2008-2009;


        21. Memorandum on Vote No 21 - " Justice and Constitutional
            Development", Adjustments Estimates, 2008-2009;


        22. Memorandum on Vote No 22 - "Safety and Security”, Adjustments
            Estimates, 2008-2009;


             23. Memorandum on Vote No 23 - "Agriculture", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2008-2009;


        24. Memorandum on Vote No 24 - "Communications", Adjustments
            Estimates, 2008-2009;


        25. Memorandum on Vote No 25 - " Environmental Affairs and
            Tourism", Adjustments Estimates, 2008-2009;


             26. Memorandum on Vote No 26 - "Housing", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2008-2009;


             27. Memorandum on Vote No 27 - "Land Affairs", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2008-2009;


        28. Memorandum on Vote No 28 - "Minerals and Energy", Adjustments
            Estimates, 2008-2009;


        29. Memorandum on Vote No 29 - "Provincial and Local Government",
            Adjustments Estimates, 2008-2009;


        30. Memorandum on Vote No 30 - "Public Enterprises", Adjustments
            Estimates, 2008-2009;


        31. Memorandum on Vote No 31 - "Science and Technology",
            Adjustments Estimates, 2008-2009;


        32. Memorandum on Vote No 32 - "Trade and Industry", Adjustments
            Estimates, 2008-2009;


             33. Memorandum on Vote No 33 - "Transport", Adjustments
                 Estimates, 2008-2009;


        34. Memorandum on Vote No 34 - "Water Affairs and Forestry",
            Adjustments Estimates, 2008-2009;

  Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance for consideration and
  report.
       i) Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services Board on
          the Registrar of Collective Investment Schemes for the year ended
          31 December 2007 [RP 145-2008].


       j) Government Notice No R.952 published in Government Gazette No
          31395 dated 5 September 2008: Amendment of the Regulations made
          under section 72 of the Long-Term Insurance Act, 1998 (Act No 52
          of 1998).

       k) Proclamation No 37 published in Government Gazette No 31410 dated
          5 September 2008: Coming into operation of sections 12(1) and
          33(1) in terms of the Revenue Laws Second Amendment Act, 2006 (Act
          No 21 of 2006): Coming into operation of section 11(1) of the
          Taxation Laws Second Amendment Act, 2007 (Act No 9 of 2007).

       l) Government Notice No 1000 published in Government Gazette No 31417
          dated 19 September 2008: Listing and delisting of public entities
          for Schedule 3 Part A, in terms of sections 47 and 48 of the
          Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).

       m) Government Notice No 1002 published in Government Gazette No 31417
          dated 19 September 2008: Listing and delisting of public entities
          for Schedule 3 Part D, in terms of sections 47 and 48 of the
          Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).

       n) Government Notice No 1003 published in Government Gazette No 31417
          dated 19 September 2008: Listing and delisting of public entities:
          Amend Schedule 3 Part A, in terms of sections 47 and 48 of the
          Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

       a) Legal Aid Guide for 2008: 11th Edition in terms of section 3A of
          the Legal Aid Amendment Act, 1996 (Act No 20 of 1996).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces


1.    Report of the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs on the
   Treaty of Friendship and Partnership between the Republic of South Africa
   and the Russian Federation, tabled in terms of Section 231(2) of the
   Constitution, dated 21 October 2008:

   The Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs, having considered
   the request for approval by Parliament of the Treaty of Friendship and
   Partnership between the Republic of South Africa and the Russian
   Federation referred to it, recommends that the Council, in terms of
   section 231 (2) of the Constitution,  approve the said Agreement.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs
   on the suspension / removal from office of magistrate SP Zwelibanzi, an
   additional magistrate at Ngqamakhwe, dated 7 October 2008:

   The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
   considered the report on the suspension/removal from office of Mr SP
   Zwelibanzi, tabled by the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs
   in terms of section 13(4)(a) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act 90 of
   1993), reports as follows:

 1.   The Select Committee noted from the report tabled by the Minister of
    Justice and Constitutional Development, that the Magistrates Commission
    on 22 November 2007 resolved to recommend the removal from office of Mr
    SP Zwelibanzi in terms of section 13(4)(a) of the Magistrates Act,
    1993.

 2.   The Select Committee noted that on 19 December 2007 the Minister of
    Justice and Constitutional Development on the basis of the Commission’s
    recommendation that he be removed from office on the ground of
    misconduct, suspended Mr Zwelibanzi from office in terms of section
    13(4)(b) of the Magistrates Act.

 3.   The Select Committee further noted that Mr Zwelibanzi was convicted
    of misconduct on two previous occasions (in 1998 and 2003) for
    infringements that included unauthorized absence from office, failure
    to enter results of criminal trials in the criminal record book,
    failure to timeously respond to reviewing judges’ queries and failure
    to timeously refer a case for automatic review. He had also been
    convicted of driving a motor vehicle whilst intoxicated, and had been
    suspended from office for a period of six (6) months by the then
    Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development.  At the most recent
    misconduct hearing (2007), Mr Zwelibanzi had pleaded guilty to all the
    charges levelled against him.  He again, on numerous occasions absented
    himself from office without leave or valid cause.

 4.   In terms of section 13(4)(c) of the Magistrates Act, Parliament must,
    as soon as is reasonably possible pass a resolution as to whether or
    not the restoration of Mr Zwelibanzi to the office of magistrate is
    recommended.

 5.   The Select Committee is of the view that Mr Zwelibanzi is not a fit
    and   proper person to hold the office of magistrate any longer and
    therefore recommends that the National Council of Provinces resolves
    not to restore Mr Zwelibanzi to his office in terms of section 13(4)(c)
    of the Magistrates Act, 1993.

Report to be considered

                         WEDNESDAY, 22 OCTOBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bills as section 75 Bills:

         (a)      Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Bill
             [B 75 – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75)
          b) Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 81 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).

    (2)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bills as money Bills:

          a) Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 76 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 77)

          b) Eskom Subordinated Loan Special Appropriation Bill [B 77 –
             2008] (National Assembly – sec 77)

          c) Finance Bill [B 78 – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 77)

          d) Government Employees Pension Fund (Condonation of Interrupted
             Service) Bill [B 79 – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 77)

          e) Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 80 – 2008] (National Assembly –
             sec 77)

        2. Membership of Committees

           1) Joint Budget Committee


        (a)      Mr E M Sogoni has been appointed as a member of the Joint
             Budget Committee.


        (b)      Mr E M Sogoni has been elected as co-chairperson of the
             Joint Budget Committee with effect from 21 October 2008.
National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


    (1)    Bills passed by National Assembly and transmitted for
         concurrence on 22 October 2008:


        a) Criminal Procedure Amendment Bill [B 42B – 2008] (National
           Assembly – sec 75).


          b) Judicial Officers Amendment Bill [B 48B – 2008 (Reprint)]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).


             The Bills have been referred to the Select Committee on
             Security and Constitutional Affairs of the National Council of
             Provinces.

TABLINGS

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson


      (a)   A copy of the report containing the adjusted recommendations of
        the Independent Commission for the Remuneration of Public Office-
        Bearers in respect of salaries, allowances and benefits of public
        office-bearers for the fiscal year commencing 1 April 2008 was
        submitted to Parliament on 14 October 2008 in accordance with
        section 8(5) of the Remuneration of Public Office-Bearers Act, 1997
        (No 92 of 1997).

      (b)   Determination of Total Remuneration Structure of Constitutional
        Court Judges and Judges.


      (c)   Determination of Salaries and Allowances of Magistrates.


        Referred to the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
        Affairs for consideration and report.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

  1. Report of the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs on the
     Minerals and Petroleum Resources Amendments Bill [B10D – 2007]
     (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 15 October 2008:


     The Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs, having considered
     the subject of the Minerals and Petroleum Resources Amendment Bill
     [B10D – 2007] ( National Assembly - sec 75) referred back to the
     Committee by the House (see Minutes of Proceedings of 25 September
     2008, p 1779) reports the Bill with proposed amendments as follows:





                                  CLAUSE 1


     1. On page 3, from line 33, to omit the definition of “environmental
        authorisation” and to substitute:

      “environmental authorisation” has the meaning assigned to it in
     section 1 of the National Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act No.
     107 of 1998);




                                  CLAUSE 18


     1.     On page 10, from line 38, to omit “within 180 days from the date
     of the notice”.


     2.     On page 10, in line 40, after “1998” to insert “, within 180
        days from the date of the notice”.



                                  CLAUSE 23


     1.     On page 12, from line 26, to omit “within 60 days from the date
    of the notice” .
     2.     On page 12, in line 28, after “1998” to insert: “, within 60
        days from the date of the notice”.

                                  CLAUSE 32

     1.     On page 14, from line 13, to omit “and any of its related and
        specific environmental management legislation”.


                                  CLAUSE 34

     1.     On page 15, line 43, to omit “[section 41]” and to substitute
        “section 41”.

                            CLAUSE 57

     1.     On page 21, in line 49, after “reports” to insert “required in
        terms of Chapter 5 of the National Environmental Management Act,
        1998,”.


                                  CLAUSE 61

     1.     On page 23, from line 18, after “reports” to insert “required in
        terms of Chapter 5 of the National Environmental Management Act,
        1998,”.

                                  CLAUSE 72


     1.     On page 25, in line 41, to omit “[, environmental management
        programme]” and to substitute “, environmental management
        programme”.

   2. On page 25, in line 43, after “1998,” to insert “as the case may be,”.

                                  CLAUSE 94

     1.     On page 30, after line 39, to insert the following subsections:
        (2)      Notwithstanding subsection 1, the following sections of
           the principal Act as amended by this Act come into operation on
           the date contemplated in section 14(2) of the National
           Environmental Management Amendment Act, 2008:


           Sections 5A(a), 16(1), 16(4)(a), 16(4)(b), 17(1)(c), 18(2)(c),
           18(3)9c), 19(2)(e), 22(1)(a), 22(4)(a), 22(4)(b), 22(5),
           23(1)(d), 24(2)(b), 24(3)(c), 25(2)(e), 27(2), 27(5)(b),
           27(6)(b), 32(3), 35(2)(a), 38A, 43(4), 43(6), 45(1), 47(1)(c),
           74(4), 75(1)(c), 79(4), 81(2)(c), 81(3)(c), 83(4), 86(2)(d),
           93(1)(b) and 106(1).


        (3)      Any provision of the principal Act as amended by this Act
           relating to prospecting, mining, exploration and production and
           related activities that is in conflict with any provision
           relating to prospecting, mining, exploration, production and
           related activities contemplated in section 14(2) of the National
           Environmental Management Amendment Act, 2008, on the date that
           it comes into operation in terms of that section, shall lapse
           with effect from that date.

  2. Report of the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs on the
     National Environmental Management Amendment Bill [B36B-2007] (National
     Assembly – sec 76), dated 21 October 2008

     The Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs, having
     considered the National Environmental Management Amendment Bill [B36B-
     2007] (National Assembly – sec 76), referred to it, reports the Bill
     with amendments [B36C-2007].

  3. Report of the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs on the
     Provision of Land and Assistance Amendment Bill [B40B-2008] (National
     Assembly – sec 75), dated 21 October 2008:

     The Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs, having
     considered the subject of the Provision of Land and Assistance
     Amendment Bill [B40B-2008] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to
     it, reports the Bill with proposed amendments as follows:

                                  CLAUSE 1

     1. On page 2, from line 5 up to and including line 10, to omit section
        (1) and to substitute of the following section:
           “1. Section 1 of the Provision of Land and Assistance Act, 1993
           (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), is hereby
           amended—
                 (a)   by the insertion before the definition of “deeds
                       registry” of the following definition:
                            “’agricultural enterprise’ includes an
                            enterprise engaged in activities pertaining to
                            agricultural production and plantation,
                            livestock production, agricultural services,
                            hunting, trapping and game propagation,
                            forestry and  logging, aquaculture and fishing
                            and any property utilised to carry on that
                            enterprise;”;


                 (b)   by the insertion after the definition of “deeds
                       registry” of the following definition:
                            “’Department” means the National Department
                            responsible for Land Affairs;”;


                 (c)   by the insertion before the definition of “Minister”
                       of the following definition:
                            “‘enterprise’ means an undertaking engaged in
                            production or distribution of goods or services
                            not for the sole purpose of own consumption;”;
                            and
                 (d)   by the insertion after the definition of “prescribed”
                       of the following definition:
                            “’property’ includes movable or immovable,
                            corporeal or incorporeal property and includes
                            shares, rights, title or interest in or to a
                            juristic person, other entity or a trust,”.


                                  CLAUSE 10

     1.     On page 3, from line 27 up to and including line 30, to omit
        subparagraph (dd) and to substitute of the following subparagraph:
           “(dd) any other person or body recognised by the Minister for
                 such purposes,
           which he or she considers suitable for the achievement of the
           objects of this Act, whether in general, in cases of particular
           nature or in specific cases.”.

                                 New clause

   1. That the following be a new clause to follow clause 4:
           “Insertion of section 10A in Act 126 of 1993
           5.    The following section is hereby inserted in the principal
              Act after section 10:
                       “Activities to be managed as separate unit
                       10A   (1)  The Department must account for the
                       acquisition, management, disposal and leasing of
                       property and the provision of financial assistance in
                       terms of this Act through a trading entity
                       established and operating in accordance with the
                       requirements of the Public Finance Management Act,
                       1999 (Act No. 1 of 1999).
                                    2) The trading entity referred to in
                                       terms of subsection (1), once
                                       established, must maintain separate
                                       and itemised financial accounts and
                                       accounting records in respect of
                                       each agricultural enterprise or
                                       separately administered portion of
                                       immovable property which it
                                       acquires, manages, disposes of, or
                                       leases.”.

4.    Report of the Select Committee on Social Services on the Prevention
      of and Treatment for Substance Abuse Bill [B12B – 2008] (National
      Assembly – sec 76 (1)), dated 21 October 2008:


      The Select Committee on Social Services, having considered the subject
      of the Prevention of and Treatment for Substance Abuse Bill [B12B –
      2008] (National Assembly – sec 76 (1)), referred to it, reports the
      Bill with amendments [B 12C – 2008].

5.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs
      on the Notice on Remuneration of Constitutional Court Judges and
      Judges, dated 22 October 2008:

      The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
      considered the request for approval by Parliament of the Notice on
      Remuneration of Constitutional Court Judges and Judges in terms of
      Judges Remuneration and conditions of Employment Act, 2001 (Act No 47
      of 2001), tabled on 22 October 2008 and referred to it, recommends
      that the Council, in terms of section 2(4) of the Act, approves the
      said Notice.

Report to be considered.

6.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs
      on the Notice on Remuneration of Magistrates, dated 22 October 2008:

      The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
      considered the request for approval by Parliament of the Notice on
      Remuneration of Magistrates in terms of section 12(3) of the
      Magistrates Act 1993, (Act No 90 of 1993), tabled on 22 October 2008
      and referred to it, recommends that the Council in terms of section
      12(3) of the Act, approves the said Notice with the exception of the
      references to the President: Divorce Court and Presiding Officer:
      Divorce Court contained in Schedule 1 of the Notice.

Report to be considered.

                          THURSDAY, 23 OCTOBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)    Bills passed by National Assembly on 23 October 2008:
         (a)      Skills Development Amendment Bill [B 49D – 2008 (Reprint)]
            (National Assembly – sec 75).

          b) National Environment Laws Amendment Bill [B 35B – 2007]
             (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).

          c) National Environmental Management: Integrated Coastal
             Management Bill [B 40D – 2007] (National Assembly – sec
             76(1)).

          d) National Environmental Management: Waste Bill [B 39D – 2007]
             (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


    (1)    Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted for concurrence on 23
         October 2008:


         (a)      Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 76 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 77).


         (b)      Eskom Subordinated Loan Special Appropriation (2008/09-
             2010/11 Financial Years) Bill [B 77 – 2008] (National Assembly
             – sec 77).
         (c)      Finance Bill [B 78 – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 77).


         (d)      Government Employees Pension Fund (Condonation of
             Interrupted Service) Bill [B 79 – 2008] (National Assembly –
             sec 77).


         (e)      Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 80 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 77).


         (f)      Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 81 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).


         (g)      Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Bill
             [B 75B – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75).


             The Bills have been referred to the Select Committee on
             Finance of the National Council of Provinces.


         (h)      National Prosecuting Authority Amendment Bill [B 23B –
             2008] (National Assembly – sec 75).


         (i)      South African Police Service Amendment Bill [B 30B – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).


             The Bills have been referred to the Select Committee on
             Security and Constitutional Affairs of the National Council of
             Provinces.

   2. Membership of Committees

     a) The following members have been appointed to serve on the Ad Hoc
        Committee that will process and consider legislation on the
        National Youth Development Agency:

        ANC
        The Hon. Ms. F. Mazibuko
        The Hon. Mr. D. D. Gamede
        The Hon. Ms. H. F. Matlanyane
        The Hon. Ms. M. P. Themba
        The Hon. Mr. R. J. Tau

        ACDP
        The Hon. Mr. W. Douglas


        DA
        The Hon. Mr A Watson


        IFP
        The Hon. Mr. M. A. Mzizi


        UDM
        The Hon. Ms. A. N. D. Qikani


     b) The Hon. Ms. F. Mazibuko has been appointed as Chairperson of the
        Ad Hoc Committee with effect from 23 October 2008.

3.    Referral to Committee of paper tabled

    (1)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and report:


        Legal Aid Guide for 2008: 11th edition in terms of section 3A of
        the Legal Aid Act, 1969 (Act No 22 of 1969).

TABLINGS

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

   (a)      Notice issued in terms of section 106(1)(b) of the Local
      Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000), on
      allegations of maladministration, fraud and corrupt practices
      occurring within Okhahlamba Local Municipality, KwaZulu-Natal.




      Referred to the Select Committee on Local Government and
      Administration for consideration.




   (b)      Report of the 54th Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA)
      Conference held in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia: 1 – 10 August 2008:


CREDA INSERT REPORT - T081023e-insert1 – PAGES 2004-2016

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

CREDA INSERT REPORT - T081023e-insert2 – PAGES 2017-2021


