---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 27 May 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2008-05-27
---

TUESDAY, 27 MAY 2008
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:05.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                          CELEBRATION OF AFRICA DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the Council –

  (1) notes that last Sunday, 25 May, marked the annual commemoration of
        Africa Day;


  (2) acknowledges that this day is intended to remind all of us that on 25
        May 1963 the leaders of the then independent Africa made history and
        gave significant impetus to the continent’s collective struggle for
        independence, by establishing the Organisation of African Unity;


  (3) further acknowledges that from the launch of the Organisation of
        African Unity to the advent of the African Union, the people of
        Africa stood united in the framework of a united African continent
        while making efforts to give depth and meaning to their political
        independence and the redress of the socioeconomic developmental
        challenges that were caused by long years of colonisation;


  (4) takes this opportunity to remind all South Africans and the people of
        Africa that the celebration of this sacred and solemn moment in the
        history of our continent celebrates the unity, co-operation and
        arduous efforts of the African people over the past 40 decades; and


  (5) therefore recognises that, as our country moves to quell the eruptions
        of xenophobic incidences and criminality directed against people
        from other parts of the African continent, Africa Day calls on all
        of us to individually reaffirm our collective resolve in our cradle
        of humanity and spirit of ubuntu to remain “our brothers’ and
        sisters’ keepers”, and to never again relive the sordid and sad
        tales of African imperialism and colonialism.
Thank you.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 23 – Agriculture and Vote No 27 - Land Affairs:

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Chairperson of the NCOP, hon
members of the NCOP, MECs, particularly our MEC from the Western Cape,
mayors and councillors, honourable guests, ladies and gentlemen, drawing on
the vision of the Freedom Charter, the provisions of the Constitution and
the lessons of the first and second decades of our democracy, there is
consensus about the urgency of the effective and speedy implementation of
the Land and Agrarian Reform Project, Larp.

The most severe and intractable poverty in South Africa today is in our
rural areas. Nearly half of all the people in our rural areas live in
absolute poverty. This remains the main cause of migration into cities,
which has imposed significant constraints on urban poverty reduction and
made it difficult to sustain rural economies as a result of losing the most
productive of our people to the cities.

The reverse of this disaster, namely the focus on development in South
Africa, must, among other things, be on agriculture. If we are committed to
reducing poverty and achieving sustainable growth, the powers and resources
of agriculture for development must be unleashed. This requires the
following: Having agriculture work in concert with other sectors and
factors at local levels; building the capacity of smallholders and their
communities; and developing institutions to help agriculture serve
development, especially working with our developing farmers, women and
young people in our communities towards sustainable development.

Compared with other initiatives, small-scale agriculture has the highest
potential of kick-starting and supporting self-sustaining growth and
employment across a range of agricultural and nonagricultural activities.
Indeed, during this budget year, we shall focus on making land accessible
to the majority of the people of South Africa and on smallholder production
systems for household and national food security. This involves the
acceleration and the implementation of the Larp. Larp is a new framework
that creates a delivery paradigm for rural development and the green
revolution aimed at unleashing access to land and agriculture as tools for
sustainable development.

We are living in times of globally escalating food prices. According to the
World Bank report, food crop prices are expected to remain high in 2008 and
2009 and then begin to decline as supply and demand respond to high prices.
However, they are likely to remain high, well above the 2004 levels,
throughout and up to 2015 for most of our food crops. Forecasts of other
major organisations such as the Food and Agriculture Organisation, FAO, of
the UN, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
countries’ report and the US Department of Agriculture that regularly
monitors and protects commodity prices, are broadly consistent with these
predictions. The FAO report of 2008 indicates that food prices have
increased by 45% over the last 9 to 10 months. International stock levels
of major staples are long-run lows which resulted in a serious shortage of
major staples such as rice, wheat and maize.

Earlier in the month, we participated in the UN Commission on Sustainable
Development known as the CSD-16, where the focus was on reviewing progress
made on the implementation of the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation in
relation to climate change, the need for increased investment in
agriculture and rural development, security of land tenure and the urgency
of the implementation of Africa’s development agenda.

The problem of food security and the rapidly rising food prices were the
main issues raised by most of the countries and groups such as the G77, the
Africa Group, China, the European Union and organs of civil society. We
agreed, with the nations of the world, to the implementation of programmes
that will address all these important focal areas. The Secretary-General of
the UN, Mr Ban Ki-moon said:
   The first green revolution may have skipped most of the African countries
   as it benefited the developed countries. We must ensure, therefore, that
   the second green revolution is specifically for Africa.

South Africa has also been affected by the rising prices, although our food
prices have not increased at the same pace as in many countries worldwide.
It is for this reason therefore that we agree with the Secretary-General of
the UN that the time for Africa’s green revolution has now come.

According to the National Agricultural Marketing Council report released in
February 2008, prices for maize during the period from January 2007 to
January 2008 increased by 33,2%; wheat by 81%; and sunflower oil by 81,02%.
Subsequently, in April 2008, Cabinet instructed a number of Ministers, and
I, responsible for the economic and social clusters, to develop a strategy
to address this challenge. Interministerial and interdepartmental task
teams have been established and have conducted an analysis which identified
various factors that contribute towards high food prices in order to
finalise an intervention strategy by government.

Higher food prices impact negatively on the purchasing power of poor
households. Thus, it is important that our budget should also speak to
providing cushions to the poor. Our short-term intervention measures should
ensure that they provide safety nets for the poor. These will include
social welfare grants, starter packs for household vegetable production,
family gardens, extending the family feeding schemes - as we know that more
and more children are now going to go hungry - and also introducing the
work for food projects under the Expanded Public Works Programme.

In addition, Cabinet is considering proposals on the zero rating of some of
the basic foodstuffs such as sorghum, mielie meal and chicken in order to
expand our protein base. We are also looking at selected baby foods.

We have also embarked on a private sector mobilisation programme to ensure
that we look into mechanisms of donating food and addressing costs of
agricultural inputs such as fertilisers and seed which impact heavily on
agricultural production.

The long-term strategy for agriculture is to invigorate and increase
agricultural production and improve investment in agriculture. I also want
to add to what the Chief Whip has said about the inhuman and xenophobic
attacks on our people and say that, as the government of South Africa, we
are appalled at these criminal attacks against our brothers and sisters who
are supposed to be our guests here in South Africa. This is definitely
against our belief in ubuntu where we don’t regard a visitor or a guest as
an enemy. In our culture, a person who comes at night into your house may
not go to sleep without a plate of food. A visitor or a guest will share
with you whatever you have. There is no child in Africa that is an orphan;
every child has a parent and a home.

It is therefore very insulting and disgraceful that today, as South
Africans who were accommodated by our very same African brothers and
sisters during our difficult times in apartheid South Africa, we treat them
this way. I think, as mothers and fathers, that it is very inhuman; what
are we teaching our children? No man or woman deserves the kind of
treatment that was meted out to our brothers and sisters. I want to say
therefore, to all of us, that the government wants to appreciate what the
people of South Africa have done to accommodate, to clothe and to feed
these people the government will do everything in its power to ensure that
criminals go to jail and that justice is done.

I want to say therefore, on behalf of our different departments, that we
shall assist the people. The Department of Social Development has already
started to make contributions to ensure that there are blankets and food.
Through our police and security system there is safety for our guests who
are here, not because of their own making, but because of the situations
that they found themselves in in their countries. We therefore thank South
Africans for the little they have done and hope that more will join and
contribute towards assisting our brothers and sisters.

In terms of the food price crisis that we are going through, our long-term
strategy, as the Department of Agriculture, is to increase agricultural
production and improve investment in agriculture. We are not alone in this
quest; we have our international partners who are intent on supporting our
efforts in this regard. As I speak, the Premier of Limpopo is in Italy on a
study tour with the MEC for Agriculture, where he is studying the food
parks concept for the purpose of introducing these food parks in Limpopo.
The Italians have made a commitment that they are ready to come to South
Africa and introduce these food parks in the Limpopo province, in the
Tzaneen area. They will be working with the government of South Africa in
this regard.

At home, we are creating partnerships with the private sector; our
commercial farmers have been very productive and supportive in this regard.
Through these partnerships we hope to bring to bear the expertise through
skills transfer and the training of our emerging black farmers. We also
want to ensure that we put in place infrastructure and provide information
and resources for the private sector on a risk-sharing basis to the
implementation of the sustainable Land and Agrarian Reform Project.

In addition, we shall also focus on investing in highly capital-intensive
projects, which will address the rehabilitation of our irrigation schemes
and dipping services.

Chairperson, the Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme, Casp, has
been prioritised to respond timeously to the demands of the Land and
Agrarian Reform Project. We shall also remember that this was one of the
priority programmes identified at the Polokwane Conference.

This flexibility has been built into the administration of this facility
Casp, which aims at developing new farmers, assisting developing farmers to
increase the production of strategic agricultural products and contributing
towards national food security, and increasing our exports. Since its
inception in the 2004-05 financial year, Casp disbursement has totalled
R1,165 billion. For the current financial year, Casp will disburse R535
million to 1 085 projects to benefit 37 908 beneficiaries. The different
provinces have also greatly improved in their facilitation of projects that
have been assisted through Casp. I believe that in the last financial year
a lot of improvement has been realised and support has been given to
farmers through this Casp programme.

The Zwelihle Organic Farm is one of the successful projects in Hermanus
owned by a co-operative of women who produce seasonal organic vegetable
crops and seedlings, which they sell locally to chain stores and the
informal sector. Their range varies from spinach, cauliflower, green pepper
to garlic and leeks.

In terms of the Ilima/Letsema Campaign, Mpumalanga has intensified
Masibuyele eMasimini, a call to intensify food production. I am informed
therefore that the bulk of their expenditure in ploughing is due to the
provision of tractors. In some provinces, tractors purchased in the last
two years have collapsed. It is important, therefore, that we come together
with all the MECs and work out a bulk purchasing strategy that will give us
a sustainable procurement of tractors for most of our provinces. This is
the only way we can ensure that we transfer skills to our people to be
mechanics for tractors and to ensure that such skills are also given to
communities in the rural areas.

Chairperson, I wonder if I have additional time. [Laughter.]

The Micro- Agricultural Financial Institutions of South Africa, Mafisa, was
rolled out in Limpopo, Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal benefiting
communities in the districts of Sekhukhune, O R Tambo – remember those are
some of the poorest districts – Amathole, Alfred Nzo, Ukhahlamba, Chris
Hani, Waterberg, Mopani and Vhembe; soon Mafisa will be rolled out in all
provinces. We have evaluated and assessed Mafisa and we believe that we are
ready to roll it out to provinces. I know that in the Northern Cape we have
already launched Mafisa and we’ll be moving to other provinces.

I want to proceed to the sensitive issue of land affairs. We have launched
the Agricultural Black Economic Empowerment Charter or the AgriBEE Charter
which was gazetted on 20 March. We call on all farmers to go out and work
collaboratively with commercial farmers ...
Bese sibatshela ukuthi manje sekuyisikhathi sokuthi basiqome nokuthi
sishade ngoba uhulumeni uthi ... [... and tell them that it is now the time
for them to fall in love with us and marry us so as to work collaboratively
with us because government says that ...]

... the whites-only companies can no longer work in South Africa. We are
looking at ensuring that women are partnered in the new AgriBEE
dispensation. We are also considering youth and people with disabilities to
participate so that they can benefit from our agricultural industry.

The Department of Land Affairs recently developed the Settlement
Implementation Support Strategy, Siss, which will address, among other
issues, the whole problem of postsettlement support. We believe this
strategy, amongst others, will ensure livelihood, enterprise and technical
support; integrated natural resource management; sustainable settlements;
and give capacity as well as institutional support to emerging farmers,
farmworkers, and women farmers. Incorporating this strategy with the Land
and Agrarian Reform Project, shall enable us to transform the agricultural
sector.

The Department of Land Affairs has completed a viability review of   1 200
projects funded by our Land Redistribution for Agricultural Development
grants. The good news today is that even though the LRAD grants have been,
of course – and we have all complained about it - very low and cannot
assist our farmers, they have now been increased from R20 000 to R111 000
per person. With the current maximum grant of R100 000 per person
qualifying, it has been increased to R430 000.

Furthermore, our big problem was the Settlement/Land Acquisition Grant,
Slag; we have substantially increased it from R16 000.

... niyakhumbula yayifana nesibonelelo sezezindlu ...[... you will remember
that it was the same as the housing grant ...]

... but we have increased it from R16 000 per person to R111 125 per
household.

Ngakho uma niyinhlangano mhlawumbe niyishumi, niyakwazi ukuthola isigidi
esisodwa samarandi ukuze nithenge into ebonakalayo. [Therefore if you are
an organisation of maybe 10 people, you are able to get yourselves at least
R1 million so as to buy something tangible.]

Chairperson, the Department of Land Affairs has responded to the calls for
a national state land audit.

Lokhu kwakungenye yezinto esasizithunyiwe ePolokwane. [This was one of the
resolutions of the ANC Conference in Polokwane.]

The department has completed the audit of some 228 000 parcels of state
land on our national database and this amounts to 23 million hectares of
state land.

Lokho akusho ukuthi sinamahektha ayizigidi ezingama-23 ombuso. [But that
does not mean that we have 23 million hectares of state land.]

That land is not vacant. Of the 23 million ...

... sibala nalana asePhalamende, yilawo amasosha nalawo ezikole.
[... we also include the precincts of Parliament, those of the Defence
Force as well as those of the schools.]

But, out of that, about two million hectares is vacant land. We have
started to redistribute this land to the previously disadvantaged; to date,
we’ve redistributed 800 000 hectares of the two million.

We are also looking at the question of security of tenure for farm dwellers
and farmworkers. This remains high on our agenda and priority list. In this
regard we are working on a number of interventions to ensure access to
land, housing, water, education, health and the protection of their human
rights.

We want to ensure that the high rate of evictions goes down. In this
regard, the department is currently working with the Department of Justice
and Constitutional Affairs. As we speak, the two study groups on justice
and land affairs in the National Assembly, NA, are meeting to discuss the
issue of evictions.

In this regard we have set up the Legal Aid Board. We are working with
civil organisations and NGOs and also the legal fraternity to increase our
collective capacity to provide legal representation, and to monitor
evictions and other human rights violations on the farms. We are also
working with the Minister of Safety and Security to ensure safety and
security of our farmers and farm dwellers on our farms. We welcome the Land
Claims Court’s decision that restored the dignity of Ntate Mokoena in
Hoedspruit in Limpopo, by granting the family an order to bury their father
on the farm where he was born, grew up and died at the age of 72. He was
denied the right to be buried there. We also condemn the murder of our
farmers, wherever this criminality occurs.

On 19 June the Department of Land Affairs will mark the 95th anniversary
since the promulgation of the Native Land Act by the previous government in
1913. I am glad to announce that in our efforts to reverse the effects of
the notorious Land Act of 1913, we have declared the month of June as Land
Month. This year we are going to commemorate Land Month by handing over 23
000 ha of land on 19 June to 665 households in the Koegas community, in the
Siyanda Municipality in the Northern Cape. We will start the Land Month
handover on 14 June at Hartebeespoort, where we will give 2 363 ha to
Bakwena ba Mogopa.
On 16 June we will give 1 570 ha of land to Moeketse Ga-Chatleka in the
Winburg district in Limpopo. On 28 June we will give 3 324 ha to the
Campbell community at Siyancuma in the Northern Cape, as well as 9 194 ha
to several communities from the Gauteng and North West provinces.

Today we deliberate on the issue of high food prices and the state of
vulnerable groups. I am delighted to state that on 20 June the Ministry,
with the two departments, will be launching the Youth in Agriculture and
Rural Development, Yard. Through the provincial structures they are ready
and prepared to toil and contribute to the growth and prosperity of the
agricultural sector. We call upon our youth to go into agriculture and go
down the value chain. We also appeal to commercial farmers, to emerging
farmers, to partner with the youth to produce and also ensure that they
transfer some of their skills to our young farmers.

In conclusion, I would like to thank my Deputy Minister Adv Dirk du Toit
for his support and his wisdom. I want to thank all our MECs for
Agriculture for their support and co-operation. I also want to thank the
Chairperson of the Select Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs, Ntate
Moatshe, for his unfailing support and guidance. I want to thank the
members of this House.

Bayasibetha ke bethu. Kodwa ke ... [They are always keeping us on our toes,
but ...]
... we do listen to them because they assist us to correct our mistakes.

I also want to thank our directors-general in both the Department of
Agriculture and the Department of Land Affairs and their dedicated support
staff and also the staff in my office. I also want to thank the Chief Land
Claims Commissioner and his team, the CEOs of all our state entities and
the boards and the heads of departments in Agriculture. Last but not least,
I want to thank the farmers unions. I want to thank AgriBEE, the Agri
Business Chamber and also the agriprocessors for all the support that they
have given to us.

Ndiyabona kwakhona ukuba bakhona noomama apha. Malibongwe! Siyazi ukuba
ngaphandle koomama, ngakumbi oomama bezolimo, ayikho into esingakwazi
ukuyenza. Nootata bebodwa abangekhe benze nto. Ndiyababulela ke nabo ootata
ngegalelo abalenzileyo kwezolimo. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph
follows.)

[I also notice that there are women here. Praise! We know that without
women, especially women in agriculture, there is nothing that we can do.
Even men alone cannot do anything. I also thank men for their contribution
in agriculture.]

I thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you, hon Minister, I am sure you are
aware why I gave you extra time, because I knew you would tell us lots of
wonderful news. But that was only given to the Minister, for the rest of
you, your minutes will be restricted to your given time.

Rev P MOATSHE: Modulasetulo o o tlotlegang, Maloko a ntlo e [Hon
Chairperson, members of this House,]

... special delegates present here, MECs, Minister, Deputy Minister, your
entourage and all stakeholders in the gallery ...

... re a le dumedisa ka leina la Agriculture. [... we greet you all in the
name of Agriculture.]

Minister, you did not mention aquaculture in your speech, so I would love
to have a response when you answer later about why it was not included in
your speech. Otherwise, the Constitution enjoins the state to take action
to enable citizens to gain access to land on an equitable basis to ensure
security of tenure for people and communities, and to realise the
restitution of land rights for those dispossessed after 1913.

Current approaches to land reform are not achieving the scale or outcomes
required for the realisation of a better life for rural South Africa. The
Minister has made mention of vast quantities of hectares that will be
allocated to our people. It sounds very good to our ears. If this could be
utilised we will really make a difference with our people participating in
the economic streams of this country.

We have only succeeded in redistributing 4%, that’s what I see, but we
heard that we will distribute more percentages to the people of South
Africa. The willing-seller willing-buyer approach to land acquisition has
constrained the pace and efficacy of land reform. It is clear from our
experience that the market is unable to effectively alter the patterns of
land ownership in favour of an equitable and efficient distribution of
land. Therefore it is imperative that this should be taken very seriously
and done equitably.

Rural development is a central pillar of our struggle against unemployment,
poverty and inequality. High levels of rural poverty and inequality
inhibits the growth of our economy and undermines our efforts to ensure
that growth is more equitably shared among our people. Gender equality must
be a critical ingredient and important outcome of all our programmes of
rural development, land reform and agrarian change. Correcting the
injustices of the past requires that women increasingly become the
beneficiaries and decision-makers in respect of strategies to overcome
poverty in the rural areas.

Our programmes of rural development, land reform and agrarian change must
be integrated into a clear strategy that seeks to empower the poor,
particularly those who already derive all or part of their livelihood from
the exploitation of productive land. In line with the Freedom Charter’s
call that the land shall be shared among those who work it, the critical
beneficiaries of change must be rural women, farm dwellers, household
producers in former Bantustans, small businesses and rural entrepreneurs
and residents of urban and peri-urban areas who wish to engage in
agricultural livelihood.

Black economic empowerment and the deracialisation of agricultural
ownership is a necessary, but insufficient, condition for the realisation
of our transformation goals in rural South Africa. The participation of the
poor in the design, implementation and monitoring of rural development
programmes is a key objective of the developmental state and must be
supported by appropriate structures to give voice to affected communities
and structure their engagement with government programmes.

The ANC and its alliance partners have a critical role in mobilising and
organising rural communities behind the objectives of the National
Democratic Revolution, NDR, in general and the goals of rural development
in particular. The ANC branches will have to work together with the
progressive trade union movement, particularly the Food and Agricultural
Workers Union, government agencies and civil society to build national
organisations for farmworkers and farm dwellers dedicated to the
realisation of their rights.

The Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme, Casp, is administered by
provincial departments of agriculture. Casp beneficiaries are the hungry,
subsistence and household food producers, emergent farmers and agricultural
macrosystems within the consumer environment. The programme is a core focus
for the Department of Agriculture. The following priorities can make Casp a
success story in its endeavour to turnaround the lives of our subsistence
farmers.

If there is no information, you are impoverishing the minds that have to
unfold to love farming and to produce food for the masses of this country,
therefore technological management has to become part of that. Technical
and advisory assistance and regulatory services have to be provided from
the side of the departments, and the departments must take the initiative
to go down to the people and take them by the hand and work together to
deliver the goods expected by the masses of South Africa. Marketing and
business development is also imperative for our people to be encouraged to
work hard in agriculture.

The ongoing training and capacity-building we experienced during our
oversight trips seems to be a major shortfall. Our people need training so
that they can be fully capacitated to do what is expected of them.
Obviously, financial support patterns must be corrected. Money cannot be
given to communities and be left at that point. They must be taught how to
spend it and be economically viable. The national department with the
provincial departments have to take that into cognisance so that the people
are helped on the ground, every cent is utilised to the maximum and there
is production of this budget.

The Micro Agricultural Financial Institutions of South Africa, Mafisa,
which is the financial assistance pillar for Casp, was first piloted, as
the Minister has said, in certain provinces. The time is long-overdue and
it should have been rolled out to other provinces some time back, not at
this point in time, so that we really speed this up. If this is successful,
it is imperative that it reaches all the provinces at a speedy pace.

The Intergrated Food Security and Nutrition Programme is an
interdepartmental programme that provides relief to indigent households
that are affected by food security in the form of agricultural starter
packs containing seeds, seedlings, farming implements, as mentioned by the
Minister, fertilisers, etc. It is important that this information is
filtered down to the people, to the periphery, to the remote corners of
this country. How is the information reaching people in the rural areas?
There is a shortfall as far as that is concerned. I think our processes and
machinery is not speeding up things we have that have to be implemented on
the ground. [Time expired.] Thank you, Chairperson, let me thank everybody.
Thank you so much. [Applause.]

Mnr J W LE ROUX: Agbare Voorsitter, agb Minister, agb Adjunkminister, LUR’e
- veral my oudkollega mnr Dowry en kollegas; ek was die afgelope 40 jaar
lank betrokke by die landbou en deel graag ’n paar gedagtes met u. Die
meeste Suid-Afrikaners en trouens die meeste mense dwarsoor Afrika hunker
om ’n stukkie grond te bekom.

Die probleem is dat dit baie moeilik is om wins te maak uit boerdery en in
die meeste gevalle is dit onmoontlik om selfs net te oorleef. Sakebeginsels
geld in die landbou net soos in alle vertakkings van die sakesektor. Die
wette van skaal geld in die landbou en as ’n reël is kleinskaalboerdery net
nie lonend nie.

Ek het plase in Kenia en Ghana besoek en die grootste armoede op die
platteland gesien, waar duisende kleinboere sukkel om te oorleef. Die grond
in Kenia en Ghana is vrugbaar en die reënval is hoog, nogtans was die
opbrengste en die gehalte van die diere baie swak. Die redes vir die
mislukking van kleinboere en boere in die algemeen is eerstens ’n gebrek
aan kennis, tweedens ’n gebrek aan landboudienste en ondersteuning van die
staat en derdens ’n gebrek aan kapitaal.

Ons moet in Suid-Afrika leer uit die ondervinding van ander en sorg dat ons
boere ten minste ’n kans gegun word om sukses te behaal. Ek hoop en vertrou
wat die Minister vandag hier aangekondig het, sal ons boere in ’n groot
mate kan help. Ongelukkig, wat betref die opleiding van voornemende boere
en die ondersteuning van landboutegniese dienste, het die regering
skouspelagtig misluk.

Dit bring my by die belangrike punt van voedselsekuriteit. In alle
suksesvolle lande speel die landbou ’n baie groot rol. Dit is die rede
waarom boere dwarsoor die wêreld groot finansiële en ander hulp van hulle
onderskeie regerings ontvang. Hoe meer effektief ons boere kan produseer en
hoe minder landbouprodukte ons hoef in te voer, hoe beter. Hoe meer ons
boere produseer, hoe goedkoper word ons voedsel.

Ons moet in Suid-Afrika ’n landbousektor hê wat floreer, wat
werkgeleenthede skep en wat valuta vir die land kan verdien. Tans kompeteer
ons boere teen produkte van ander lande wat deur hulle regerings
gesubsidieer word. Hierdie is ’n groot probleem en die regering sal ’n
oplossing hiervoor móét vind.

As ons na ander lande kyk wat finansieel agteruit gaan en waar inflasie en
veral voedselinflasie handuit ruk, is een faktor altyd teenwoordig, naamlik
dalende produksievlakke in die landbou. ’n Florerende landbougemeenskap is
in ons land se belang en die staat moet sy positiewe rol hier speel. Dit is
tragies dat waar Suid-Afrika eers ’n netto uitvoerder van voedsel was, ons
nou vir die eerste maal ’n netto invoerder van voedsel is.

Wat die billike herverdeling van grond betref, is daar hopeloos te veel
spanning. In dié verband kan ek die Minister die versekering gee dat die
meeste boere wil hê dat herverdeling moet slaag en meer as gewillig is om
hulp en kundigheid te deel. Dit sal dwaas wees om die enkele negatiewe
boere as die norm te gebruik. Die probleem van herverdeling lê nie by die
boere nie; die grootste probleem moet by staatsdepartemente gesoek word.
Dís die probleem, nié die boere nie.

Daar is baie goeie landbougrond deurlopend in die mark en dis onwaar dat
slegs swak landbougrond aangebied word. Verder is daar baie boere wat
bereid is om vennootskappe te sluit. Verwyder rompslomp in die
departemente, dan sál ons ons teikens bereik. Tans is die vestiging van
nuwe boere ’n ramp. Alle aanduidings is dat 50% van alle projekte volslae
mislukkings is. Miljoene rand is vermors en winsgewende boerderyeenhede is
vernietig.

Wat betref die verkoop van grond: Landbougrond is ’n bate wat verkoop word
en die eienaar van die bate het die reg om sy bate te verkoop teen ’n
sekere prys. Die debat gaan oor wat ’n billike prys is. Natuurlik is daar
met landbougrond ook ander faktore wat ’n rol speel, maar gesiene ekonome
van Adam Smith se tyd is dit eens dat vraag en aanbod die prys van ’n
kommoditeit moet bepaal.

Op die oomblik heers daar groot spanning oor die Wysigingswet op
Onteiening. Een van die hoofredes waarom Afrika nie beleggers kan trek nie,
is dat eiendomsreg nie beskerm word nie. Minister, behalwe dat die wet
ongrondwetlik is, gaan Suid-Afrika ’n duur prys betaal as ons voortgaan met
hierdie wetgewing. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr J W LE ROUX: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister, MECs -
especially my ex-colleague Mr Dowry and other colleagues; I have been
involved in agriculture for the past 40 years and I gladly share a few
thoughts with you. Most South Africans and, in fact, most of the people
across Africa long to obtain a piece of land.

The problem is that it is difficult to make a profit in farming and in most
cases it is even impossible just to survive. Business principles apply to
agriculture in much the same way they apply to other branches of the
business sector. The laws of scale apply to agriculture and as a rule small-
scale farming is just not profitable.

I visited farms in Kenya and Ghana and witnessed the worst poverty in the
rural areas, where thousands of peasant farmers struggle to survive. The
land in Kenya and Ghana is fertile and the rainfall is high, but even so
the crops and the quality of the animals are very poor. The reasons for the
failure of peasant farmers and farmers in general are: Firstly, a lack of
knowledge; secondly, insufficient agricultural services and support by the
state; and thirdly, insufficient funds.

We in South Africa should learn from the experience of others and see to it
that our farmers are given at least a chance to achieve success. I hope and
trust that what the Minister has announced here today will assist our
farmers in a significant way. Unfortunately, when it comes to the training
of prospective farmers and support from Agricultural Technical Services,
the government has failed spectacularly.

This brings me to the important matter of food security. Agriculture plays
a very important role in all successful countries. This is the reason why
farmers across the globe receive major financial and other aid from their
respective governments. The more effectively our farmers can produce and
the fewer agricultural products we have to import, the better. The more our
farmers produce, the cheaper our food will become.

In South Africa we should have an agricultural sector that flourishes, that
creates job opportunities and that can earn foreign exchange for the
country. Currently, our farmers are competing with products of other
countries which are being subsidised by their governments. This is a major
problem and the government will have to find a solution for this.

If we look at other countries that are regressing financially and where
inflation, and especially food inflation, has become unmanageable, one
factor is always present, namely, the declining levels of agricultural
production. A flourishing agricultural community is in the interest of our
country and the government should play a positive role in this. It is
tragic that whereas South Africa has been a net exporter of food in the
past, we are now, for the first time, a net importer of food.

As far as the fair redistribution of land is concerned, there is far too
much tension. In this regard I can give the Minister the assurance that the
majority of the farmers want redistribution to be successful and are more
than willing to assist and to share expertise. It will be absurd to use the
few farmers who are negative as the norm. The problem of redistribution
lies not with the farmers; the most important problem should be sought in
the government departments. That is the problem, not the farmers.

There is regularly a lot of excellent agricultural land on the market, and
it is untrue that only poor agricultural land is made available. In
addition, there are many farmers who are willing to form partnerships.
Remove the red tape in the departments then we will achieve our targets.
Settling new farmers is a catastrophe at the moment. All indications are
that 50% of all projects are absolute failures. Millions of rand have been
squandered and profitable farming units have been destroyed.

With regard to the selling of land: Agricultural land is an asset that
could be sold and the owner of the asset has the right to sell his asset at
a certain price. The debate deals with what constitutes a reasonable price.
When it comes to agricultural land, there are, of course, other factors
that play a role as well, but respected economists from the time of Adam
Smith agree that supply and demand should determine the price of a
commodity.

Currently, huge tension prevails regarding the Expropriation Amendment Act.
One of the main reasons why Africa is unable to attract investment is
because the right of ownership is not protected. Minister, except for the
fact that this Act is unconstitutional, South Africa will also pay a high
price if we were to continue with this legislation. Thank you.]

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Modulasetulo, Tona ya tša Temo le Motlatši wa gagwe,
badiredi ba mmušo kamoka ga bona, maloko a Ntlo e hlomphegago ... [Hon
Chairperson, Minister of Agriculture and her Deputy, all government
officials, members of this august House ...]

... comrades and all the members, dignitaries and the visitors to this
House ...

... go fepa setšhaba ke tlhotlo ye kgolo yeo Lefapha la tša Temo le
lebanego le yona. Tlhago le yona e mpefatša maemo ka baka la komelelo yeo e
tšeago nako e telele. Malwetši a diphoofolo le ona a dira gore seemo se
befele pele le go tšea karolo moo go sego gwa lekalekana ka baka la go
hloka tsebo le bjona bokgoni bja tša temo.
Matšatšing a lehono go mpefalela pele ka ge ditheko le tšona di nyoga go ya
go ile. Theko ya makhura a dinamelwa ke peterole le disele - dijo le bona
bophelo ka kakaretšo, ga di dire gore bao ba fulelago ganong ba kgone go ba
le bophelo bjo bokaone – bjo bo bego bo ka phelega. Bodiidi, hlokego ya
mešomo, hlokego ya tsebo le maitemogelo le yona thuto di maatlafatša seo
mokgatlo wa ANC o se boletšego ge o re ... (Translation of Sepedi
paragraphs follows.)

[One of the most challenging issues faced by the Department of Agriculture
is to feed the nation. The ongoing drought is also worsening the situation.
Animal diseases, lack of knowledge and skills in farming and poor
participation also make matters worse.

Furthermore, things are getting more and more expensive these days. Fuel –
be it petrol or diesel - food prices and our lifestyle in general are not
helping the situation at all. Poverty, unemployment and the lack of skills,
experience and education add to what was said by the ANC that ...]

... there must be adequate support services for farmers in the form of
inputs; that is, tractors, fertilisers, chemicals, seed and financing for
agribusiness and quality extension advisory services. The Freedom Charter
stated the ANC’s approach to issues of land and agrarian transformation in
those terms.

Rural development forms an essential component of the ANC’s programmes for
redistribution and growth. As such, the rural development policy would give
emphasis to generating a viable productive rural economy through activities
such as the agro industry.

Sustainable job creation programmes would incorporate the provision of
infrastructure and skills to enhance the productivity capacity of these
areas as well as raise the standard of living of the people. These
programmes should focus on economically viable localities and at the same
time benefit people of the rural areas, especially women, the youth and
people with disabilities.

In addition, the ANC also stated that it would initiate wide-ranging
consultation and co-ordinated research to develop a comprehensive rural
development programme.

As a result the current budget seeks to allocate resources as a simple
technical process of financial allocation. The thrust of the ANC’s
priorities should also be adequately reflected. Such issues as articulated
through the “Ready to Govern” and other key policy priorities of the ANC
should as such find resonance in the current Vote.

Amongst these is the crystallisation and effective incorporation of the
52nd National Conference Resolution on Land, Rural Development and Agrarian
Reform in the centre of the government programme going forward.

In this regard the conference’s resolution calls for the discarding of
market–driven land reform and the immediate reviewing of the principle of
willing-buyer willing-seller in accelerating equitable distribution of
land. This clearly indicates that the resources allocated to land reform
should increase substantially, given the anticipation that there is going
to be challenges of postsettlement support or other risk factors, including
litigation, in the process of expropriation.

In addition, agrarian change must be pursued with a view to supporting
subsistence food production, expanding the role and productivity of the
modern smallholder, and farming and maintaining a vibrant and competitive
agricultural sector. Thus, connecting forms of ownership is at the centre
of how the ANC is viewing agrarian change and rural development.]

Thlahlo ya baswa e raloka karolo e kgolo go tša temo. Re boletše gantši
bjalo ka mokgahlo wa ANC gore re nyaka baswa bao ba tlago tšea karolo ka go
hlabolla le go fepa setšhaba.

Go na le baswa bao ba nago le phišego ya go ba balemi ba ka moso, bao ba
nyakago go bona setšhaba se etšwa bodidiing. Ga bjale, ke ile ka huduega
maikutlo ge ke be ke re ke iša ba bangwe ba baswa bao kua dikholetšheng tša
tlhahlo tša go swana le boTompi Seleka, ka hwetša e le gore ga ba sa tšea
baswa bao. Ke ile ka ba tšea gape ka re ke a furalela ke leba
Madzivhandila, ka hwetša e le gore le gona ga go sa na monyetla wa baswa wa
gore ba tle ba kgone go fepa setš haba.

Potšišo ke gore, a naa ge re sa nyake baswa ba ba tsenya diatla tša bona ka
mo gare ga temo – ba fepe setšhaba, re nyaka bafe bao e lego gore ba tla re
ge ba re re a ithuta, ba ithuta ba se na selo ka mo maleng. Re reng? Re re
naa baswa ba Limpopo ba emelele ba ye Mpumalanga goba ba ye North West goba
ba ye kae – ba tshele mellwane ba ye go ithutela tša temo? Mola re be re re
ka lebaka la gore dikholetšhe tše di gona mo gae mo Limpopo gomme re tlo
holega ka tšona.

Tše dintši tša dienywa tšeo di tšwago Limpopo, bjale ka ge re re Limpopo ke
Edene ya Afrika. Batho ba gona, le a ba bona, go thoma ka Kgoši Mokoena,
Ntate Botha le mohlomphegi Sibiya, gore ke batho bao ba jago dienywa tša
tlhago – ke batho bao ba kgonago gore ge ba tsoga gosasa ba ye go kga ka mo
sehlareng ba kgone go ja. Fela bothata bjo bogolo ke gore bontši bja
dienywa tšeo ka moka ga tšona di tšwa ka mono porofenseng ya Limpopo ka ge
re se na difeme tša go tšweletša, tša go dira gore batho ba Limpopo ba
kgone gore   go be le dikgotlaomone, ke ra tšamo bao ba sa tsebego Sepedi,
ba tsebe go bona gore go ba le tamatisoso. Ka ge Limpopo e le yona e
ntšhago tše dintši tša dienywa tša go swana le ditamati, re kgone go bona
go eba le difeme, re tloše batho ba kua magaeng bodidi bja go hloka mešomo.
Se sengwe seo se ilego sa nkhuduwa maikutlo ke gore ge re be re ile Limpopo
ka Taking Parliament to the People, re dira ditatelelo tša tšhepedišo, re
ile ra etela dipolase tša go swana le bo-Berlin, bo-Mariveni le bo-
Ngavumune, go tšona ka moka re re batho ba swanetše ba boele ba kgone go
itirela. Se ka moka se, mohlomphegi Tona, se befetšwa pele ke gore batho
bao re ba tsenye ka gare ga mathata ka nako yona ye. Ba bangwe ba kolota
Land Bank tšhelete ye nngwe ye ntši ye e ka fihlago dimilione tše R24. Ba
tlo e tšea kae ka gore ke batho ba dikobo di magetleng, ba ikgonere, ga ba
na sa bona.

Bjale ka mokgahlo wa ANC re re, lefapha le ga le tsenye seatla le mo go
diprofense, le kgontšhe gore batho ba Limpopo le batho ba diporofense ka
moka bao ba lego kua dinaga-magaeng ba kgone go holega. Re re...
(Translation of Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[Farming skills that are offered to the young generation play a very
important role. As the ANC, we have mentioned before that we are looking
for youth who will commit themselves to taking part in developing and
feeding the nation through agriculture.

Some of the youth are willing to commit themselves to farming as a way to
fight poverty. I took some of those youth to colleges like Tompi Seleka for
enrolment but, to my surprise, I was told that the college is closed; they
do not offer training anymore. I also went to Madzivhandila and the
situation there is the same. There is no more training.
Now the question is, if we do not offer farming skills to our very own
youth, who are we going to train and develop? What should be done? Are the
youth of Limpopo supposed to go to Mpumalanga or North West in order to be
trained as farmers? We were hoping that the youth of Limpopo would benefit
from those colleges in their own province.

Most of the fruits in this country are from Limpopo, hence the name “Eden
of Africa”. By looking at Kgoshi Mokoena, Mr Botha and the hon Sibiya, one
can tell that they get healthy fruits from their own gardens every day. It
is unfortunate that although Limpopo is rich with fruits and vegetables,
there are no factories that produce jam and tomato sauce. More factories
are necessary to assist in fighting poverty in Limpopo.

During our Taking Parliament to the People visit in Limpopo, we visited
farms such as Berlin, Mariveni and Nguvamuni as a follow-up procedure and I
was very disappointed because we were hoping that our people would benefit
from them. The problem is that those people are now in serious trouble –
some of them owe an estimated amount of R24 million to the Land Bank. Poor
as they are, where will they get the money to pay off their debts?
As the ANC, we say that this department must assist the people in the rural
areas of Limpopo and all the other provinces. We say ...]

Hon Minister, we support your Budget Vote with those recommendations. I
thank you.

Mr C DOWRY (Western Cape): Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy
Minister and hon members, this Budget Vote is tabled at a time when
agriculture is on the receiving end of electricity outages, rising
inflation and interest rates, rocketing fuel prices and the issue of food
security and land reform that are topping the list of priorities of
agriculture. I am mindful of the words of the hon Minister when she
recently said:


  Through our co-ordinated efforts and actions, which include sustainable
  empowerment initiatives, the challenges can be absorbed and turned into
  successes.

We are very aware of the fact that the earth was not given to us by our
parents but that it is lent to us by our children and, therefore, my
efforts and those of the Western Cape’s department of agriculture have for
the past five years been to work vigorously towards liberty for the people
of the Western Cape and to make sure that we develop and protect the land
which our children are lending to us. It is the mission of this government
to provide to our people the freedom to own and cultivate land and to
experience the right of food security and access to safe and nutritious
food. That is necessary for an active and healthy life.

The Constitution of our country recognises food security as a fundamental
right and our labours have been focused on turning this right into a
reality. According to the Food and Agriculture Organisation, FAO, there are
worldwide around 852 million men, women and children who are chronically
hungry due to extreme poverty, while up to 2 billion people lack food
security, intermittently due to varying degrees of poverty.

It is our task, on the one hand, to enable people to have the financial
means to buy food and on the other hand to help people to produce their
food within their limited means. One of the most pressing issues is the
rise in food prices and we can rightfully ask: What is happening with the
price of food? The most recent report by the National Agricultural
Marketing Council indicates that the January 2008 year-on-year increase in
the consumer price of food was 13,4%. This means that the cost of the food
basket bought by the average South African has increased significantly
faster over the past year than the official three to six per cent inflation
target of the Reserve Bank.

In the case of certain individual products this increase was even
significantly higher. Specific mention can be made of increases in the
price of onions – 69,4%; cooking oil – 66%; pumpkin – 59,4%; potatoes – 47%
and even oranges – 45,4%. Similarly the SA Futures Exchange, Safex spot
price of wheat has increased from the low of R1 235 per ton on 25 February
2005 to a high of R4 298 on 26 March 2008 – this is a significant increase
of close to 250% over this three-year period.

It is important to understand what is driving this increase in the price of
agricultural commodities. The South African agricultural economy is open to
the international environment. It follows that the prices of agricultural
commodities, in general, are being driven by the international price of
that product, as the exchange rate translates international price into the
domestic price.

The second factor determining the domestic price of food is the exchange
rate. The third major factor influencing food prices is the movement of
domestic industries between import and export parity. This in turn is the
function of local climatic conditions and the relative price movements
between commodities.

Finally, the domestic competitive structure of an industry has an impact on
the effectiveness and transparency of price forming. While the farmers are
price takers and price setters, we would have to look at input cost. What
is not driving the farm-gate prices of agricultural commodities are the
domestic price of diesel, labour, land, land reform, fertiliser and claimed
illegitimate margins in the supply chain. These factors will influence the
profit margins of various individual and collective role-players but not
the prices of farm commodities.

Let us then apply this rationale to the record high prices of wheat. Land
being transformed to carbohydrate production, like sugar cane, maize, wheat
and lipids that will serve as feedstock for the biofuels industry led to a
sharp increase in global wheat prices. The drought in Australia, one of the
major exporters of wheat, led to historical lows in wheat stocks, changing
consumption patterns driven by rapid economic growth. In China and India it
led to increased demand for certain commodities. Around the turn of the
year, the rand was one of the most rapidly depreciating currencies and
global economic conditions have led to renewed interest in commodities.

Die stygende voedselpryse is vir ons ‘n uiters ernstige saak en as regering
is ons intens bewus van die gevolge hiervan. Suid-Afrikaanse huishoudings
word in 10 “lifestyle measure”- groepe ingedeel. Die eerste groep is die
armste groep en daar word 70% van hulle inkomste aan voedsel bestee, terwyl
die LSM 10, die rykste groep, slegs nodig het om 10% van hulle inkomste aan
voedsel te bestee. Die armste mense word dus die meeste geraak deur
stygings in voedselpryse en indien dit nie verlaag word nie, sal ons beslis
ongewenste reaksie in Suid-Afrika sien.

Die vraag is nou: Wat moet ons hieromtrent doen? Ons het bepaal dat in die
Wes-Kaap daar nie te min voedsel is nie. Daar word genoeg voedsel
geproduseer, maar die voedsel is te duur vir arm mense om te kan bekostig.
Daarom sal ons ernstig moet kyk na die produksiekoste van voedsel en kyk
hoe daardie produksiekoste verminder kan word, sodat voedsel goedkoper
geproduseer kan word vir arm mense sodat hulle dit kan benut.

Daar is nog vele ander opsies en ter ondersteuning van die Minister se
inisiatiewe poog ek en my departement om soveel moontlik met ons eie
beskikbare begroting te doen, om die kwessie aan te spreek. So word geld
bestee aan navorsing, opleiding en die ondersteuning van bestaande, sowel
as nuwe boere. Die departement maak ’n integrale deel uit om armoede te
verlig en werk te skep. Dit is hoekom ons oor die laaste vier jaar daarin
geslaag het om byna 99 000 persoonwerksdae vir werklose mense te skep, deur
hulle onder andere in te span vir die uitwissing van indringerplante.
Vanjaar beoog ons om nog 25 000 persoonwerksdae te skep.

Ten opsigte van die maatskaplike welstand van byvoorbeeld plaaswerkers het
ons na afloop van ons konferensie oor alkohol- en dwelmmisbruik ‘n taakspan
op die been gebring om ‘n dwelmmeesterplan te formuleer wat in
ooreenstemming is met die nasionale plan. Hierdie plan is voltooi en ter
tafel gelê.

By ons Volstruis Centre of Excellence ondersteun ons ‘n bedryf wat werk
verskaf aan meer as 20 000 mense en terselfdertyd valuta genereer vir ons
land via die uitvoer van die verskillende volstruisprodukte.

Ons program vir volhoubare hulpbronbestuur het sedert 2004 R15 miljoen aan
20 projekte bestee, veral rondom die watervoorsiening- en
besproeiingsinfrastruktuur wat in baie gevalle aan mense water voorsien
het, wat nooit voorheen toegang tot water gehad het nie. Hierdie projekte
is ... (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The rise in food prices is a very serious matter to us and we as
government are intensely aware of the consequences thereof. South African
households are divided into 10 ”lifestyle measure” groups. The first group
is the poorest group, which spends 70% of its income on food, while the LSM
10, the wealthiest group, only spends 10% of its income on food. Therefore
the poorest people are affected the most by this rise in food prices and if
it is not cushioned, we will definitely experience an undesirable reaction
to this in South Africa.

The question now is: What should we do about this? We have determined that
there is no food shortage in the Western Cape. Enough food is being
produced, but the food is too expensive for poor people to afford. That is
why we will have to look at food production costs and how we can reduce
these production costs, so that food can be produced in a cheaper way which
will allow poor people to be able to afford it.

There are many other options and in support of the Minister’s initiatives,
my department and I are striving to do as much as possible with the budget
that is available to us to address this issue. Therefore money is spent on
research, training and to support existing as well as new farmers. The
department is an integral part of the process to alleviate poverty and
create jobs. That is why we have succeeded, over the past four years, in
creating nearly 99 000 person-days of work for unemployed people, by using
them, among other things, to clear alien vegetation. We intend to create
another 25 000 person-days of work in this year.

Subsequent to our conference on alcohol and drug abuse, regarding the
social wellbeing of farmworkers for example, we’ve established a task team
to formulate a drug master plan that is in accordance with the national
plan. This plan was finalised and tabled.

We are also supporting an industry that provides work to more than 20 000
people at our Ostrich Centre of Excellence, which at the same time
generates foreign exchange for our country via the export of different
ostrich products.

Since 2004, we have spent R15 million on 20 projects through our programme
for sustainable resource management, particularly in relation to the
provision of water and irrigation infrastructure, which in many instances
supplied water to people who previously had no access to water. These
projects are ...]
... at Matjies River near Oudtshoorn. Two earth canals were replaced with
pipelines and water tanks provided to 12 households; two further earth
canals were completed, replaced by pipelines for 6,7 km and a small
balancing reservoir constructed; water tanks provided to 15 households;
irrigation equipment supplied to 20 ha and 50 ha of land prepared and
planted with lucerne, providing 155 beneficiaries on 29 farms.

The Kobee Berg Project near Vanrhynsdorp is now supplying water for
domestic and animal use to nine farms through a borehole pump storage tank
and a pipeline of 18 km. Some 200 beneficiaries now have clean drinking
water for the first time. Previously they had to transport water over a
distance of 50 km to have that kind of privilege to drink clean water.

Let me end by saying that we will continue to support those who work the
land and those with a dream with its roots in agriculture. I thank you.

Mr W M DOUGLAS: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon MECs, hon members and
guests, the Department of Agriculture plays a key role in the development
of South African agriculture and its profitability and international
competitiveness. To this end we are facing serious problems due to unstable
weather conditions, lack of safety on our farms, unavailability of water,
slow progress in land reform, increasing food and fuel prices globally and
skills shortages.

What’s more, global food stockpiles have declined to the lowest point in
decades. The world supply of wheat is at its lowest in 50 years, and there
is just five weeks worth of consumption available for the world’s more than
6 billion people. Food security may soon depend more on availability rather
than affordability. In one example, wheat stock worldwide declined by 11%
in 2007.

The ACDP is therefore concerned with the price and cost increases in
agriculture as this translates directly into higher living costs for all
South Africans. With maize still being the staple diet of the indigent in
South Africa, we cannot help but call on government to  begin investigating
a large-scale roll-out of subsidisation to farmers in South Africa similar
to those found in the US and European Union, in order to secure food
security and the supply of low-cost maize to the indigent.

In a report recently tabled at the United Nations it was stated that, on
the whole, African governments should significantly increase investments in
agricultural research and development institutions and in agricultural
education in general at all levels of education, in order to attract and
develop new talent in the field of agriculture.

We live each day with the legacy of apartheid in the agricultural
environment. One of the hallmarks of this legacy is a severe lack of
skilled black landowners who can economically participate in large-scale
agricultural development.

Education and skills improvement of young people to become farmers in key
nodal points in the education system is paramount in redressing the legacy
of apartheid. We need more money to be set aside for this purpose, and we
have seen that a lack of food security can turn law-abiding citizens into
violent people who turn on their fellow Africans. We ask that the Minister
seriously look at education as a spending priority. The ACDP will support
this Vote.

Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, in a developing country such as South Africa,
issues of agriculture and land are of the utmost importance. Many people
who are living in the rural areas do not have the necessary education and
skills to make a living or to survive. In the formal sector, agriculture on
tenure land plays a leading role in their fight for survival and economic
freedom.

This department is tasked with leading and supporting sustainable
agriculture, and promotes rural development. To achieve this, it is of
paramount importance that people with the necessary skills and expertise
are employed by the department.

Many people who farm in the rural areas rely on indigenous knowledge and
farming techniques. Issues such as global warming and climate change will
have a much greater influence on the way that these farmers do their
farming. The changing weather patterns that result from global warming will
necessitate change in farming techniques and patterns.

This department must ensure that all farmers, and particularly those in the
rural areas, are aware of these impending changes and incorporate a
traditional farming method with more modern techniques for farmers to
survive and thrive. For this to happen I suggest that the department’s
assistance to rural farmers be substantive, and knowledgeable experts be
employed to assist farmers and pass this knowledge to them.

With the limited time I have, I shall probably focus on land reform. Land
reform has been an explosive issue for many years. We, in the IFP, believe
that the complex issues surrounding land reform have consequences for the
country in respect of agricultural production, economic opportunities and
race relations. There has been a widespread failure of support to
beneficiaries who wish to farm commercially and maximise the economic
benefit. Redress has not been realised while the slow pace of change has
resulted in growing frustration about landlessness.

The IFP believes that the provinces should have a greater scope to address
the land issue. Centralising power and responsibility does not promise a
locally accepted solution. We also believe that far more attention needs to
be paid to the post-distribution phase of the process. Abandoning
commercial productive farms and subsistence practices is not a desirable
outcome.

This land issue has been dragging on. If it is to be successful, then a
creative solution is needed. There must also be more synergy and
communication between various levels of government and governmental
departments and stakeholders. The department faces a challenge of
obstacles, but it has an important role to play in the economy and social
advancement of the people of our country. So, it is imperative that it
succeeds in reaching its objectives. The IFP supports the Vote.

Ngqongqoshe udaba lwakho lolo lokuthi akuqonywane, cha mina nje uqobo lwami
ngishadelwe kodwa ke ngiyatholakala. [Uhleko.] [As for your suggestion, hon
Minister, that we – as a people - should fall in love - well, I am married
but available! [Laughter.]]

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Chairperson, hon Minister and Deputy Minister, MEC,
members and comrades, in an article Mr Masemola, General Secretary of the
Food and Allied Workers Union, published in the ANC Today he argues that:

   ... any intervention in the demand side to relieve consumers from the
   impact of the current abnormal high increase in food prices, without
   tackling the structural problems and market failures on the supply side,
   would be tantamount to redistributing resources away from the poor to the
   rich.

I have to agree with Mr Masemola’s very sound argument and his proposed
interventions which include the following: To nationalise companies located
in the value chain of staple foods; to pursue those found guilty of price-
fixing; to set up state-owned enterprises that will seek to influence
prices downwards, through training people and producing and storing
commodities in times of surplus; to set up a price regulatory body that
will control prices from reaching levels reflecting super profits, and to
strengthen the competition authorities and review competition laws, such
that chief executive officers presiding over companies found guilty of
price-fixing are impeached and banned from serving as directors or employed
as senior management.

What the above statement does not sufficiently address and which, to my
mind, is of fundamental importance from a supply perspective, as well as
food security point of view, is a necessity of substantial support to small
and emerging farmers by government. This will require a complete rethinking
by the National Treasury and the Department of Agriculture in the
allocation of resources and the current funding model.

These small producers, both in SA and in Africa as a whole, are currently
not only faced with adverse global factors such as climate change,
spiralling input costs and uncontrolled increase in oil prices, but they
are further subjected to marketing and production pressures from the
developed countries such as the USA and the European Union, who provide
billions of dollars of subsidies to support their own farmers, own most of
the intellectual property for genetically modified organisms through
multibillion dollar conglomerates, deliberately delay the World Trade
Organisation negotiations, and increasingly use maize for the production of
biofuels.

Since all the above factors have a direct effect on the price and
availability of food, it is therefore clear that farmers, whose main
function is to alleviate poverty and provide food security, are under
tremendous pressure to compete and produce successfully in a very hostile
environment.

The department’s budget of R435 million for the current financial year for
farmers’ support and development is insufficient in providing any
meaningful support, as well as addressing the current pressures that they
are subjected to.

To illustrate this further, in the Free State province, which is the bread
basket of the country and where agriculture is a major employer and
contributor to the provincial gross domestic product, only R49 million is
allocated to the Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme or Casp. This
is totally insufficient to have any meaningful impact on the agricultural
sector in the Free State.

If we are truly serious about eradicating poverty and providing food
security for our people, funding for farmers’ support and development must
be substantially increased over the next MTEF period to avoid a major
meltdown of this sector.

Under the department’s Livelihoods Development Support programme, which
provides postsettlement support to emerging farmers and is responsible for
food security, the budget allocation will decline from R744 million in the
2008 to 2009 financial year to only R572 million in 2010 to 2011. This,
together with the fact that the allocation for Casp increased at the
average rate of 27,5 % from R200 million in 2004 and 2005 to R415 million
in 2007 and 2008, but then declined to an average annual rate of only 6,9%
over the next three years, is a matter of great concern.

The good work done by the department thus far in developing small emerging
farmers must now be complemented and strengthened by providing sufficient
comprehensive support with regard to agricultural inputs, thereby levelling
the playing field for these farmers to operate and survive in a hostile and
competitive environment.

During the state of the nation address the President called for “Business
Unusual”. Other than the specific support to emerging small farmers, the
strategy and budget presented to us by the department seems to have taken
the President’s call seriously for which they must be congratulated. I
thank you.

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Thank you, Madam Chair, if you say that ...

Die mense sê ek moet mooi praat. Hulle moet maar net mooi luister vandag.
[Gelag.]

Verskeie kollegas het verwys na stygende voedselpryse en dat dit ’n
wesenlike invloed op veral arm mense in Suid-Afrika het. Onlangs het die
sekretaris-generaal van die ANC, mnr Mantashe, gesê dat grondhervorming
stygende voedselpryse sal verhinder. ’n Mens sou ’n veel meer deurdagte
benadering van die sekretaris-generaal verwag het. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[People are saying that I should choose my words carefully. They should
just listen carefully today. [Laughter.]

Various colleagues have referred to rising food prices and that it has a
real impact, especially on the poor in South Africa. The secretary-general
of the ANC, Mr Mantashe, said recently that land reform would prevent
rising food prices. One would have expected a more measured approach from
the secretary-general.]
Madam Chair, responsible land reform is necessary. But what is the hon
Minister doing? The current approach to land issues has a Zimbabwean style
to it. What are the facts? White farmers facing land claims are reluctant
to plant crops while emerging black farmers have insufficient training and
support. Other colleagues also referred to this insufficient training and
support and they cannot therefore produce the quantities needed.

A recent report by the Centre for Development and Enterprise estimated that
at least 50% of land reform projects are considered as failures.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order! Is that a
point of order, hon member?

Mr V V Z WINDVOëL: What does the hon member mean by a Zimbabwean style of
government in terms of the South African law?

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: If I have time at the end of my speech I will
definitely reply to that question, Madam Chair.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): We would like you to
reply now, please.

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: If you’ll allow me extra time, Madam Chair, at the end
of my speech. What I mean by the Zimbabwean style is the inconsiderate
taking of land and giving it to people who are not properly funded and
trained to farm those lands.

Mr V V Z WINDVOëL: Thank you.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): You may continue,
hon member.

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: As I was saying, a recent report by the Centre for
Development and Enterprise estimated that at least 50% of land reform
projects are considered as failures. The Minister’s department is presently
encouraging municipalities to levy very high rates on farmland in order to
make it unaffordable for established ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order, hon van
Heerden. Is that a point of order, hon member?

Mr D D GAMEDE: Will the hon member take a question?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Would you like to
take a question, hon member?

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Yes, Madam Chair, I would like to respond to a question
but I noticed on this timer that the moment that I started again with my
contribution, a bit of my time was taken off. I would like to respond and
if you’ll allow me to finish my contribution, I will gladly take a
question.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): I will.

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Yes, Madam Chair.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you.

Mr D D GAMEDE: May I raise a question, Chairperson? Can the hon member
acknowledge that the misery that he’s just told us about, the Zimbabwean
style in South Africa, was caused by the apartheid regime that he belonged
to? Thank you very much.

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Madam Chair, I have already referred to the Zimbabwean
question in replying to hon Windvoël. Is this a separate question?
[Laughter.] Otherwise, that hon member must just please listen and not wake
up at this late stage, Madam Chair. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon van Heerden, are
you asking him a question now?

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Madam Chair, no, I am making a statement. It’s not a
question. Yes, it’s a statement, maybe in the form of a question.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you.

My tyd loop uit. Ek sien ek het ’n paar minute oor. ’n Plaas wat nie
gebruik word nie of wat ondoeltreffend of slegs gedeeltelik gebruik word,
beteken weinig, indien enigiets, en mense eet nie ’n ideologie nie. ’n
Ideologie maak mense ook nie vol nie. Pas grondhervorming billik, regverdig
en prakties toe, dan sal almal wen en almal sal dit ondersteun. Ek dank u.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[My time is running out. I see that I have a few minutes left. A farm that
is not being utilised, or that is not being utilised effectively, or that
is only partly utilised means little, if anything at all, and one does not
eat an ideology. An ideology does not fill one’s stomach. If land reform is
implemented in an equitable, fair and practical manner, then everyone will
win and support it. I thank you.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you, hon
member.

Mr R J TAU: Hon Chair, hon Minister and Deputy Minister, MEC from the
Western Cape, officials and comrades, I think it would be unfair if one
does not really make a reflection on what the hon Le Roux has said. He
spoke of Adam Smith, and Adam Smith as an economic philosopher. I want to
believe that the problems that we are faced with today are as a result of
that very same ideology and philosophy of land reform. The unfortunate hon
member who just finished here said that we cannot live and eat an ideology.
But, unfortunately, it is the very same capitalist ideology that has forced
us to have the problems that we are faced with today.

When we talk about price-fixing of bread; when we talk about price fixing
of milk; when we talk about price-fixing of very important food - some of
which is even being investigated by the Competition Board as we speak today
- it’s as a result of the same ideology that informs their thinking which
is a capitalist thinking. It is a ruthless thinking of accumulation at the
expense of the poor, a ruthless accumulation that does not give a damn how
our people feel. It doesn’t think about the poor; it doesn’t think about
the one who goes to bed without having anything to eat. It is therefore
important that one must make a call as a result of that same ideology.

It is important that as a House we must accept and call upon the
Competition Board, not only to find these price-fixers but in actual fact
to criminally charge them, because poor people have died as a result of
hunger as they could not afford to buy bread. Poor people have gone hungry
and children have gone hungry and as a result they could not go to school.
That poor people and children have fled into our country today is as a
result of the very same nature of this cruel system and ideology referred
to as capitalism. [Applause.]
Chairperson, by now we all know that the main aim of the Department of Land
Affairs is to create and maintain an equitable and sustainable dispensation
that results in social and economic development for all South Africans.

These objectives are in line with the ANC’s policy objectives of ensuring a
better life for all which are accordingly reflected in the Freedom Charter.
As a result the 52nd National Conference of the ANC resolved as follows,
hon Le Roux: That there is a greater need to support the growth and rural
market institutions, including through the provision of infrastructure by
helping rural communities and small farmers to build organisations which
will help them access markets, build links for the formal sector value
chains and co-ordinate their activities to realise economies of scale.

The resolutions become clearer in ensuring that there is a need for a
developmental approach in terms of the formation of producer co-operatives,
when they state that the range of organisations to be built include
producer co-operatives smallholder associations. In a way, what we are
saying as the ANC is that we need to harness the energy of all those people
who are capable, and especially those who have been put on the periphery of
agriculture, and who have the capacity to make a meaningful and
constructive contribution in developing our agricultural sector.

I don’t know why this time is running so fast. I must jump now. [Laughter.]
Okay, for the implementation of, for instance, the five objectives of LARP,
the department will need financial resources as well as appropriate
capacity. We think it is quite important. In particular, it will need more
funding for post-settlement support for the 10 000 new agricultural
producers that will be created through the Land and Agrarian Reform
Project, LARP. This implies that the budget for the Comprehensive
Agricultural Support Programme is expected to increase in order to be able
to deal with the increase in land reform beneficiaries owing to the
accelerated land reform programme.

It is therefore important that in order to ensure that proper support is
given to land beneficiaries and other emerging farmers, the department is
going to roll out an extension recovery plan. Thus, through this plan
provinces will be recruiting about 350 additional extension officers by
upgrading the skills of 560 extension staff members and providing
information and communications technology, equipment and other resources to
about 365 extension officers. All these will have an impact on the budget.

Furthermore, the roll-out of Micro Agricultural Financial Institutions of
South Africa, Mafisa, to the other six provinces will imply that more money
should be allocated to Mafisa. Through Mafisa the department has disbursed
about R635 million which, I think, it is important that provinces take note
of in order to follow up some of these things. Truly speaking, hon
Minister, it is quite embarrassing that when we go to our provinces and
when we visit projects that have been supported we find that at some of
these projects there is no accountability for money that has been
disbursed. Some of the project money has not even been spent and therefore
it is important that we reflect on some of these things.

Under the Livelihoods, Economics and Business Development programme, the
department commits itself to promoting equitable access to the agricultural
sector, the growth and commercial viability of emerging farmers, food
security and rural development. Furthermore, it facilitates market access
for South African agricultural products nationally and of course
internationally by developing and implementing appropriate policies and
targeted programmes and promotes broad-based black economic empowerment,
BBBEE.

Hon Minister, it would not be fair for me not to mention the following once
more:  May this be true broad-based black economic empowerment and not
PEE’s which is personal economic empowerment or economic development,
because it is quite important that government programmes be guarded and
protected in such a way that individuals do not take advantage on the basis
of the access to these resources and only advance their personal interest
through state resources, which would have in the main benefited the poor
and the vulnerable or the hungry.

We have noted that the budget allocation of course to the department over
the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework is not in line with the government
priority to speed up land and agrarian reform. That is a very important
observation we have made as a committee. Budget allocation to the
Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme, Casp, is increasing gradually
and is not in line with the sharp increase in budget for land reform. In
addition, the budget allocation to the Mafisa in real terms over the MTEF
is declining.

However, the recruitment of additional extension officers in the MTEF
period shows a commitment to improving support to land reform beneficiaries
and other emerging farmers. It is important maybe to mention in the last
seconds that the issue of the extension farmers becomes quite important. In
the North West we visited about three agricultural projects, and in the
Northern Cape, and we could not find a single extension officer, because
the provincial department said they didn’t have extension officers.

We embrace this aspect to say that the money should be spent on the
recruitment of extension officers over the MTEF. Of course, with the
completion of the Land Restitution Programme, we hope that the money that
has been put in land restitution will therefore be shifted to address some
of the shortcomings that we have identified as we move around. [Time
expired.] We support the Bill. Thank you very much, Chair. [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS:  Chairperson, Deputy Chair,
let me first thank all the hon members for their support and also for
pleading on behalf of the farmers.

Indeed our farmers are suffering, in real terms, even though we say the
high food prices mean opportunities for agriculture. The additional income
does not go to the farmer, because of the input price increase that we have
experienced in recent months. If you look at the price of diesel that the
farmer has to use; the price of fertiliser, which also is a derivative of
petrol chemicals and we import most of our fertiliser; and if we look at
the price of seed, definitely, all that is a load that the farmer is
carrying alone.

I know that in some of the reports of the Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development, OECD, South Africa has been regarded as one of
the countries that really does not give enough support to the farmers. So,
it is something that we are working on with the Treasury and Cabinet. There
is political will. I’m sure, with your support, we will be able to realise
the necessary support that we need in this regard.

I want to say to the chair, yes, I didn’t say much about
aquaculture. I had said a lot about it last year. Indeed we are training
our young people in China. I think we have trained about 35 now. We are
planning to start a training pilot project in the Free State, at the Gariep
Dam and another one in Limpopo where we are going to train young South
Africans to go to each province and establish aquaculture. We realise that
it will open great opportunities for us, also for job creation and it’s
also of nutritional value to our people, particularly in the rural areas.

So, it’s something that we are prioritising in terms of food production in
the department. I am sure the chairperson will hear soon about the amount
of work that has been done there.
[Applause.]

I have received a note from hon Gamede talking about title deeds and a few
problems. I just want to say that hon Gamede can speak to Sibusiso Gamede
in my office. [Laughter.] Maybe he is a father too. You can send the son to
go assist and ensure that ... I remember the request that you have made.

I also want to say that, on the issue of extension officers, yes, when I
first came to the department that was my main concern, namely where are the
extension officers?

Abalimi ababesebenza no mama no bobaba emakhaya bebafundisa ukulima,
bebafundisa ukulima iklabishi, isipinashi, ukherothi, nobhithuruthi,
nokuthi zithenwa kanjani izinkomo. [Extension officers who worked hand in
hand with men and women in rural areas, teaching them about ploughing, were
also teaching them how to cultivate cabbage, spinach, carrots and beetroot
and also how to castrate bulls.]
How do you prune your fruit trees?

Where are they today? We have since embarked ... I think it’s a crisis of a
shortage of them, but also a crisis of just sitting in the office, and not
going out there and doing the work. There was such invisibility that I
suggested that we give them the orange uniform so that you can see them
from far away. [Laughter.]

Now at one stage we had the Ilima/Letsema campaign. Some police were
looking for Mr Mathe. We all remember Mr Mathe who was in Pretoria High
Security Prison. The police stopped my officials and said ``Akuna Mathe la
phakathi kwenu’’. [Uhleko.] [There is no Mathe amongst you?][Laughter.]
That is because they were wearing orange overalls.

However, I want to inform members that we have embarked on an extension
recovery plan. That plan was launched at an indaba that was held in East
London this year where we invited officials from Kenya and Cuba who came to
share with us their experience and how they do extension services in those
countries.

As a result, this year, working towards this extension recovery plan, we
have set aside R500 million over the MTEF period 2008-11. We have targeted
all nine provinces to address capacity deficiencies and create a more
visible and accountable extension service.

We also want to have an agriculture summit at the end of July this year,
the purpose of which will be to review our agriculture policy and also to
launch the revised sector plan and the land and agrarian reform plan to
which we hope hon members will be invited.

In that summit in July, we want to launch the ``green book’’. The ``green
book’’ will be given to our farmers. We are saying that all those farmers
must record the time that the extension officer has visited.

Uma efikile ngehora leshumi, akabhale phansi ukuthi ufikile ngehora leshumi
kwaze kwaba ihora leshumi nambili. Ufike wenzani? [If the person did arrive
at work at 10 am, he must write down that he arrived at 10 am until 12 pm.
What did he do?]

It’s not just like popping in. What he did and when he moves and goes to
the next farm, the next farmer has his own ``green book’’. They will record
and will state, ukuthi ufike nini? [Indicate what time he arrived.]

We are also in the process of engaging and monitoring officials who will go
to these provinces and monitor whether the extension officers are going out
there, because we are tired of extension officers sitting in the office and
doing their work by remote control - by telephone. Our telephone bill is
just too high and we must put those resources there and assist the farmers
to do their work.

That is what we are doing. But overall, we have a plan of retraining our
extension officers and recruiting. We are planning for this year to recruit
1 000 new extension officers, well-qualified in terms of their technical
and professional qualifications.

Hon Matlanyane, we are working on that as the department. Hon Tau has gone
out. He also raised the issue of ... [Interjections.] There was a lady
there who raised the issue of training colleges, Matlanyane, ok. Oh! I have
swopped you. [Laughter.]

The comrade raised an important ... I just want to report - because I
passed over this point in my speech because of time - that in terms of our
colleges, the Department of Agriculture and Land Affairs has commissioned a
study to investigate the best possible mechanisms to transform our colleges
of agriculture into national agricultural training institutes, and to
position these institutions as centres of excellence in terms of various
agro-ecological zones and centres for rural wealth creation.

Therefore, perhaps we are going to look at the issues that she raised. I
don’t know why the students were not taken in at the colleges, but we have
already set up the national education and training forum which will be
providing a bridging course for learners who do not meet the entry
requirements.

I am sure we can talk with the hon member and see what can be done for
those young people, because it is a major concern for us. The average age
of a farmer in South Africa is 55 years. If we don’t train and invest in
our young people, then it means agriculture has no future in South Africa.
Therefore, we might not be able to feed this nation five years, ten years
down the line. I would like to encourage our hon members to bring in young
people into this sector.

On an integrated food security system, yes, we see this as our antipoverty
programme. This is why we are talking about family gardens. We also believe
we can use this programme to fight the increasing food price crisis.

If we increase food production in our back gardens, we will not use our
money to go and buy expensive food in the shops. We shall be able to feed
ourselves. Perhaps we shall even have a surplus where we can go and sell to
the communities out there and maybe even to other countries.

I also want to say that for us the food price is not yet a food crisis,
it’s a food price crisis. It is about food affordability, not food
accessibility. In other countries, for instance in Egypt, there is no food
on the shelves. In our case the food is there but the price is the problem.


Therefore, I think what is important is for us to make sure that the
poorest of the poor are assisted through subsidies, through the safety
nets, through the cutting of VAT on basic foodstuffs and other programmes
that will assist the poorest, the vulnerable and the elderly who cannot
afford the food that we are now being sold on our shelves.

I want to say that through our food security programme, we can assist by
ensuring that people are able to produce their own food. I also want to say
to Mr Le Roux who raised the question of commercial farmers who are ready
to partner with our farmers, that we must commend those farmers. But I must
say they are still very few.

We need more and more farmers who are ready and prepared to train, transfer
skills to the poor but also to ensure that all South Africans can also be
part of this agricultural sector that has great potential in South Africa.

We are also saying that we would like to see farmers come forward, and not
charge exorbitant prices for land, because they know that the Department of
Agriculture and Land Affairs has to buy land because it has to meet the
government targets, and therefore, they can charge any price. I think, as
true South Africans and patriots, for us to have a stable democracy and a
prosperous South Africa all of us must support land reform.

I thank the MEC for all the projects and the programmes that he has raised.
Indeed, we are all working very well together with the MECs to ensure food
security for the people of South Africa and also for the people of the
world.

Kubaba uMzizi ngifuna ukuthi ... [I would like to say this to Mr Mzizi ...]

Through the Land and Agrarian Reform Project, which was also part of the
resolutions of the Polokwane Conference, we are committing to addressing
the problems of postsettlement support. Very soon we will be engaging a
special project co-ordinator, who will be focusing on land and agrarian
reform.

One of the priorities in this regard would be to buy land for farm dwellers
and farmworkers. It will also be to help those of our people who have
received land, who have a lack of training and lack of skills, to assist
them to make those farms productive, sustainable and also good agricultural
enterprises.

I also want to say to the hon member Van Rooyen, who raised the question of
support for poor emerging farmers, that I think we will be looking at how
we expand the costs, put together the Land Bank packages or the Mafisas to
ensure that we come up with a comprehensive package that would be
meaningful and that will assist our farmers. I agree that price-fixing is a
crime and that we need to have stricter measures to deal with that crime.

I also want to say regarding the WTO, that as developing countries and
Africa, we are not treated in a fair and just manner. In fact, last year I
met with the US secretary for agriculture, the Minister, in Washington DC,
and I met with the chair of the Congress responsible for agriculture.

From both of them, I did not get any joy. The Chair was ready and prepared
to add more subsidies for their farmers. Indeed, a week ago, I heard on the
news that they have actually added to their subsidies for domestic support
and for farmers in America.

Now under such circumstances, we know at the end it’s a question of dumping
their cheap products onto our farmers from the developing countries and
from Africa. And that means because their products are cheaper, because
they are heavily subsidised, our farmers cannot afford to produce at the
level that they are producing and compete with these products that are
cheap on the market. We have been informed that there will be a meeting of
Ministers at the WTO next month, but I don’t know what we are going to
achieve.

However, I want to agree again and endorse the concerns that have been
raised by members that we need to increase support for our farmers. As the
department, we will do our best to assist farmers, particularly in these
inflationary times. However, I want to say to hon Van Heerden from the FF
Plus that it would just not be logical; it is not going to make political
sense or economic sense to stop land reform.

I think the land reform programme was introduced in order for us to bring
peace to South Africa. All of them, the Centre for Development and
Enterprise, CDE, the FF Plus, Agri SA, the Transvaal Agriculture Union, Tau
- because Agri SA, when it comes to real interest, is at one with Tau.
[Interjections.] When things are nice, they are liberals. But when it comes
to what it really means to do land reform and to transform the agricultural
sector, they are at one with Tau.

So, for me it is a Broederbond. A Broederbond that includes CDE, FF Plus,
Tau and Agri SA. [Laughter.] That Broederbond wants us to stop
transformation. They want us to stop land reform in this country. There is
no way we are going to stop land reform. There is no way we can say it is
correct that 90% of fertile commercial prime agricultural land must belong
to 10% of the elite white farmers of South Africa.

It cannot happen. We cannot allow the status quo to continue forever and
ever. Amen! [Interjections.] [Laughter.] I want to say also that we are not
doing anything Zimbabwean style. We are implementing the mandate that we
have been given. We are implementing under the rule of law, South African
law, guided by our Constitution.

We have the Restitution of Land Rights Act, Act 22 of 1994. It is not from
Zimbabwe. We have all the land Acts that we have in this country. They are
not from Zimbabwe. We have our Constitution that says we must redress the
imbalances and the injustices of the past. [Interjections.]

That did not come from Zimbabwe. [Interjections.] And we are not going to
be intimidated. They can insult us in whatever way they want. They can
write all their lies about us in their newspapers. We are not going to be
intimidated. We are not going to stop transformation. [Applause.]

We are going to move forward. They can go to their Orania and revive the
Broederbond. [Laughter.]

Nakhona sizofika, ngoba isikhathi sabo siphelile. [Uhleko.] [We will get
there as well, because their time is up.][Laughter.]

I want to say: Forward with land reform, forward with land restitution.
Forward ever, backward never. Malibongwe! [Praise.] [Interjections.]
[Applause.]

 CONSIDERATION OF SPECIAL REPORT OF JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE
                - SPECIAL ``BROWSE MOLE’’ CONSOLIDATED REPORT

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, I come before this House to table a report
that responds to something that was issued in this country and that nearly
shook our government and the world. As the Joint Standing Committee on
Intelligence, we have been suspecting all along that the Directorate of
Special Operations - commonly known as the Scorpions - was illegally
gathering intelligence. We invited several officials from the National
Intelligence Agency and the Scorpions and questioned them about this
illegal activity and they all denied this.

The Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence was not convinced. We probed
the matter further. As can be seen by the report and by the chronological
list of events in relation to what is known as the ``Browse Mole’’ Report,
members will recall that the President, in terms of section 84(2) of the
Constitution, appointed the Khampepe Commission whose task was to look,
among other things, at the mandate of the DSO – the Scorpions.

The Khampepe Commission came to the conclusion that, yes, the Scorpions
were illegally gathering intelligence. This was confirmed not only by
Khampepe but those very senior officials who denied it from the beginning.

What made the matter even worse was when the ``Browse Mole’’ Report was
leaked to Cosatu by one Good Samaritan. Members will recall that in that
very report that was leaked there were serious and very damaging
allegations against the ANC President, Comrade Jacob Zuma and that he was
planning to overthrow this government.

The report also alleges that the ANC President, Comrade Jacob Zuma, was
funded by the Angolan President Jose-Eduardo dos Santos and the Libyan
leader, Muammar Gaddafi.

The Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence was concerned about these
serious allegations against our leader. The ``Browse Mole’’ Report contains
these very serious allegations.

When it was enquired as to who had authorised this investigation it was
only then that it was discovered that the Scorpions were really gathering
this illegal intelligence. This was the report that is called the ``Browse
Mole Report’’. Senior officials were fingered to be responsible for this
illegal action.

It was at this point that the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence, on
which the Chief Whip hon Ntwanambi and I are serving, made its own
investigation and discovered that its suspicions were not wrong and were
spot on. It was only then that those people owned up to this wrongdoing and
also promised the committee that, from now onwards, they are going to stop
this illegal gathering of intelligence.

The question is: Why were such serious allegations made against our
President? Where was this mischievous plan conducted, by whom, with whom
and for what reason? And the timing thereof is very suspicious.

Some of the senior officials who were part of this smear campaign against
our President have resigned. As I am speaking, they are busy looking for
greener pastures. It is now official that they are going and they are now
accepting that they were really doing a wrong thing. They accepted that in
front of the committee.

It is only the National Intelligence Agency, NIA, that is authorised to
gather intelligence – not any other person, not any other institution.

Our committee made its own investigations and findings. After a thorough
consideration, we made the following recommendations: That the executive
authority must take appropriate action against the head of the DSO and all
the officials who were involved in the production of the ``Browse Mole’’
Report; that government must direct the DSO to stop these intelligence
gathering operations with immediate effect; that the NIA must expedite the
averting of all DSO officials, prioritising those who are exposed to
sensitive state information, such as the DSO senior special investigators;
that government must expedite the regulation of private intelligence -
gathering activities and put measures in place that will reduce the risk of
being exposed to information peddlers; that the government must conduct a
comprehensive review of the DSO; and that serious and urgent attention must
be given to the manner in which the DSO is operating. Oh, thank God, their
days are numbered.

We therefore call upon the executive, especially the Justice cluster, to
take the necessary corrective measures and report back within a specified
period.

Chairperson and colleagues, those of you who did not have time to go
through this report, please do so because you will be shocked – if you are
not strong enough, please, get a good doctor.

The report that we are tabling before this honourable House is the report
that was produced by the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence that
responds to the so-called very damaging `Browse’ Mole Report. I humbly
request this House to adopt the report as tabled before it. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order!  I shall now
put the question in respect of the Second Order. The question is that the
report be adopted. As this decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of
the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are
present in the Chamber to cast their province’s votes. Are all the
delegation heads present?

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make their declarations of vote if they so wish. Is there any province
wishing to make any declaration of vote? There is obviously none.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour or against or abstain from voting.
Eastern Cape?

Mr A T MANYOSI: Eastern Cape supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Free State?
Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Free State supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Gauteng?

Ms N F MAZIBUKO: Gauteng supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal siyaxhasa. [KwaZulu-Natal supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo ondersteun. [Limpopo supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Mpumalanga votes in favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Noord-Kaap ondersteun. [Northern Cape supports.)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Bokone-Bophirima ke ya rona. [North West supports.)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Wes-Kaap ondersteun.  [Western Cape supports.)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): All nine provinces
voted in favour. I therefore declare the report adopted in terms of section
65 of the Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF JOINT BUDGET COMMITTEE - WORKSHOP WITH NATIONAL
         TREASURY ON CONTENT AND REVISION OF PFMA SECTION 32 REPORTS

Order disposed of without debate.

Question put.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order! I shall now
put the question in respect of the Third Order. The question is that the
report be adopted. As this decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of
the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are
present in the Chamber to cast their province’s votes. Are all the
delegation heads present?

I shall now also allow provinces the opportunity to make their declarations
of vote in terms of Rule 71 if they so wish. Is there any province wishing
to make any declaration of vote? There is obviously none.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour or against or abstain from voting.
Eastern Cape?

Mr A T MANYOSI: Eastern Cape supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Free State is in favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Gauteng?

Ms N F MAZIBUKO: Gauteng iyavuma. [Gauteng supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal is in favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo ondersteun. [Limpopo supports.]
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Mpumalanga supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Noord-Kaap ondersteun. [Northern Cape supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West is in favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Western Cape supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): All nine provinces
voted in favour. I therefore declare the report adopted in terms of section
65 of the Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF JOINT BUDGET COMMITTEE - BUDGET AND MEDIUM-TERM
                            EXPENDITURE FRAMEWORK
Order disposed of without debate.

Question put

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order! I shall now
put the question in respect of the Fourth Order. The question is that the
report be adopted. As this decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of
the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are
present in the Chamber to cast their province’s votes.  Are all the
delegation heads present? Thank you.

I shall now also allow provinces the opportunity to make their declarations
of vote in terms of Rule 71 if they so wish. Is there any province wishing
to make any declaration of vote? There is obviously none.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour or against or abstain from voting.
Eastern Cape?

Mr A T MANYOSI: Eastern Cape is in favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Free State supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Gauteng?

Ms N F MAZIBUKO: Gauteng siyavuma. [Gauteng supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal siyaxhasa. [KwaZulu Natal supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo ondersteun. [Limpopo supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Mpumalanga ke ya rona. [Mpumalanga supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Re a dumelana. [Northern Cape supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Bokoni-Bophirima ke ya rona. [North West supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: INtshona-Koloni siyavuma. [Western Cape supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): All nine provinces
have voted in favour. I therefore declare the report adopted in terms of
section 65 of the Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF JOINT BUDGET COMMITTEE — EXPENDITURE FOR SECOND
                      QUARTER OF 2007-08 FINANCIAL YEAR

Mr B J MKHALIPHI: Hon Deputy Chairperson and hon members, it is our
pleasure to tackle the expenditure report for the second quarter of the
financial year ending March 2008 in this session of this Council.

As you are aware, this report was tabled in the Announcements, Tablings and
Committee Reports of 15 April 2008. This report before us is consistent
with the terms of reference of the Joint Budget Committee. In terms of this
reference, the Joint Budget Committee is required to monitor on a monthly
basis and then report on a quarterly basis the actual revenue and
expenditure incurred by national departments. The purpose of this
monitoring is to ascertain whether the patterns of spending are consistent
with the budgets of these departments.

The Joint Budget Committee is aware that this in-year monitoring exercise
is crucial to ensuring the timeous detection of the slightest discrepancy
in spending is prevented, and any derailment of service delivery avoided.
Increased volume of service promptly delivered is a major contribution to
the pursuit of a better life for all.

It is then our obligation to work tirelessly in order to ensure that
obstacles to service delivery are tackled and removed. The crucial message
we are trying to convey here is that we need to do better. Government
comprises numerous departments, each with specific functions, objectives
and responsibilities. For sure, the national Budget helps us to ensure that
public resources are allocated in accordance with the national priorities
and we need to maximise that.

That our expenditure must align with the declared objectives is crucial to
the strategic plans of national departments. This Council is in the best
position to question actual performance in order to ensure that government
departments have, in actual fact, delivered what is expected.
We are trying, in this regard, to explain some of these expenditure
patterns in our report by means of graphs for the first and the second
quarters, and we’ll continue in this pattern, and in a day or two, we will
be publishing the expenditure trends for the third quarter, followed by the
report of the whole financial year after the end of May this year.

I, therefore, table this report in this House, not only for adoption and
then filing, but we sincerely hope that this focus will help us as we deal
with our Budget Votes. Some of the issues were raised here. I think they
could have been better enhanced had we also borne in mind what is raised in
this report. This is our sincere contribution to better service delivery
and oversight in this Parliament. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): I shall now put the
question. The question is that the report be adopted. As the decision is
dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first
ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the Chamber to cast
their province’s vote. Are all the delegation heads present?
HON MEMBERS: Yes!

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): In accordance with
Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity to make their
declarations of vote if they so wish.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour or against or abstain from voting.
Eastern Cape?

Mr A T MANYOSI: Eastern Cape is in favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: In favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Gauteng?

Ms N F MAZIBUKO: Gauteng iyavuma [Gauteng supports.)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: In favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo ondersteun. [Limpopo supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Siyavuma. [Support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Northern Cape?

Mr C M GOEIEMAN: Ke a rona. [Support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: In favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Die Wes-Kaap ondersteun. [Western Cape supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Nine provinces voted
in favour. I therefore declare the report adopted in terms of section 65 of
the Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 16:30.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                             FRIDAY, 23 MAY 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs


          a) Agricultural Debt Management Repeal Bill [B 24 – 2008]
             (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of
             Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
             Government Gazette No 30979 of 15 April 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Agriculture and Land Affairs of the National Assembly, as well
             as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
             classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

      (a)   Government Notice No R.391 published in Government Gazette No
        30953 dated 11 April 2008: Regulations prescribing the tariff of
        allowances payable to witnesses in criminal proceedings, in terms
        of the Criminal Proceedings Act, 1977 (Act No 51 of 1977).


      (b)   Government Notice No R.392 published in Government Gazette No
        30953 dated 11 April 2008: Regulations prescribing the tariff of
        allowances payable to psychiatrists and clinical psychologists who
        appear as witnesses in court, in terms of the Criminal Proceedings
        Act, 1977 (Act No 51 of 1977).


      (c)   Government Notice No R.393 published in Government Gazette No
        30953 dated 11 April 2008: Tariff payable to a psychiatrists or
        clinical psychologists for an enquiry into the mental condition of
        an accused, in terms of the Criminal Proceedings Act, 1977 (Act No
        51 of 1977).


      (d)   Government Notice No R.394 published in Government Gazette No
        30953 dated 11 April 2008: Tariff of allowances payable to
        witnesses in civil cases, in terms of the Magistrates’ Courts Act,
        1944 (Act No 32 of 1944) and the Supreme Court Act, 1959 (Act No 59
        of 1959).


2.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Nelson Mandela National
        Museum for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 242-2007].

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson


       (a)  The Acting President of the  Republic  submitted  the  following
          letter dated 15 April 2008 to the  Chairperson  of  the  National
          Council of Provinces informing Members  of  the  Council  of  the
          extension of the employment of the South African National Defence
          Force in the Central African Republic, for service in  fulfilment
          of the International Obligations of the Republic of South  Africa
          towards the Central African Republic:


          EXTENSION OF EMPLOYMENT OF THE  SOUTH  AFRICAN  NATIONAL  DEFENCE
          FORCE IN THE CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC, FOR SERVICE IN  FULFILMENT
          OF THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH  AFRICA
          TOWARDS THE CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC


          This serves to inform the National Council of  Provinces  that  I
          have authorised the extension of employment of the South  African
          National Defence Force (SANDF) personnel in the  Central  African
          Republic (CAR), in fulfilment of the international obligations of
          the Republic of South Africa towards the CAR, to provide security
          to the President of the CAR.
          This employment was authorised in accordance with the  provisions
          of section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
          Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002  (Act
          No 42 of 2002).


          A total of 85 SANDF members were employed in the  CAR  to  assist
          with the capacity building  of  the  CAR  Defence  Force  and  to
          provide security to the President of the CAR.  It  was  initially
          thought that the deployment of the SANDF  protection  task  force
          would be completed by end of February 2008. After the  review  of
          security situation in CAR it became necessary that the protection
          services be extended extend until 31 July 2008  and  to  have  an
          additional 15 SANDF members employed.


          I will  communicate  this  report  to  members  of  the  National
          Assembly and Joint Standing Committee on  Defence,  and  wish  to
          request that you bring the contents hereof to  the  attention  of
          the National Council of Provinces.


          Regards


          signed
          P MLAMBO-NGCUKA
          ACTING PRESIDENT
                            TUESDAY, 27 MAY 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)    Companies Bill and Competition Amendment Bill, 2008, submitted
         by the Minister of Trade and Industry. Referred to the Portfolio
         Committee on Trade and Industry and the Select Committee on
         Economic and Foreign Affairs.

2.    Withdrawal of Bills

    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development withdrew the
    following Bill on 27 May 2008 :


    (1)    Judicial Officers Amendment Bill [B 72 - 2001] (National
         Assembly - sec 75).


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government

    (a)    Strategic Plan of the Department of Provincial and Local
        Government for 2007-2012.

2.    The Minister of Sport and Recreation

    (a)    Strategic Plan of the Department of Sport and Recreation South
        Africa for 2008-2012.

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson


     a) Tabling of written statement submitted in terms of  section  106(3)
        of the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32  of
        2000):  Rustenburg  Municipality  by  the  North   West   MEC   for
        Developmental Local Government and Housing.


        Referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on   Local   Government   and
        Administration for consideration and report.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

“1.   Report of the  Select  Committee  on  Finance  on  the  Taxation  Laws
    Amendment Bill [B13 – 2008] (National Assembly—Section  77),  dated  27
    May 2008:
     The Select Committee on Finance, having considered  the  Taxation  Laws
     Amendment Bill [B13 – 2008] (National Assembly – Section  77)  referred
     to it and classified by the JTM as a Section 77 Bill, reports  that  it
     has agreed to the Bill.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Taxation Laws Second
    Amendment Bill [B14 – 2008] (National Assembly – Section 75), dated 27
    May 2008:

     The Select Committee on Finance, having considered  the  Taxation  Laws
     Second Amendment Bill [B14 – 2008] (National  Assembly  –  Section  75)
     referred to it and classified by the JTM as a Section 75 Bill,  reports
     that it has agreed to the Bill.’’

