---
title: 'National Assembly - 12 June 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2008-06-12
---

THURSDAY, 12 JUNE 2008
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                    WELCOMING OF DELEGATION FROM BURUNDI

                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I wish to acknowledge the presence in the gallery
of a delegation from Burundi. The delegation is led by Gen Evariste
Ndayshimiye and Mr Agathon Rwasa. Welcome to South Africa.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                            (Reply by President)

Debate on Vote No 1 – The Presidency:

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, hon Deputy President, hon
members, let me join the Speaker in welcoming our friends from Burundi.
Indeed I am very glad that you are here, which signifies that we are indeed
ending the conflict that has persisted in that sister country for too long.
[Applause.]

Also with us today are 36 students from the Archbishop Mitty High School in
California who are visiting Johannesburg and Cape Town to interact with
other students, as well as visit street children and those infected and
affected by HIV and Aids. Again, to them, we say welcome to South Africa
[Applause].

Madam Speaker, in his book, India after Gandhi, the Indian historian and
academic Ramachandra Guha quotes a Dr B R Ambedkar, who chaired the
drafting committee of the Indian Constituent Assembly, which drew up
India’s Constitution soon after India’s independence in 1947.

Dr Ambedkar, an untouchable in terms of the Indian caste system, warned
that when India became a republic in January 1950:

    It was going to enter a life of contradictions. In politics we will
    have equality and in social and economic life we will have inequality.
    In politics we will be recognising the principle of one man one vote
    and one vote one value. In our social and economic life, we shall, by
    reason of our social and economic structure, continue to deny the
    principle of one man one value. How long shall we continue to live this
    life of contradictions? How long shall we continue to deny equality in
    our social and economic life? If we continue to deny it for long, we
    will do so only by putting our political democracy in peril.

Sixty years after its independence, India today continues to live the life
of contradictions which Dr Ambedkar, an untouchable man, decried 59 years
ago, while it is engaged in a continuing struggle to resolve those
contradictions.

On January 1, 1863, as our friends from the United States will know, the
then President of the United States of America, Abraham Lincoln, issued the
famous Emancipation Proclamation announcing the liberation of the black
slaves.

Among other things, the Proclamation said:

    That on the first day of January, in the year of our Lord one thousand
    eight hundred and sixty-three, all persons held as slaves within any
    state or designated part of a state, the people whereof shall then be in
    rebellion against the United States, shall be then, thenceforward, and
    forever free; and the executive government of the United States,
    including the military and naval authority thereof, will recognise and
    maintain the freedom of such persons, and will do no act or acts to
    repress such persons, or any of them, in any efforts they may make for
    their actual freedom.

As the hon members know, thereupon followed a costly civil war; one of
whose ultimate purposes was to ensure that the African-American population
enjoyed the political equality of which Dr Ambedkar had spoken in 1949 with
regard to India.

One hundred and forty five years after the Emancipation Proclamation was
issued, the United States continues to live the life of contradictions of
political equality and social and economic inequality, which Dr Ambedkar,
an Indian untouchable man, decried, even as the people of the United States
remain engaged in a continuing struggle to resolve these contradictions.

The French Revolution triumphed in 1789, and gave to all humanity the task
to build a world based on the now historic vision - liberty, equality,
fraternity.

Less than three years ago, in October and November 2005, France was
engulfed in very destructive riots or violent civil unrest, which obliged
the then government of the French Republic to declare a state of emergency.

Those involved were mainly young French citizens whose parents had migrated
to France from both North and sub-Saharan Africa. What drove them to their
desperate acts were their experience of racial and social discrimination
and the endemic poverty afflicting their communities.

Two hundred and nineteen years after the victory of the French Revolution,
which blessed all humanity with the glorious vision of liberté, égalité,
fraternité, France continues to live the life of contradictions of
political equality and social and economic inequality, which Dr Ambedkar,
the Indian untouchable man, decried, even as the people of France remain
engaged in a continuing struggle to resolve these contradictions.

We achieved our own emancipation a mere 14 years ago. We adopted our
current Constitution only 12 years ago.

We too, like the French, the American and Indian peoples made the
determination that all our people must attain and enjoy political equality.
But like them, and as Dr Ambedkar had said:

    In politics we will be recognising the principle of one man one vote
    and one vote one value. In our social and economic life, we shall, by
    reason of our social and economic structure, continue to deny the
    principle of one man one value.

Having listened to many debates in this House, and our Parliament as a
whole and other fora in our society over the last 14 years, many a time it
has seemed to me that we were very determined to ignore or radically
minimise this reality such that it should cease to be of any material
significance in terms of our thinking, our planning, and the messages we
communicate to the masses of our people.

Out of this manner of proceeding has emerged a perhaps unstated proposition
based on a false notion of South African exceptionalism. In terms of this,
miraculously, or by an extraordinary act of God, our country would give
birth to new ways of social development which would prove that we are far
wiser than the French, the Americans and the Indians in terms of solving
the social and national contradictions of which Dr Ambedkar spoke in 1949.

Clearly, the inequalities in social and economic life, born of our social
and economic structure, of which Dr Ambedkar spoke, will persist in our
country for a significant period of time. The contradictions he spoke of
will continually put to the test the durability and resilience of our
political democracy.

Consequently, we must continue to insist upon, and pursue programmes aimed
at the eradication of the legacy of colonialism and apartheid, precisely to
abolish the social and economic structure whose stubborn persistence has
given birth to the unsolved contradiction in our country, in France, in the
United States, and in India.
In our case, given the fact that the social and economic structures have
very deep roots, the leaders in this House and in Parliament as a whole,
the hon members, and other leaders in our society, have at last to
understand that the task we face, and have faced for the last 14 years, is
truly revolutionary in character.

What our country has been about in our years of liberation has been to give
itself a new birth - not merely new houses, and new clinics, and new
schools, and new roads, and more jobs, and much else besides - but also a
new national identity of equal citizens in a nonracial society; of equal
citizens in a nonsexist society; of equal citizens in a society liberated
from poverty; of equal citizens in a truly popular participatory democracy.


The Minister of Sport and Recreation, the hon Makhenkesi Stofile, reflected
correctly on this challenge when he said yesterday:

  Structural inequality is very deep in our society and it has the great
  potential to damage nation-building if not carefully handled. The past
  lives in ubiquitous ways in the present, grappling to pull the present
  back; also spawning forces that push it forward. In addition, the present
  marches to the future not in linear fashion, but it has to zigzag around
  many obstacles. Ours is a long walk precisely because in 1994, we arrived
  only at the end of the beginning.

Similarly, the hon I S Mfundisi sought to remind both us and the nation of
the reality that we are only at the beginning of our journey when he said:

  The teenager that is South Africa is behaving like a real teenager. Like a
  typical teenager the nation is impatient, intolerant, rebellious and
  aggressive. We should bear in mind that teenagers have suicidal
  tendencies: this country, therefore, as it awakes and becomes aware of
  itself should be nurtured to avoid self-destruction. There are things that
  need unity of purpose by all South Africans, black, brown and white, young
  and old. These are fighting crime, poverty, sexism, racism, and other
  similar evils such as xenophobia.

The hon Pieter Mulder also sought to address our strategic, rather than
short-term, challenges, which we must do, when he said:

  As long as there are white people who say that all black people are bad,
  we are not at all making progress. But as long as there are black people
  who say that all white people are bad and whites do not belong in Africa,
  we are also not making any progress at all. If the good people from the
  different groups can work together, we can resolve our problems. If we
  can learn this alone from the recent events, we are making progress to
  create a place in the sun for everyone, and together start resolving
  Africa’s problems.
To underline the critical point made by the hon Pieter Mulder, the hon
Makhenkesi Stofile cited a comment made by Oliver Tambo in 1982 that “We
must take our common destiny into our own hands.”

Strangely, in this context, which demands that we take our destiny into our
own hands, and as the hon Andries Nel pointed out, the hon Leader of the
Opposition in the House found “the leader” and “the kind of man we can
believe in”, in the United States in the person of Senator Barack Obama.

To the contrary, I would have thought she would have used this podium
vigorously to project her leader, the honourable Helen Zille ...
[Laughter.] [Applause.] ... as “the kind of woman we can believe in”, but
clearly the Good Lord works in mysterious ways. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

Most unfortunately, the hon Rev K R J Meshoe went back to his old ways of
showing little respect for the truth. My humble advice to the hon Rev K R J
Meshoe is that he would have been well advised to ask our Ministry and the
Department of Foreign Affairs about the allegations made by The Washington
Post. I am certain that this would have enabled him to present a more
truthful view about the positions his government has taken at the UN
Security Council with regard to Iran, Sudan, Myanmar and Zimbabwe.

Happily, the hon Patricia de Lille avoided the journey across the Atlantic
Ocean ... [Laughter.] ... determined to remain firmly South African. She
pleaded, and pleaded, and pleaded that all of us and the nation must
understand that she is, most definitely, according to her own opinion of
herself, a great South African patriot. [Laughter.] To respond to this
special pleading, from now onwards, personally I will be honoured to
address the hon member as “Patricia the Patriot”. [Laughter.]

An important part of the message of Patricia the Patriot, or rather, the
hon Patricia the hon Patriot, was about leadership. In this regard, among
other things, she said:

  It is to the President of a country that the people look, to give them a
  sense of direction and of hope ... What South Africa needs right now is
  leadership that can inspire us again ... We need to restore to the
  Presidency the trust and leadership it should embody ... But we cannot
  restore it without it being earned. And that, Mr President, is your
  challenge.

The issue of leadership is indeed very critical. In my humble view, the
revolution suggested by the challenge posed by Dr Ambedkar in India in 1949
fundamentally requires not a leader but a leadership. The hon members who
sit in this House for the greater part of the year are an important part of
that leadership.

Every member in this House is a leader of our people, and an integral part
of the leadership I insist our critically important and unavoidable process
of fundamental social transformation needs and demands.

Neither the hon De Lille nor the hon Botha spoke of their own
responsibilities as such leaders, content to perform on the public stage as
militant critics and vigilant watchdogs. As I sat and listened attentively
to what they had to say, I asked myself the question: When will they accept
their responsibility to lead not partisan factions, but the nation?
[Applause.]

If I may betray a confidence, at the close of the debate yesterday evening
I had a short discussion with the Deputy President of the ANC, the hon
Kgalema Motlanthe, and expressed this concern. In response he said that
there will always be some people who call themselves leaders, but are
content to curse the darkness, while making absolutely no effort to light
the candle. [Applause.]

Take the matter of the role of our country with regard to our important
neighbour, the Republic of Zimbabwe. It seems to me perfectly obvious that
one of our principal tasks in this regard is to assist the people of
Zimbabwe to find one another with regard to the resolution of the immense
problems they face.

There are some farther afield from us who choose to describe us as a so-
called “rogue democracy”, to the absolute delight of the hon Rev K R J
Meshoe, because we refuse to serve as their subservient “klipgooiers”
[stone throwers] against especially President Robert Mugabe.

Given all this, the government I am honoured to lead will continue to
engage the Zimbabweans to convey to them our views and feelings about any
matter we believe is fundamentally or otherwise at variance with processes
that must respect the will of the people.

We will continue to insist that the people of Zimbabwe have the possibility
freely to choose their leaders and government and refuse to participate in
projects based on the notion that we have a right to bring about “regime
change” in Zimbabwe.

We will also continue to argue that the people of Zimbabwe will have to
unite to extricate their country from the economic crisis in which it is
immersed, and that we will contribute everything we can to support the
realisation of this objective.

With regard to the leadership task arising from Dr Ambedkar’s 1949 comments
as they relate to our country, I am arguing that what we need is not some
supreme leader, but a leadership, including the hon members, which
understands the imperative relating to the fundamental social
transformation of our country.
The hon Ben Turok correctly addressed yet another important pillar of the
construct we need to help achieve this fundamental social transformation,
and thus resolved the contradictions which Dr Ambedkar spoke about. In
summary, the hon Ben Turok said we must, while further entrenching our
democracy, construct an efficient and effective developmental state; ensure
that this state has the necessary capacity to carry out meaningful national
socioeconomic planning, without creating a command economy; ensure that
this state is able to mobilise and lead the whole of society to address the
challenges of poverty and underdevelopment on a sustained basis; build an
effective and functioning partnership between this state and the national
business community; mobilise the masses of the people into a united,
conscious movement for sustained development; and democratically determine
our own growth path, refusing to be trapped into neoliberal propositions
about economic development which, historically, have absolutely no
provenance.

Related to this, once more the hon Bantu Holomisa called for a national
convention which would “debate issues of the economy as well as social
cohesion”. I have been informed that Parliament has already taken the
decision to discuss these issues, and was pleased to hear that the elected
assembly of our elected leaders had taken this important decision.

Together with a good number of other hon members, including the Deputy
Minister of Science and Technology, the hon Derek Hanekom, the Minister of
Education, the hon Naledi Pandor, spoke correctly about our considerable
achievements since 1994. The telling of this truth is important in itself
as the pursuit of our objective to solve the Ambedkar contradictions
requires that we constantly and honestly review our progress and failures.

In addition, the hon Derek Hanekom pointed to another critically important
issue in this regard. This is a matter with which any organiser or
commander would be familiar. I refer here to the issue of never
demoralising one’s forces.

Having accurately identified some current problems, the hon Derek Hanekom
said: “In the face of these challenges it would be easy to descend into a
mood of pessimism, and to lose sight of the immensely positive changes that
have reached every corner of our country since the arrival of democracy.”

This I have also observed, which I am certain is, in part, born of the
failure to understand the true nature of the process of change our country
is undergoing, that many in our society seem to thrive on negative messages
about our country.

These, including many in the media, and some who spoke here yesterday, seem
absolutely determined to cultivate and entrench a permanent sense and mass
psychology of present gloom and impending doom, thus to communicate the
entirely false message that our democracy cannot but fail and collapse, as
virtually a predetermined outcome.

Thus, constantly, we find that many of those who belong within the
leadership echelon - charged by history with the task to lead a
revolutionary process of fundamental social transformation in our country -
see it as their task constantly to run the country down; to deny or
minimise its achievements; to exaggerate its weaknesses and failures; to
judge it negatively against tasks it could never achieve, objectively; and,
to measure its progress and failures according to standards befitting very
much older and wealthier democracies, all of which are located in the
Western world.

Whereas some in this House, like the hon Patricia the hon Patriot,
correctly argued that the President of the Republic needs to communicate a
message of direction and hope to our people, so does the rest of our
leadership, including her, have an equal obligation to communicate a
message of direction and hope.

In our situation this is a critically important task that cannot be left
just to one leader, while the rest are left content to define leadership as
amounting to nothing more than the right to criticise and to act as a so-
called watchdog, to justify their failure to light the candle.

In their own ways, the hon members F T Maserumule and J J Maake sought to
address this question. For instance, the hon Maake said:


   I always stand on this platform and try to teach the Opposition the right
   ways, the right way of listening to people when they talk to them, the
   right way of behaving in response to events in our country, but they
   never listen … We forcefully open a kid’s mouth, with the kid screaming
   and kicking, and give him or her castor oil or cod-liver for his or her
   own good. And that is surely not violence. I tend to think that is the
   only solution left for me in order to help my fellow compatriots out of
   their shifting sense of illusion.

I sincerely hope that all of us are South African enough never to require
to be force-fed, in order to understand the imperatives of our national
reality.

Various hon members have raised a number of specific issues, including
matters relating to the institution of traditional leadership, the need for
an institution of higher learning in Northern KwaZulu-Natal, the fight
against crime, a housing project in Limpopo, issues relating to inter-
governmental relations, and alleged discrimination against coloured people.

We will indeed respond to all of these and others, directly to the hon
members who raised these issues. With regard to the hon Simmons, I am
certain that, despite what he said, the Presidency has been regularly in
contact with him and is engaged with his office, in the process of agreeing
on the date and venue for the meeting he requested.

I would like to thank all the hon members for the effort they took properly
to intervene in the debate we had yesterday.

In particular, I would like to thank all the hon members, and would in this
instance like to single out the hon Dr Mangosuthu Buthelezi for the kind
remarks he made about me personally. I sincerely value everything said,
knowing as I do that it was spoken honestly.

In this context I must confirm that within my personal knowledge, the hon
Dr Mangosuthu Buthelezi told the truth when he spoke about his relations
with the late President of the ANC, O R Tambo.

Our history, like life itself, has produced outcomes that might not have
been intended by the actors. When I first met the hon Dr Buthelezi many
decades ago, as he said, I approached him as a political senior to myself,
and a comrade-in-arms.

In the years since he stopped serving in the national government, I have
made it a point to listen carefully to everything he said. Constantly, I
have marvelled at his wisdom and his deep concern to sustain a value system
that is critical to the survival of our democracy.

I was very pleased when, yesterday, the hon Essop Pahad acknowledged
Shenge’s unfailing sense of courtesy. Even at my age, this is a deeply
human characteristic I must still emulate successfully from Umntwana wa
kwaPhindangene. [Applause.]

Shenge, many thanks for everything you have done for all of us. Yesterday
you quoted the Latin saying by Seneca - errare humanum est - to err is
human!

Those who act will err. Those who do nothing will carry no blemish of any
errors. [Applause.] To them is, therefore, given the possibility to
criticise those who choose to act. That, you and I will have to accept as
an unavoidable corollary of what had to be done.

Not very long ago, a Bishop from Cameroon, who came to see us to discuss
the situation in Zimbabwe, told us his people have a proverb which says:
Those charged with the task to fetch water from the river should not listen
to the songs of the frogs. And neither should you, Shenge. [Applause.]

This, I would like to say to this House and the nation: Together, during
the last 14 years, and longer, we have recorded truly remarkable
achievements. Acting together, we have placed ourselves on course to emerge
as a winning nation. Today we face particular problems, in the same way
that we have faced other difficult problems in the past. In the past we
overcame these problems and will now also overcome the new problems we face
In the past we have never allowed our problems to condemn us to
demoralisation, despondency and pessimism; in the present, we know that our
problems constitute a challenge to which we must respond with vigour, with
confidence in our capacity, and optimism about our future. Now is the time
for those who aspire to lead to put the yoke of leadership on their
shoulders, understanding that they serve only as one draught animal in the
span, with no possibility to claim or receive any special benefits.

Those who have spoken of the legacy of the President of the Republic, need
to know that there is no other legacy the President seeks apart from what
has been said above.

All that remains is for the leadership gathered in this House, which
understands its responsibilities to the nation, to do what it has to do far
beyond this parliamentary perimeter, to assume its leadership of the masses
that have to be mobilised and focused on the task of sustained development.
I thank all the hon members for their attention. Thank you very much, Madam
Speaker. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: I thank the hon President. We now proceed with notices of
motion.

Debate concluded.

 CONSIDERATION OF LIST OF CANDIDATES RECOMMENDED FOR APPOINTMENT TO COUNCIL
           OF INDEPENDENT COMMUNICATIONS AUTHORITY OF SOUTH AFRICA

Mr I VADI: Madam Speaker, indeed it is a privilege to speak after the
President. I don’t think it is an honour bestowed on many people very often
in this House. I know that members are eager to go to the presidential
reception now, so I’m not going to be very, very long. We’ve got to table a
short report to the House. By the end of this month the Independent
Communications Authority of South Africa will have three vacancies on its
council. This is the case as the terms of office of two of the councillors
expire on 30 June, and one further vacancy was not filled because the
candidate approved by the House late last year, failed to honour her
appointment.

The Portfolio Committee on Communications had in April this year invited
the public to nominate candidates for the three vacancies. We had received
a total of 20 nominations. And I must say that the committee was quite
disappointed that not many female candidates were nominated this time
around. Previously, we had a quite few female candidates but this time we
only had two.

The committee eventually short-listed seven candidates for interviews and
we are pleased to recommend five of the seven for consideration by the
Minister of Communications for eventual appointment to the council of
Icasa.

The names of the five nominees were published in yesterday’s Announcements,
Tablings and Committees and the candidates have the unanimous support of
the political parties that are active in the committee.

The candidates in order of preference for the committee are: Mr Fungayi
Sibanda, Ms Nomvuyiso Batyi, Mr Thabo Makhakhe, Ms Lahlang Somo and
Professor Bonke Dumisa. Collectively these candidates have a strong
background in economics, telecommunications regulatory policy, competitions
law and business administration.

The committee has opted for candidates with these particular skills as it
appears to be a critical need within Icasa. We are confident that if they
could be approved by the Minister they would add value to the council. The
committee, therefore, recommends to the House that these nominations be
approved and forwarded to the Minister of Communications for consideration.
Thank you very much.

Question put: That the following list of  candidates  be  submitted  to  the
Minister of Communications for consideration for appointment as  councillors
to ICASA: Mr F K Sibanda, Ms N Batyi, Mr T Makhakhe, Ms L S Somo and Prof  B
Dumisa.

Question agreed to.

The following  list  of  candidates  accordingly  to  be  submitted  to  the
Minister of Communications for consideration for appointment as  councillors
to ICASA: Mr F K Sibanda, Ms N Batyi, Mr T Makhakhe, Ms L S Somo and Prof  B
Dumisa.

The House adjourned at 14:42.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills

     (1)    The Minister of Transport


          a) National Road Traffic Amendment Bill [B 39 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 76) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
             prior notice of its introduction published in Government
             Gazette No 31058 of 15 May 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Transport of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
             Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
             Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

     (2)    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs


          a) Provision of Land and Assistance Amendment  Bill [B 40 – 2008]
             (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of
             Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
             Government Gazette No 31102 of 30 May 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Agriculture and Land Affairs of the National Assembly, as well
             as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
             classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

     (3)    The Minister of Minerals and Energy
          a) National Radioactive Waste Management Agency Bill [B 41 –
             2008] (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory
             summary of Bill and prior notice of its introduction published
             in Government Gazette No 31090 of 26 May 2008.]
             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Minerals and Energy of the National Assembly, as well as
             referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
             classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.


National Assembly

1.    Correction to referral of paper tabled


     The referral of the following paper and the accompanying instruction
     for conferral, as published in the ATC of 5 March 2008, are hereby
     withdrawn and the paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
     Trade and Industry for consideration and to the Portfolio Committee on
     Defence and Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy:


      (a)   Report of the South African Council for the Non-Proliferation of
          Weapons of Mass Destruction for July 2006 to June 2007.

2.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

         1) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
            Trade and Industry:
          a) Government Notice No R.819 published in Government Gazette No
             30254, dated 7 September 2007: Proposed amendment of the
             Compulsory Specification for Vehicles of Category 03 and 04 in
             terms of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


          b) Government Notice No R.845 published in Government Gazette No
             30276, dated 14 September 2007: Amendment to the National
             Building Regulations in terms of the National Building
             Regulations and Building Standards Act, 1977 (Act No 103 of
             1977).


          c) Government Notice No 1054 published in Government Gazette No
             30442, dated 9 November 2007: Proposed amendment of the
             Compulsory Specification for Motor Vehicles of Category M1 in
             terms of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


          d) Government Notice No 1055 published in Government Gazette No
             30442, dated 9 November 2007: Proposed amendment of the
             Compulsory Specification for Motor Vehicles of Category N1 in
             terms of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


          e) Government Notice No 1079 published in Government Gazette No
             30471, dated 16 November 2007: Incorporation of an external
             company as a company in the Republic of South Africa in terms
             of the Companies Act, 1973 (Act No 61 of 1973).


          f) Government Notice No 1167 published in Government Gazette No
             30549, dated 7 December 2007: Incorporation of an external
             company as a company in the Republic of South Africa in terms
             of the Companies Act, 1973 (Act No 61 of 1973).


          g) Government Notice No R.1168 published in Government Gazette No
             30551, dated 7 December 2007: Amendment of Government Notice
             No R.269 relating to the International Trade Administration
             Commission of South Africa in terms of the International Trade
             Administration Act, 2002 (Act No 71 of 2002).


          h) Government Notice No R.1225 published in Government Gazette No
             30593, dated 14 December 2007: Patents Regulations: Amendment
             pursuant to the Patents Amendment Act, 2005 (Act No 20 of
             2005).


          i) Government Notice No R.1226 published in Government Gazette No
             30593, dated 14 December 2007: Patents Regulations: Amendment
             pursuant to the Patents Amendment Act, 2005 (Act No 20 of
             2005).


          j) Proclamation No 46 published in Government Gazette No 30593,
             dated 14 December 2007: Determination that Act and Regulations
             will come into operation in terms of the Patents Amendment
             Act, 2005 (Act No 20 of 2005).


          k) Government Notice No 54 published in Government Gazette No
             30687, dated 25 January 2008: Companies and Intellectual
             Property Registration Office (Cipro): Practice Note No 1 of
             2008: Directives of the Registrar of Companies and of Close
             Corporations on Applications for the Reservation of Names of
             Companies, Close Corporations and Defensive Names in terms of
             the Companies Act, 1973 (Act No 61 of 1973) and Close
             Corporations Act, 1984 (Act No 69 of 1984).


          l) Government Notice No 63 published in Government Gazette No
             30696, dated 1 February 2008: Approval of Strategic Industrial
             Project (SIP) in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58
             of 1962).


          m) Government Notice No 64 published in Government Gazette No
             30696, dated 1 February 2008: Approval of Strategic Industrial
             Project (SIP) in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58
             of 1962).


          n) Government Notice No R.82 published in Government Gazette No
             30718, dated 1 February 2008: Amendments to the National
             Liquor Regulations, 2004, in terms of the Liquor Act, 2003
             (Act No 59 of 2003).


          o) Proclamation No 47 published in Government Gazette No 30594,
             dated 14 December 2007: Commencement of the Corporate Laws
             Amendment Act, 2006 (Act No 24 of 2006).


          p) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
             Africa and the Government of the Czech Republic on Economic
             Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
             Constitution, 1996.


          q) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government
             of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the
             Czech Republic on Economic Cooperation.


          r) Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
             Republic of South Africa and the Government of the People’s
             Republic of China on Promoting Bilateral Trade and Economic
             Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
             Constitution, 1996.


          s) Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of Understanding
             between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
             Government of the People’s Republic of China on Promoting
             Bilateral Trade and Economic Cooperation.

       2) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Trade and Industry for consideration:

          a) Medium-Term Strategic Framework of the Department of Trade and
             Industry for 2008 to 2011.


          b) Annual Report of the Office of Consumer Protection for 2006-
             07.


    (3)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Public Service and Administration for consideration:


          a) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on Grievance
             Trends in the Public Service – September 2007 [RP 222-2007].


          b) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on Trend
             Analysis on Complaints Lodged with the Public Service
             Commission during the 2006-07 Financial Year – October 2007
             [RP 233-2007].


          c) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the
             Evaluation of Government’s Poverty Reduction Programme –
             October 2007 [RP 239-2007].


          d) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the
             Implementation of Fraud Prevention Plans in the Public Sector
             – November 2007 [RP 236-2007].


          e) Oversight Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the
             Verification of Qualifications in the Public Service –
             November 2007 [RP 6-2008].


          f) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the
             Implementation of the Performance Management and Development
             System for Senior Managers in the North West Province –
             January 2008 [RP 13-2008].


          g) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on an Assessment
             of Professional Ethics in the KwaZulu-Natal Provincial
             Administration – 2007 [RP 8-2008].


          h) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the
             Implementation of the Batho Pele Principle of Openness and
             Transparency in the Public Service – February 2008 [RP 23-
             2008].


          i) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the
             Evaluation of the Training Needs of Senior Managers in the
             Public Sector – January 2008 [RP 16-2008].


          j) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the State of
             the Public Service for 2008 [RP 22-2008].


          k) Strategic Plan of the Department of the Public Service and
             Administration for 2008 to 2011.


          l) Strategic Plan of the South African Management Development
             Institute (Samdi) for 2008 to 2011.

       4) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Labour:

          a) International Labour Organisation (ILO) Convention 187 and
             Recommendation 197 concerning the Promotional Framework for
             Occupational Safety and Health, 2006, tabled in terms of
             section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


          b) Explanatory Memorandum to the International Labour
             Organisation (ILO) Convention 187 and Recommendation 197
             concerning the Promotional Framework for Occupational Safety
             and Health.


          c) International Labour Organisation (ILO) Convention 188 and
             Recommendation 199 concerning Work in the Fishing Sector,
             tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.
          d) Explanatory Memorandum to the International Labour
             Organisation (ILO) Convention 188 and Recommendation 199
             concerning Work in the Fishing Sector.


          e) International Labour Organisation (ILO) Recommendation 198
             concerning the Employment Relationship, 2006, tabled in terms
             of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


          f) Explanatory Memorandum to the International Labour
             Organisation (ILO) Recommendation 198 concerning the
             Employment Relationship, 2006.


          g) International Labour Organisation (ILO) Maritime Labour
             Convention, 2006, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
             Constitution, 1996.


          h) Explanatory Memorandum to the International Labour
             Organisation (ILO) Maritime Labour Convention, 2006.


       5) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Communications for consideration:

          a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Communications for 2008 to
             2011.


          b) Strategic Plan of the Government Communication and Information
             System (GCIS) for the medium-term period 2008 to 2011.


          c) Strategic Plan of the Media Development and Diversity Agency
             (MDDA) for 2008 to 2011.

       6) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Environmental Affairs and Tourism for consideration:

          a) Government Notice No R.15 published in Government Gazette No
             30645, dated 4 January 2008: Notice in terms of section 16 of
             the Marine Living Resources Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of 1998).


          b) Government Notice No 19 published in Government Gazette No
             30666, dated 18 January 2008: Correction to Government Notice
             No 1197 published in Government Gazette No 30590, dated 18
             December 2007, in terms of the World Heritage Convention Act,
             1999 (Act No 49 of 1999).


          c) Government Notice No R.341 published in Government Gazette No
             30904, dated 28 March 2008: Regulations for the prohibition of
             the use, manufacturing, import and export of asbestos and
             asbestos-containing materials in terms of the Environmental
             Conservation Act, 1989 (Act No 73 of 1989).


          d) Government Notice No R.343 published in Government Gazette No
             30907, dated 28 March 2008: Amendment of regulations in terms
             of the Marine Living Resources Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of 1998).


          e) Strategic Plan of the Marine Living Resources Fund for 2008 to
             2011.
          f) Strategic Plan of the Department of Environmental Affairs and
             Tourism for 2008 to 2011.


          g) Annual Report of the Committee for Environmental Coordination
             for 2007, presented in terms of section 10(3) of the National
             Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).

       7) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Finance for consideration and to the Portfolio Committee on
          Housing:

          a) Government Notice No 179 published in Government Gazette No
             30779, dated 15 February 2008: Stopping and reallocation of
             conditional allocations in terms of the Division of Revenue
             Act, 2007 (Act No 1 of 2007).

       8) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Public Works for consideration:

       a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Public Works for 2008 to
          2011.

       9) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Defence and the Joint Standing Committee on Defence:

          a) The President of the Republic submitted a letter dated 28
             February 2008 to the Speaker of the National Assembly,
             informing members of the Assembly of the extension of the
             employment of the South African National Defence Force in
             Burundi for service in fulfilment of the international
             obligations of the Republic of South Africa to the African
             Union.


          b) The President of the Republic submitted a letter dated 28
             March 2008 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, informing
             members of the Assembly of the extension of the employment of
             the South African National Defence Force in the Democratic
             Republic of Congo for service in fulfilment of the
             international obligations of the Republic of South Africa to
             the Democratic Republic of Congo.


          c) The President of the Republic submitted a letter dated 28
             March 2008 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, informing
             members of the Assembly of the extension of the employment of
             the South African National Defence Force in the Darfur region
             of Sudan for service in fulfilment of the international
             obligations of the Republic of South Africa to the African
             Union and the United Nations.


          d) The President of the Republic submitted a letter dated 28
             March 2008 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, informing
             members of the Assembly of the extension of the employment of
             the South African National Defence Force in the Central
             African Republic for service in fulfilment of the
             international obligations of the Republic of South Africa to
             the Central African Republic.


          e) The President of the Republic submitted a letter dated 15
             April 2008 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, informing
             members of the Assembly of the extension of the employment of
             the South African National Defence Force in the Central
             African Republic for service in fulfilment of the
             international obligations of the Republic of South Africa to
             the Central African Republic


          f) The President of the Republic submitted a letter dated 28
             March 2008 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, informing
             members of the Assembly of the extension of the employment of
             the South African National Defence Force in Uganda for service
             in fulfilment of the international obligations of the Republic
             of South Africa to the African Union.


          g) The President of the Republic submitted a letter dated 28
             March 2008 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, informing
             members of the Assembly of the extension of the employment of
             the South African National Defence Force in Ethiopia and
             Eritrea for service in fulfilment of the international
             obligations of the Republic of South Africa towards the
             African Union and United Nations.


          h) The President of the Republic submitted a letter dated 28
             March 2008 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, informing
             members of the Assembly of the extension of the employment of
             the South African National Defence Force in Nepal for service
             in fulfilment of the international obligations of the Republic
             of South Africa to the United Nations.


          i) The President of the Republic submitted a letter dated 28
             March 2008 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, informing
             members of the Assembly of the extension of the employment of
             the South African National Defence Force in the Democratic
             Republic of Congo for service in fulfilment of the
             international obligations of the Republic of South Africa to
             the United Nations.

      10) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Health for consideration:

          a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Health for 2008 to 2011.

      11) The following paper is referred to the Committee on Public
          Accounts for consideration and to the Portfolio Committee on
          Water Affairs and Forestry:

          a) Report of the Auditor-General on a performance audit of the
             provision of sanitation services at the Department of Water
             Affairs and Forestry [RP 11-2008].

      12) The following paper is referred to the Committee on Public
          Accounts for consideration and to the Portfolio Committee on
          Trade and Industry:

          a) Report of the Auditor-General on a performance audit of grant
             management at the National Lotteries Board [RP 12-2008].

      13) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Water Affairs and Forestry for consideration and report and to
          the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government:

          a) Rand Water Board’s proposed increase in water tariffs for 2008-
             09, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local Government:
             Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


          b) Sedibeng Water Board’s proposed increase in water tariffs for
             2008-09, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).


          c) Magalies Water Board’s proposed increase in water tariffs for
             2008-09, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).


          d) Pelladrift Water Board’s proposed increase in water tariffs
             for 2008-09, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).


          e) Bushbuckridge Water Board’s proposed increase in water tariffs
             for 2008-09, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).


          f) Amatola Water Board’s proposed increase in water tariffs for
             2008-09, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).


          g) Umgeni Water Board’s proposed increase in water tariffs for
             2008-09, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).


          h) Mhlathuze Water Board’s proposed increase in water tariffs for
             2008-09, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).


          i) Namakwa Water Board’s proposed increase in water tariffs for
             2008-09, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).


          j) Overberg Water Board’s proposed increase in water tariffs for
             2008-09, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).


          k) Botshelo Water Board’s proposed increase in water tariffs for
             2008-09, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).


          l) Lepelle Northern Water Board’s proposed increase in water
             tariffs for 2008-09, tabled in terms of section 42 of the
             Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act
             No 56 of 2003).


          m) Bloem Water Board’s proposed increase in water tariffs for
             2008-09, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).


          n) Albany Coast Water Board’s proposed increase in water tariffs
             for 2008-09, tabled in terms of section 42 of the Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
             of 2003).

      14) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Public Enterprises for consideration:

          a) Letter from the Minister for Public Enterprises, dated 13
             March 2008, to the Speaker of the National Assembly, informing
             Parliament that Eskom’s pricing structure for 2008-09 would
             not be tabled on 15 March 2008 as required by section 42 of
             the Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003
             (Act No 56 of 2003), but on 15 April 2008.


          b) Amendment to Eskom's pricing structure, tabled in terms of
             section 42(4) of the Local Government: Municipal Finance
             Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003), and supporting
             documents required in terms of section 42(3) of the same Act.

      15) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Agriculture and Land Affairs for consideration:

       a) Business Plan of the Agricultural Research Council for 2008-09
          [RP 29-2008].
       b) Strategic Plan and Budget of the Ingonyama Trust Board for 2008-
          09.


       c) Strategic Plan of Ncera Farms (Pty) Ltd for 2008-09 [RP 29-2008].


       d) Strategic Plan of the National Agricultural Marketing Council for
          2008 to 2011.

      16) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration:

          a) Report of the South African Law Reform Commission on Domestic
             Partnerships (Project 118, March 2006) [RP 136-2007].

      17) The following paper is referred to the Committee on Public
          Accounts for consideration and to the Portfolio Committee on
          Safety and Security:

          a) Report of the Auditor-General on a performance audit of border
             control by the South African Police Service – January 2008 [RP
             10-2008].

      18) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Finance:

          a) Government Notice No 214 published in Government Gazette No
             30794, dated 22 February 2008: Determination of the interest
             rate for the purposes of paragraph (a) of the definition of
             “official rate of interest” in paragraph 1 of the Seventh
             Schedule to the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).
          b) Government Notice No 216 published in Government Gazette No
             30796, dated 22 February 2008: Fixing of the rate per
             kilometre in respect of motor vehicles for the purposes of
             section 8(1)(b)(ii) and (iii) of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act
             No 58 of 1962).


          c) Government Notice No R.242 published in Government Gazette No
             30818, dated 27 February 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
             1/2/149) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
             91 of 1964).

          d) Government Notice No R.243 published in Government Gazette No
             30818, dated 27 February 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
             1/5/143) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
             91 of 1964).


          e) Government Notice No R.244 published in Government Gazette No
             30818, dated 27 February 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
             1/5/144) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
             91 of 1964).


          f) Government Notice No R.245 published in Government Gazette No
             30818, dated 27 February 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 6 (No
             6/12) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
             of 1964).


          g) General Notice No 305 published in Government Gazette No
             30805, dated 29 February 2008: Notice on proposed variation of
             Policyholder Protection Rules (Short-term Insurance) in terms
             of the Short-term Insurance Act, 1998 (Act No 53 of 1998).
          h) Report of the South African Reserve Bank on the Annual General
             Meeting of Shareholders for 2007.

          i) Government Notice No R.250 published in Government Gazette No
             30826, dated 29 February 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
             1/1/1356) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
             91 of 1964).


          j) Government Notice No R.254 published in Government Gazette No
             30829, dated 7 March 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
             1/1/1358) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
             91 of 1964).


          k) Government Notice No R.255 published in Government Gazette No
             30829, dated 7 March 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
             3/631) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
             of 1964).

          l) Government Notice No R.256 published in Government Gazette No
             30829, dated 7 March 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
             1/1/1357) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
             91 of 1964).


          m) Government Notice No R.302 published in Government Gazette No
             30875, dated 20 March 2008: Appointment of an authorised
             dealer in foreign exchange with limited authority, Albaraka
             Bank Limited, in terms of the Exchange Control Regulations.


          n) Agreement between the International Bank for Reconstruction
             and Development and the Government of the Republic of South
             Africa on the IDF Grant for the University of Pretoria:
             Faculty of Law, enhancing access to legal information (IDF
             Grant No TF 090558), tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
             Constitution, 1996.


          o) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the
             International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the
             Government of the Republic of South Africa on the IDF Grant
             for the University of Pretoria: Faculty of Law, enhancing
             access to legal information (IDF Grant No TF 090558).


          p) Government Notice No R.492 published in Government Gazette No
             31012, dated 25 April 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No
             2/298) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
             of 1964).

          q) Government Notice No R.493 published in Government Gazette No
             31012, dated 25 April 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No
             4/312) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
             of 1964).


          r) Government Notice No R.462 published in Government Gazette No
             30988, dated 25 April 2008: Amendment of regulations made in
             terms of section 70, read with section 45, of the Short-term
             Insurance Act, 1998 (Act No 53 of 1998).


          s) Government Notice No 516 published in Government Gazette No
             31021, dated 9 May 2008: Prescribing Standards of Generally
             Recognised Accounting Practice (GRAP) in terms of section 91
             of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).


          t) Government Notice No 436 published in Government Gazette No
             30978, dated 14 April 2008: Allocations per municipality for
             each Schedule 3, 4, 6 and 7 allocation to local government and
             the framework for each Schedule 4, 5, 6 and 7 allocation made
             in terms of the Division of Revenue Act, 2008 (Act No 2 of
             2008).


          u) Government Notice No 456 published in Government Gazette No
             30987, dated 25 April 2008: Call for the nomination of
             competent persons to serve as board members of the Co-
             operative Banks Development Agency in terms of section 58 of
             the Cooperative Banks Act, 2007 (Act No 40 of 2007).


          v) Government Notice No 457 published in Government Gazette No
             30987, dated 25 April 2008: Determination of an increased
             maximum amount of benefit to be provided by a “Friendly
             Society” as envisaged in section 7(2)(b) of the Long-term
             Insurance Act, 1998 (Act No 52 of 1998).


          w) Government Notice No 458 published in Government Gazette No
             30987, dated 25 April 2008: Determination of an increased
             maximum amount of benefit to be provided by a “Friendly
             Society” as envisaged in section 7(2)(b) of the Short-term
             Insurance Act, 1998 (Act No 53 of 1998).


          x) Government Notice No 459 published in Government Gazette No
             30987, dated 25 April 2008: Determination of the maximum
             amount contemplated in the definition of “Assistance Policy”
             in section 1(1) of the Long-term Insurance Act, 1998 (Act No
             52 of 1998).

      19) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
          report. The Reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial
          Statements are referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
          consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Represented Political
             Parties’ Fund for 2006-07, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2006-07 [RP 129-2007].


          b) Report on Monies in Trust Kept in the Guardian’s Fund for 2006-
             07, including the Report of the Auditor-General on Monies in
             Trust Kept in the Guardian’s Fund for 2006-2007 [RP 122-2007].

      20) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Social Development for consideration:


          a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Social Development for
             2008 to 2011 [RP 37-2008].


          b) Strategic Plan of the South African Social Security Agency
             (SASSA) for 2008 to 2011 [RP 25-2008].


          c) Strategic Plan of the National Development Agency (NDA) for
             2008 to 2011 [RP 40-2008].

      21) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Transport for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-
          General on the Financial Statements is referred to the Committee
          on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Road Traffic Management
             Corporation for 2006-07, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2006-07.

      22) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Science and Technology for consideration:

       a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Science and Technology for
          2008-09.

      23) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Education for consideration:

          a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Education for 2008 to 2012
             and the Operational Plans of the Department of Education for
             2008-09.

      24) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Trade and Industry for consideration and report:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Small Enterprise
             Development Agency (SEDA) for 2006-07.

      25) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Water Affairs and Forestry for consideration and report. The
          report of the Independent Auditor is referred to the Committee on
          Public Accounts for consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of Namakwa Water for the year
             ended 30 June 2007, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30
             June 2007.

      26) The following paper is referred to the Porfolio Committee on
          Public Works:

          a) Memorandum by the Minister of Public Works setting out
             particulars of the Building Programme for 2008-09.

      27) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
          report:

          a) Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate: Ms A
             Bacharam, an additional magistrate at Scottburgh, in terms of
             section 13(3)(a) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of
             1993).

          b) Report on the confirmation of provisional suspension of a
             magistrate: Mr X R I Masimini, an additional magistrate at
             Queenstown, in terms of section 13(4)(a) of the Magistrates
             Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).

      28) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Housing for consideration:


       a) Strategic and Performance Plans of the Department of Housing for
          2008 to 2011.

      29) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Safety and Security for consideration and report:

          a) Proclamation No R.29 published in Government Gazette No 30382,
             dated 19 October 2007: Notification by the President in
             respect of entities involved in terrorist and related
             activities as identified by the United Nations Security
             Council in terms of sections 25 and 26 of the Protection of
             Constitutional Democracy against Terrorist and Related
             Activities Act, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004).


          b) Proclamation No R.30 published in Government Gazette No 30382,
             dated 19 October 2007: Notification by the President in
             respect of entities involved in terrorist and related
             activities as identified by the United Nations Security
             Council in terms of sections 25 and 26 of the Protection of
             Constitutional Democracy against Terrorist and Related
             Activities Act, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004).


          c) Proclamation No R.49 published in Government Gazette No 30634,
             dated 31 December 2007: Notification by the President in
             respect of entities involved in terrorist and related
             activities as identified by the United Nations Security
             Council in terms of sections 25 and 26 of the Protection of
             Constitutional Democracy against Terrorist and Related
             Activities Act, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004).
          d) Proclamation No R.1 published in Government Gazette No 30704,
             dated 30 January 2008: Notification by the President in
             respect of entities involved in terrorist and related
             activities as identified by the United Nations Security
             Council in terms of sections 25 and 26 of the Protection of
             Constitutional Democracy against Terrorist and Related
             Activities Act, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004).


          e) Proclamation No R.2 published in Government Gazette No 30705,
             dated 1 February 2008: Notification by the President in
             respect of entities involved in terrorist and related
             activities as identified by the United Nations Security
             Council in terms of sections 25 and 26 of the Protection of
             Constitutional Democracy against Terrorist and Related
             Activities Act, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004).


          f) Proclamation No R.11 published in Government Gazette No 30939,
             dated 2 April 2008: Notification by the President in respect
             of entities involved in terrorist and related activities as
             identified by the United Nations Security Council in terms of
             sections 25 and 26 of the Protection of Constitutional
             Democracy against Terrorist and Related Activities Act, 2004
             (Act No 33 of 2004).


          g) Proclamation No R.12 published in Government Gazette No 30939,
             dated 2 April 2008: Notification by the President in respect
             of entities involved in terrorist and related activities as
             identified by the United Nations Security Council in terms of
             sections 25 and 26 of the Protection of Constitutional
             Democracy against Terrorist and Related Activities Act, 2004
             (Act No 33 of 2004).


      30) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Labour for consideration:

       a) Preliminary Report of the Department of Labour for 2007-08 [RP 41-
          2008].


       b) Strategic Plan of the Department of Labour for 2008 to 2011 [RP
          43-2008].

      31) The following paper is referred to the Committee on Public
          Accounts for consideration and to the Portfolio Committee on
          Provincial and Local Government and the Portfolio Committee on
          Housing:

          a) Report of the Auditor-General on a performance audit of
             housing subsidies to municipal employees and the
             administration of low-cost housing projects by certain
             provincial housing departments – March 2008 [RP 47-2008].

      32) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Finance for consideration:

       a) Strategic Plan of National Treasury for 2008 to 2011.


       b) Work Programme of Statistics South Africa for 2008 to 2011.

      33) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Water Affairs and Forestry for consideration:

          a) Consolidated Business Plan of the Department of Water Affairs
             and Forestry for April 2008 to March 2009.

      34) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Home Affairs for consideration:

       a) Strategic Plan of the Electoral Commission for 2008 to 2011.


       b) Strategic Plan of the Department of Home Affairs for 2008 to
          2011.

      35) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Correctional Services for consideration:

       a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Correctional Services for
          2008/09-2012/13.

      36) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Transport for consideration:

       a) Rural Transport Strategy for South Africa – December 2007.

      37) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Arts and Culture for consideration and report. The Report of the
          Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is referred to the
          Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Luthuli Museum for 2006-07,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2006-07 [RP 207-2007].

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister of Safety and Security

    (a)    Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the Government of  the
         Republic of South Africa and the  Government  of  the  Republic  of
         Uganda on Contribution of South African Police Service  Members  to
         assist in the Provision of Security to the Meeting of  Commonwealth
         Heads of State and Government to be held in Uganda, tabled in terms
         of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

    (b)    Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the Government of  the
         Republic of South Africa and the African  Union  (AU)  contributing
         members of the South African Police Service to  the  African  Union
         Electoral and Security Assistance Mission (MAES)  to  the  Comoros,
         tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

    (c)    Arrangement between the Minister for Safety and Security of  the
         Republic of South Africa and  the  Minister  of  the  Interior  and
         Kingdom Relations of the Kingdom of the  Netherlands  on  Bilateral
         Police Cooperation, tabled  in  terms  of  section  231(3)  of  the
         Constitution, 1996.

National Assembly

The Speaker

CREDA INSERT REPORT - T080612e-insert1 – PAGES 1137-1154.

CREDA INSERT - T080612e-insert2 – PAGES 1155-1165.

COMMITTEE REPORT

National Assembly

CREDA INSERT REPORT- T080612e-insert3 – PAGES 1166-1178.

