---
title: 'National Assembly - 17 June 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2008-06-17
---

TUESDAY, 17 JUNE 2008
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:01.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                (Decision of Question on Votes and Schedule)

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, I wish to thank parties for advising the
staff on the Votes with regard to which they will be making declarations,
recording their objections and intending to divide. This information will
greatly assist the process in the House this afternoon.

I will put each Vote and ask parties for declarations of vote as they have
indicated. Members may make declarations of vote from the floor microphones
if they wish; thereafter I will put the Vote for decision.

I have been advised that by agreement declarations will be limited to one
and a half minutes each. The bells will be rung for five minutes for the
first division on a Vote, but for only one minute for subsequent divisions.


Vote No 1 – The Presidency - put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, the objection of the DA to be noted please.

The SPEAKER: The objection of the DA will be noted.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, the objection of the ACDP to be noted.

The SPEAKER: The objection of the ACDP will be noted.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Madam Speaker, as far as I recall, this is the first time
ever that the ACDP will be voting against Vote No 1 on the Presidency for a
number of reasons. The main reason is government’s policy of quiet
diplomacy while the innocent people of Zimbabwe are being brutally
assaulted, tortured and burnt alive by Zanu PF militia.

The ACDP doesn’t want to support a budget that will be used by President
Thabo Mbeki to go into Zimbabwe to embrace and hold hands with an old man
who is inciting war in his own country. Why is the cruel leader of Zimbabwe
allowed to persecute and displace his own citizens from their homes in
order to deny them the right to vote for a candidate of their choice?

During apartheid the ANC leaders were all over the world, asking foreign
governments to impose sanctions against the apartheid government. The ANC
called for UN intervention, but for a long time now they have been opposing
UN intervention in Zimbabwe.

The ACDP wants to see people in our own country and Zimbabwe living in
peace, and as a result the ACDP will vote against Budget Vote No 1.

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Speaker, some of the Presidency budget is being used
in countries such as Zimbabwe, but its purpose will not be achieved where
the mediator advocates peace with a view to stabilising that sister-African
country, while on the other hand Britain and America, especially, undermine
the mediation efforts through their sanctions on Zimbabwe and irresponsible
statements.

Zimbabwe long ago said goodbye to colonialism. Its patriots will not allow
any form of colonial or imperialist power to lecture it on democracy, good
governance or the Rule of Law when the lecturers have not been exemplary in
Iraq, Iran and Guantanamo Bay where thousands of prisoners have been
refused their rights of habeas corpus for six years. Zimbabwe needs people
who negotiate in good faith and want peace and stability in Zimbabwe. There
has been talk of the invasion of Zimbabwe by people who ought to know
better.

Well, Tanzania’s very noble and justified campaign to overthrow Idi Amin of
Uganda nearly emptied the Tanzanian national treasury and Britain knows
what the Falklands - or Malvinas - War cost. Equitable distribution of land
in Zimbabwe and no sabotage of that country’s economy by the forces-of-
change regime are the only lasting solutions to the Zimbabwe situation
coupled with reconciliation among the sons and daughters of Zimbabwe.

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance and African Christian Democratic Party
dissenting).

Vote No 2 - Parliament - put.

Declaration of vote:

Mr N T GODI: Madam Speaker, I wish to remind the House that on the day of
the debate I was the only one who congratulated Parliament on having an
unqualified financial audit report, with the exception that I had indicated
that there was “emphasis of matter”.

After having checked my dictionary I want to make a correction because
“emphasis of matter” draws the reader’s attention to matters that affect
the financial statements and yet in that annual report there were “other
matters”. “Other matters” refer to matters that are of concern but do not
necessarily affect the financial statement. So I wanted to make that
correction.

Vote agreed to.

Vote No 3 - Foreign Affairs – put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr W J SEREMANE: Madam Speaker, the DA opposes the Foreign Affairs Budget
Vote because of South Africa’s failure to live up to the human rights
commitment that former President Mandela set for the country; and the
country’s inability to resolve the political crisis in Zimbabwe.

It is also very sad that we have been shamed by the painful xenophobic
attacks on fellow Africans, citizens and others because of our dilly-
dallying and denial syndrome.

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Speaker, no Ministry can ever have a big enough
budget, but the PAC thinks that Foreign Affairs has been allocated an
adequate budget. It seems, however, that the practice of asking the
Department of Defence to pay for certain peacekeeping missions - if this is
correct - and that the Department of Defence will be refunded from the
African Renaissance Fund later must be stopped, or we must have stricter
arrangements for refunds.

Reports suggest that the Department of Defence has not been paid on time
for years and has been getting only qualified statements. Citizens of this
country are often stranded abroad when told at the last minute that they
cannot get visas. The USA is one of the notorious countries. It has placed
some of our former freedom fighters on its list of terrorists. Our country
and AU member states must not enter into diplomatic relations that are not
based on mutual respect and reciprocity.

Dr P W A MULDER: Madam Speaker, President Mbeki and the Department of
Foreign Affairs are continually demanding that the problems in Zimbabwe
should be resolved in a democratic way. After the MDC has been doing
precisely that for more than 10 years, this department prefers to give Mr
Mugabe credibility by saying that there is no crisis in Zimbabwe.

South Africa cannot allow Mr Mugabe to steal the election and the political
power in Zimbabwe for the third time through his undemocratic abuse of
power. Continued reports from Zimbabwe that Mr Tsvangirai and the MDC are
not being allowed to hold election gatherings and are being arrested, while
Mr Mugabe addresses such meetings, should already have resulted in a
reaction from this department and the government. Everything indicates that
Mr Mugabe’s end is in sight. The reason why South Africa is still trying to
artificially prop him up does not serve our interests and is
incomprehensible.

Mevrou die Speaker, mnr Mugabe het oor die naweek gesê dat die balpuntpen
nie sterker is as die geweer nie. Hy sal nie die uitslag aanvaar nie. Met
alle respek, wat verstaan hy en die mense wat hom ondersteun onder die
woord “demokrasie”? Beteken demokrasie slegs, “as ek wen, dan is ek `n
demokraat”? Hy maak `n bespotting van die hele poging om demokrasie in
Afrika te bevorder.

Botswana het vir ons `n voorbeeld gestel deur die Zimbabwiese Hoë
Kommissaris in te roep en hom aan te spreek. Suid-Afrika doen niks nie.
Hierdie departement doen niks nie. Die VF Plus kan nie so `n begroting
goedkeur nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Madam Speaker, Mr Mugabe said over the weekend that the ballpoint pen is
not mightier than the gun. He will not accept the results. With all due
respect, what do he and the people who support him understand the word
“democracy” to mean? Does democracy merely mean, “if I win, then I am a
democrat”? He is making a mockery of the whole endeavour to promote
democracy in Africa.

Botswana has set an example for us by calling in the Zimbabwean High
Commissioner and addressing him. South Africa is not doing anything. This
department is not doing anything. The FF Plus cannot approve such a
budget.]

Mr M S BOOI: Madam Speaker, Amilcar Cabral said, “Tell no lies, claim no
easy victories.” It would be wrong for anyone to suggest that we question
our human rights record as the old man, Rev Meshoe, has done. It is wrong
for somebody to suggest that because Zimbabwe has difficulties the budget
of Foreign Affairs should bear the brunt of these difficulties in Zimbabwe.
As a reverend he should have sourced his views from the Bible because it
would have told him “thou shall not lie”.

It is wrong for my hon friend Seremane to stand up and argue that because
we have not been able to resolve Zimbabwe today it reflects as a failure on
our foreign policy. I think he will appreciate that there are difficulties
out there and that Zimbabwe is one of the difficulties. Therefore, I want
to urge him not to listen to his leader, but to take a correct decision and
fully follow his conscience and support this budget.

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance, Freedom Front Plus and African
Christian Democratic Party dissenting).

Vote No 4 - Home Affairs - put:

Declarations of vote:

Mr C M LOWE: Madam Speaker, the Democratic Alliance opposes the Vote for
Home Affairs. We would welcome any opportunity not to do so because we do
believe very strongly that this department needs support, it needs to be
pushed and it needs to be taken into the future. For far too long, the DA
believes, Home Affairs has sat with a moribund report, without direction
and without any clear policies.

Recently this seems to have changed very much. We have welcomed the
turnaround strategy. We fully supported it. We have welcomed the role of
the director-general and his team. It has cost millions so far but we
believe that this will bear fruit.

While much has changed, too much is still not right at Home Affairs.
Offices are not up to standard, staff are demotivated and too many people
are standing around in sunshine and in rain, waiting for ID books and other
documents. They deserve better.

Most of all, much of the recent wave of xenophobic violence can be laid at
the door of Home Affairs, because of its failure to monitor, manage and
control the movement of peoples across our border. Government’s response to
the crisis was too little and too late. The City of Cape Town put
government to shame with its response.

However, most of all, because we believe in the future of this department,
we would like to support it in future years. But for those reasons, Madam
Speaker, the DA opposes Vote 4 on Home Affairs. Thank you.

Mr S N SWART: The recent violent attacks on foreign nationals have
horrified the world and focused attention on the plight of foreign
nationals. A report submitted in March this year by a team charged by the
Minister with assessing and addressing the huge backlog in applications for
asylum, has confirmed that a new backlog of staggering has developed with
the new influx of refugees since August 2005.

When refugees have no official status or documentation they cannot access
jobs, health services or education and are at the greatest risk of
xenophobia-related incidents. Additionally, the majority of South Africans
who deal with Home Affairs officials attest to the inefficiency of the
department and widespread corruption.

Whilst the ACDP appreciates that the department is in the process of a
turnaround strategy, which we support, following a previous audit
disclaimer by the Auditor-General, this department can only be termed to be
a department in crisis. We also appreciate, however, that significant
improvements and quick decisions have been implemented. But the department
remains in a parlous state. Consequently, the ACDP cannot support this
Budget Vote and we trust that we will have an improvement in future years.
I thank you.

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Speaker, the PAC declaration is that South Africa,
our country, needs to elevate its standing on human rights in favour of
refugees by ensuring that we sign and ratify all relevant Geneva
Conventions regarding immigrants and refugees.

It is imperative for African unity to begin by ensuring that we are in
compliance with all human rights instruments concerned with the promotion
of human rights of all refugees and immigrants who come to our country.
Thank you.

Dr C P MULDER: Mevrou die Speaker, indien ’n party hierdie begrotingspos
van Binnelandse Sake sou ondersteun, dan beteken dit by implikasie dat u
tevrede is met wat in die departement aangaan, asook met die diens wat daar
gelewer word.

Die feit van die saak is dat hierdie departement ’n rekord het van
geweldige probleme. Die agb President het reeds vroeër vanjaar en verlede
jaar tydens die opening van die Parlement in sy “state of the nation”
toespraak verwys na die probleme in die Departement van Binnelandse Sake.
Ons sê nie dat die agb Minister nie haar uiterste bes probeer om reg te
maak in daardie departement nie, maar ons let op dat daar ’n spesiale
taakspan aangestel is om die departement reg te ruk. Daar was die hele
probleem rondom direkteurs-generaal; die korrupsie en diefstal met die
verlore raak van identiteitsdokumente; die feit dat van die buitelandse
state nie meer ons reisdokumente, ons tydelike paspoorte, wil erken of
aanvaar nie. Daar is ’n hele rits van hierdie probleme.

Die feit van die saak is die gewone publiek daar buite, wat in kontak is
met hierdie departement, kla op ‘n deurlopende basis as gevolg van die swak
diens wat hulle ontvang. Ons kan nie hierdie departement se pos ondersteun
nie. Ons sal dit graag in die toekoms wil doen as dinge reggeruk is. Ons
sal teen hierdie departement stem. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Dr C P MULDER: Madam Speaker, if a party were to support this Home Affairs
Budget Vote, this would imply that you are satisfied with what is happening
in the department, as well as the service that is being delivered there.

The fact of the matter is that this department has a record of tremendous
problems. In his state of the nation address during the opening of
Parliament earlier this year and last year the hon President already
referred to the problems experienced by the Department of Home Affairs.
We are not saying that the hon Minister is not trying her utmost to fix
that department, but we have noticed that a special task team has been
appointed to straighten out the department. There was the whole problem
regarding the directors-general; the corruption and theft regarding the
disappearance of identity documents; the fact that some foreign countries
do not want to recognise or accept our travel documents, our temporary
passports, anymore. There is a large number series of these problems.

The fact of the matter is that ordinary citizens out there, who are in
contact with this department, constantly complain because of the poor
service they receive. We cannot support this department’s Vote. We would
really like to do so in the future when things have been straightened out.
We will vote against this department.]

Mr H P CHAUKE: I stand here, firstly, to support the Budget Vote on behalf
of the ANC. I think members of the portfolio committee who have been
speaking are fully aware that the changes we are beginning to see in the
Department of Home Affairs, compared to the last twelve years, make it
possible for us proudly to admit that there were problems, but we can see
changes. Hon Lowe knows very well that without the current team that we
have in the department we would not be able to go anywhere.

Therefore, this call to support the Budget Vote is not only informed by
just needing to give money to the department, it is also informed by the
kind of changes we are beginning to see. I think everybody knows – and Mr
Mulder knows this very well - that if this department does not have a
budget, nothing will move in this country. I think all of us are fully
aware that everything will come to a standstill.

What we have done in this House, with regard to the issue of refugees, is
that we have passed the amending Bill a week ago which gives the director-
general more powers to deal with issues of refugees. This used to be a
problem before because we had only five refugee centres in the country.

This current budget has helped the department to open more of these centres
so that we are able to provide enabling documents to most of the asylum
seekers. Therefore, I think we must make an honest call. All of us are
aware of the challenges, but the department is getting somewhere. We must
give them credit where we see it is deserved. Therefore, as the ANC we
support this Budget Vote.

Division demanded.

The House divided:

    AYES - 231: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Arendse, J D; Balfour,
    B M N; Baloyi, M R; Bapela, K O; Beukman, F; Bhengu, F; Bloem, D V;
    Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Bonhomme, T J; Booi, M S; Botha, N G W; Burgess, C
    V; Buthelezi, M G; Carrim, Y I; Cele, M A; Chalmers, J; Chauke, H P;
    Chikunga, L S; Chohan, F I; Combrinck, J J; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C;
    Dambuza, B N; Davies, R H; De Lange, J H; Diale, L N; Didiza, A T;
    Dikgacwi, M M; Dithebe, S L; Dlali, D M; Dlungwana, Z P; Doidge, G Q M;
    Du Toit, D C; Erwin, A; Fazzie, M H; Fihla, N B; Fraser-Moleketi, G J;
    Frolick, C T; Fubbs, J L; Gabanakgosi, P S; Gaum, A H; Gcwabaza, N E ;
    George, M E; Gerber, P A; Godi, N T; Gogotya, N J; Gololo, C L; Gumede,
    D M; Gxowa, N B; Hendricks, L B; Hendrickse, P A C; Hlangwana, N; Hogan,
    B A; Holomisa, S P; Huang, S; Jacobus, L; Jeffery, J H; Johnson, M;
    Kalako, M U; Kasienyane, O R; Kekana, C D; Kganyago, N M; Khoarai, L P;
    Kholwane, S E; Komphela, B M; Koornhof, G W; Kotwal, Z; Landers, L T;
    Lekgetho, G; Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T; Louw, S K; Ludwabe, C I; Luthuli,
    A N; Mabandla, B S; Mabe, L L; Mabena, D C; Madasa, Z L; Madella, A F;
    Madlala-Routledge, N C; Maduma, L D; Madumise, M M; Magau, K R; Mahlawe,
    N M; Mahomed, F; Maine, M S; Makasi, X C; Makgate, M W; Malahlela, M J;
    Maloney, L; Maluleka, H P; Maluleke, D K; Manana, M N S; Manuel, T A;
    Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Martins, B A D; Maserumule, F T; Mashangoane, P R;
    Mashigo, R J; Mashile, B L; Masutha, T M; Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F;
    Matsemela, M L; Matsomela, M J J ; Mayatula, S M; Mbombo, N D; Mdaka, N
    M; Mdladlana, M M S; Meruti, M V; Mfeketho, N C; Mgabadeli, H C; Mkongi,
    B M; Mlangeni, A; Mnguni, B A; Mnyandu, B J; Moatshe, M S; Mofokeng , T
    R; Mogale, O M; Mogase, I D; Mohamed, I J; Mohlaloga, M R; Molefe, C T;
    Moleketi, P J ; Moloto, K A; Monareng, O E; Morutoa, M R; Morwamoche, K
    W; Mosala, B G; Moss, M I; Motlanthe, K P; Motubatse-Hounkpatin, S D;
    Mshudulu, S A; Mthembu, B; Mthethwa, E N; Mtshali, E; Mufamadi, F S;
    Mzondeki, M J G; Ndlazi, Z A; Ndlovu, V B; Ndzanga, R A; Nene, M J ;
    Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B
    T; Ngculu, L V J; Ngele, N J; Ngwenya, W; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njikelana, S
    J ; Nkuna, C; Nogumla, R Z; Nonkonyana, M; Nqakula, C; Ntuli, B M;
    Ntuli, M M; Ntuli, R S; Ntuli, S B; Nxumalo, S N ; Nyambi, A J; Olifant,
    D A A; Oliphant, G G; Oosthuizen, G C; Padayachie, R L; Pahad, A G H ;
    Pahad, E G; Pandor , G N M; Phadagi, M G; Pheko, S E M; Pieterse, R D;
    Rabinowitz, R; Radebe, B A; Radebe, J T; Rajbally, S ; Ramakaba-Lesiea,
    M M; Ramgobin, M; Ramodibe, D M; Ramotsamai, C P M; Rasmeni, S M; Reid,
    L R R; Roopnarain, U; Schippers, J; Schneemann, G D; Schoeman, E A;
    Sefularo, M; Selau, J G; September, C C; Sibanyoni, J B; Sibhidla, N N;
    Siboza, S ; Sibuyana, M W; Sikakane, M R; Singh, N; Sisulu, L N;
    Sithole, D J; Skhosana, W M; Skosana, M B; Skweyiya, Z S T; Smith, V G;
    Solo, B M; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Surty, M E ; Swanson-
    Jacobs, J; Thabethe, E; Tinto, B; Tobias, T V; Tolo, L J; Tsenoli, S L;
    Tshabalala-Msimang, M E; Tshivhase, T J; Turok, B; Twala, N M; Vadi, I;
    Van den Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe, J H; Van der Merwe, S C ; Van
    Schalkwyk, M C J; Van Wyk, A; Wang, Y; Xingwana, L M; Xolo, E T;
    Yengeni, L E; Zikalala, C N Z; Zulu, B Z.

    NOES - 53: Blanché, J P I; Boinamo, G G; Botha, A; Botha, C-S; Camerer,
    S M; Coetzee, R; Davidson, I O; Doman, W P; Dreyer, A M; Dudley, C;
    Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; George, D T; Greyling, L W; Groenewald, P J;
    Hoosen, M H; Jenner, I E; Joubert, L K; Julies, I F; Kalyan, S V; King,
    R J; Kohler-Barnard, D; Labuschagne, L B; Lee, T D; Loe, S J; Lowe, C M;
    Marais, S J F; Masango, S J; Meshoe, K R J; Minnie, K J; Mulder, C P;
    Mulder, P W A; Nel, A H; Opperman , S E; Rabie, P J; Sayedali-Shah, M R;
    Selfe, J; Semple, J A; Seremane, W J; Simmons, S; Smuts, M; Spies, W D;
    Stephens, J J M; Steyn, A C; Swart, M; Swart, P S; Swart, S N; Trent, E
    W; Van Der Walt, D; Van Niekerk, A I; Waters, M; Weber, H; Woods, G G.

Vote accordingly agreed to.

Vote No 5 - Public Works – put and agreed to.

Vote No 6 – Government Communication and Information System - put and
agreed to.

Vote No 7 - National Treasury - put and agreed to.

Vote No 8 - Public Service and Administration - put and agreed to.

Vote No 9 – Public Service Commission - put and agreed to.

Vote No 10 - South African Management Development Institute - put and
agreed to.
Vote No 11 - Statistics South Africa - put and agreed to.

Vote No 12 - Arts and Culture – put and agreed to.

Vote No 13 - Education – put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr G G BOINAMO: Madam Speaker, it has been more than 14 years since the
evil of the apartheid system was abolished for good. It is absolutely right
that this government has vowed never to allow such discrimination to happen
again. At the same time that these promises are made, however, our
education system remains one of the most unequal in the world.

The South African Institute of Race Relations recently found that only 20%
of our schools can make the claim to offer a world-class education. This
means that 80% of our schools are dysfunctional and this government’s
policies continue to entrench this divide, instead of narrowing it. About
50% of our educators are not yet trained in the National Curriculum
Statement. The curriculum is confusing and educators in the weaker schools
struggle the most because in these schools even the basics of good
schooling are not established.

There are still unqualified teachers teaching our children and these
teachers are almost invariably in the weaker schools. The country is faced
with an enormous teacher shortage crisis. The government has closed teacher
training colleges and the universities can only produce between 6 000 and 7
000 teachers per annum. Where is this country going to get teachers from?

In the weaker schools, teachers are not assessed as inspectors are not
allowed. Cosatu rules supreme and appoints fellow comrades as principals
and teachers, with no consideration of their merits. The culture of
teaching and learning has collapsed, because both teachers and learners are
demoralised.

There is also a dire shortage of learning spaces, resulting in learner
congestion in classrooms. Many schools are unfenced, with no running water,
electricity, science laboratories or libraries. Only 20% of our schools
have proper sanitation. Five hundred of the 728 no-fee schools in the North
West Province have not received their budgets to date.

As a result of all of these things, learners cannot read, write or speak
properly. Violence, drugs and teenage pregnancy are common features of our
schools. As many as 50% of South African children who start school do not
complete matric. Even those children who complete matric are not properly
prepared for employment or further education. It is the sad reality that
more than 50% of the children ... [Time expired.]

The SPEAKER: Hon member, your time has expired!

Mr G G BOINAMO: The DA will not support an education budget that entrenches
apartheid.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, despite the many challenges, the ACDP will
support this Vote. Thank you.

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Speaker, the budget allocated to education is
considerable. It will, however, achieve its goal only when the government
recognises that our country is a developing country. Its education system
must be tailored to its own needs. We must provide quality education that,
although meeting our country’s needs, is not oblivious to the fact that it
has to meet international standards. Because of the global nature of the
world and the competition between nations, theories such as “pass one, pass
all” must not even cross our minds.

The PAC will always insist that education is the best national investment.
The budget for education must seriously consider students from poor homes.
They are in the majority. This country cannot be developed by the skills of
the rich minority.

Is it not time that some subjects are taught in the nine African languages
without abandoning English as a subject? Does chemistry, economics,
plumbing or mathematics become inferior just because they are taught in
isiZulu, Tshivenda or Sesotho? Well, the Germans have produced the Mercedes
Benz car and the Chinese are a nuclear power yet they do not speak English.
Of course, African languages need terminolog development to cope with the
rapid increase in knowledge in the world today.

An ANC Member: Madam Speaker, one could have believed hon Boinamo if he
were not a member of the Portfolio Committee on Education. All the issues
he has tabled are the issues that are being addressed as we speak. When it
comes to monitoring, inspection, even the budget that has been allocated,
what surprises me is that when we were going through this budget, we gave a
hand because we felt we were talking from the same page.

I think the hon member is talking more for the people out there than he is
talking about what is actually happening in the budget. The budget for
education has increased from R11,3 billion to R18,9 billion over four
years. If we were to take the overall budget it would be R120,6 billion for
all the schools, both provincial and national.

If we talk mainly about what we are engaged in here as this Parliament and
the budget for our national higher education, we will see that we are
assisting our learners to continue studying. We have bursaries for
educators, bursaries for social workers and bursaries for FET colleges.
This shows that this government has come a long way.

Again, if one looks at the presentations covering all these issues that
were received by the portfolio committee when hon Boinamo was present, one
would have thought that he would by now know which way the education system
in our country is moving. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mnr W D SPIES: Agb Speaker, Suid-Afrika is een van die lande wat die meeste
aan onderwys spandeer met die minste resultate. Waarom gebeur dit? Dit
gebeur wanneer prioriteite verkeerd is. As prioriteite in ’n organisasie
verkeerd is, dan is die uitsette nie eweredig aan die insette nie. Dis baie
basiese bestuursbeginsels.

Waarmee hou die Departement van Onderwys hom besig? Hy hou hom besig met
litigasie teen presterende skole, hy hou hom besig met rasseteikens, met
rassekwotas en met die daarstel van ongelyke meetinstrumente om prestasie
te meet.

Die VF Plus kan dit nie ondersteun nie. Die VF Plus kan nie kondoneer dat
daar op so ’n wyse met Suid-Afrika se belangrikste besitting omgegaan word
nie, en daarom steun ons nie hierdie begroting nie. Ek dank u. (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr W D SPIES: Hon Speaker, South Africa is one of the countries that
spends the most on education with the least results. Why is this happening?
This happens when one has the wrong priorities. When the priorities of an
organisation are wrong, then the outputs are not proportional to the
inputs. These are very basic management principles.

With what does the Department of Education occupy itself? It occupies
itself with litigation against schools that are doing well, it concerns
itself with race targets and race quotas, and with the creation of
inconsistent measuring instruments to measure performance.

The FF Plus cannot support this. The FF Plus cannot condone the manner in
which the most important asset of South Africa is being treated, and we
therefore do not support this budget. I thank you.]
Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance, Freedom Front Plus and National
Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 14 - Health – put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr M WATERS: Madam Speaker, the Minister of Health will be leaving a
department that is in meltdown to her successor next year. Queues are
getting longer, waiting lists for operations are growing, and the quality
of health care is falling. There are 46 109 vacant nursing posts, and 9 711
vacant doctors’ and specialists’ posts. The department is in severe need of
emergency surgery.

The department has once again received a qualified audit opinion. We are
one of 12 countries in the world where the child mortality rate is actually
increasing, a national embarrassment given the billions allocated to the
department every year.

The Minister still has not given any credible reason why it took four years
for her department to implement guidelines that would allow dual therapy to
be given to pregnant HIV-positive mothers. Given the fact that these
guidelines were ready in November 2003, the DA estimates that over 100 000
babies have been unnecessarily infected. The Minister owes the nation, and
in particular the parents of these babies, an explanation.

In addition to this, 142 babies in the Eastern Cape died of diarrhoea. A
simple rehydration mixture containing water, salt and sugar could have
saved the lives of these babies, yet nothing was done until over a hundred
babies were declared dead.

The Minister’s continuing flirtation with quacks such as Dr Rath has caused
this country and the fight against HIV/Aids untold damage. It has taken the
High Court to do what you should have done, hon Minister, and what the
Medicines Control Council should have done years ago, and that is enforce
the law and protect vulnerable people from Dr Rath’s concoctions. Hon
Minister, you saw fit to protect him and promote his quack concoctions. You
have done more damage to the fight against HIV/Aids than you can imagine.

What we need is leadership in the fight against HIV/Aids from both the
Minister and the President. The leadership has been sorely lacking from
both quarters. The DA will be opposing this budget. Thank you. [Applause.]

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Speaker, in measuring the state of our country’s health,
we must look at the private and public health sectors.

While there have been incremental advances in both of these, for which
reason the IFP supports the budget, the overall trend has been a decline.
We are making this declaration to highlight the weaknesses and offer our
solutions.

Our health information systems are inadequate. Co-operation within the
department and between the department and other departments necessary to
improve the health of people, particularly in rural areas, is inadequate.
The average life expectancy is declining. The rate of infant mortality is
on the increase, largely due to infections, diarrhoea and HIV.

Public facilities are in disrepair. The 55 000 vacancies for nurses and
doctors leaves them almost crippled. Matters that should be regulated, such
as the use of cellphones within the hazardous radiation division of this
department, are left to the industry. No warnings, no measurements, no
radiation measurements are provided. The health effects of GMOs entering
the food chain are not tracked.

Where does the hon Minister place her attention? She places it on prices in
the private sector! Medicine price regulations are still not resolved.
Pharmaceutical manufacturers make much the same on medicines since they
save on rebates; yet, there is a greater shortage of pharmacists and no
increased access to medicines in rural areas.

Members of medical aids pay extra for nongenerics and administration fees
and for higher medical scheme costs. Medical schemes are not transparent.
There is no indication of what goes into administration fees and costs,
making them more profit-making than meets the eye.

Hospital costs are now under the spotlight, yet medical devices are not
regulated. The creative steering of a traditional medicine industry
languishes, with the steady depletion of our indigenous plant resources.

The IFP has always advocated, and continues to advocate, for
decentralisation; greater urgency on Aids and for treating Aids like an
ordinary disease without special provisions for testing and treatment;
greater use of mobile units and better partnerships with traditional
healers to test for HIV; and competitive partnerships with the private
sector and the public to make better use of the private sector’s
management, training, equipment and staff for large numbers of South
Africans. Thank you.

Dr S E M PHEKO: Speaker, our declaration on health is that the rising cost
of private medical aid policies and the decline of services at our public
hospitals demand a policy that offers a national insurance programme for
all.

Health care cannot be a privilege. It must become a right if we are to
build a healthy nation that contributes to the economy of our country.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Speaker, firstly, one does not know whether to laugh or cry
as this budget talks of reducing the impact of HIV/Aids on society by
increasing access to a suitable package of treatment, care and support. And
yet the Minister waves away the last 10 years of loss of life as if she
were dismissing a fly that’s being a nuisance!

There are legitimate concerns about the lack of crucial access to quality
health care for a large number of South Africans, while proposals
regulating private health care prices are foolhardy. Discouraging private
hospitals from providing and expanding services and chasing away our few
remaining doctors and specialists will help no one. Instead, lack of
delivery by public hospitals should come under the spotlight and public-
private partnerships should be urgently negotiated.

Medical aid, through a national health scheme, is also far more likely to
broaden access to services. Why is this taking so long, hon Minister?
Reports of increased numbers of women, babies and children dying are
extremely disturbing, especially as experts believe these deaths could have
been avoided. The ACDP mourns the loss of these women and their little
ones, just as we mourn the loss of more than 600 000 additional little ones
who have been legally aborted during the Minister’s term of office.

Apart from everything else, we are simply not spending enough on the public
health sector, especially in view of the HIV/Aids epidemic and its ripple
impact in terms of the disease profile. Previously, minimal increases in
the budget have barely kept up with inflation let alone addressing
escalating needs.

This, coupled with our total lack of confidence in the Minister, leaves us
with no option but to vote against this budget. Thank you.
Mr L V J NGCULU: Madam Speaker, firstly, the issue of qualification of the
Department of Health’s budget report comes about because the Auditor-
General deals with the issues of concurrent powers; it is not necessarily
based on the performance of the department per se.

Secondly, one of the things that makes us, as the ANC, support this budget
– and we will continue to do so – is the fact that, again, it is agreed by
all those interested in positive approaches to health, also in the debate
we had this morning in the portfolio committee about the HIV clinicians,
that our programme on HIV/Aids is the biggest in the world.

In fact, one of the things that must be emphasised and continue to be
emphasised is the research. There is an agreement that research must be
scaled up. In fact, the issue regarding the guidelines for dual therapy is
that they are just guidelines. And guidelines can’t just be implemented
carte blanche across the board immediately, because you must take
experiences as they come, and learn and escalate from those experiences.
That is why they are called guidelines. The problem is that if you want to
experiment on the health of people, you must understand the consequences
thereof.

One of the things I think we must appreciate about this budget is that the
programmes on primary health care have actually grown across the board. The
question of the children dying is a multidisciplinary challenge that is
facing us. It is not necessarily only about health. [Interjections.] The
question of the cleanliness of water is not necessarily an issue falling
under the Department of Health. There is the question of the death of the
children; diarrhoea is avoidable and that’s why there must be a co-
ordinated approach to all the issues that are facing us. The ANC will
support this budget. Thank you.

Division demanded.

The House divided:

    AYES - 226: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Arendse, J D; Balfour,
    B M N; Baloyi, M R; Bapela, K O; Beukman, F; Bhengu, F; Bloem, D V;
    Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Bonhomme, T J; Booi, M S; Botha, N G W; Burgess, C
    V; Buthelezi, M G; Cachalia, I M; Carrim, Y I; Cele, M A; Chalmers, J;
    Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S; Chohan, F I; Combrinck, J J; Cronin, J P;
    Cwele, S C; Dambuza, B N; Davies, R H; De Lange, J H; Diale, L N;
    Didiza, A T; Dikgacwi, M M; Dithebe, S L; Dlali, D M; Dlungwana, Z P;
    Doidge, G Q M; Du Toit, D C; Erwin, A; Fazzie, M H; Fihla, N B; Fraser-
    Moleketi, G J; Frolick, C T; Fubbs, J L; Gabanakgosi, P S; Gaum, A H;
    Gcwabaza, N E ; George, M E; Gerber, P A; Godi, N T; Gogotya, N J;
    Gololo, C L; Gumede, D M; Gxowa, N B; Hendricks, L B; Hlangwana, N;
    Hogan, B A; Holomisa, S P; Huang, S; Jacobus, L; Jeffery, J H; Johnson,
    M; Kalako, M U; Kasienyane, O R; Kasrils, R; Kekana, C D; Kganyago, N M;
    Khoarai, L P; Kholwane, S E; Khunou, N P; Komphela, B M; Koornhof, G W;
    Kotwal, Z; Landers, L T; Lekgetho, G; Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T; Louw, S
    K; Ludwabe, C I; Mabandla, B S; Mabe, L L; Mabena, D C; Madasa, Z L;
    Madella, A F; Madlala-Routledge, N C; Madumise, M M; Magau, K R;
    Magubane, N E ; Mahlawe, N M; Mahomed, F; Mahote, S; Maine, M S; Makasi,
    X C; Makgate, M W; Malahlela, M J; Maloney, L; Maluleka, H P; Maluleke,
    D K; Manana, M N S; Manuel, T A; Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Martins, B A D;
    Maserumule, F T; Mashangoane, P R; Mashigo, R J; Mashile, B L; Masutha,
    T M; Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F; Matsemela, M L; Matsomela, M J J ;
    Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M; Mbombo, N D; Mdaka, N M; Mdladlana, M M S;
    Meruti, M V; Mfeketho, N C; Mgabadeli, H C; Mlangeni, A; Mnguni, B A;
    Mnyandu, B J; Moatshe, M S; Mofokeng , T R; Mogale, O M; Mogase, I D;
    Mohamed, I J; Mohlaloga, M R; Molefe, C T; Moleketi, P J ; Moloto, K A;
    Monareng, O E; Morutoa, M R; Morwamoche, K W; Mosala, B G; Moss, M I;
    Motlanthe, K P; Motubatse-Hounkpatin, S D; Mshudulu, S A; Mthembu, B;
    Mthethwa, E N; Mtshali, E; Mufamadi, F S; Mzondeki, M J G; Ndlazi, Z A;
    Ndlovu, V B; Ndzanga, R A; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E;
    Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T; Ngculu, L V J; Ngele, N J; Ngwenya, W;
    Nhlengethwa, D G; Njikelana, S J ; Nkuna, C; Nogumla, R Z; Nonkonyana,
    M; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M M; Ntuli, R S; Ntuli, S B; Nxumalo, S N ;
    Nyambi, A J; Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G; Oosthuizen, G C; Padayachie,
    R L; Pahad, A G H; Pahad, E G; Pandor, G N M; Phadagi, M G; Pheko, S E
    M; Phungula, J P; Pieterse, R D; Rabinowitz, R; Radebe, J T; Rajbally, S
    ; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin, M; Ramodibe, D M; Rasmeni, S M;
    Roopnarain, U; Schippers, J; Schneemann, G D; Schoeman, E A; Sefularo,
    M; Selau, J G; September, C C; Shabangu, S; Sibanyoni, J B; Sibhidla, N
    N; Siboza, S ; Sibuyana, M W; Sikakane, M R; Singh, N; Sithole, D J;
    Skhosana, W M; Skosana, M B; Smith, V G; Solo, B M; Sonto, M R; Sosibo,
    J E; Sotyu, M M; Surty, M E ; Swanson-Jacobs, J; Thabethe, E; Tinto, B;
    Tobias, T V; Tsenoli, S L; Tshabalala-Msimang, M E; Tshivhase, T J;
    Twala, N M; Vadi, I; Van den Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe, J H; Van der
    Merwe, S C ; Van Schalkwyk, M C J; Van Wyk, A; Wang, Y; Xingwana, L M;
    Xolo, E T; Yengeni, L E; Zikalala, C N Z; Zulu, B Z.

    NOES - 53: Blanché, J P I; Boinamo, G G; Botha, A; Botha, C-S; Camerer,
    S M; Coetzee, R; Davidson, I O; De Lille, P; Doman, W P; Dreyer, A M;
    Dudley, C; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; George, D T; Greyling, L W;
    Groenewald, P J; Hoosen, M H; Jenner, I E; Joubert, L K; Julies, I F;
    Kalyan, S V; King, R J; Kohler-Barnard, D; Labuschagne, L B; Lee, T D;
    Loe, S J; Lowe, C M; Marais, S J F; Masango, S J; Meshoe, K R J; Minnie,
    K J; Mulder, C P; Mulder, P W A; Nel, A H; Opperman , S E; Rabie, P J;
    Sayedali-Shah, M R; Selfe, J; Semple, J A; Seremane, W J; Simmons, S;
    Smuts, M; Spies, W D; Stephens, J J M; Steyn, A C; Swart, M; Swart, P S;
    Swart, S N; Trent, E W; Van Niekerk, A I; Waters, M; Weber, H; Woods, G
    G.


Vote accordingly agreed to.

Vote No 15 - Labour – put.

Declarations of vote:

Ms A M DREYER: Madam Speaker, there are five reasons why the DA opposes the
labour budget. The first is unemployment. The Department of Labour should
alleviate unemployment. Instead it is putting obstacles in the way of job
seekers as well as small and medium companies who want to employ more
people. The Minister has allowed struggling aspirant workers to give up
hope.

Secondly, there is the compensation fund. This safety net should assist
workers who are injured or disabled while on duty. Instead, due to
maladministration, it’s leaving vulnerable people without care.

Thirdly, with regard to training, the sector education and training
authorities should facilitate the training of unskilled people. Instead
they have failed miserably in their duty, dashed the hopes of desperate
young people and created another lost generation. [Interjections.]

Fourthly, on the issue of nonracism and nonsexism, the Employment Equity
Act is supposed to help create a workforce for all the people. Instead it
has contributed to the skills flight and divided South Africa along racial
and gender lines. [Interjections.]

The last point is financial management. The department should spend tax
money appropriately. Instead it has received yet another qualified report
from the Auditor-General, as did the sheltered employment factories, the
National Skills Fund and eight Setas, with some being placed under
administration and others undergoing forensic investigations.

The Department of Labour does not enhance the South African labour force.
It is incapable of proper financial management and cannot be trusted with
public money. [Interjections.]

Mr H P CHAUKE: On a point of order, Speaker. Is it possible that we can
remind the member that this is not a military base? [Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: That is not a point of order.

Dr S E M PHEKO: Very briefly, the PAC calls for learnerships that can enjoy
an accreditation process that enable millions in our country to compete
competently in the work force. The amount of money spent on learnerships is
not equal to the quality of outcomes. It is critical that learnerships are
re-evaluated by the Department of Labour. Thank you.

Ms O R KASIENYANE: Maybe I should start with the PAC. I would like to
advise the PAC to be part of this committee so that they can have more
information about the whole issue as there are wonderful programmes in
place concerning the learnerships and the amount of money spent.

Regarding the DA, I want to remind them that we have been dealing with some
of the issues, especially the Setas, in each and every meeting in order to
satisfy them. Let me just remind Mrs Dreyer, especially about the one point
she raised. I am saying “reminding her” because as far as all the issues
she is raising are concerned, we have dealt with them in each and every
meeting and the department clarified and addressed all these issues.

In terms of Setas there is a Nedlac process regarding their review and, of
course, recommendations from the review range from government’s funding of
Setas, their roles and functions and scope. I must say in 2010 there will
be a new Seta landscape based on recommendations from the National Skills
Authority, which was tasked by the Minister of Labour Department. I don’t
know why Mrs Dreyer is raising this because it has been clarified.

In respect of internal control, there are guidelines for that. The
department has also developed guidelines for the internal control system
and financial management system, which have subsequently been drawn up and
circulated to all provincial departments and labour centres. The ANC
supports the Budget Vote. [Time expired.]

Mnr W D SPIES: Agb Speaker, die Departement van Arbeid is een van die swart
skape in die Staatsdiens. Dit is die departement wat verantwoordelik is vir
die Werkloosheidverskeringsfonds, die Ongevallekommissaris en ook die
Setas, wat die afgelope jaar in omstredenheid gehul is.

Dit het die afgelope jaar so sleg gegaan dat die departement genoodsaak was
om sy direkteur-generaal in die pad te steek. Waarom gaan dit so sleg? Weer
eens is dit ’n saak van verkeerde prioriteite.

Die Departement van Arbeid moet deur middel van die gelyke
indiensnemingskommissie die skeidsregter wees vir die toepassing van
billike indiensneming. Maar wat doen die departement? Deur middel van mnr
Jimmy Manyi gebruik die departement ’n kommissie wat veronderstel is om
skeidsregter te wees as ‘n aktivis vir diskriminasie.

Die VF Plus kan dit nie goedkeur nie en ons kan om daardie rede nie die
begroting steun nie. Gister was Jeugdag. Jongmense het geveg vir gelykheid,
maar Suid-Afrika se jongmense het nog nie gelykheid nie. Voordat dit
gebeur, kan ons dit nie steun nie. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Mr W D SPIES: Hon Speaker, the Department of Labour is one of the black
sheep of the Public Service. This department is responsible for the
Unemployment Insurance Fund, the Workmen’s Compensation Commissioner as
well as the Setas, which were shrouded in controversy over the past year.

Things have been so bad over the past year that the department was forced
to dismiss its director-general. Why are things so bad? Once again it is a
case of incorrect priorities.

Through the Commission for Employment Equity the Department of Labour
should be the arbiter for the implementation of equitable employment, but
what is the department doing? Through Mr Jimmy Manyi, the department is
using a commission that was supposed to be an arbiter, to be an activist
for discrimination.

The FF Plus cannot approve it and therefore cannot support the Budget Vote.
Yesterday was Youth Day. Young people fought for equality, but South
Africa’s young people have not yet experienced equality. Until that
happens, we cannot support it. I thank you.]

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance, Freedom Front Plus, National Alliance
and African Christian Democratic Party dissenting).
Vote No 16 – Social Development – put and agreed to.

Vote No 17 – Sport and Recreation South Africa – put and agreed to
(Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 18 - Correctional Services – put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr J SELFE: Chairperson, the situation in the Department of Correctional
Services this year is somewhat better than it has been in previous years
thanks very largely to the national commissioner’s insistence on compliance
with the law, policy and procedure.

Being better than last year, however, in a department as important in the
fight against crime as Correctional Services is, is simply not good enough.
There are still too many incidents of corruption in the department which
seem to happen from the lowest to the highest levels, as we heard from the
Special Investigation Unit the other week.

This sort of corruption has resulted in the escape of Ananias Mathe from C-
Max in Pretoria and his near-escape again. There were also shameful escapes
from the Qalakabusha Prison.

The department has also been lamentably slow in getting the construction of
the new-generation prisons going. The finalisation of the Kimberley Prison,
the only one currently under construction, has been delayed time after
time. The others are awaiting final negotiations around the financing
model.

These delays are occurring against the backdrop of the fact that the vast
majority of correctional centres are overcrowded and do not conform to
minimum standards of health and hygiene laid down by the Correctional
Services Act itself.

Finally, the department has once again received a qualified audit and until
such time as it gets a clean bill of financial health, this remains a cause
for concern. It doesn’t help that the chief financial officer of the
department resigned suddenly 10 days ago.

For all these reasons, the DA will not be supporting this Vote.

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, we will be the first to say there are challenges
in Correctional Services. But I think the ANC is a very responsible
organisation. Our approach is to raise the weaknesses, but one must also
come up with solutions to the challenges. We really believe that it is our
duty to assist the department to overcome these problems.

As hon Selfe has said, I think the new accounting officer, Mr Vinnie
Petersen, and his team are trying very hard to tackle all these problems.
And the ANC appeals to all political parties and all members in this House
to assist the commissioner and the department to overcome these challenges.
The ANC supports this Vote.

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance and Freedom Front Plus dissenting).

Vote No 19 – Defence – put.

Declarations of vote:

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: Chairperson, we have reached a stage where we
must, as a country, decide whether we want to have a defence force or not.
I ask this question because the budget as it stands is inadequate.

When taking into consideration the issues and challenges facing the SANDF,
the most critical issues are as follows: the rejuvenation of landward
forces; the lack of ammunition for training; the retention of critical
personnel; the critically inadequate equipment and resourcing of our
peacekeeping missions; and maintaining and developing the infrastructure.

However, the DA wishes to make it perfectly clear that while we take the
position that more funds should be given to the SANDF, we demand greater
accountability for expenditure and results. When money has been misspent or
delivery is poor, heads must roll.

We want to see first-class, professional soldiers being given the best
possible training, being issued with up-to-date weapons and equipment and
being led by military leaders of integrity and experience. It is criminal,
Chairperson, to have a situation in the SANDF where the operational
requirements of personnel are not adequately funded.

We are losing the technical skills of engineers, pilots and navigators at a
rapid rate - and ironically VIP flights are fully funded.

Moreover, Africa relies on the SANDF to a large extent for its stability.
We cannot afford to play political games when the lives and the future of
millions of people are affected and the security of our country is
compromised.

It is for this reason that the DA opposes the current Defence Budget Vote
and calls for an increase in the Defence budget to enable the SANDF to
fulfil its mandate and all its commitments.

Mnu V B NDLOVU: Sihlalo, okokuqala nje, kufuneka ngisho ukuthi uMqondisi-
Jikelele walo Mnyango akawazi umsebenzi. Okwesibili, iminyaka isize
yamihlanu ilandelana ababheka izimali bengafuni ukusiphasisa kahle lesi
sabiwomali ngoba bethi asiphethwe kahle, ngakho-ke umsebenzi wakhe akawazi.


Okwesithathu, sifuna ukwenza isiqiniseko thina, njengeqembu le-IFP, sokuthi
amasosha lana asebenza ezindaweni zonke lezi ezingaphandle athole
ukubhekelelwa kahle. Uma ngabe-ke laba bantu abasebenza izimali
bengezukuwenza umsebenzi wabo ngokuhlakanipheleyo, bazokwazi kanjani ukuthi
amasosha lana aphethe izibhamu, ahlala emzini yabantu nalawo ahlala
emazweni angawazi azokwazi ukufukanyelwa kahle ukuze athokomale?

Kuzosebenzeka kanjani uma amasosha ezongena emgwaqeni atoyitoye kodwa
kungabibikho obekwa icala bese kuthiwa umuntu ophethe uMnyango uyawenza
umsebenzi? Bayoxoshwa nini abantu uma kuwukuthi umsebenzi owabangani?
Ngiyabonga. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr V B NDLOVU: Chairperson, firstly, I want to say that the director-
general of this department does not know what he is doing. Secondly, for
five consecutive years the auditors have not really approved of the budget
allocation saying that there is mismanagement of funds. We therefore say he
does not know what he is doing.

Thirdly, as the Inkatha Freedom Party, we would like to make sure that the
soldiers who are deployed in all neighbouring countries are well taken care
of. If the people who are working with the finances are not doing their
work cleverly, how will they ensure that the soldiers who are carrying
guns, who are residing at people’s houses and who are in foreign countries
are well taken care of and comfortable?

How will we work if the soldiers embark on mass action and toyi-toying?
Nobody is held responsible for this, and yet it is said that the person in
charge of the department is doing his job well? When are people going to be
fired if work is reserved for friends? Thank you.]

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Hon Chair, during the Budget Vote debate I told the hon
Minister that I saw that they have developed a new salute in Polokwane –
they saluted him by rolling their arms like this. But I didn’t know that
the effect was so vast, because I see that the hon Minister is not here
today. Maybe the hon Kgalema Motlanthe can tell us whether there’s been a
replacement or not, because I don’t see the hon Minister.

Agb Voorsitter, miljarde rande van die belastingbetaler is spandeer aan
wapentuig vir die Suid-Afrikaanse Nasionale Weermag. Dit is van die mees
gesofistikeerde en ontwikkelde wapentuig en ons kan almal met trots sê dat
dit wapentuig is wat Suid-Afrika aangekoop het.

Dit help egter nie ons het hierdie gesofistikeerde wapentuig, maar ons het
nie die geld om die mense behoorlik op te lei of om vir die onderhoud van
daardie wapentuig te betaal nie. Ek wil vir die agb Huis sê dat dit nou
omtrent al die derde en die vierde agtereenvolgende jaar is wat selfs die
ANC-lede saamstem dat daar nie genoeg geld vir verdediging is nie.

Ons sê altyd daar is ‘n kritieke tekort in terme van finansies om ons
Weermag behoorlik te laat funksioneer. Dit het dalk tyd geword dat hierdie
Parlement moet besluit: wil ons ’n Weermag hê of wil ons nie ‘n Weermag hê
nie. Ons kan nie op hierdie manier aangaan nie. Ons Weermag is besig om
uitmekaar te val en daarom sal die VF Plus nie hierdie begrotingspos kan
ondersteun nie. Dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Hon Chairperson, billions of rands of taxpayers money were spent on arms
for the SA National Defence Force. The most sophisticated and developed
arms were purchased and we can all proudly say that these armaments were
bought by South Africa.

It is, however, of no use that we have these sophisticated arms, but we do
not have the money to train the people properly or to maintain those
armaments. I want to say to the august House that this is the third or
fourth consecutive year in which even the ANC members agree that there is
not enough money for defence.

We always maintain that there is a critical shortage in terms of finance to
enable our defence force to function properly. Maybe the time has come for
this Parliament to decide: do we want a defence force or not. We cannot go
on like this. Our defence force is falling apart and consequently the FF
Plus will not support this Budget Vote. Thank you.]

Mnu F BHENGU: Sihlalo, ndiyaziva iintetho ezi. La madoda athethayo
besikunye ngela xesha besibambe ingxoxo-mpikiswano. Zonke ezi zinto
azithethayo azikho ntsha.

Ndiyafuna ukuphakamisa ukuba noko iPalamente mayikhe iyiqwalasele le nto
siyenzayo namhlanje. Iminyaka ili-13 sisenza into enye, efana nale.
Ndiyacinga ukuba nokho iya kusinceda into yokuwuqwalasela lo mba, kuba
siphinda-phinda into enye. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Mr F BHENGU: Chairperson, I do follow these discussions. We were
participating in the debate with the men who are talking now. He is not
saying anything new.

I want to urge Parliament to take what we are doing today seriously. We
have been doing this very same thing for 13 years. I think this will help
us to look into this matter seriously, because we are repeating the same
thing.]

Coming back to the FF Plus, I cannot imagine a person coming to this House
and asking the question: Do we need a defence force? Go and look at the
Constitution.

We have discussed these matters, as I have said. We have discussed the
issue of the audit reports, of the Auditor-General and of the public
commission’s recommendations. We have spoken about the state of readiness
of the army, the ammunition and the equipment.

As for the welfare of the soldiers, yes, indeed, we cannot expect the
unions to tell the department what to do, because the department, not the
unions, has the capacity to address the issues affecting our soldiers. But,
again, in the meeting we had this morning as the portfolio committee, we
discussed these issues at length.

I-ANC ke, Sihlalo, iyaluxhasa olu hlahlo lwabiwo-mali. Enkosi.
[Chairperson, the ANC therefore supports this Budget Vote. I thank you.]
[Time expired.]

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance, Freedom Front Plus, African Christian
Democratic Party and Independent Democrats dissenting).

Vote No 20 – Independent Complaints Directorate – put.

Declarations of vote:
Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Chairperson, as one of the most important divisions in
the parliamentary portfolio, the Independent Complaints Directorate is one
of the few entities directly aimed at protecting the public interest. Now,
despite having been kept, very deliberately, under-resourced and
understaffed for years, and still today with an acting CEO, this entity has
conducted hundreds of station visits, revealing filth and neglect in the
cells. It has also investigated hundreds of cases of abuse on the part of
SAPS officers as well as rape, murder and armed robbery, yet the ANC has
kept this watchdog without teeth.

The police utterly ignore a full third of the ICD’s recommendations when it
investigates misconduct on the part of its members. In fact, the only time
the SAPS pays it any mind is when legally obliged to, in the case of deaths
in custody. Anyone who is suggesting that this under-resourced body,
ignored on the whole by the SAPS, could have conducted an investigation
into police chief Jackie Selebi is misleading this House.

This body cannot replace the Directorate of Special Investigations. It
needs its own budget debate and was, without doubt, compromised by being
contained within the Safety and Security department, answerable to the self-
same Minister responsible for the police.

This body is underfunded, sits within the wrong Ministry and is very
deliberately being held back by a division determined to protect its own.
The DA will not vote for this budget.

Mnuz V B NDLOVU: Sihlalo uphiko olubhekele izikhalazo ngokusebenza
kwamaphoyisa i Independent Complaints Directorate ifana nenja enkulu
engenamazinyo, konke ekwenzayo kufanele ukuthi baphakamise emaphoyiseni
ukuthi awabophe amanye amaphoyisa. Akwenzeki lokho Sihlalo ngoba laba bantu
okufanele ngabe bajezisa amaphoyisa abawenzi lowo msebenzi ngoba ozakwabo
laba okufanele babajezise. Okokuqala lokho.

Okwesibili kuchithwa imali kuqashwa abantu okuthiwa abaphenye amacala,
abafela ezitokisini nabafa ngendlela engabonakali kahle, kwenziwe konke
kuthi uma sekuyoqulwa icala, icala lingaqulwa kutholakale ukuthi abantu
abasekho bonke futhi nalelo phoyisa obekufanele lenze lokho alisekho
emsebenzini. Akekho oshoyo ukuthi kwenzekani.

Ngamanye kukhona umdlalo nje odlalwayo kuloMnyango we ICD ongaziwa ngempela
ukuthi umlabalaba obhekaphi ngoba ukhona nowesiZulu kube khona nowesilungu
kanye nowesiSotho umlabalaba. Lo odlalwa kwa ICD awazeki ukuthi uqonda
ngalaphi ngempela. Kuchithwa imali ngempela ngaphandle kokuthi kube khona
umthetho ozoqonda ngqo ukuthi uma ngabe kufanele ukuthi uma ngabe kufanele
ukuthi umuntu owonile i ICD imthole ukuthi wonile ajeze kufanele ajeze
hhayi ukuthi kudlalwe ngabantu. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs
follows.)

[Mr V B NDLOVU: Chairperson, the Independent Complaints Directorate is like
a bulldog without teeth, in everything they do, they are supposed to direct
the detectives to arrest other police officers. Chairperson, this is not
happening because these people who are supposed to reprimand the police
officers are not doing that job since it is their colleagues who have to be
reprimanded. That was the first point.

Secondly, money is being spent on hiring people to investigate cases of
people who died in police custody and those who died mysteriously.

Everything will be done and when the matter goes to trial, the case is not
tried because all state witnesses could no longer be found and the
investigating officer who is supposed to be looking for them is no longer
working for the Police Service. No one can tell us what is happening.

In other words, there is a game that is being played in the ICD and we
really do not understand what kind of draughts game it is, because there
are Zulu, English and Sotho draughts. The one that is being played in the
ICD does not show its direction. Money is really being spent without
enacting an Act that will directly deal with that. If the ICD finds that
someone is an offender then that person has to be punished. They should not
play games with people.]

Mr N T GODI: Chairperson, whilst the APC will support the budget, we
nonetheless want to highlight two things: Firstly, it is a fact that the
structure of the ICD was approved about 11 years ago, with 535 posts. To
date, only 270 of those posts are funded. The question is: When will the
remaining 265 posts also be funded so that the ICD can operate at optimal
strength? Also, seeing that numbers in the SAPS are increasing on a yearly
basis, when will the next staff review be done so that the ICD is able to
do its job effectively?

Secondly, there is the challenge of leadership. For the past almost 30
months, the executive director’s position has been filled by people in an
acting capacity and the current acting executive director has been there
for 18 months. The question is: Why can’t we put somebody there on a
permanent basis or appoint the person who has been acting in that position
for 18 months on a permanent basis?

If you look at the work that the current management team has done to get
the ICD from a disclaimer to the clean audit that it will most definitely
get this time around, I don’t think there’s any reason why we should keep
these people in a less than permanent position. This will ensure that there
is stability and effectiveness in that unit. Thank you.

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Voorsitter, wat is een van die argumente wat deur die
regerende party gebruik word om die Skerpioene te ontbind? As die vraag
gevra word: maar wie gaan dan die polisie polisieer as die Skerpioene nie
daar is nie, dan word daar baie vinnig gesê dis die Onafhanklike
Klagtesdirektoraat, OKD, se taak en funksie om dit te doen.

Feit is dit bewys mos vir ons dat die OKD nie in staat is om dit te doen
nie. Die OKD het bestaan terwyl die klagtes teen hul Nasionale Kommissaris,
mnr Jackie Selebe, al klaar daar was en die OKD kon niks daaromtrent doen
nie; en hulle het ook niks daaromtrent gedoen nie.

Daarom sê die VF Plus dat die OKD, weet ons, nie in ’n posisie is nie, nie
die fondse het nie, nie die mannekrag het nie en net eenvoudig nie in staat
is om dit te doen nie. Daarom sê ons om die argument te voer dat die OKD
daardie werk sal vervul net eenvoudig nie waar is nie. As daar nie
indringend gekyk gaan word na die begroting van die OKD nie, en as daar nie
indringend gekyk gaan word na die OKD in terme van sy mannekrag nie, wil ek
vandag vir u sê, gaan dit ’ n lamgelêde departement wees wat eintlik maar
net die belastingbetaler se geld gebruik.

Daar is hoeveel klagtes van die publiek teen lede van die polisie by die
OKD. Ek persoonlik het al skrywes aan die OKD gerig. Hulle doen nie eers
die moeite om dit te beantwoord nie. Hoe kan die publiek dan vertroue hê in
so ‘n liggaam as hulle nie eens korrespondensie behoorlik kan beantwoord
nie. Die VF Plus sal dan nie die begroting ondersteun nie. Dankie.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Chairperson, what is one of the arguments being used by
the ruling party to disband the Scorpions? When the question is asked: Who
will police the police if the Scorpions are no longer there, it is quickly
said that it will be the task and function of the Independent Complaints
Directorate, ICD.

The fact of the matter is that it has been proved that the ICD is not
capable of doing so. The ICD already existed when the complaints against
their National Commissioner, Mr Jackie Selebe, were made and the ICD could
not do anything about it; and they did nothing about it either.

That is why the FF Plus says that the ICD, as we know, is not in a position
to do so; it has no funds, no manpower and is simply not able to do so.
That is why we say to advance the argument that the ICD will perform that
function, is simply not true. If the budget of the ICD is not incisively
looked into and the ICD’s manpower is not incisively examined, I want to
say to you today, it will be a hamstrung department that is really only
using the taxpayer’s money.

The public have lodged so many complaints with the ICD against members of
the police. I have personally written to the ICD. They do not even make the
effort to reply to such correspondence. How can the public then have any
confidence in such a body that cannot even deal with correspondence
properly? The FF Plus will therefore not support the Budget Vote. Thank
you.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Chairperson, the ACDP will not be supporting Budget Vote
No 20 because of the ICD’s lack of leadership. Complaints about the ICD
being a toothless body whose recommendations are shrugged off by the SAPS
management must be addressed as a matter of urgency.

The ICD must use its increased budget to address the problem of
understaffing. It must fill vacant positions and employ more investigators
to fulfil the core mandate of the ICD. We trust that this increased budget
will enable the ICD to buy more vehicles so as to be able to attend to
crime scenes and court hearings. The ACDP will not be supporting this Vote.
Thank you.

Ms M M SOTYU: Chairperson, since 2000 the DA has not supported this Budget
Vote. The problem, according to them, has been that we have not been giving
enough funding to the ICD. Yet now that the ICD is getting enough money
from the department, they are still not supporting the budget. I won’t
stoop to their level, as people might not see the difference.
We acknowledge the challenges faced by the ICD and I believe, as Ntate
Moruti Meshoe has said, that given the significant increase the ICD has
received, it will be possible for them to attract more investigators.

Regarding the issue of the acting head of the ICD, I would like to tell
Ntate Moruti that the process of getting a suitable candidate for that
position is about to be completed. The problem has been that the Minister
has been advertising year in and year out, but we did not get a suitable
candidate until this month of June.

Having said that, I won’t go into details regarding the Scorpions. We are
not debating the Scorpions here. The time will come for us to debate the
Scorpions, and then we’ll do so. We support this budget.

Division demanded.

The House divided:

    AYES - 227: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Arendse, J D; Balfour,
    B M N; Baloyi, M R; Beukman, F; Bhengu, F; Bloem, D V; Bogopane-Zulu, H
    I; Bonhomme, T J; Booi, M S; Botha, N G W; Burgess, C V; Buthelezi, M G;
    Carrim, Y I; Cele, M A; Chalmers, J; Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S;
    Combrinck, J J; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; Dambuza, B N; Davies, R H; De
    Lange, J H; De Lille, P; Diale, L N; Didiza, A T; Dithebe, S L; Dlali, D
    M; Dlungwana, Z P; Doidge, G Q M; Du Toit, D C; Erwin, A; Fazzie, M H;
    Fihla, N B; Fraser-Moleketi, G J; Fubbs, J L; Gabanakgosi, P S; Gaum, A
    H; Gcwabaza, N E ; George, M E; Gerber, P A; Godi, N T; Gogotya, N J;
    Gololo, C L; Greyling, L W; Gumede, D M; Gxowa, N B; Hendricks, L B;
    Hlangwana, N; Hogan, B A; Holomisa, S P; Hoosen, M H; Huang, S; Jacobus,
    L; Jeffery, J H; Jenner, I E; Johnson, M; Kalako, M U; Kasienyane, O R;
    Kasrils, R; Kekana, C D; Kganyago, N M; Khoarai, L P; Kholwane, S E;
    Khunou, N P; Koornhof, G W; Kota, Z A; Kotwal, Z; Landers, L T;
    Lekgetho, G; Likotsi, M T; Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T; Louw, S K; Ludwabe,
    C I; Mabandla, B S; Mabe, L L; Mabena, D C; Madasa, Z L; Madella, A F;
    Madlala-Routledge, N C; Maduma, L D; Madumise, M M; Magau, K R; Mahlawe,
    N M; Mahomed, F; Mahote, S; Maine, M S; Makasi, X C; Malahlela, M J;
    Maloney, L; Maluleka, H P; Maluleke, D K; Manana, M N S; Mapisa-Nqakula,
    N N; Martins, B A D; Mashangoane, P R; Mashigo, R J; Mashile, B L;
    Masutha, T M; Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F; Matsemela, M L; Matsomela, M
    J J ; Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M; Mbombo, N D; Mdaka, N M; Mdladlana, M
    M S; Meruti, M V; Mfeketho, N C; Mgabadeli, H C; Mlambo-Ngcuka, P G;
    Mnguni, B A; Mnyandu, B J; Moatshe, M S; Mofokeng , T R; Mogale, O M;
    Mogase, I D; Mohamed, I J; Mohlaloga, M R; Molefe, C T; Moleketi, P J ;
    Moloto, K A; Monareng, O E; Moonsamy, K; Morutoa, M R; Morwamoche, K W;
    Mosala, B G; Moss, M I; Motlanthe, K P; Motubatse-Hounkpatin, S D;
    Mpahlwa, M B ; Mshudulu, S A; Mthembu, B; Mthethwa, E N; Mtshali, E;
    Mufamadi, F S; Mzondeki, M J G; Ndlazi, Z A; Ndlovu, V B; Ndzanga, R A;
    Nene, M J ; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N
    D; Ngcobo, B T; Ngculu, L V J; Ngele, N J; Ngwenya, W; Nhlengethwa, D G;
    Njikelana, S J ; Nkuna, C; Nogumla, R Z; Nonkonyana, M; Nqakula, C;
    Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, R S; Ntuli, S B; Nxumalo, S N ; Nyambi, A J; Olifant,
    D A A; Oliphant, G G; Oosthuizen, G C; Padayachie, R L; Pahad, A G H ;
    Pahad, E G; Pandor , G N M; Phadagi, M G; Pheko, S E M; Phungula, J P;
    Pieterse, R D; Rabinowitz, R; Radebe, B A; Radebe, J T; Rajbally, S ;
    Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin, M; Ramodibe, D M; Ramotsamai, C P M;
    Rasmeni, S M; Roopnarain, U; Schippers, J; Schneemann, G D; Schoeman, E
    A; Sefularo, M; Selau, J G; September, C C; Shabangu, S; Sibanyoni, J B;
    Sibhidla, N N; Siboza, S ; Sikakane, M R; Singh, N; Sithole, D J;
    Skhosana, W M; Skweyiya, Z S T; Smith, V G; Solomon, G; Sonto, M R;
    Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Surty, M E ; Swanson-Jacobs, J; Thabethe, E;
    Tinto, B; Tobias, T V; Tsenoli, S L; Tshabalala-Msimang, M E; Tshivhase,
    T J; Turok, B; Twala, N M; Vadi, I; Van den Heever, R P Z; Van der
    Merwe, J H; Van der Merwe, S C ; Van Schalkwyk, M C J; Van Wyk, A; Wang,
    Y; Xingwana, L M; Xolo, E T; Yengeni, L E; Zulu, B Z.

    NOES - 50: Blanché, J P I; Boinamo, G G; Botha, A; Botha, C-S; Camerer,
    S M; Coetzee, R; Davidson, I O; Doman, W P; Dreyer, A M; Dudley, C;
    Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; George, D T; Groenewald, P J; Joubert, L K;
    Julies, I F; Kalyan, S V; King, R J; Kohler-Barnard, D; Labuschagne, L
    B; Lee, T D; Loe, S J; Lowe, C M; Marais, S J F; Masango, S J; Meshoe, K
    R J; Minnie, K J; Morgan, G R; Mulder, C P; Mulder, P W A; Nel, A H;
    Opperman , S E; Rabie, P J; Sayedali-Shah, M R; Selfe, J; Semple, J A;
    Seremane, W J; Simmons, S; Smuts, M; Spies, W D; Stephens, J J M; Steyn,
    A C; Swart, M; Swart, P S; Swart, S N; Trent, E W; Van Der Walt, D; Van
    Niekerk, A I; Waters, M; Weber, H.

    ABSTAIN - 1: Woods, G G.
Vote accordingly agreed to.

Vote No 21 - Justice and Constitutional Development – put.

Declarations of vote:

Dr A I VAN NIEKERK: Chairperson, in the debate on the Justice Vote, I
expressed my concerns regarding the failure of the Ministry to adequately
address the problems in Justice notwithstanding that Parliament has nearly
doubled the Justice budget during the past five budgets.

The Deputy Minister who closed the budget debate did not address these
genuine concerns. He referred to our inputs as nonsense, rubbish and
vitriolic diatribe. Instead of engaging our arguments intellectually, he
became personal and started to play the man and not the ball.

Vir my beteken “vitriolic diatribe” bitsige spotrede, wat glad nie ons
bedoeling was nie. Ons was ernstig in ons begrotingsdebat, en ek kan u
verseker dat ons regspleging as ’n hoogste prioritieit beskou het. Dit is
waarom ek gesê het in ’n demokrasie is die Ministerie van Justisie een van
die belangrikste portefeuljes, aangesien dit een van die arms van die
regering verteenwoordig.

Die hele Suid-Afrika het die afgelope tyd besef al wat tussen ons en die
anargie in ons noordelike buurstaat staan, is ons regstelsel. Ons is egter
hoogs bekommerd oor die stand van ons regspleging en veral die aanslag op
ons Konstitusionele Hof, wat die finale skans tussen ons en anargie is.

As amptelike Opposisie het ons nie meer vertroue in die regering om die reg
te handhaaf nie. En daarom kan ons nie hierdie begroting ondersteun nie. Ek
dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[According to me “vitriolic diatribe” implies cutting and mocking discourse
which was not our intention at all. We were serious in our budget debate,
and I can assure you that we regarded jurisprudence as being of prime
importance. That is why I said that in a democracy the Ministry of Justice
is one of the most important portfolios, seeing that it represents one of
the arms of government.

Lately the whole of South Africa has realised that the only thing standing
between us and the anarchy in our northern neighbouring state is our legal
system. However, we are extremely concerned about the state of our
jurisprudence and especially the onslaught on our Constitutional Court
which represents the final shield between us and anarchy.

As Official Opposition we no longer have confidence in the government to
maintain justice. And therefore we cannot support this budget. I thank
you.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Voorsitter, ek stem saam met mnr Joubert wat betref
sy sentimente. [Chairperson, I agree with the sentiments voiced by Mr
Joubert.]

But I want also to refer to the Deputy Minister who during the debate
referred to the inputs by the opposition as rubbish. That means that the
annual report of the Department of Justice is rubbish because what I said
comes from that report. I proved it based on the annual report. The
Minister and her department are failures.

I’ll give you some examples: Out of a personnel of more than 15 000, more
than 9 000 have left that department. The department had a shortage of 70%
as far as service delivery is concerned, and the amount of sick leave taken
in that department, without medical certification, amounts to about fifty
productive years.

In the professional component, the prosecutors and the magistrates, the
turnover rate was about 80%. Of the 1 493 courts on average, each did not
even finalise an average of one court case per day. More than 720 000 cases
were removed from the roll. Of more than a million complaints laid with the
police only about 30% were eventually dealt with by the courts. What this
shocking picture proves, based on the department’s annual report, is that
our justice system is a failure.

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, a significant portion of R3,3 billion of the
budget is allocated to court services. Of that amount R59,7 million is
allocated to the Constitutional Court. Our courts are independent and
subject only to the Constitution and the law, which must be applied
impartially and without fear, favour or prejudice. No person or organ of
state may interfere with the functioning of these courts. It is against
this background that the ACDP views the recent developments surrounding the
Cape Judge President and the Constitutional Court judges with great
concern.

Public confidence in the Judicial Service Commission and judiciary was not
well served by the manner in which previous complaints against the Cape
Judge President, including that of the ACDP, were dealt with by the JCI. We
are now facing a greater crisis with Constitutional Court judges apparently
divided on this issue. It is crucial for the Constitutional Court judges
and the JSC to act urgently and in a transparent manner. A full and
transparent inquiry must be held.

As far as the budget in general is concerned, the ACDP is fully aware of
the challenges facing this department and the adverse findings by the
Auditor-General. Whilst there have been improvements, surely after 14 years
there should have been greater progress in this department, which plays
such an important role in the fight against crime. We believe that this
should have occurred and will regrettably not support this Vote. Thank you.

Dr S E M PHEKO: Chairperson, the PAC is concerned about long delays in
reported criminal cases coming to court, especially the High Court. In some
cases evidence has been lost when witnesses died.

Our country has also been hit by scams. The perpetrators of these scams
have robbed many innocent people who thought they were helping genuine
cases of suffering. It is a recognised principle of law that justice
delayed is justice denied.

Mr Y I CARRIM: Chairperson, obviously given the scope and magnitude of what
the department deals with, there’ll be problems. But it’s nowhere near what
it’s purported to be by the DA and the IFP, in particular. We, of course,
have read the same report you read, but came to very different conclusions.


In fact, if anything, there is something both the DA and IFP need to note,
and, of course, the IFP wouldn’t because Mr Koos van der Merwe is on
permanent sick leave. How can he speak about sick leave in reference to the
department’s report when he is on permanent sick leave?

In fact, this morning we had the Customary Law of Succession Bill. He
represents the IFP, but he was not there. We had the Traditional Courts
Bill; he wasn’t there. In fact, he has not been there at all in the seven
months I’ve been chairing. Let me go on to say ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon member, there is a point of
order.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: The point of order is: How can I attend a committee
meeting if I’m not notified?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): That is not a point of order.

Mr Y I CARRIM: Mr Koos van der Merwe won’t know either that the vacancy
rates have been reduced from 23% to 12% in the department, though we have
said that that must mean more service delivery.

Indeed, when you talk about the budget, Mr Joubert, you know that it has
doubled, but in this current year that has passed us by, 97,7% of the
budget was spent whereas previously 92,7% was spent. This is a 5% increase,
which is quite significant even though the committee as a whole has said
that it is the quality of the spending, not just the amount that is spent.

In fact, the department has had to deal with issues that, strictly
speaking, don’t belong to its core functions, and we urged the Minister on
this. The Deputy Minister regrettably cannot reply to the many statements
made about it. Parliament should consider that since whereas statements are
made here the executive members are not allowed to respond, and that is not
entirely fair.

Also, you talk about there being anarchy in the north of our country. Why
don’t you go to the polls early next year and say the same thing? Indeed,
if there is anarchy, why is it that the Democratic Republic of Congo has
come to our country to get training in respect of its legal system? Why is
it, too, that the Department of Justice is asked repeatedly to help other
countries in Africa?

I have barely begun, but what can I do, the time doesn’t allow me to
finish. Perhaps I can talk to them outside this House. Thank you. [Time
expired.]

Division demanded.

The House divided:

    AYES - 225: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Arendse, J D; Balfour,
    B M N; Baloyi, M R; Beukman, F; Bhengu, F; Bloem, D V; Bogopane-Zulu, H
    I; Bonhomme, T J; Booi, M S; Botha, N G W; Burgess, C V; Buthelezi, M G;
    Cachalia, I M; Carrim, Y I; Cele, M A; Chalmers, J; Chauke, H P;
    Chikunga, L S; Combrinck, J J; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; Dambuza, B N;
    Davies, R H; Diale, L N; Didiza, A T; Dithebe, S L; Dlali, D M;
    Dlungwana, Z P; Doidge, G Q M; Du Toit, D C; Erwin, A; Fazzie, M H;
    Fihla, N B; Fraser-Moleketi, G J; Fubbs, J L; Gabanakgosi, P S; Gaum, A
    H; Gcwabaza, N E ; George, M E; Gerber, P A; Godi, N T; Gogotya, N J;
    Gololo, C L; Gumede, D M; Gxowa, N B; Hendricks, L B; Hlangwana, N;
    Hogan, B A; Holomisa, S P; Huang, S; Jacobus, L; Jeffery, J H; Johnson,
    M; Kalako, M U; Kasienyane, O R; Kasrils, R; Kekana, C D; Kganyago, N M;
    Khoarai, L P; Kholwane, S E; Khunou, N P; Koornhof, G W; Kota, Z A;
    Kotwal, Z; Landers, L T; Lekgetho, G; Likotsi, M T; Lishivha, T E; Louw,
    J T; Louw, S K; Ludwabe, C I; Mabandla, B S; Mabe, L L; Mabena, D C;
    Madasa, Z L; Madella, A F; Madlala-Routledge, N C; Maduma, L D;
    Madumise, M M; Magau, K R; Mahlawe, N M; Mahomed, F; Mahote, S; Maine, M
    S; Makasi, X C; Malahlela, M J; Maloney, L; Maluleka, H P; Maluleke, D
    K; Manana, M N S; Manuel, T A; Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Martins, B A D;
    Maserumule, F T; Mashangoane, P R; Mashigo, R J; Mashile, B L; Masutha,
    T M; Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F; Matsemela, M L; Matsomela, M J J ;
    Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M; Mbombo, N D; Mdaka, N M; Mdladlana, M M S;
    Meruti, M V; Mfeketho, N C; Mgabadeli, H C; Mlambo-Ngcuka, P G;
    Mlangeni, A; Mnguni, B A; Mnyandu, B J; Moatshe, M S; Mofokeng , T R;
    Mogale, O M; Mogase, I D; Mohamed, I J; Mohlaloga, M R; Molefe, C T;
    Moleketi, P J ; Moloto, K A; Monareng, O E; Moonsamy, K; Morutoa, M R;
    Morwamoche, K W; Mosala, B G; Moss, M I; Motlanthe, K P; Motubatse-
    Hounkpatin, S D; Mpahlwa, M B ; Mshudulu, S A; Mthembu, B; Mthethwa, E
    N; Mtshali, E; Mufamadi, F S; Mzondeki, M J G; Ndlazi, Z A; Ndlovu, V B;
    Ndzanga, R A; Nene, M J ; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E;
    Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T; Ngculu, L V J; Ngele, N J; Ngwenya, W;
    Nhlengethwa, D G; Njikelana, S J ; Nkuna, C; Nogumla, R Z; Nonkonyana,
    M; Nqakula, C; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, R S; Ntuli, S B; Nxumalo, S N ;
    Nyambi, A J; Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G; Oosthuizen, G C; Padayachie,
    R L; Pahad, A G H ; Pahad, E G; Pandor , G N M; Phadagi, M G; Pheko, S E
    M; Phungula, J P; Pieterse, R D; Rabinowitz, R; Radebe, B A; Radebe, J
    T; Rajbally, S ; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin, M; Ramodibe, D M;
    Ramotsamai, C P M; Rasmeni, S M; Roopnarain, U; Schippers, J;
    Schneemann, G D; Schoeman, E A; Sefularo, M; Selau, J G; September, C C;
    Shabangu, S; Sibanyoni, J B; Sibhidla, N N; Siboza, S ; Sibuyana, M W;
    Sikakane, M R; Singh, N; Sithole, D J; Skhosana, W M; Skweyiya, Z S T;
    Smith, V G; Solomon, G; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Surty, M E
    ; Swanson-Jacobs, J; Thabethe, E; Tinto, B; Tobias, T V; Tshivhase, T J;
    Turok, B; Twala, N M; Vadi, I; Van den Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe, J
    H; Van der Merwe, S C ; Van Schalkwyk, M C J; Van Wyk, A; Wang, Y;
    Xingwana, L M; Xolo, E T; Yengeni, L E; Zulu, B Z.

    NOES - 51: Blanché, J P I; Boinamo, G G; Botha, A; Botha, C-S; Camerer,
    S M; Coetzee, R; Davidson, I O; Doman, W P; Dreyer, A M; Dudley, C;
    Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; George, D T; Groenewald, P J; Joubert, L K;
    Julies, I F; Kalyan, S V; King, R J; Kohler-Barnard, D; Labuschagne, L
    B; Lee, T D; Loe, S J; Lowe, C M; Marais, S J F; Masango, S J; Meshoe, K
    R J; Minnie, K J; Morgan, G R; Mulder, C P; Mulder, P W A; Nel, A H;
    Opperman , S E; Rabie, P J; Sayedali-Shah, M R; Selfe, J; Semple, J A;
    Seremane, W J; Simmons, S; Smuts, M; Spies, W D; Stephens, J J M; Steyn,
    A C; Swart, M; Swart, P S; Swart, S N; Trent, E W; Van Der Walt, D; Van
    Niekerk, A I; Waters, M; Weber, H; Woods, G G.

    ABSTAIN - 3: De Lille, P; Greyling, L W; Jenner, I E.

Vote accordingly agreed to.
Vote No 22 – Safety and Security – put.

Declarations of vote:

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Chairperson, billions have been spent on safety and
security over the past ten years, yet we have an unwavering murder rate of
52 citizens per day and the viciousness of attacks during robberies and
muggings is accepted as the norm. We have police criminality where we see
them charged with rape, murder and armed robbery.

Sixty-five per cent of our police stations don’t comply with the Domestic
Violence Act. Thirty-eight million rand was paid out in civil claims this
year to citizens who were beaten, run over, shot or illegally detained by
bad cops.

Thousands of farmers have been slaughtered on their farms. We have millions
of unregistered refugees we can’t provide for because we don’t know how
many there are because this Ministry has failed to protect our borders.

The massively expensive 10111 system doesn’t work and millions are going to
be wasted on scrapping one of the most successful crime units in our
history, the Scorpions. Millions more are wasted on the utterly
unproductive secretariat. Tourists are being advised to take their foreign
currency elsewhere; men and women are being gang-raped in the SAPS holding
cells; there are massive shortages in logistical support, the forensic
laboratories are so far behind, cases are thrown out of courts.

The Minister is making coy claims that crime is decreasing but has failed
to deliver the more regular release of crime stats as promised. Today we
are being asked to provide a massive new budget to do exactly the same as
has been done for the past 10 years where SAPS members of quality are being
sidelined while unqualified members are promoted to act as station
commanders.

The answer is no. The Democratic Alliance will under no circumstances vote
for this budget. [Applause.]
Mnu V B NDLOVU: Sihlalo, okokuqala, uNgqongqoshe unehhovisi likanobhala
okufanele engabe yilona elikhipha umyalelo wenqubomgomo yoMnyango kodwa
liyehluleka ukwenza lowo msebenzi. Eqinisweni bakhona nje phela ngoba
bangabafowethu nodadwethu kodwa ukuthi benze umsebenzi lona okufanele
bawenze, abakwazi nhlobo.

Okwesibili, kuyanda ukugqekezwa kwemizi yabantu. Ngamanye amazwi, ziyanda
izinto ezihlupha abantu emizini yabo. Akhona amaphoyisa okufanele ngabe
enza umsebenzi kodwa awawenzi. Lokhu kubulawa kwabantu kwenzeka ngoba
ubuholi abukho emaphoyiseni.

Sekufanele manje silungele u-2010. Yiso lesi sikhathi lapho kufanele ngabe
silungisa umphathi wamaphoyisa ozoba nobuholi. Uma ubuholi bungekho ubuholi
uzoshonaphi? Nawe njengoba ulapho nje, Sihlalo, uyaholwa. Uma ungaholwa
muntu uzoshonaphi? (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr V B NDLOVU: Chairperson, firstly, the Minister has the Secretariat for
Safety and Security which is supposed to issue a statement on the policy of
the department, but they are failing to do so. The truth of the matter is
that they are merely there as our brothers and sisters but they cannot
perform their duties.

Secondly, housebreaking is on the rise. In other words, there is a lot that
is troubling people in their houses. The police who are supposed to be
working are not doing their work. This killing of people is happening
because there is no leadership in the Police Service.

We should now get ready for 2010. This is the time when we should be
grooming the National Commissioner of Police who is going to have
leadership qualities. If there is no leadership where are you going to go?
Chairperson, you yourself, as you are seated there, are being led. If you
are not led by anybody, where are you going to go?]

Rev K R J MESHOE: The ACDP will not be supporting Budget Vote 22 on Safety
and Security, not because we do not want the police to be paid decent
salaries but because the police are not winning the fight against organised
and violent crime. The Million Man March that took place this past week was
another expression of the unhappiness of the people about the high
incidence of violent crimes.

Threats that were made by the ANC Youth League President, Julius Malema, at
a youth rally in Thaba Nchu, must be taken seriously by the police. He is
reported to have said that his organisation is prepared to take up arms and
kill if the impending fraud and corruption court case against the ANC
President is not dropped.

The ACDP believes that that was a reckless and irresponsible statement that
the ANC leadership must condemn. Although the ACDP will not be supporting
this Vote, we nevertheless hope that the police will be properly trained
and prepared to prevent the ANC Youth League from carrying out their
threats. Most South Africans want peace and stability, and not war. Thank
you.

Mr A MLANGENI: On a point of order, Chairperson: The hon Meshoe says that
the ANC leadership must condemn the statement made by Malema, the president
of the ANC Youth League. For his information, the ANC has already distanced
itself from that statement and condemned it.

Mr M J ELLIS: On a point of order, Chairperson: This is not a point of
order.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): I was still getting to that, so you
are ahead of me. Hon Mlangeni, it was not a point of order, so leave it
there.

Dr S E M PHEKO: Chairperson, beyond crime figures, we need a safety and
security system that works closely with communities and businesses in
fighting crime. Communities need to be encouraged to take back their
communities from drug dealers and criminals by having better support from
the police to fight crime in their communities.

We still have police stations in the townships that have no working
telephones and no available vehicles. The response from the system is still
extremely slow in the townships. We still have rural areas in places like
the Eastern Cape that do not have mobile police stations. It is critical
that community policing becomes participatory.

Mr N T GODI: Chairperson, the APC wishes to stress that the fight against
crime cannot be left to the police alone. It is a responsibility that all
of us should take on our shoulders. In the struggle to rebuild our country
and develop a new nationhood, it is important that our people should be
taught new values and norms, especially our young ones.

They should be taught to love themselves, respect others, respect the
property of others and respect other people’s lives. We believe as the APC
that if these values were to be instilled amongst our people, it would go a
long way in making a substantive impact on the fight against crime. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr P J GROENEWALD: In the reply to my speech during the Budget Vote, the
hon Minister referred to me as a dead person. He said that I was a dead
person because according to him I was part of those people who said that
they would never allow the ANC to become the government, even over their
dead bodies. Hon Minister, you have been wrong again. I have never been
part of those people. In fact, the people who said that are now actually
sitting behind you on the same side as the ANC; and whether they are dead
or alive in the ANC, that I wouldn’t know!

Hon Minister, I personally, in 1983 – and you have heard correctly, I said
1983 - already predicted that the ANC would become the government of South
Africa. You are wrong to say that I am a dead person.

Agb Voorsitter, gedurende die afgelope vyf jaar – en dit is volgens die
statistiese gegewens van die Polisiediens self – was meer as 4,6 miljoen
mense in Suid-Afrika die slagoffers van geweldsmisdade. Dit is ernstige
misdade soos moord, verkragting, aanrading en huisroof.

Huisroof het met 25,4% toegeneem en skakings het met 7% toegeneem. Daar
waar die mense moet veilig voel, by hulle huise of op pad na hulle werk
toe, daar het misdaad toegeneem. Suid-Afrika vergelyk in terme van die
gemiddelde moordsyfer van 4 per 100 000 van die bevolking in die wêreld
sleg op agt keer meer as die gemiddeld, en net daarom sal ons die
begrotingspos nie ondersteun nie. [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Hon Chairperson, during the past five years – and this is according to
statistical data of the Police Service itself – more than 4,6 million
people in South Africa were victims of violent crimes. These are serious
crimes such as murder, rape, assault and housebreaking.

Housebreaking has increased by 25,4% and hijackings by 7%. The places where
people should feel safe, in their homes or on their way to work, is where
crime has increased. When compared to the average murder rate of 4 per 100
000 of the world population, South Africa’s murder rate is eight times the
average, and for that reason alone we will not support this Budget Vote.
[Time expired.]]

Ms M M SOTYU: Chairperson, on the issue that was raised by Dr Pheko, on 10
November 2005, the Safety and Security Portfolio Committee adopted a
station monitoring tool that was given to all Members of Parliament,
including the opposition. They are to fill in that questionnaire whenever
they visit stations and bring it to the portfolio committee. So far, only
ANC cadres do that; the opposition doesn’t do it. That is why it is not
possible for us then to attend to some of these issues that have been
raised here, especially the shortage of vehicles at police stations.

I’m so surprised that the hon member raised this issue of the farmers that
are being murdered, since I’ve never heard you saying anything about farm
workers that are being murdered, especially in the Free State Province
which you know about - especially along the borders. Yet today you come and
take this opportunistic moment and raise it here.

The issue of fighting crime not only depends on the police, as the hon
member from the APC has said. It’s the responsibility of us all. People are
sick and tired of crime and we must look at both sides of it. That was also
the message sent out by the Million Man March that we are talking about.
The ANC supports this Budget. Thank you.
Division demanded.

The House divided:

    AYES - 231: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Arendse, J D; Balfour,
    B M N; Baloyi, M R; Beukman, F; Bhengu, F; Bloem, D V; Bogopane-Zulu, H
    I; Bonhomme, T J; Booi, M S; Botha, N G W; Burgess, C V; Buthelezi, M G;
    Cachalia, I M; Carrim, Y I; Cele, M A; Chalmers, J; Chauke, H P;
    Chikunga, L S; Chohan, F I; Combrinck, J J; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C;
    Dambuza, B N; Davies, R H; De Lange, J H; De Lille, P; Diale, L N;
    Didiza, A T; Dithebe, S L; Dlali, D M; Dlungwana, Z P; Doidge, G Q M; Du
    Toit, D C; Erwin, A; Fazzie, M H; Fihla, N B; Fraser-Moleketi, G J;
    Fubbs, J L; Gabanakgosi, P S; Gaum, A H; Gcwabaza, N E ; George, M E;
    Gerber, P A; Godi, N T; Gogotya, N J; Gololo, C L; Gumede, D M; Gxowa, N
    B; Hendricks, L B; Hendrickse, P A C; Hlangwana, N; Hogan, B A;
    Holomisa, S P; Huang, S; Jacobus, L; Jeffery, J H; Jenner, I E; Johnson,
    M; Kalako, M U; Kasienyane, O R; Kasrils, R; Kekana, C D; Kganyago, N M;
    Khoarai, L P; Kholwane, S E; Khunou, N P; Koornhof, G W; Kota, Z A;
    Kotwal, Z; Landers, L T; Lekgetho, G; Likotsi, M T; Lishivha, T E; Louw,
    J T; Louw, S K; Ludwabe, C I; Luthuli, A N; Mabandla, B S; Mabe, L L;
    Mabena, D C; Madasa, Z L; Madella, A F; Madlala-Routledge, N C; Maduma,
    L D; Madumise, M M; Magau, K R; Magubane, N E ; Mahlawe, N M; Mahomed,
    F; Mahote, S; Maine, M S; Makasi, X C; Malahlela, M J; Maloney, L;
    Maluleke, D K; Manana, M N S; Manuel, T A; Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Martins,
    B A D; Maserumule, F T; Mashangoane, P R; Mashigo, R J; Mashile, B L;
    Masutha, T M; Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F; Matsemela, M L; Matsomela, M
    J J ; Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M; Mbombo, N D; Mdaka, N M; Mdladlana, M
    M S; Meruti, M V; Mfeketho, N C; Mgabadeli, H C; Mlambo-Ngcuka, P G;
    Mlangeni, A; Mnguni, B A; Mnyandu, B J; Moatshe, M S; Mofokeng , T R;
    Mogale, O M; Mogase, I D; Mohamed, I J; Mohlaloga, M R; Mokoena, A D;
    Molefe, C T; Moleketi, P J ; Moloto, K A; Monareng, O E; Moonsamy, K;
    Morutoa, M R; Morwamoche, K W; Mosala, B G; Moss, M I; Motlanthe, K P;
    Motubatse-Hounkpatin, S D; Mpahlwa, M B ; Mshudulu, S A; Mthembu, B;
    Mthethwa, E N; Mtshali, E; Mufamadi, F S; Mzondeki, M J G; Ndlazi, Z A;
    Ndlovu, V B; Ndzanga, R A; Nene, M J ; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S;
    Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T; Ngculu, L V J; Ngele, N J;
    Ngwenya, W; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njikelana, S J ; Nkuna, C; Nogumla, R Z;
    Nonkonyana, M; Nqakula, C; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, R S; Ntuli, S B; Nxumalo,
    S N ; Nyambi, A J; Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G; Oosthuizen, G C;
    Padayachie, R L; Pahad, A G H ; Pahad, E G; Pandor , G N M; Phadagi, M
    G; Pheko, S E M; Phungula, J P; Pieterse, R D; Radebe, B A; Radebe, J T;
    Rajbally, S ; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin, M; Ramodibe, D M;
    Ramotsamai, C P M; Rasmeni, S M; Roopnarain, U; Schippers, J;
    Schneemann, G D; Schoeman, E A; Sefularo, M; Selau, J G; September, C C;
    Shabangu, S; Sibanyoni, J B; Sibhidla, N N; Siboza, S ; Sibuyana, M W;
    Sikakane, M R; Singh, N; Sithole, D J; Skhosana, W M; Skweyiya, Z S T;
    Smith, V G; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Surty, M E ; Swanson-
    Jacobs, J; Thabethe, E; Tinto, B; Tobias, T V; Tsenoli, S L; Tshabalala-
    Msimang, M E; Tshivhase, T J; Turok, B; Twala, N M; Vadi, I; Van den
    Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe, S C ; Van Schalkwyk, M C J; Van Wyk, A;
    Wang, Y; Xingwana, L M; Xolo, E T; Yengeni, L E; Zulu, B Z.

    NOES - 52: Blanché, J P I; Boinamo, G G; Botha, A; Botha, C-S; Camerer,
    S M; Coetzee, R; Davidson, I O; Doman, W P; Dreyer, A M; Dudley, C;
    Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; George, D T; Groenewald, P J; Joubert, L K;
    Julies, I F; Kalyan, S V; King, R J; Kohler-Barnard, D; Labuschagne, L
    B; Lee, T D; Loe, S J; Lowe, C M; Marais, S J F; Masango, S J; Meshoe, K
    R J; Minnie, K J; Morgan, G R; Mulder, C P; Mulder, P W A; Nel, A H;
    Opperman , S E; Rabie, P J; Sayedali-Shah, M R; Selfe, J; Semple, J A;
    Seremane, W J; Simmons, S; Smuts, M; Spies, W D; Stephens, J J M; Steyn,
    A C; Swart, M; Swart, P S; Swart, S N; Trent, E W; Van der Merwe, J H;
    Van Der Walt, D; Van Niekerk, A I; Waters, M; Weber, H; Woods, G G.

Vote accordingly agreed to.

Vote No 23 – Agriculture – put.

Declarations of vote:

Dr A I VAN NIEKERK: Chair, the DA will oppose the Budget Vote for the
following reasons: the apathy of the Ministry towards commercial and new
farmers regarding the problems they experience; the lack of support,
planning, management and extension guidance to new farmers in their
endeavour to develop sustainable farming enterprises. This has resulted in
the failure of almost all the restitution projects that involve farming
activities.
Then there is the indifference to the lack of implementation of the
agricultural sector plan as agreed to by the President and organised
agriculture; it just never gets off the ground.

The ANC government has neglected to protect South Africa against cheap
imports of highly subsidised agricultural products, to such an extent that
South Africa has become a net importer of food and farmers have been put
out of business. The role that the Department of Agriculture played in the
banning by Europe of the import of South African venison is inexcusable.

The inability of the department to enhance food security in South Africa
and to develop high-potential agricultural land in poverty-stricken areas
to produce food is a sign of major neglect. Then there is the poor state of
affairs regarding the financial position of the Land Bank, which is under
the management of the department.

Lastly, the lack of proper policy and timeous support schemes to assist the
agricultural fraternity in times of disasters beyond their control, such as
droughts and fires, which is absolutely necessary, is also inexcusable. We
will not support the Budget Vote.

Mr N SINGH: Chairperson, we, in the IFP, will support the vote, but we
believe that the Department of Agriculture can and must increase its
efforts to promote the development of the agricultural sector in order to
boost production and development, and, in turn, also ensure a stable supply
of food at reasonable prices.

The promotion and development of small-scale and previously disadvantaged
farmers must receive particular attention. It is important that this
support is qualitative and not based solely on numbers and the need to
fulfil and achieve certain numerical or statistical targets. Real support
must be forthcoming.

To this end, we are extremely concerned about the shenanigans that have
taken place within the Land Bank. The aim of the Land Bank is to promote,
facilitate and support agricultural development, but they are far from
doing that. In fact, certain members of the Land Bank, senior officials and
others, have been involved in funding the purchase of residential estates,
golf courses and the like.

Certainly, this is not one of their aims and objectives. Poor rural farmers
and other disadvantaged farmers have not benefited from what the Land Bank
can offer.

We believe that a forensic report outlining the shenanigans needs to be
made public as soon as possible and that those who are responsible for the
alleged corruption need to be brought to book and put in jail, if
necessary.

Further, we need to ensure that the moneys that they have allegedly stolen
or misused are recovered as soon as possible. Thank you.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Is the ACDP taking the floor? You
are next on the list.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chair, the ACDP is not going to make a declaration on this
Vote, but we will be opposing it.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): The ANC. Sorry, the FF Plus.

Mr P J GROENEWALD: I can speak after them, I don’t mind, hon Chair; it’s
your ruling.

Voorsitter, met die begroting het ek gesê dat die beste vooruitskouing vir
die landbou in ’n lang tyd die feit was dat die agb Minister nie weer die
Minister van Landbou sal wees na volgende jaar se verkiesing nie. Dis
nogsteeds baie waar.

Sonder boere, sonder kos. Daar word baie gepraat oor voedselsekerheid, nie
net in Suid-Afrika nie, maar in die wêreld. Die vraag is of ons werklik
besef wat die belangrikheid van ons boere’s.

Die agb Minister van Landbou, wat veronderstel is om die boere te beskerm
en vir hulle te werk, is egter die vyand van die boere. Sy beledig hulle
deur hulle te vertel hoe sleg hulle hul werkers behandel, maar sy vertel
nie van die meeste boere wat hul werkers absoluut baie goed behandel nie.
Dít sê die agb Minister nie.

Ek het nog nie gehoor dat die agb Minister vreeslik te kere gaan oor
plaasmoorde wat plaasvind nie. Nee, die agb Minister het hierdie
portefeulje uiters swak bestuur. Daarom sal ons dit nie kan ondersteun nie,
en is dit tyd dat dié agb Minister maar moet gaan. Dankie. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, during the Budget Vote I said that the fact that the hon
Minister would no longer be the Minister for Agriculture after next year’s
election would be the best prospect agriculture has had in a long time.
This is still very true.

Without farmers one is without food. There is a lot of talk about food
security, not only in South Africa, but all over the world. The question is
whether we really realise just how important our farmers are.

The hon Minister for Agriculture, who is supposed to protect the farmers
and work for them, is, however, the enemy of the farmers. She insults them
by telling them how badly they treat their workers, but she says nothing
about the majority of farmers who treat their workers extremely well. This
the hon Minister does not mention.

I have not yet heard the hon Minister making a fuss about farm murders. No,
the hon Minister has managed this portfolio extremely poorly. Therefore we
will not be able to support this budget, and the time has come for this hon
Minister to go. Thank you.]

Mr M R MOHLALOGA: Hon Chairperson, I just want to inform the House that hon
Van Niekerk was the Minister of Agriculture during apartheid. He never
cared for black farmers, and today he wants to masquerade as their
champion. He is objecting to this Budget Vote because the ANC government is
committed to uprooting his legacy.

Hon Dudley is opposed to the Budget Vote, but she is never at our portfolio
committee meetings. She suffers from perpetual truancy, and comes here and
opposes something that she knows nothing about. I still have to see her
attending the portfolio committee meetings.

Regarding the issue about extension services and post-settlement support
that hon Van Niekerk is raising, he knows quite well that this year the
department is going to employ more than 1 000 extension officers throughout
the country. In fact, when the Land Bank came to the portfolio committee,
he himself was impressed with their presentation. Today he comes here to
impress his political leadership. The same goes for the hon Singh.

Whilst we agree with some of the points that hon Singh has raised, we
cannot raise the issue of the stability of the Land Bank as though we are
running on the same spot. You were part of the portfolio committee and you
appreciated the presentation by the Land Bank and the appointment of the
new leadership. The ANC supports this Budget Vote. [Time expired.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, we were going to ask that our objection be
noted, but because of the provocation from the ANC we now call for a
division.

Division demanded.

The House divided:

    AYES - 219: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Balfour, B M N;
    Baloyi, M R; Beukman, F; Bhengu, F; Bloem, D V; Bogopane-Zulu, H I;
    Bonhomme, T J; Botha, N G W; Burgess, C V; Buthelezi, M G; Cachalia, I
    M; Carrim, Y I; Cele, M A; Chalmers, J; Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S;
    Chohan, F I; Combrinck, J J; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; Dambuza, B N;
    Davies, R H; De Lange, J H; Diale, L N; Didiza, A T; Dithebe, S L;
    Dlali, D M; Dlungwana, Z P; Doidge, G Q M; Du Toit, D C; Erwin, A;
    Fazzie, M H; Fihla, N B; Fraser-Moleketi, G J; Fubbs, J L; Gaum, A H;
    Gcwabaza, N E ; Gerber, P A; Godi, N T; Gogotya, N J; Gololo, C L;
    Hendricks, L B; Hendrickse, P A C; Hlangwana, N; Hogan, B A; Holomisa, S
    P; Huang, S; Jacobus, L; Jeffery, J H; Jenner, I E; Johnson, M; Kalako,
    M U; Kasienyane, O R; Kekana, C D; Kganyago, N M; Khoarai, L P;
    Kholwane, S E; Khunou, N P; Koornhof, G W; Kota, Z A; Kotwal, Z;
    Landers, L T; Lekgetho, G; Likotsi, M T; Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T; Louw,
    S K; Ludwabe, C I; Luthuli, A N; Mabandla, B S; Mabe, L L; Mabena, D C;
    Madasa, Z L; Madella, A F; Madlala-Routledge, N C; Maduma, L D;
    Madumise, M M; Magau, K R; Magubane, N E ; Mahlawe, N M; Mahomed, F;
    Mahote, S; Maine, M S; Makasi, X C; Malahlela, M J; Maloney, L;
    Maluleka, H P; Maluleke, D K; Manana, M N S; Manuel, T A; Mapisa-
    Nqakula, N N; Martins, B A D; Maserumule, F T; Mashigo, R J; Mashile, B
    L; Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F; Matsemela, M L; Maunye, M M; Mayatula,
    S M; Mbombo, N D; Mdaka, N M; Mdladlana, M M S; Meruti, M V; Mfeketho, N
    C; Mgabadeli, H C; Mlambo-Ngcuka, P G; Mlangeni, A; Mnguni, B A;
    Mnyandu, B J; Moatshe, M S; Mofokeng , T R; Mogale, O M; Mogase, I D;
    Mohamed, I J; Mohlaloga, M R; Mokoena, A D; Molefe, C T; Moleketi, P J ;
    Moloto, K A; Monareng, O E; Moonsamy, K; Morutoa, M R; Morwamoche, K W;
    Mosala, B G; Moss, M I; Motlanthe, K P; Motubatse-Hounkpatin, S D;
    Mpahlwa, M B ; Mshudulu, S A; Mthembu, B; Mthethwa, E N; Mtshali, E;
    Mufamadi, F S; Mzondeki, M J G; Ndlazi, Z A; Ndlovu, V B; Ndzanga, R A;
    Nene, M J ; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N
    D; Ngcobo, B T; Ngculu, L V J; Ngele, N J; Ngwenya, W; Nhlengethwa, D G;
    Njikelana, S J ; Nkuna, C; Nogumla, R Z; Nonkonyana, M; Nqakula, C;
    Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, R S; Ntuli, S B; Nxumalo, S N ; Nyambi, A J; Olifant,
    D A A; Oliphant, G G; Oosthuizen, G C; Padayachie, R L; Pahad, A G H ;
    Pahad, E G; Pandor , G N M; Phadagi, M G; Pheko, S E M; Phungula, J P;
    Pieterse, R D; Rabinowitz, R; Radebe, J T; Rajbally, S ; Ramakaba-
    Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin, M; Ramodibe, D M; Ramotsamai, C P M; Rasmeni, S
    M; Roopnarain, U; Schippers, J; Schoeman, E A; Sefularo, M; Selau, J G;
    September, C C; Shabangu, S; Sibanyoni, J B; Sibhidla, N N; Siboza, S ;
    Sibuyana, M W; Singh, N; Sithole, D J; Skhosana, W M; Skosana, M B;
    Skweyiya, Z S T; Smith, V G; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Surty,
    M E ; Swanson-Jacobs, J; Thabethe, E; Tinto, B; Tobias, T V; Tsenoli, S
    L; Tshabalala-Msimang, M E; Tshivhase, T J; Twala, N M; Vadi, I; Van der
    Merwe, J H; Van der Merwe, S C ; Van Schalkwyk, M C J; Wang, Y;
    Xingwana, L M; Xolo, E T; Yengeni, L E; Zikalala, C N Z; Zulu, B Z.

    NOES - 50: Blanché, J P I; Boinamo, G G; Botha, A; Botha, C-S; Camerer,
    S M; Coetzee, R; Davidson, I O; Doman, W P; Dreyer, A M; Dudley, C;
    Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; George, D T; Groenewald, P J; Joubert, L K;
    Julies, I F; Kalyan, S V; King, R J; Kohler-Barnard, D; Labuschagne, L
    B; Lee, T D; Loe, S J; Lowe, C M; Marais, S J F; Masango, S J; Minnie, K
    J; Morgan, G R; Mulder, C P; Mulder, P W A; Nel, A H; Opperman , S E;
    Rabie, P J; Sayedali-Shah, M R; Selfe, J; Semple, J A; Seremane, W J;
    Simmons, S; Smuts, M; Spies, W D; Stephens, J J M; Steyn, A C; Swart, M;
    Swart, P S; Swart, S N; Trent, E W; Van Der Walt, D; Van Niekerk, A I;
    Waters, M; Weber, H; Woods, G G.

Vote accordingly agreed to.

Vote No 24 - Communications – put.

Declaration of vote:

Mr V B NDLOVU: Deputy Speaker ...

... ngento eyenzeka laphaya kwa-SABC ngaphansi kwalo Mnyango, nengane
encane iyazibuza ukuthi kwenzekani ngempela. Namhlanje kumiswa umphathi
wehhovisi kuthi ngakusasa ibhodi kuthiwa aliwenzile umsebenzi ngakho nayo
ayimiswe. Yilowo uxosha owakhe kanjalo nomunye uxosha owakhe.
Umaxoshaxoshana kodwa bebe besebenzisa imali eyodwa. Okokuqala lokho.

Okwesibili, basebenzisa i-SABC njengomdlalo kanti i-SABC yayo iphuma lapha
eNdlini. Okwesithathu, sonke lapha eNdlini sinelungelo ngokwe-SABC ukuthi
sivele uma sikade sinemigubho noma kade sikhuluma lapho kade sikhona, kodwa
kukhona abantu abangavezwa lapha kuvezwa abathize ngoba bengcono kunabanye.


Kahleni nina ukubanga umsindo. Lokho kuyingozi. Ngihlale ngisho ngithi
akungafakwa abantu bepolitiki kuthiwa abasebenze umsebenzi wokuphatha
imisebenzi yabantu ngoba basebenzela ikwabo kunokuthi basebenzele wonke
umphakathi. Ngiyabonga. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[... regarding what is happening at the SABC, which falls under this
department, even a small child is wondering what is really going on. Today,
the Group Chief Executive Officer is suspended and then tomorrow the board
is allegedly not doing its job, therefore let it be suspended as well. Each
and every person fires someone else. They are playing a firing game whilst
they are using the same funds. That is the first point.

Secondly, they use the SABC as some sort of a game whilst its budget comes
from this House. Thirdly, in this House, we all have a right, according to
the SABC, to appear on television when we have some celebration or when we
are delivering papers, wherever we are, but there are some who do not
appear. Only certain people appear, because their status is better than
that of others.

Stop making a noise please. That is dangerous. I have always said that no
politically aligned individual should be appointed to public office because
they serve their political masters rather than serving the public as a
whole. Thank you.]

Vote agreed to.

Vote No 25 - Environmental Affairs and Tourism – put and agreed to.

Vote No 26 – Housing - put and agreed to.

Vote No 27 - Land Affairs - put.

Declarations of vote:

Mnr A J BOTHA: Agb Adjunkspeaker, die Departement van Grondsake het ’n
veelvoudige taak, veral met die beperkte ruimte en fondse wat aan hulle
toegeken is.

Die departement se twee belangrikste take is egter die afhandeling van
restitusie van eiendomsregte wat in die verlede onregmatig onteien is en,
tweedens, die aankoop van grond om swart ekonomiese bemagtiging te
bewerkstellig.

Restitusie moes al in 2005 afgehandel gewees het, maar daar word geraam dat
die keerdatum nou sover as 2012 sal moet uitstrek om die pyn en
verontregting van almal aan te spreek. Volgens die departement se eie
berekening sal R17 miljard nodig wees, terwyl slegs ’n breukdeel hiervan
begroot is.

Die teiken van 21 miljoen ha grond vir swart ekonomiese bemagtiging is
eweneens onhaalbaar met die geallokeerde R2,6 miljard, terwyl die
departement self ’n behoefte van R15 miljard per jaar identifiseer het.

Boonop is die departement se indiensnemingsbeleid so op kader ingestel dat
daar ’n tekort van 1 600 personeel is, wat dienslewering kelder.

Met sulke kniehalters sou selfs ’n briljante departement struikel, maar in
die geval van hierdie armsalige departement het prestasie “gestall”. Onder
die huidige leiding dreig hierdie departement baie meer as wat hulle doen,
en daarom sal die DA hierdie begroting verwerp. Dankie. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr A J BOTHA: Hon Deputy Speaker, the Department of Land Affairs has a
manifold task, particularly within the limited scope and funds allocated to
them.

The department’s two most important tasks, however, are the settlement of
restitution of property rights that had been unlawfully expropriated in the
past and, secondly, the acquiring of land to effect black economic
empowerment.

The restitution process should already have been concluded in 2005, but it
is estimated that the deadline would now have to be extended to as far as
2012 to address the pain and injustice of all. According to the
department’s own calculations, R17 billion would be needed, whilst only a
fraction of this amount has been budgeted for.

The target of 21 million hectares of land for black economic empowerment is
also not attainable with the allocated R2,6 billion, whilst the department
itself has identified a need for R15 billion per annum.

Moreover, the department’s employment policy is so focused on cadres, that
there is a shortage of 1 600 personnel, which subverts service delivery.

Given such hindrances, even a brilliant department would falter, but in the
case of this poor department, performance has stalled. Under the present
leadership, this department resorts more to threats as opposed to
performance, hence the DA will not support this Budget Vote. Thank you.]

Mr N SINGH: Deputy Speaker, I just want to remind the hon chairperson of
the portfolio committee that being aware of a problem does not make it go
away. Doing something about it does; and we certainly need to do something
about what happened at the Land Bank even though it may be on a solid
footing at the moment.

According to the report in the Estimates of National Expenditure, 93% of
the almost 80 000 lodged claims have been settled, and this is a laudable
effort by the department. But I think, once again, we shouldn’t be looking
at numbers. If it is 95%, Madam Minister, that is good, but there are still
a number of claims that are outstanding that need to be gazetted. In
KwaZulu-Natal there are almost 1 788 claims that have not been gazetted and
still need to be attended to.

One of the problems we discovered in the portfolio committee is that the
commissioners’ offices indicated that there is a lack of human resources
within those offices. We would like the hon Minister and the department to
make sure that the commissioners’ offices are adequately staffed so that
they can deal with the backlogs and they can deal with these new claims as
expeditiously as possible.

The aspirations of the claimants have to be met and we also have to address
the fears of the farmers that have been waiting for a long time for claims
to be settled. Thank you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Hon chairperson, I hope you know that I am not a member of
your committee, and if I wasn’t so badly needed in my other committees, I
would happily be there.

The 4,95% increase in the Land Affairs budget is hugely problematic as at
least an additional R74 billion is needed over six years if we hope to
deliver the remaining 21 million ha of land promised.

The ACDP believes that the failure by government to meet its own land
redistribution targets has been a trigger for irrational blaming and
extreme policy and legislation. The Expropriation Bill, for example, just
creates added insecurity with regard to investment and production.

Key findings in a recent report on land reform show that erroneous
perceptions about what is holding up land restitution have been misleading.
The slow pace of settling claims, they say, is due to a chronic lack of
staff, skills and experience in the department and the Land Claims
Commission; and this is nothing new.

The ACDP has called on the Minister to seriously consider proposals by the
Centre for Development and Enterprise for public-private partnerships that
will seek to urgently speed up land restitution.

It is imperative that no holds are barred in accessing an adequate budget
and the capacity to effectively spend on sustainable land reform. South
Africa is facing serious food shortages, and escalating food and commodity
prices effectively counter efforts to eradicate poverty and improve the
standard of living of all South Africans.

An urgent review of both the impact of land and agricultural policy and
legislation on increasing food and commodity prices and the budget
allocation to the department is needed. The ACDP opposes this budget, which
is not going to get the job done.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, there are too many meetings in the House.
Much as we would encourage them, because I think they are work-related,
they could take place in the offices or in the restaurants.

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Deputy Speaker, our declaration on the budget on land
is that there will never be enough money to pay even for land claims that
occurred after 20 June 1913, let alone the impossibility of resolving the
land question with cut-off dates which derive from the Native Land Act of
1913.

Our country must go back to the principle of equitable redistribution of
land. The present policy is a bomb explosion. The PAC would be abdicating
its national responsibility if it failed to issue warnings about this. We
wish the land question could be settled from 1913, but that is not
possible.

All over the world land is a critical, sensitive issue, because there is a
connection between land and economic power. There will never be economic
liberation and social emancipation of the poor majority as long as land and
its riches are in the hands of the minority.

The African leaders of this country and their kings, indeed, were not wrong
when, on 20 July 1914, they sent a petition to King George V, the coloniser
of their country. Their petition read in part that the “... natives must be
put in possession of land in proportion to their numbers, and on the same
conditions as the others”.  [Interjections.] [Time expired.]

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Agb Speaker, ... [Hon Speaker, ...]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have noted you, sir. I said it’s the ANC.
Mr M R MOHLALOGA: Thanks, hon Deputy Speaker. I wouldn’t mind if the hon
member speaks before me. Hopefully I won’t provoke the DA again.

I think it’s convenient to blame the pace of land reform on the department,
because that is only one side of the story. You could be right - partly.
The real problem here is the price of land. You know that in KwaZulu-Natal
there are areas where land goes for R10 million a hectare. So in a sense
you’ve got the willing buyer, but there’s no willing seller. The seller
wants to use this opportunity to cash in on the revenue, and we cannot
allow that. This point must be lifted out from the context of the debate
around land reform.

The second thing is that our restitution commission is one of the best in
the world. The work that it has done cannot even be matched by any other
body, including those in Canada, Brazil and Australia. They have pursued a
similar programme of land reform. So this commission has done a good job in
terms of land reform. Yes, there are challenges, for example, poor
settlement and so on.

The problem with hon Dudley is that she is talking about the Expropriation
Bill, and she knows – well, she may not know this because she doesn’t come
to the portfolio committee meetings – that it does not reside with our
portfolio committee, but with Public Works. Now she is objecting on the
basis of inexactitude. [Time expired.]

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Dankie, Adjunkspeaker. Ek wil vir die abg lid van die
ANC sê ek stem nogal saam met hom: die prys van grond is nogal ’n probleem,
want in Noordwes is daar ’n swart boer wat sy plaas aan die staat verkoop
het. Die gemildelde prys daar is R4 000 per hektaar, maar hy het sy plaas
vir R18 000 per hektaar verkoop. Ek het die agb Minister in hierdie
Parlement amptelik gevra hoekom dit so is, maar sy weier om my te antwoord.

Sien, dis juis die problem. Weer eens is ons terug by die agb Minister en
haar departement se onbevoegdheid. Sy probeer nou eintlik die blaam op die
boere en die ander grondeienaars plaas, asof hulle die oorsaak van die
probleem is. Hulle is nie die probleem nie.

Ek het vir die agb Minister gevra hoeveel mense die slagoffers van gedwonge
afsettings van plase was. Sy het gesê dat sy my nie die syfers kon gee nie.
Dit is die werklike probleem.

Die Minister se eie departement se strategiese plan stippel baie duidelik
uit dat die probleem ’n administratiewe en ’n personeelprobleem is. Ons
moenie by mense verwagtinge skep wat ons nie kan nakom nie.

Ek wil vir die ANC sê: As u u grondhervormingsplan verkeerd hanteer, gaan u
hierdie land op sy knieë dwing en hom in vlamme laat opgaan. Ek waarsku u.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. I want to tell the hon
member of the ANC that I’m inclined to agree with him. The price of land is
quite a problem, because there’s a black farmer in North West who has sold
his farm to the state. Up there the average price is R4 000 per hectare,
but he sold his farm for R18 000 per hectare. I have officially asked the
hon Minister in this Parliament how this can be, but she has refused to
answer.

You see, that’s exactly the problem. Once again we return to the
incompetence of the Minister and her department. She is now actually trying
to shift the blame onto the farmers and the other landowners, as if they
are the cause of the problem. They are not the problem.

I asked the Minister how many people were victims of forced removals from
farms. She said that she could not give me those figures. That is the real
problem.

The strategic plan of the Minister’s own department very clearly points out
that the problem is of an administrative and human resource nature. We
should not create expectations among people that we cannot live up to.

Let me tell the ANC: If you mismanage your land reform programme, you will
force this country to its knees and cause it to go up in flames. I am
warning you.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the Vote. Are there any objections?

Mr M J ELLIS: Yes.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: The objections of the DA will be recorded.
The Vote is therefore agreed to.

Dr C P MULDER: No, Madam Speaker.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: And the FF Plus.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I’m sorry but you are changing the
rhythm that we have had up until the time that you took over the Chair.
Normally we put the question and then go to the Vote, but you are not doing
that this time, so you are catching us a bit on the hop.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I am following the Rules. Rhythm or no rhythm, that
is how it has to be done. Please take your seat. I’ve asked for any
objections, and I’ve noted the objections of the DA. Is that okay; are you
not objecting?

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, we are objecting, but I am trying to
explain to you that there was a different process in place before you took
the Chair. Now you’ve changed it, and you are catching us on the hop. I
would prefer us to go back to the system that we had before you took the
Chair. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I’m not doing this for the first time, and I’ve done it
this way all the time. I said: I put the vote, are there any objections?
The DA is objecting, the FF Plus is objecting, and now I’m saying the
objections of the FF Plus and the DA will be recorded. [Interjections.]

Dr C P MULDER: Madam Speaker, I humbly suggest that the Rules say
differently. After you’ve asked if there is an objection, any member of the
opposition may say there’s an objection. Then you need to put the Vote
fully – Ayes and Noes. After that, then one can object or ask for a
division.
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think you are very right there. [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, if you had allowed me to finish, I
would have said exactly the same thing!

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Next time I will allow you to finish.

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance, Freedom Front Plus, African Christian
Democratic Party and National Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 28 – Minerals and Energy – put.

Declarations of vote:

Ms A M DREYER: Madam Deputy Speaker, the DA opposes this Budget Vote for
the following reasons. Due to power outages, mining output has contracted
by as much as 22%, the biggest contraction in mining in over 40 years. Thus
major mining houses are reviewing local capital operations and may
ultimately cut jobs.

Secondly, the implementation of the Mineral and Petroleum Resources
Development Act and the conversion of old order mining rights to new order
mining rights resulted in substantial delays in the processing of
applications, because the department cannot administer the Act efficiently.

The appropriation of ownership of mining rights from mining companies
without any offer to pay fair value is scaring off prospective
international and local investors in the mining industry.

The Precious Metals Act of 2005 determines that all applicants for diamond
cutting and polishing licences, despite the size of the business, are
subject to the mining charter. This means single self- employed individuals
will be unable to continue with their occupation from the end of this
month, leading to more unemployment.
With regard to energy, the 1998 White Paper on energy pointed to an
electricity crisis in 2007. Despite that warning and plenty of time to
plan, South Africa finds itself in a crisis this year. [Time expired].

Mr O E MONARENG: I just want to note one point: The Mineral and Petroleum
Resources Development Bill is still under amendment and under discussion.
We had public hearings and I am sure that that portfolio committee is an
ANC-dominated portfolio committee. We do have the IFP participating
regularly, but the DA has rotating members. So the DA cannot come here and
say that there are flaws in the MPRD Amendment Bill because the process is
ongoing.

I just want to say around electricity and the price hikes that the ANC
reiterates its position, based on its submission to the National
Electricity Regulator of South Africa, Nersa, that as long as the
electricity price hike by Eskom is not considerate towards the poor, the
downtrodden and the unemployable, it will continue to oppose the 53% price
hike. Firstly, the price hike should be smooth and over a period of five
years. Secondly, the Manenberg site costs should be done or taken over by
the state.

Based on these principles, the ANC supports this Bill. What we want to say
is that because the ANC is the people’s organisation it is people-driven,
it is biased to the poor, the downtrodden and the working class and the ANC
will always fight the struggle to make sure that it improves the conditions
of the people. The ANC supports this Vote. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question. Those in favour will say aye.

HON MEMBERS: Aye!

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: And those against will say no.

HON MEMBERS: No!

Dr C P MULDER: Madam Deputy Speaker, we would like to object please.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Won’t you just wait for me to announce the result?
Dr C P MULDER: But I did not want to say anything, in the first place.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the ayes have it.

Vote agreed to (Freedom Front Plus, Democratic Alliance, Independent
Democrats, African Christian Democratic Party and National Alliance
dissenting).

Vote No 29 – Provincial and Local Government - put.

Declaration of vote:

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Declarations of vote have been requested. I call on the
IFP. The IFP have changed their mind. Would the ANC like to change its mind
as well or will it take the slot?

Mr S L TSENOLI: We’ll take it, Deputy Speaker.

Ha re qeaqee hohang. Tjhelete ena e abetsweng lefapha lena, e ya tiisong ya
makgotla a metse le diprofensi ho ona mosebetsi oo re lakatsang hore o
etsahale ka hare ho lekgotla lena la setjhaba. Re tshehetsa ka botlalo kabo
ena ya ditjhelete lefapheng lena. Ke a leboha mme. (Translation of Sesotho
paragraph follows.)

[We are not in doubt at all. These funds have been allocated to this
department, and they are meant for those municipalities and provinces that
carry out the duties which we would like to see happening within the
municipalities. We support this budget allocation unreservedly. Thank you.]

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 30 – Public Enterprises – put.

Declaration of vote:

Ms F I CHOHAN: Madam Deputy Speaker, I thought it was important that we
hear in this House today yet again - when we are voting R130 million for a
matter this morning – that when the portfolio committee took a briefing on
Alexkor, there were no opposition members present at that portfolio
committee meeting. I do think that when we exercise our oversight it is
important that members reflect a measure of fairness, and we can only do so
when we have fully equipped ourselves with information and we are able to
speak with a degree of knowledge.

I want to say that many SOEs are doing rather well and that the department
and the Minister should be commended for this. Denel, Transnet, and I
daresay even the SAA, have restructured and reoriented their businesses. In
this regard we certainly do not have any objections to this Vote.

While Eskom still operates with some challenges, I think this House would
be failing in its duty if it did not commend the fact that Eskom has been
able to handle the winter’s increased demand rather well. For this reason
we should definitely all support this Budget Vote because it is indeed a
vote of confidence in the institution and the people who have worked under
much strain. The ANC supports this budget. [Time expired.]

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance, Independent Democrats, African
Christian Democratic Party, Freedom Front Plus and National Alliance
dissenting).

Vote No 31 – Science and Technology – put.

Declaration of vote:

Mr D A A OLIFANT: Madam Speaker, this Budget Vote was supported by all the
parties. Therefore, there is no need to even engage on it. You can see that
it is very clean there. The PAC is not even here to defend its case. The
ANC supports the Vote.

Vote agreed to.

Vote No 32 – Trade and Industry - put.

Declaration of vote:

An HON MEMBER: Deputy Speaker, I rise on behalf of the ANC to support Vote
No 32.

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 33 – Transport – put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr S B FARROW: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Minister, I was in two
minds when considering whether to give you a clean bill of health in
possibly your last term as the Minister of Transport.
Although much expenditure has gone into public transport, which I support,
I then got to thinking whether, in fact, any heed had been paid to previous
objections to this Vote or whether any improvements had been made over the
past budget years.

Unfortunately, I had to come to the conclusion that the negatives
outweighed the positives for the following reasons: Firstly, the
department’s vacancy rate has still not improved and sits at an
unacceptable 41%. Of more concern is the fact that many of these vacant
posts are in the upper management and technical levels.

Secondly, the taxi recap has been poorly managed from its conception and
the delays in putting the Taxi Scrapping Agency in place timeously resulted
in Treasury reducing the recap fees this current year to 8 000 taxis per
annum. This programme could in fact now take 15 years to be fully
implemented.

Thirdly, the poorly handled implementation of the Road Accident Fund
legislation amendments and its regulations have resulted in losses of R10
million a day to the already insolvent fund. Despite the R2,7 billion cash
injection in the previous financial year, the fund still sits with a
backlog of over 350 000 claims. A new funding model is urgently needed,
Minister.

Fourthly, Minister, your lack of communication with the transport portfolio
committee on finding solutions to crucial issues like road and rail
infrastructure is unacceptable, particularly in the light of the fast
approach of the 2010 World Cup.

Finally, your failure to listen to the concerns of the portfolio committee
on the massive Gautrain expenditure is coming home to roost with its costs
rising from the region of R20 billion to a now estimated R23 billion. Under
the circumstances, Minister, I regretfully have no alternative but not to
support the Budget Vote.

Mr J P CRONIN: Madam Deputy Speaker, the hon Farrow says he is in two
minds. Unfortunately, the lesser of his two minds won the day in his input.


Of course there are challenges on the transport front, but let’s see the
wood for the trees. This budget represents a five-fold increase over the
budget of 2004, and it is sustained over the MTEF period – this five-fold
increase. This is in line with Cabinet’s decision to ensure that public
transport becomes the legacy for South Africa, coming out of our hosting of
the 2010 World Cup.

In all of our major cities, including Cape Town, we are seeing the
development of wonderful public transport plans and the beginnings of
implementation. I am quite sure that within a year to a year and a half we
will, for once in South Africa, finally see some wonderful transport.

Also encouraging is the fact that for the first time in a long while we are
starting to see a decrease in the numbers of fatalities and injuries on our
roads. They are still unacceptably high, but this marked increase across
the board is beginning to tell us that we are starting to do something
right.

For all of these reasons and also because the department’s vacancy rate is
down from 41% to something like 30% - still too high but improving - the
ANC strongly supports this Budget Vote. Thank you.

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 34 - Water Affairs and Forestry - put.

Declarations of vote:

Mrs D VAN DER WALT: Madam Deputy Speaker, the Department of Water Affairs
and Forestry, Dwaf, has made great strides over the last decade. Indeed,
hundreds of thousands of South Africans now have access to clean drinking
water for the first time, despite many more people waiting in the wings.

The decision by the DA to oppose this budget this year is not taken
lightly. This is the first time we have ever done so. But there are a
number of issues that require the urgent attention of the department if we
are to avoid a future water crisis.

The death of over 140 babies from waterborne diseases in the Ukhahlamba
Municipality is a clear indication that all is not well. But there are also
other concerns, including the fact that there are a number of mines
operating without water licences. The ecological reserves of rivers are not
always respected as water withdrawn by industry and the mines, with the
knowledge of the department, sometimes exceeds what is ecologically viable.


A number of important rivers, including the Vaal and Crocodile Rivers, as
well as the Wonderfonteinspruit, are becoming increasingly polluted. A
number of dams, including the Hartbeespoort and Roodeplaat Dams, are
suffering from severe eutrophication. No epidemiological studies have been
undertaken to determine the long-term effects of cyanobacteria toxins on
human or ecological health.

Furthermore, 165 dams have been identified for dam safety rehabilitation,
which suggests a lack of maintenance and investment. While 46 of these dams
are being prioritised, the situation needs to be improved even further. It
is important that warnings on water are sounded for the health of South
Africans and our environment. Our water’s future security needs to be
ensured now. Thank you. [Time expired.]

Ms C C SEPTEMBER: Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC supports this Budget Vote.
The target that was set for the 2007-08 financial year was to supply water
to 1,7 million people. The year under review saw the ANC providing water to
1,27 million people. Out of 4,95 million people in South Africa, 2,4
million people have no access to water and 3,3 million have no access to
basic services. Since 1994, access to water supply infrastructure improved
from 59% to 95%. How can this budget then be opposed?

On sanitation, the ANC government set a target of 300 000 people in this
financial year. This was increased to 301 000 without access - 3,5%. How
can this budget then be opposed?

On bucket eradication for 2007, the backlog was 118 301. We removed 95 218.
The backlog is still 23 083, with the Free State, Eastern Cape and Northern
Cape still outstanding. But that is not because there wasn’t a will. The
communities themselves have asked that there must be waterborne sewerage.

Discussions are taking place in at least seven out of the nine provinces on
the quality of drinking water, which the member of the DA is complaining
about. Currently, the portfolio committee is having hearings on this. On
raw water quality, we have been asked to adopt a river, and the DA has yet
to adopt a river. The ANC supports this Budget Vote. [Time expired.]

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance and African Christian Democratic Party
dissenting).

Schedule put and agreed to.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

There was no debate.

Bill read a second time.

The House adjourned at 16:43
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)


    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a section 75 Bill:

          a) Competition Amendment Bill [B 31 – 2008] (National Assembly –
             sec 75).


    (2)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a section 76 Bill:

          a) National Railway Safety Regulator Amendment Bill [B 32 – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 76).

2.    Introduction of Bills

     (1)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


          a) Judicial Matters Amendment Bill [B 48 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
             prior notice of its introduction published in Government
             Gazette No 31117 of 2 June 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Justice and Constitutional Development of the National
             Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
             (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.


     (2)    The Minister of Labour
          a) Skills Development Bill [B 49 – 2008] (National Assembly –
             proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
             of its introduction published in Government Gazette No 31103
             of 29 May 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Labour
             of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint
             Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint
             Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.


     (3)    The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
         Development


          a) Repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment of
             Certain Laws Amendment Bill [B 50 – 2008] (National Assembly –
             proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
             of its introduction published in Government Gazette No 31088
             of 23 May 2008.]


             Bill initiated by the Portfolio Committee on Justice and
             Constitutional Development of the National Assembly, and
             referred to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
             classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.
             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

3.    Calling of Joint Sitting of Parliament


    The Speaker of the National Assembly, Ms B Mbete, and the Chairperson
    of the National Council of Provinces, Mr M J Mahlangu, in terms of
    Joint Rule 7(2), have called a joint sitting of the Houses of
    Parliament for Thursday 19 June 2008 at 14:00 to debate the report of
    the Task Team of members of Parliament probing violence and attacks on
    foreign nationals.


    B MBETE, MP                                    M J MAHLANGU, MP
    SPEAKER OF THE                                      CHAIRPERSON OF THE
    NATIONAL ASSEMBLY                        NATIONAL COUNCIL OF
                                                         PROVINCES

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

CREDA INSERT REPORTS - T080617E – Insert 1 – PAGES 1201-1253


