---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 13 November 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2008-11-13
---

THURSDAY, 13 NOVEMBER 2008
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 11:35.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the NCOP I shall move on behalf of the IFP:

     That the Council -

      1) notes with concern that the Gauteng MEC for health has admitted
         that security in public hospitals in the province is a problem;


      2) further notes that these comments follow an attack on a University
         of Witwatersrand medical student in the parking lot of a local
         hospital last Friday;


      3) realises that the inadequate security in our hospitals not only
         puts the lives of many people in danger but is also a deterrent to
         doctors, nurses and other badly needed medical professionals who
         might otherwise have worked in these hospitals; and


      4) urges the relevant security and hospital authorities to work
         together in formulating plans to improve security in our hospitals.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                            (The late S P Molamu)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council -

     1) notes with utter dismay the brutal murder of Samuel Papi Molamu in
        Sharpeville in the Gauteng province;


     2) further notes that the 31-year-old paraplegic was apparently killed
        for his monthly R940.00 disability grant, which he had gone to
        collect from a payout point in the township;


     3) also notes that Mr Molamu used his disability grant to provide for
        his three siblings, who are now left to fend for themselves; and


     4) takes this opportunity to convey its condolences to the Molamu
        family and calls on the law enforcement agencies to make sure that
        the perpetrators of this brutal and vicious crime are brought to
        book to face the might of the law.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

    CASH-IN-TRANSIT VAN ROBBED AND POLICE OFFICERS SHOT IN KWAZULU-NATAL

                             (Draft Resolution)


Mnu D D GAMEDE: Sihlalo ohloniphekile, ngiphakamisa ngaphandle kwesaziso:

   Ukuthi lo Mkhandlu -

   (1)      nomphakathi wonke waseNingizimu Africa nowaKwaZulu-Natali ugxeka
        isenzo sezigebengu sokubulala amaphoyisa nokuthatha imali
        yempesheni;

   (2)      weseka uNgqogqoshe WezokuPhepha uMhlonishwa Nathi Mthethwa
        esimemezelweni sakhe sokuthi kuliwe ngokushesha nalezi zigebengu
        futhi zingancengwa zingatotoswa;

   (3)      umema umphakathi wonke welekelele amaphoyisa ekubanjweni kwalezi
        zigebengu; futhi


   (4)      wedlulisa ukuzwelana nazo zonke izihlobo ezilahlekelwe kulesi
        sigameko.
   (Translation of isiZulu draft resolution follows.)

[Mr D D GAMEDE: Hon Chairperson, I move without notice:

    That the Council -

    (1)     and the entire South African community, particularly in KwaZulu-
         Natal, critises the callous act of the criminals who killed
         policemen and robbed a cash-in- transit van;

    (2)     supports the Minister of Safety and Security, hon Nathi
         Mthethwa, in his call to fight these criminals immediately and
         that the police have to be hard on them;
    (3)     asks the people to help the police to catch these criminals; and



    (4)     conveys its condolences to all the bereaved families who lost
        their loved ones in this incident.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                         REVENUE LAWS AMENDMENT BILL

                     REVENUE LAWS SECOND AMENDMENT BILL

               (Consideration of Bills and of Reports thereon)


Mr M O ROBERTSON: Hon Deputy Chair, hon members, what is frequently
overlooked in our discourse over a developmental state is the importance of
revenue collection and also the importance of a focused and well-
capacitated revenue administration.

Revenue collection and administration are the core of building an effective
developmental state. Revenue collection is considered an enabler of
development. It permits government to create fiscal space in order to
pursue its national developmental agendas such as contesting poverty and
inequality. I ask the House to please accept the amendments to the revenue
Bills. I thank you. [Applause.]
Debate concluded.

Revenue Laws Amendment Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the
Constitution.

Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75
of the Constitution.

                                FINANCE BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr T S RALANE: Chairperson, colleagues, to ensure an effective link between
policies and public expenditure, the first task is to establish a
comprehensive, valued and appropriate policy agenda.
Assessing spending programmes against a range of measures such as national
developmental plans, a poverty-reduction strategy and the political
manifesto of the ruling party is a difficult but manageable task. This task
is difficult because of the following reasons: One, various policy agendas
that have competing requirements; two, a lack of clarity on how a policy
should be ranked; and three, a lack of policy prioritisation, which causes
a dilemma for line agencies.

South Africa’s policy agenda represents a contract between voters of the
majority party and their elected leaders. Changes to policy and budget
systems are embedded in this understanding of the government-voter
relationship.

It is accepted that contracts cannot be specified for all eventualities.
Policy agendas and budgets are examples of contracts that are transparent.
It is not feasible to cover all contingencies that may affect the ability
of a government to deliver on its policy promises.

On this note, could I ask this House to pass this Finance Bill? Thank you
very much.

Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

 GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES PENSION FUND (CONDONATION OF INTERRUPTED SERVICE) BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): I now call upon the
hon E M Sogoni, chairperson of the Select Committee on Finance, to lead the
debate. [Interjections.] Order!

Mr E M SOGONI: Thank you very much for protecting me, Deputy Chairperson.
Hon members, somehow this Bill is a distortion of the real issue. We are
dealing here with one individual who petitioned Parliament so that his
pension can go uninterrupted. The person initially stopped working for
government and then returned later. So the intention of this Bill is to
effect a continuous service.

In terms of clause 56 of the Constitution, citizens of South Africa are
permitted to petition and make representations or submissions to
Parliament. This is what the person did.

The objectives of the Bill are to give effect to the petition before the
National Assembly - we are now at the National Council of Provinces - so
that the service of Adv Abraham Kellermann is regarded as continuous
service of 20 years. The Select Committee on Finance deliberated on this
Bill and now requests this House to support it. Thank you.

Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

    ESKOM SUBORDINATED LOAN SPECIAL APPROPRIATION BILL (2008-09 – 2010-11
                              FINANCIAL YEARS)

              (Consideration of Bill and of Report of thereon)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order! I request
that this House comes to order immediately, please! You are impugning the
decorum of this House. Please, let there be order in this House
immediately!

Ms A N T MCHUNU: Chairperson, the energy crisis that gripped South Africa
for so long was a clear indication that Eskom did not have the generating
capacity to meet the needs of our growing population and to support our
growth targets. This Bill before us today is to provide for a subordinated
loan to Eskom in support of its investment in enhanced electricity
generation capacity and security of supply. The passing of this Bill is
therefore very important and is supported by the Select Committee on
Finance.

We hope that the additional funds will be used wisely to enhance the
generating capacity, and not only to provide relief to businesspeople and
people in urban areas, but also to speed up the electrification of our
rural areas.

I do sympathise with the people and businesses in urban areas that have
suffered as a result of the electricity shortages. However, I believe that
more attention and resources must be focused on, firstly, electrifying our
rural areas at a more rapid pace and, secondly, ensuring a reliable supply
of electricity to these areas so that the quality of life of the people in
these areas can be improved. The lack of development and electrification of
the rural areas also has a negative social and economic impact on the urban
areas as it causes people to flee these areas for the cities and towns.
They take shelter in urban informal settlements, again placing a demand on
service delivery.

The Select Committee on Finance requests that this House supports the Bill.
I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

        METHODIST CHURCH OF SOUTHERN AFRICA (PRIVATE) ACT REPEAL BILL

                DUTCH REFORMED CHURCHES UNION ACT REPEAL BILL

    THE APOSTOLIC FAITH MISSION OF SOUTH AFRICA (PRIVATE) ACT REPEAL BILL

               (Consideration of Bills and of Reports thereon)

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, we have three Bills before this august House
today, namely the Methodist Church of Southern Africa (Private) Act Repeal
Bill, the Dutch Reformed Churches Union Act Repeal Bill and The Apostolic
Faith Mission of South Africa (Private) Act Repeal Bill. Before I get to
the contents of the Bills, let me explain that the hon member P Gerber has
a habit of picking up old books and putting them in a storeroom. This hon
member came across a book containing statutes and discovered that these
three churches were governed by an Act of Parliament.

Now, in terms of our Constitution, South Africa is a secular state. There
is, therefore, no need for an Act of Parliament to govern the affairs of
churches in the Republic of South Africa. Therefore, these three Bills make
it possible for us, today, to repeal these three Acts. In South Africa we
have – I don’t know how many - hundreds of churches, and only these three
churches are governed by an Act of Parliament.

If you read through the principal Acts, you will find that they are
discriminatory in nature: They only refer to men, and speak about coloured
people, and so on. Therefore, these three Acts that we are repealing here
today are, in actual fact, unconstitutional and we would like to appeal to
this august House to support these three Bills. Enkosi. [Thank you.]

Debate concluded.

Methodist Church of Southern Africa (Private) Act Repeal Bill agreed to in
accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

Dutch Reformed Churches Union Act Repeal Bill agreed to in accordance with
section 75 of the Constitution.

The Apostolic Faith Mission of South Africa (Private) Act Repeal Bill
agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon members, before
I suspend the proceedings, there’s a request from the Chief Whip of the
Council for you to stay behind after I have suspended the proceedings for
this session. Hon members, the proceedings of the House are suspended and
will be resumed at 14:00. Thank you.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, this was a request to you, as
the presiding officer, that we should continue with the business of the day
to its completion, seeing that we still have enough time left to do so.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): I’m sorry, I cannot
continue with the business of the day. I was requested to preside over this
session only. Proceedings will resume at 14:00. Thank you.

Business suspended at 12:15 and resumed at 14:05.

                              Afternoon Sitting

                             STUDENTS IN GALLERY

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon members, I am informed that there
are students in the gallery from Tulbagh High School. I wish to acknowledge
them. Thank you very much for visiting the National Council of Provinces.
[Applause.]

I hope to see one of you sitting here as a politician in the future. Maybe
one of you will even become the President of the country. Welcome to the
NCOP. Thank you.

                       ADJUSTMENTS APPROPRIATION BILL

                    (Consideration of Votes and Schedule)

Vote No 1 - The Presidency - put and agreed to.

Vote No 2 - Parliament - put and agreed to.

Vote No 3 - Foreign Affairs - put and agreed to.

Vote No 4 - Home Affairs - put and agreed to.

Vote No 5 - Public Works - put and agreed to.

Vote No 6 - Government Communication and Information System - put and
agreed to.

Vote No 7 - National Treasury - put and agreed to.

Vote No 8 — Public Service and Administration — put and agreed to.

Vote No 9 — Public Service Commission — put and agreed to.

Vote No 10 — SA Management Development Institute (Samdi) — put and agreed
to.

Vote No 11 — Statistics South Africa — put and agreed to.

Vote No 12 — Arts and Culture — put and agreed to.

Vote No 13 — Education — put and agreed to.

Vote No 14 — Health — put and agreed to.

Vote No 15 — Labour — put and agreed to.

Vote No 16 — Social Development — put and agreed to.

Vote No 17 — Sport and Recreation South Africa — put and agreed to.

Vote No 18 — Correctional Services — put and agreed to.

Vote No 19 — Defence — put.

Division demanded.

The Council divided:


AYES - 28: Adams, F; Botha, D J; Douglas, W M; Dlulane, B N; Gamede, D D;
Hollander, P M; Kolweni, Z S; Mack, N J; Matlanyane, H F; Mazibuko, N F;
Mchunu, A N T; Moatshe, P; Moseki, A L; Mqungquthu, N S S; Mzizi, M A;
Ntembe, B L; Ntuli, Z C; Ntwanambi, N D; Oliphant, M N; Ralane, T S;
Robertson, M O; Setona, T S; Sulliman, M A; Themba, M P; Tsotetsi, D R; Van
Rooyen, C J; Vilakazi, J N; Windvoël, V V Z.

NOES - 9: Chen, S S; Krumbock, G R; Lamoela, H; Le Roux, J W; Terblanche, J
F; Thetjeng, O M; Van der Merwe, D J P; Watson, A; Worth, D A.

Vote accordingly agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 20 — Independent Complaints Directorate — put and agreed to.

Vote No 21 — Justice and Constitutional Development — put and agreed to.

Vote No 22 — Safety and Security — put.

Division demanded.

The Council divided:

AYES - 29: Adams, F; Botha, D J; Douglas, W M; Dlulane, B N; Gamede, D D;
Hollander, P M; Kolweni, Z S; Mack, N J; Matlanyane, H F; Mazibuko, N F;
Mchunu, A N T; Moatshe, P; Mokoena, M L; Moseki, A L; Mqungquthu, N S S;
Mzizi, M A; Ntembe, B L; Ntuli, Z C; Ntwanambi, N D; Oliphant, M N; Ralane,
T S; Robertson, M O; Setona, T S; Sulliman, M A; Themba, M P; Tsotetsi, D
R; Van Rooyen, C J; Vilakazi, J N; Windvoël, V V Z.

NOES - 9: Chen, S S; Krumbock, G R; Lamoela, H; Le Roux, J W; Terblanche, J
F; Thetjeng, O M; Van der Merwe, D J P; Watson, A; Worth, D A.

Vote accordingly agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 23 — Agriculture — put and agreed to.

Vote No 24 — Communications — put and agreed to.

Vote No 25 — Environmental Affairs and Tourism — put and agreed to.

Vote No 26 — Housing — put and agreed to.

Vote No 27 — Land Affairs — put and agreed to.

Vote No 28 — Minerals and Energy — put and agreed to.

Vote No 29 — Provincial and Local Government — put and agreed to.

Vote No 30 — Public Enterprises — put and agreed to.

Vote No 31 — Science and Technology — put and agreed to.

Vote No 32 — Trade and Industry — put and agreed to.

Vote No 33 — Transport — put.

Division demanded.

The Council divided:


AYES - 29: Adams, F; Botha, D J; Douglas, W M; Dlulane, B N; Gamede, D D;
Hollander, P M; Kolweni, Z S; Mack, N J; Matlanyane, H F; Mazibuko, N F;
Mchunu, A N T; Moatshe, P;  Mokoena, M L; Moseki, A L; Mqungquthu, N S S;
Mzizi, M A; Ntembe, B L; Ntuli, Z C; Ntwanambi, N D; Oliphant, M N; Ralane,
T S; Robertson, M O; Setona, T S; Sulliman, M A; Themba, M P; Tsotetsi, D
R; Van Rooyen, C J; Vilakazi, J N; Windvoël, V V Z.

NOES - 9: Chen, S S; Krumbock, G R; Lamoela, H; Le Roux, J W; Terblanche, J
F; Thetjeng, O M; Van der Merwe, D J P; Watson, A; Worth, D A.

Vote accordingly agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 34 — Water Affairs and Forestry — put and agreed to.

Schedule put and agreed to.

                       ADJUSTMENTS APPROPRIATION BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr D J BOTHA: Hon Chairperson, hon colleagues, the Adjustments
Appropriation Bill makes provision for the appropriation of an additional
adjustment budget of R25,9 billion.

Furthermore, this Adjustments Appropriation Bill implements the ANC’s
pledge to create a better life for all. The Bill channels funds to
programmes aimed at improving the welfare of ordinary people.

In regard to voting on this Bill, the ANC’s landslide victory here is a
precursor to what will happen in next year’s elections. The Finance
committee asks this House to approve this Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I’m very excited to see this House so
active today. I don’t know what’s wrong with you today. [Laughter.]
[Interjections.] There must be something that excites you. Is it payday
today? Oh, payday is tomorrow!

Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon members, I have been requested by
an hon member of this House, Ms Beauty Dlulane, to thank all of you for
taking Parliament to the Eastern Cape. She told me that you all worked very
hard and behaved well. So, I want to congratulate you and to thank you very
much for that.

                     COMPLAINT REGARDING S & T RESOLVED

The second announcement is that, following the complaint that you raised
during a programming committee meeting about the S and T, this allowance
has been paid into your accounts. The S and T for the sixth day is being
processed currently.

HON MEMBERS: Amandla! [Power to the people!]

The Council adjourned at 14:22.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Bills passed by Houses—to be submitted to President for assent

      (1)   Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 13 November
      2008:

          (a)    Methodist Church of Southern Africa (Private) Act Repeal
                 Bill [B 68—2008] (National Assembly—sec 75).
           (b)   Dutch Reformed Churches Union Act Repeal Bill [B 69—2008]
                 (National Assembly—sec 75).
           (c)   The Apostolic Faith Mission of South Africa (Private) Act
                 Repeal Bill [B 71B 〉
           (d)   Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 76—2008] (National
                 Assembly—sec 77).
           (e)   Eskom Subordinated Loan Special Appropriation
                (2008/09—2010/11 Financial Years) Bill [B 77—2008] (National
                Assembly—sec 77).
           (f)   Finance Bill [B 78—2008] (National Assembly—sec 77).
           (g)   Government Employees Pension Fund (Condonation of
                Interrupted Service) Bill [B 79—2008] (National Assembly—sec
                77).
          (h)    Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 80—2008] (National
                Assembly—sec 77).
          (i)    Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 81—2008] (National
                 Assembly—sec 75).

TABLINGS

National Council of Provinces

     1. The Chairperson
        a) Amending Draft Notice and Schedule submitted in terms of section
           2(4) of the Judges Remuneration and Conditions of Employment
           Act, 2001 (Act No 47 of 2001), determining the rate at which
           salaries are payable to Constitutional Court judges and judges
           annually, with effect from 1 April 2008, for approval by
           Parliament.

           Referred to the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
           Affairs for consideration and report.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
1.    Report of the Ad hoc Joint Committee on Amendment Regulations made in
      terms of section 10 of the Public Funding of Represented Political
      Parties Act, 1997 (Act No.  103 of 1997), dated 13 November 2008:


      The Ad hoc Joint Committee on Amendment Regulations made in terms of
      section 10 of the Public Funding of Represented Political Parties Act,
      1997 (Act No.  103 of 1997), consisting of members of the Portfolio
      Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development and the Select
      Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having considered
      the draft amendment regulations tabled by the Minister of Justice and
      Constitutional Development on 20 October 2008, referred to it,
      recommends to the President, in terms of section 10(1) of the Public
      Funding of Represented Political Parties Act, 1997 (Act No. 103 of
      1997), that the said regulations be amended to read as follows:

                                  SCHEDULE

      Definitions

           1.    In this Schedule "the Regulations" means the regulations
      published under Proclamation No. R.  117 of 20 November 1998, as
      amended by Proclamation No.  R.  47 of 31 August 2005.
      Amendment of Regulation 5 of the Regulations

          2.     Regulation 5 of the Regulations is hereby amended—
      (a)   by the substitution for subregulation (1) of the following
subregulation:
                       "(1)  All allocations to which a political party is
           entitled as determined in terms of regulations 3 and 4, must be
           paid to the political party in question in four equal
           instalments, each within three months of the previous payment.
           The first instalment must be paid within four weeks of the
           beginning of the financial year in question.";  and
      (b)   by the deletion of subregulation (3).

      Amendment of Regulation 8 of the Regulations

           3.    Regulation 8 of the Regulations is hereby amended by the
           substitution for subregulation (2) of the following
           subregulation:
                       "(2)  The information required for the purposes of
           subregulation (1) must be furnished to the Commission by the
           accounting officer referred to in section 6(1) of the Act within
           three months after the end of the financial year in question.".

      Report to be considered.

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Education and Recreation on the
      Bible Society of South Africa Act Repeal Bill [B 70B - 2008] (National
      Assembly – sec 75), dated 12 November 2008:

     The Select Committee on Education and Recreation, having considered the
     Bible Society of South Africa Act Repeal Bill [B 70B - 2008] (National
     Assembly – sec 75) referred to it, reports that it has agreed to the
     Bill with proposed amendments as follows:

                                  CLAUSE 2

1.    On page 2, after line 13, to insert the following subsections:


           (3)   Any immovable property to be vested in the Bible Society
           of South Africa (Association incorporated under Section 21),
           Registration number 2008/007505/08 must be transferred by an
           endorsement on the title deed thereof or on the registered deed
           of lease thereof.
           (4)   Any bond transferred to the Bible Society of South Africa
           (Association incorporated under Section 21), Registration number
           2008/007505/08 must be transferred by an endorsement on the
           bond.
           (5)   Any right or obligation accruing in terms of an
           unregistered document is transferred by operation of law without
           the need for a written cession or delegation.
           (6)   Any expectance of the receipt by the Bible Society of
           donations or bequests in terms of a written instrument is
           transferred to the Bible Society of South Africa (Association
           incorporated under Section 21), Registration number
           2008/007505/08.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Public Services on the National
      Land Transport Bill [B 51B - 2008] (National Assembly – sec 76), dated
      12 November 2008:

         The Select Committee on Public Services, having considered the
         National Land Transport Bill [B 51B - 2008] (National Assembly –
         sec 76) referred to it, reports the Bill with amendments [B 51C -
         2008].


3.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs
      on the Constitution Fourteenth Amendment Bill [B 62B-2008] (National
      Assembly sec 74), dated 12 November 2008.

The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
considered the Constitution Fourteenth Amendment Bill [B 62B-2008]
(National Assembly – sec 74) referred to it, reports the Bill without
amendment.



