---
title: 'National Assembly - 18 November 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2008-11-18
---

                          TUESDAY, 18 NOVEMBER 2008
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                                 NEW MEMBERS

                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Order! I wish to announce that the vacancy that occurred due
to Mr K P Motlanthe being elected President has been filled by the
nomination of Mr L M Kgabi with effect from 14 November 2008 and that the
vacancies caused by the resignations of Ms G J Fraser-Moleketi, Mr A G H
Pahad, Mr M G P Lekota, Ms A T Didiza, Mr A Erwin and Ms S P Rwexana have
been filled by the nomination, with effect from 14 November 2008, of Mr E
Godongwana, Ms D N Sikosana, Ms T B Sunduza, Mr P O Moloto, Ms J C Moloi-
Moropa and Mr X B Mabaso respectively.

In terms of section 48 of the Constitution, members of the National
Assembly must swear or affirm faithfulness to the Republic and obedience to
the Constitution before they begin to perform their functions in the NA.

I also wish to announce that the vacancy which occurred in the National
Assembly owing to the resignation of Mr T D H Ramphele, has been filled
with effect from 31 October 2008, by the nomination of Ms T M A Gasebonwe.

I further wish to announce that the vacancies which occurred in the
National Assembly owing to the resignation of Ms P G Mlambo-Ngcuka, Mr E G
Pahad, Mr R Kasrils and Mr F S Mufamadi, have been filled with effect from
31 October 2008, by the nomination of Ms T M A Gasebonwe, Ms A C Mashishi,
Ms S B Moiloa-Nqodi, Mr F C Fankomo and Ms F J Wright respectively. The
members made and subscribed the oath or affirmation in my office.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr N SINGH: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that, at the next sitting,
I shall move on behalf of the IFP:

   That the House notes that -

     1) the IFP has been a consistent critic of the ministerial blue
        lights, which have been a source of chaos on the provinces’ roads;


     2) in the latest incident a member of the security unit of the KZN MEC
        for Social Development, Meshack Radebe, has been arrested for
        shooting at a tyre of a motorist who failed to move over to a
        slower lane of the N3, near Pietermaritzburg, on Saturday, causing
        an accident that left eight people injured;


     3) the IFP believes that MEC Radebe must be held accountable for this
        incident;

     4) the IFP further believes that clear guidelines and rules now need
        to be put in place so that this unlawful behaviour is stopped
        before innocent lives are lost;

     5) the users of blue lights seem now to have become a law unto
        themselves; and

     6) an urgent debate in Parliament is therefore called for on this
        matter.

  GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS AFFECTING BOTH DEVELOPED AND DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
                                    ALIKE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:


   That the House ...

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, there are other motions without notice before
we get to the Order Paper. I wonder if we could put those first.

The SPEAKER: Yes.
              BARACK OBAMA WINS AMERICAN PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –

   (1)      notes that Barack Obama was elected the 44th President of the
         United States of America on Tuesday, 4 November 2008;


   (2)      further notes that the 2008 US presidential election saw the
         highest voter turnout since 1908, demonstrating how Americans have
         embraced their democratic right to have a direct say in the
         governance of their country;

   (3)      recognises that Barack Obama is the first black president of the
         United States, signifying how he has been able to transcend racial
         prejudice and also how the country has overcome injustices of the
         past that include slavery and segregation;
   (4)      acknowledges how this election united Americans from different
         races, cultures, religions and age groups, who all voted for Barack
         Obama;


   (5)      congratulates Barack Obama on his election as US President and
         all Americans who voted and who succeeded in making these US
         elections an example of democracy at its best and a model worthy of
         emulation across the world; and


   (6)      wishes President Obama well for his presidential term.

Agreed to.

                               WORLD AIDS DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms S V KALYAN: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –
   (1)      notes that Monday, 1 December 2008, is World Aids Day and marks
         the 20th anniversary of this internationally recognised day;


   (2)      further notes that the number of people living with HIV/Aids is
         continuing to rise in every part of the world and that there are
         now around 33 million people living with HIV/Aids worldwide;


   (3)      recognises that South Africa has one of the highest prevalence
         of HIV/Aids in the world and around 65% of Aids-related deaths
         occur in sub-Saharan Africa;


   (4)      further recognises that people living with HIV/Aids often face
         discrimination from others due to the fact that HIV/Aids still
         carries a social stigma in our country and that the pandemic has
         pervaded every sphere of our society and has left over a million
         children orphaned across South Africa;


   (5)      acknowledges the selfless role stakeholders in civil society and
         in local communities have played in fighting the enormous social
         consequences of the HIV/Aids pandemic in our country;
   (6)      further acknowledges that education is needed to prevent an
         increase in new infections and that all South Africans, especially
         our leaders, need to speak loudly and unambiguously about
         HIV/Aids; and


   (7)      calls on all South Africans to stand together to fight this
         pandemic and to support and care for those whose lives have been
         ravaged by HIV/Aids.

Agreed to.


  GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS AFFECTING BOTH DEVELOPED AND DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
                                    ALIKE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –


     1) notes the serious global financial crisis that  is  affecting  both
        developed  and  developing  economies  across  the  world  with  no
        abatement;


     2) further  notes  that  the  deteriorating  economic  environment  is
        largely a result of a slowing global economy following the  world’s
        longest growth  trajectory,  a  sustained  low  inflation  and  low
        interest rates periods resulting  in  reckless  lending  practices,
        holding  of  risky  speculative   assets   and   derivatives,   low
        appreciation of risk management practices and deregulation  of  the
        financial sector, leading to the collapse of the inter-bank lending
        system, withdrawal of liquidity short-term bank curatorships and  a
        bust in the international financial systems;

     3) further notes that, despite pursuance of a  neo-liberal  agenda,  a
        substantial majority of developed countries, especially the  United
        States of America, USA, and the United Kingdom, UK,  have  embarked
        on partial  nationalisation  of  banks  as  well  as  some  of  the
        financial institutions that are seriously affected by  the  current
        financial crisis over and above bailing them out financially;

     4) recognises that the meetings and  declarations  of  world  leaders,
        including the Summit on Financial Markets and World Economy, the G-
        20 meeting of Finance Ministers and Governors, and the  meeting  of
        African Ministers of Finance and  Planning  and  Governors  of  the
        Central Banks have conceded to the call for  strong  action  to  be
        taken to stabilise the financial system,  the  use  of  appropriate
        fiscal and monetary policy to stimulate  domestic  demand,  greater
        macroeconomic co-operation to avoid  negative  spillovers,  support
        for emerging and developing markets and  the  need  to  ensure  the
        restructuring of the International Monetary Fund,  IMF,  the  World
        Bank, WB, and other Multilateral Development Banks, MDBs;

     5) believes that the resolution  taken  by  the  recent  119th  Inter-
        Parliamentary Union General Assembly in Geneva to organise as  soon
        as possible an international parliamentary  conference  to  examine
        the causes and effects of the international financial crisis on the
        global economic system  and  identify  ways  of  dealing  with  the
        consequences of this crisis, is correct; and

     6)  urges  the  Parliamentary  Network  on  the  World  Bank,   PNoWB,
        Conference, which will convene in Paris  from  18  to  22  November
        2008, to provide leadership as elected public  representatives  and
        address the current crisis as a matter of urgency  in  consultation
        with the IPU.

Agreed to.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                      (The late Prof Es’kia Mphahlele)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker I move without notice:

    That the House –

    (1)     notes with profound sadness the death of Professor Es’kia
        Mphahlele on Monday, 27 October 2008;
    (2)     further notes that Professor Mphahlele lived out a career that
        was emblematic of a whole generation of writers;


    (3)     recalls that, together with Lewis Nkosi, they were leading and
        towering figures in the Drum generation of writers that came to
        prominence in the 1950s in the magazine of which he was responsible
        for editing fiction stories and for which he was also a political
        reporter;


    (4)     further recalls that in 1957 Professor Es’kia Mphahlele left the
        country of his birth, South Africa, and went to live in exile in,
        amongst others, countries such as Nigeria, Zambia, Kenya and the
        United States of America;


    (5)     recognises that he has written several books that depict the
        life of a black South African, which include: Down Second Avenue,
        Africa My Music, Man Must Live and The Wanderers, to mention but a
        few; and


    (6)     conveys its condolences to the Mphahlele family, his friends and
        the academic fraternity.


Agreed to.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                     (The late Mrs Vuyiswa “Tiny” Nokwe)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:


    That the House -

     1) notes with sadness the passing away of Mrs Vuyiswa “Tiny” Nokwe, on
        24 October 2008;


     2) recalls that, after her matriculation at Langa High School in  Cape
        Town, she went to study at the only  tertiary  institution  in  the
        country at that time that allowed black  students,  the  University
        College of Fort Hare, where she obtained her BSc degree in 1951 and
        B.Ed in 1952 and that it was while at the same institution that she
        met the love of her life, Advocate Dumalisile Nokwe;



     3) further recalls that in 1964, together with  Manzo,  she  left  the
        country of her birth and settled in Zambia, where  she  took  up  a
        teaching post and remained till she returned home;


     4) acknowledges that the outstanding quality  of  selfless  dedication
        and willingness to serve in whatever capacity was the  hallmark  of
        this remarkable lady and freedom fighter, and that she showed  that
        one could maintain dignity and still be a fearless fighter; and


     5) conveys its  condolences  to  the  Nokwe  family  and  the  African
        National Congress.


Agreed to.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                    (The late Mama Miriam Zenzile Makeba)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move the draft
resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:

    That the House -

      1) notes with shock and profound sadness the untimely death  of  Mama
         Miriam Zenzile Makeba on Sunday, 9 November 2008;


      2) further notes that the Goodwill Ambassador for South  Africa  died
         doing what she does best, namely communicating a positive  message
         through the art of singing while she was taking part in a  concert
         for Roberto Saviano, a writer threatened with death by the Mafia;


      3) recalls that  throughout  her  life  Mama  Makeba  communicated  a
         positive message to the world about the struggle of the people  of
         South Africa and the certainty of victory over the dark forces  of
         apartheid colonialism through the art of song, and  that  she  was
         the legendary voice of the African continent  that  remained  very
         strong for democratic changes;


      4) recognises that Mama Africa received a Grammy Award for Best  Folk
         Recording in  1965  with  Harry  Belafonte  for  An  Evening  With
         Belafonte/Makeba and that the album was about black South Africans
         living under apartheid, and also that she became the  first  black
         African woman to receive a Grammy Award,  which  she  shared  with
         folk singer Harry Belafonte in 1965; and `


      5) conveys its condolences to the Makeba family, her friends and  the
         arts community.

The SPEAKER: Before I give parties an opportunity to address the motion as
introduced by the Chief Whip, I want to acknowledge the presence of Miriam
Makeba’s family in the gallery, and also that of one outstanding South
African actor and cultural worker, Zakes Mokae, who lived with Miriam
Makeba in the States for many years. They are present in the Speaker’s bay.
Welcome to the House. [Applause.] Mr Mokae is accompanied by his friends,
also from the States, and his wife, Mandy. Welcome to the House.
The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Speaker, may I also start by welcoming, yet
again, and recognising the friends and family of Miriam Makeba.

Hon members of Parliament and fellow South Africans, I am honoured to join
the millions around the world to commemorate the living memory of Mama
Miriam Zenzile Makeba. This past weekend at her memorial service, we joined
the multitude of fans of this world-acclaimed icon to pay our last respects
and say: Thank you, Mama Miriam, for sharing your life with us.

We acknowledge that she has returned to her everlasting home to watch over
us as she did in this world in her capacity as our mother, sister and story
teller in song. The whole world recognises her stellar achievements in the
world of music in particular and culture in general.

She accomplished a great deal since her debut with legendary groups like
the Manhattan Brothers and the Skylarks. As the National Heritage Council,
NHC, said:


  Our country and the musical world at large have not only lost an
  irreplaceable idol but we have lost a cultural institution all by
  herself.

She extended the horizons of African musicians and inspired a whole
generation of Afro-pop and Afro-jazz musicians. We have lost a singer par
excellence who used her beautiful voice of unique rhythmic power to spread
a message that stated simply that injustice anywhere must be challenged and
the struggle for truth must continue. Even in her last days, she was
participating in a concert in Italy for an Italian journalist whose life
had been threatened after publishing a book critical of the mafia.

Today, we are gathered in this House to remember South Africa’s Goodwill
Ambassador to Africa, to pay homage to a woman who sacrificed much for us
to be free. Her contributions to our liberation are legendary, as when she
stood at the United Nations in 1963 to decry and denounce a system of
unimaginable dehumanisation to its citizens. Those of us who were
privileged to bask in her glory and glow in her shadow recall a woman and a
sister whose humility came naturally.

Mama Miriam was not a pretender to her queenly throne. She was kind, she
was giving and she was there for her contemporaries who struggled to cope
with life in exile. Mama Miriam’s actions spoke louder than our
pronouncements of her abilities as a caring singer.

In being honoured as South Africa’s first ever Goodwill Ambassador in March
2001, the former President said that he recognised and honoured Ms Makeba’s
contribution over the decades in playing a lead role internationally, in
the struggle for the African people’s freedom and their emancipation from
slavery, colonialism and apartheid, and in the instilling of pride in
African history, culture and civilisation.

Africa has lost a true daughter and patriot to whom it was unforgivable to
be a singer and just entertain without educating the world about the
tragedy of women survivors in the Democratic Republic of Congo, DRC.

In March this year, she went to the DRC in her capacity as the Food and
Agriculture Organisation Ambassador. She also expressed concern to us here
in South Africa about sexual violence. Her words ring true for Africa that
even though women, and I quote, “guarantee the survival of 80% of
households ... they are frequently victims to rape”.


These are not the words of a woman who was only interested in world fame or
becoming rich; she was acquainted with the sea of poverty, hunger and
hopelessness besetting our families and neighbourhoods. Her life is a
message by itself to all people who aspire to either public office or
celebrity status. Her life says to all of us as public representatives that
such positions carry a responsibility to those without a voice. Her life
says that to be a public figure is to be selflessly dedicated to the poor,
the marginalised and the vulnerable. Mama Makeba managed to combine
effortlessly her commitment to her craft and art along with her love for
her people, especially young children.

The accolades she garnered in the five decades she was in the public
spotlight speak to a person who could not sit idly by when she was told of
the abused girl-children, who did not have a home and people to care for
them.

These accolades speak to someone who founded and became a benefactor to the
Makeba Rehabilitation Centre for Girls, which opened in 2003 in Midrand.
This centre caters for girls ranging in age from 11 to 17 years, and what
is truly touching about this centre is that these girls come from
dysfunctional families, and some are orphans.

She has done it all and received all known acknowledgements, from Grammy
Awards to a Swedish Polar Music Prize, as well as the Dag Hammarskjöld
Prize for Peace in 1986, and in 1999 she received the National Order for
Meritorious Service from South Africa.

Her story of triumph in this world does not end here. Mama Miriam is a
woman, a mother, a grandmother and a great-grandmother who also took up the
initiative of developing continental networks among women from South Africa
and West Africa. In this capacity she set up a Skills Development Exchange
Programme, which is a continent-wide collaboration.

It is my wish that the younger generation of musicians that are trustees of
her legacy will take up the baton and work to transform lives of others for
the better. This is what “Mama Africa” has striven to do since she went
into exile in 1959, being a light of inspiration to her fellow musicians,
lifting up and empowering women and children and simply being an
unparalleled role model to all of us.

It was thus befitting that she was voted 38th in the top 100 poll of Great
South Africans in 2004.

I recall her words on the already-mentioned trip to the DRC this year:

  I would like my visit to this country to be an opportunity to renew and
  strengthen our commitment and ensure that innocent victims suffering from
  hunger have access to the necessary resources to cultivate their hopes
  for a better life.

When I think of Mama Zenzile Makeba, I seem to recall another heroine, Ms
Ella Fitzgerald, when she sang Skylark. The lyrics to this classical tune
are familiar on this occasion:

  Skylark, have you anything to say to me? Is there a meadow in the mist?
  Have you seen a valley green with spring? Where my heart can go a-
  journeying over the shadows and the rain to a blossom-covered land? Oh
  Skylark, won’t you lead me there?

I see I have some time, and I wish to share with you some of the words we
listened to at the funeral service on Saturday.

When the Minister of Arts and Culture addressed the funeral service, among
other things, he referred to the endless love of music of “Mama Africa”.

She kept telling us that she was retiring. And I think hon members will
remember when she sang to us, some years back, at one of those beginning-of-
the-year concerts. She did even on that occasion announce that she was
retiring. But look where she died, coming down from a stage, after singing.
She could never get herself to stop singing. I always say she left
beautifully, because she left us after doing something that was what she
enjoyed most in life; what she did best in life.

I also want to refer to the words of Minister Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, who
referred to her generosity. Among stories she told was a story of how Mama
Miriam came across her daughter at an airport, and the child had lost her
luggage. Without hesitating, she took out some money and gave it to her to
go and buy clothes for herself. That is why we say that she was not just a
star on stage; she was a beautiful human being, a mother and a very gentle
person.

In working with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, she co-operated
unhesitatingly with the Minister on the many needs that they had to
address, sometimes without having planned ahead, and she would immediately
just offer herself and her energies to assist in addressing the problems
that the department was faced with.

The speech that touched me most was that of her 13-year-old great-grandson,
who told us that, of course, he ought to have been calling her “ukhokho”
that is great-grandmother, but he called her “gogo” [grandmother]. He also
said that she was her own person.

She got to America and, of course, any normal human being would immediately
start playing the game according to what the people around you are doing,
but Miriam stayed African; in the way she carried herself, in the songs
that she sang, the preoccupations that, in fact, informed the content of
the music. At the end, Lindelani said that we should learn from her.

I think that that is a great message that we should also leave in this
House today. In the way she lived her life, the way she loved Africa, and,
in fact, became more of an African than a South African, we should learn
from her.

I believe that a better place is where Mama Makeba is at present.

At her memorial service this past Saturday, I was touched also by a
wonderful rendition of hers of a biblical song, and I felt that it was a
fitting end to a most dignified life and a most dignified woman. The song I
am referring to is titled When I Die Tomorrow, and I wish to briefly quote
its touching lyrics,


  When I die tomorrow, I will say to the Lord, Oh Lord you’ve been my
  friend. Thank you, Lord. Oh Lord, I’m your child, Oh Lord, I am your
  child.

May her soul rest in peace!

Thank you.

Mrs D VAN DER WALT: Madam Speaker, `` a larger-than-life lioness of the
struggle and a songstress in whom Africa had found her voice’’: This is how
the publicist, Mark Le Chat, so aptly paid tribute to Miriam Makeba in his
foreword to her 2004 album, Reflections. As he recounted his presence in
the hot and fevered atmosphere where her arrival was awaited in a downtown
club in Johannesburg in December of 1990, suddenly, he recounts, the room
went quiet in a reverential kind of way as Miriam Makeba stood in the
doorway, clothed in a headdress and robe fashioned from the gorgeous
fabrics of Guinea-regal, yet paradoxically humble. She was seemingly shy.
Yet the owner of a powerful persona which took your breath away momentarily
before the assembled crowd burst into ululating, applause and tears.

The mark that Miriam Makeba left on the global music scene and the great
service that she has done to both African and South African music will live
on for decades to come.

She remains one of the most important female vocalists to have emerged out
of South Africa. She has rightly been hailed the Empress of African Song
and Mama Africa, not only for her prowess as a musician but also for
helping to bring African music to a global audience in the important decade
of the 1960s.

More than five decades after her debut with the Manhattan Brothers, she
continued to play an important role in the growth of African music on the
stages of the world. The fruits of her musical contribution will live on
for decades to come and nothing will ever be able to relegate it, or the
memory of her gorgeously pitched range and the husky drift of her voice, to
the forgotten annals of music.

But Miriam Makeba’s contribution was not only in terms of music. Her life
was marked consistently by struggle. Born into poverty, she soon recognised
that music was a type of magic which she could use to uplift herself. But
she would always balance her vocal successes with her outspoken views about
apartheid and racial injustice across the world, something for which she
came to pay a heavy price.

In a regrettable step, the government of South Africa revoked her
citizenship in 1960. This forced her to be a citizen of the world for the
next 30 years, albeit a world that for the next 30 years was not entirely
welcoming, since a number of Western governments also became unsympathetic
towards her for her association with the civil rights movement.

In a lesson to all of us, Miriam Makeba prevailed as a force of good and a
force of musical beauty - her fate in death being nearly as poetic as her
fate in life.

On 9 November 2008, in the moments before her passing, she was taking part
in a concert organised for a social cause, to support writer Roberto
Saviano in his stand against the Camorra, a mafia-like organisation local
to the region of Campania.

Miriam Makeba has shown herself to be a great South African. She has
distinguished herself as a daughter of Africa who was proud of her
continent and who enlivened many of its grand steps to liberation. But most
importantly, Miriam Makeba was an outstanding global citizen who spoke out
about injustice everywhere in the most beautiful songs that will permeate
homes, public spaces and memories for decades to come. Lala kahle, Mama
Africa. [Rest in peace, Mama Africa.] [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Thank you, Madam Speaker, hon
Ministers, Deputy Ministers and hon members, on behalf of the Inkatha
Freedom Party and its President, Prince Mangosuthu Buthelezi, I join the
hon members of this respectable House in expressing our sincere condolences
to the family of the late Miriam Makeba, her friends and all people of
South Africa.

Much has been said about her over the past days: her life, her music and
her friends – some of whom, I understand, are also here with us - her
achievements, her accolades and her selfless sacrifice in the struggle for
South Africa’s liberation. When one talks about Mr Zakes Mda, then I
remember a play called, Come Home Child.

The demise of Miriam Makeba is a great loss for South Africa and the world,
from all those who were touched by her dynamic presence and personality to
those whose hearts and souls were charmed by her majestic melody and song.

Indeed, we are all poorer without her. However, we must derive much solace
and comfort in the magnanimous spirit she left with us. And like Thucydides
in her oration of a funeral, we say:
  For heroes have the whole earth for their tomb; and in lands far from
  their own, where the column with its epitaph declares it, there is
  enshrined in every breast a record unwritten with no tablet to preserve
  it, except that of the heart.

The people of Italy blessed with the last performance and song from Miriam
Makeba that fateful evening will testify to their fortune. Miriam Makeba
was bequeathed to the world community at a very tender age. She became
South Africa’s ambassador of goodwill decades before this title was
officially conferred on her by the former President, Mr Thabo Mbeki.

Persecuted at home with racist draconian laws, Miriam Makeba amassed
exceptional courage to tell the painful story of the people of South Africa
to the United Nations, presidents, kings, and prime ministers around the
world.

Long after the mourning period is over and tears of sorrow have been
gracefully wiped away, long after memorial services and eulogies have
passed, long after the gospel choirs, symphonies, musicians and bands of
all shades have ended their renditions, Miriam Makeba’s beautiful song will
remain with us and with the people of the world.

For now, let us be content that the songbird sings no more for us, but
sings with the angels above. May God keep her soul. Amen. [Applause.]

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Madam Speaker and hon members, the United Democratic
Movement wishes to extend our deepest heartfelt condolences to the family,
friends and colleagues of the late Miriam Makeba during this time of
bereavement.

Mama Africa, as she was affectionately known, attained many tremendous
achievements during her lifespan. She will be remembered as a person who
lived her life to the fullest. She will also be remembered for her talent,
style and passionate belief in what she was doing, as well as carrying a
message of hope for South Africans during trying times inside and outside
the country.

Her legacy lives on through the accomplishments of her children and the
younger generation who aspire to be musicians. The youth of today can learn
from the discipline and respect that Miriam Makeba embraced throughout her
life.

She was rated among the leading proponents of change in South Africa. We
have lost a true role model whose work will always be remembered. Indeed,
hers is a sad loss to the country and to the continent. May her soul rest
in peace. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Madam Speaker, on behalf of the ID, I want to express our
condolences to the family of our sister, Miriam Makeba. Mama Africa’s
contribution towards the struggle against apartheid can never be
overstated. Miriam Makeba was the daughter of the soil who liberated our
country with her beautiful voice. She appealed to young and old, and her
activism as a singer who sang about real issues is a hard act for singers
of today to follow. We will forever be indebted to her for the countless
times we were made to feel alive and free by her beautiful voice, even
during oppression.

To her family and millions of fans around the world, I would like to say,
this is not only a time for mourning; it is also an opportunity to
celebrate the contribution of her life to our nation. May her soul rest in
peace. Thank you. [Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Madam Speaker, the ACDP is saddened by the loss of Mama
Africa, Zenzile Miriam Makeba; a great lady, musician, activist and an
ambassador for black people everywhere, who made famous the phrase, “black
is beautiful.” Her rich voice sang songs that decried oppression wherever
she found it. Her “Click Song” and “Pata Pata” become international hits,
bringing attention to the plight of black people suffering under apartheid.
She declared that she would sing until the day she died, which she did, in
Italy, in the open air at an antiracism and anti-Mafia concert.

Mama Africa twice addressed the United Nations, speaking out against the
evils of apartheid, and her fearless humanitarianism earned her many
international awards. She weathered many storms, including several car
accidents, a plane crash and even cancer, and was as active in her latter
days as if she were still a young girl.

It was heartwarming to hear that at the age of 74, Mama Makeba insisted on
doing a studio interview when she could have stayed home and done it over
the telephone. It revealed a woman of much humility despite her immense
fame. The ACDP expresses heartfelt condolences to the family. We join you,
together with people all over the world, in mourning your great loss. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Madam Speaker, hon members, the legendary South
African singer, fondly known as Mama Africa, has passed away. In 1963, her
South African citizenship was revoked after testifying before the United
Nations Congress on the issue of apartheid. She was not welcome in her own
country, but 10 different countries made Makeba an honorary citizen and
they all issued her with passports.

The South African government’s radio and television refused to broadcast
her songs until 1989. It was only in 1990, when many long-exiled South
Africans returned, that she was able to return home. We want to honour her
today and thank her for the tremendous sacrifice and contribution she made
by leaving behind her family and still continuing to make us proud as she
used her fame to focus attention on the abomination of apartheid.
Re lebogela botshelo ba ga Mama Afrika. O dirile tiro ya gagwe e e neng e
mo tshwanetse, e e neng a e rata. O tlhokafetse a e dira. A Modimo o nne le
ena. Re leboga le go utlwa botlhoko le bagaabo. A kagiso e nne le bone.
[Legofi.] (Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[We would like to pay tribute to Mama Africa. She played her part. She was
passionate about singing; that is why it was not surprising that she met
her untimely death while singing. Let the Lord be with her. We celebrate
her life and we would like to convey our condolences to her family. Let
peace be with them. [Applause.]]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, I cannot express the shock and dismay I felt
when hearing the news of the passing away of our beloved Mama Africa. The
late Miriam Makeba was a light to our nation and her melodious voice rang
out the sweetness of our people, on being African.

Miriam Makeba, though a great celebrity and loved globally, did not live
unscathed by the apartheid regime. Her return to South Africa brought back
to our people an angel of light, to whom she was a best friend, a mother
and a sister.
The MF takes this opportunity to express our deepest condolences to the
family, friends and the entire nation on the loss of this magnificent
artist and an amazing lady, Miriam Makeba. Miriam, you will always be our
angel and as you “Pata Pata” our hearts, you’ll live in them forever. God
bless you. May you rest in peace. Thank you. [Applause.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Speaker, Miriam Zenzile Makeba defied the
circumstances of her birth. She was only 18 days old when her mother was
imprisoned for six months for brewing African beer. This was illegal
according to colonial laws. Her mother took her with her to jail. Miriam
also lost her father when she was six years old. Childhood was, for Miriam
Makeba, a bundle of despair, but she rose to be a celebrated musician
internationally and earned the title “Mama Africa”. She was not a
politician, but a musician par excellence. She was sensitive to the
national humiliation of her people. Many of her songs spoke to suffering
and dispossession of her people. She sang ...

   Bahleli bonke etilongweni; bahleli bonke kwaNongqongqo.
   Yini na ma-Afrika?

She sang:
   Nanku, nanku uSobukwe; nanku, nanku noMandela.

She sang:

   Abantwana beAfrika bakhalela izwe labo, elathathwa ngabamhlophe.
   Mabawuyeke umhlaba wethu!

She consulted with Johnson Makhathini of the ANC and David Sibeko of the
PAC at the United Nations. She treated all leaders of our country with
respect. She knew that all freedom fighters of this country were
sacrificing for some noble cause. She gave them equal respect and
recognition, and her speech is testimony to this.

Anyway, death is a necessary end. “It will come when it will come,” as
Shakespeare put it, but in the context of eschatology, death is a passport
to a deathless land beyond the universe. Mama Africa for now:

   Mabawuyeke umhlaba wethu.

We shall sing that song until the objective for which the liberation
struggle was waged is achieved.
Tsamaya ka kgotso kgabane ya Afrika, re lla le lona he, ba ha Makeba. Bohle
re tseba hore ngwana wa lona e ne e se moradi wa lona feela, e ne e le
moradi wa Afrika, e ne e le moradi wa rona kaofela. Re a le leboha ka ho mo
adima batho ba Afrika. Ke a leboha. [Mahofi.] (Translation of Sesotho
paragraph follows.)

[Go well, Mama Africa; we sympathise with you, the Makeba family. We all
know that your daughter did not belong to you alone; she was the daughter
of Africa, and she was a daughter to all of us. We thank you for lending
her to the people of Africa. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, the late Miriam Makeba was a world musical
icon. She was a daughter of this soil who sang her way into the hearts of
millions of people, and her “Click Song” brought melodious joy to all of
us. “Pata Pata”, one of her most famous songs, is a classic and as it means
dance, we believe that such was the influence of her songs. It brought
happiness to our souls.

She will be missed, but she died while doing what she does best, and that
is singing to international audiences. Her death will be mourned by us all,
for she has made her mark on the world stage; not only as a singer, but as
a humanitarian activist as well. She made her contribution to making this
world a better place. Her virtues were those of integrity, respect for
others, charity and unselfish service.

South Africa has over the past few years lost many excellent artists
through death, some naturally, others through violence. We become poorer in
spirit if these icons are not recognised for what they contribute to the
soul of our nation.

On behalf of the FD, I wish to express our sincere condolences to the
family of Miriam Makeba. May the Lord be with the family and loved ones of
the late Miriam Makeba during the time of bereavement and may they be
consoled with the knowledge that though she is no longer with us, her songs
and memories will remain in our hearts for generations to come. May the
soul of Miriam Makeba rest in peace. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Motion agreed to.
                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                            (The late Mr B Nair)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY:

    That the House -

    (1)     notes with profound sadness the passing away of Mr Billy Nair on
         23 October 2008;


    (2)     recalls that Mr Nair committed his life to the cause of freedom,
         peace and democracy and that he  joined  the  Natal  Indian  Youth
         Congress in 1949, became its Secretary in 1950  and  later  joined
         the Natal Indian Congress and that he was also a volunteer in  the
         1952 Defiance Campaign and served on the first executive committee
         of the South African Congress of Trade Unions;


    (3)     further recalls that Mr Nair was active in Umkhonto weSizwe from
         its establishment on 16 December 1961 and in 1963 was charged with
         sabotage and received a  20-year  sentence,  which  he  served  on
         Robben Island and that Mr Nair had  also  been  a  member  of  the
         national executive committee of the United Democratic  Front,  the
         Central Committee  of  the  South  African  Communist  Party,  the
         National Executive Committee of the  ANC  and  in  1994  became  a
         Member of Parliament until 2004;


    (4)     acknowledges the momentous role played by Mr  Nair  towards  the
         birth of a nonracial, nonsexist and democratic  South  Africa,  as
         well  as  his  immense  contribution  in  the  reconstruction  and
         development of our country; and


    (5)     conveys its condolences to the Nair family, the African National
         Congress and the South African Communist Party.

Agreed to.

The SPEAKER: The condolences will be conveyed to the Nair family, the
African National Congress, and the South African Communist Party.

                    CONCERN ABOUT GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS
                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr T J BONHOMME (ANC): Madam Speaker, on the statement of the global
financial crisis, the African National Congress has observed, with great
concern, the current global financial crisis that has affected, and is
still seriously affecting both developed and developing economies across
the board with no abatement.

The epicentre of this extremely grave financial market crisis is the USA.
South Africa’s financial sector has borne up relatively well and for
several reasons including, as it is widely acknowledged, the remaining
exchange control measures.

But the global economic crisis will certainly impact upon South Africa’s
economic growth prospects over the next years and pose challenges for job
creation and other development goals. The global crisis will also impact
upon the persisting systematic points of vulnerability: currency
volatility, the current account, and the inflationary pressures.

Despite the advocacy of the neoliberal agenda, a substantial majority of
developed countries, especially the United States and United Kingdom, have
embarked on partial nationalisation of the banks, as well as some of the
financial institutions that experienced the current financial crisis, over
and above bailing them out financially.

The African National Congress-led government continues to work for changes
at the World Trade Organisation, the International Monetary Fund and the
World Bank and thus mandate government to prioritise efforts to fight
poverty and to build the economies of developing countries; to work to make
multilateral institutions more accountable to the people of the South; to
work to strengthen the United Nations and specialised economic agencies and
promote greater coherence between the different multilateral agencies. I
thank you, Madam Speaker.

                       RELAUNCH OF DEMOCRATIC ALLIANCE

                            (Member’s Statement)

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (DA): Chairperson, may I also express my
condolences to the family of Miriam Makeba, whom I first heard in concert
in Berlin in 1969.

The relaunch of the Democratic Alliance signals a new promise and a new
approach: a promise that we can turn South Africa into a society in which
everyone has a fair chance at achieving their dreams, irrespective of the
circumstances of their birth, and a renewed determination to address the
injustices and to transcend the racial divisions of our country’s past for
the benefit of all the people of South Africa.

It melds our core philosophy of an open opportunity-driven society for all
with our historic quest to promote and defend the Constitution and our
democracy.

One nation, one future: the security of all our children, women and men, a
market economy appropriately regulated and focused on creating jobs, and a
welfare safety net for those who cannot provide for themselves. We now
express each of these concerns as an integrated part of our new identity.

This step signals the DA’s confidence as a party that speaks to the needs
of the people with real policy alternatives. Most importantly, our new
identity shows we are a party of government and not just opposition – a
winning party that will prove its governing mettle after the next election.
ANC, beware. [Interjections.]

               WELCOMING OF DELEGATION FROM REPUBLIC OF KENYA

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr A C Nel): Hon members, before I give the IFP an
opportunity, could I recognise the presence in the gallery of a delegation
from the parliament of the Republic of Kenya, led by the hon Fred Kapondi
Chesebe. Welcome to Parliament. [Applause.]

    INTERVENTION IN KWAZULU-NATAL IN TERMS OF SECTION 100 OF CONSTITUTION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr H J BEKKER (IFP): Chairperson, whilst the rest of South Africa, and the
world for that matter, are trying to be financially prudent, the
overspending of departments in the KwaZulu-Natal government has meant that
the intervention of National Treasury is needed to keep government services
going.

In his presentation to the provincial legislature finance committee, the
KwaZulu-Natal head of treasury said that 11 out of the 16 departments were
currently overspending. Overexpenditure for the 2009 year is now at R2,1
billion, with the health department alone overspending by R1,5 billion.
This mismanagement and the irresponsible actions of these departments mean
that service delivery, which is already slow, is going to be hampered even
further, resulting in inconvenience and suffering for the many people whom
they are meant to be helping.

It is obvious that there is a lack of leadership and management, and that
the current management cannot deliver and provide the necessary services to
the people of KwaZulu-Natal. It is with this in mind that we call upon the
Minister of Finance to intervene directly in terms of section 100 of the
Constitution. I thank you.

                           registration of voters

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr W M SKHOSANA (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC welcomes the efforts
demonstrated by all South African patriots in defending the democratic
gains of all the people and advancing towards a society in which the
government is freely chosen by the people. The IEC set aside the weekend of
8 and 9 November 2008 as voter registration weekend.

A total number of 1 648 189 new registrations were received, whilst another
1 752 596 currently registered persons applied for registration in new
voting districts following the change of addresses. A further 293 871
reregistered in their same voting districts, these having already
registered previously. The total number of recorded visits to the
registration stations came to about 3 694 656.

The drive has far surpassed the expectations of the IEC and we are all
delighted to see a successful weekend drive to register new voters,
especially the youth, who represent the majority of the weekend
registration actively at about 77,9%. The IEC says: “We are proud to say
that this was our most successful registration since 2000.”

However, there have been some challenges that cropped up during the
registration relating to the setting up of the some voting districts and
opening time. We urge the IEC      to attend to these challenges. The ANC
urges all registered voters to participate in their millions in the
elections of 2009 and renew the democratic mandate of the ANC. I thank you.
[Applause.]

              ALLEGED Corruption at SAA Senior management LEVEL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N C NKABINDE (UDM): Thank you, Chairperson. The UDM notes that the SAA
finds itself, once again, embroiled in a scandal. This time, the Sunday
Times claims that the CEO has been involved in breaking the company policy
by reinstating Voyager miles to a person supposedly employed to investigate
corruption in the SAA.

It is nonsensical to commit corruption in pursuit of fighting corruption.
If this were an isolated incident of dubious management at the SAA it would
have been cause for concern. The SAA has not seen a year go by in the past
decade without management and financial woes. In the past few years this
House has bailed out the SAA to the tune of billions of rands.

It is especially galling for the thousands of workers who have lost their
jobs during the SAA’s restructuring and the many workers who still face
retrenchment, to witness the excess and the unpunished transgressions of
senior management. Whilst thousands of workers are uncertain about their
future, the man at the top is paid a fortune despite wasting the resources
of the company. The UDM calls on the board of SAA to act immediately on
these latest allegations. I thank you.

                             Teenage pregnancIES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs P DE LILLE (ID): Chairperson, may I use this opportunity to
congratulate you on your appointment as the chairperson. As we enter the 16
days of activism against women and children abuse, the issue of teenage
pregnancies must be dealt with. But it cannot be dealt with through knee-
jerk reactions and solutions that put the sole responsibility and blame on
teenage girls.
The ANC’s President’s comments that pregnant teenage girls must be sent to
boarding schools perpetuate the patriarchal and sexist values in our
society. Why is it that girls and women have to bear the responsibility
alone? What about the responsibility of the boys and men? Why are we not
confronting the power relations within our society that are leading to
girls being victimised while men refuse to take responsibility for their
actions?

The ID believes that we need real solutions to the many social problems
afflicting our society. Real leadership means standing up for what is right
rather than mouthing of the rhetoric that simply entrenches the values that
need to be challenged in our society. Thank you.

                        education summit in Gugulethu

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N M MDAKA (ANC): Chairperson, the Gugulethu parliamentary constituency
office, in partnership with the metro central education district and other
stakeholders, held a successful two-day educational summit on Friday, 24
and Saturday, 25 October at the Ekhwezi Community Centre. The summit was an
initiative of the Gugulethu parliamentary constituency office, after
visiting and consulting with schools as part of a fact-finding exercise
through readiness earlier this year.

The primary focus of the summit was to look at various challenges facing
schools in Gugulethu, ranging from poor matric results, school vandalism,
crime, teenage pregnancy, lack of recreational facilities in schools, drug
abuse, etc.

The summit was attended by various local stakeholders, including the MP
deployed into the area, Ms Ramakaba-Lesiea and the MEC for education, Mr
Yousuf Gabru, in order to engage these challenges and come up with
solutions. Some of the resolutions taken were: the formation of the
Gugulethu education forum, that education should not be treated as a
government matter alone but in partnership with communities, and that the
summit should be held annually in order to check the progress made on the
summit resolutions.

The ANC is committed to the principle of building a caring society. I thank
you.

                           THE STRUGGLE OF INDIANS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S RAJBALLY (MF): Chairperson, I would first like to congratulate you on
achieving your seat. I’m not going to call you Deputy Speaker.

Chairperson, 148 years ago, the ships Bulverde and Tyrol left Calcutta and
Madras for South Africa, bringing onto our shores Indians who were
indentured to do manual labour. Today, I stand here requesting all to
recognise the struggle of these people and the great contribution Indians
have made to the development of South Africa.

Under a segregated system Indians too bore the brunt of the apartheid
regime and, together with the other victims of the system, fought for the
freedom of our people. We applaud all who share this heritage by realising
the value of every person in South Africa. We encourage unity and so
stimulate our ability to address our country’s challenges. Thank you.

                      CONSTRAINTS ON OPERATION OF SCOPA
                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr E W TRENT: I hope the Minister of Finance will listen, since he’s in the
House.

If the Democratic Alliance becomes the government of South Africa, we will
ensure that Parliament plays its oversight function effectively and well.
It is for this reason that we agree, Chairperson, with what you said this
morning, seven hours ago, at the Auditor-General’s briefing, namely that
this Parliament must leave a firm foundation which the next Parliament will
be able to build upon, when it comes to oversight.

Sadly, this legacy will not be achieved because of the way in which the
Standing Committee on Public Accounts, Scopa, was stopped from attending to
its affairs because of narrow party-political considerations. Scopa’s
responsibility is critical. It is to oversee prudent spending on the part
of public persons to ensure that the executive remains accountable to South
Africa and to the taxpayers.

The fact that the ANC pays lip service to oversight and accountability is
vividly demonstrated by the fact that Scopa will - out of a total of 248
departments, constitutional institutions and entities - only consider the
reports of four departments and entities this year - scarcely one per cent.
Even the resolutions of these four will probably never reach the National
Assembly because they will only come next year.

We believe, in fact, that the public hearings for tomorrow and Friday are a
total waste of resources. When the DA proposed that the Scopa should be
given permission to sit during the constituency period, we were blocked by
the ANC majority in the committee. To them, I suppose, sorting out the
ANC’s internal political problems, clearly, took precedence over our
government departments’ oversight.

On 23 October 2008, I wrote to the Speaker and to this day I haven’t heard
a ruling from her about why we can’t sit during constituency periods.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr A C Nel): Hon member, I’ve audited your time. It
has expired. Thank you.

                            PROVISION OF HOUSING

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D C MABENA (ANC): Chairperson, the democratic government, led by the
African National Congress, together with our people, works tirelessly to
ensure that people can live where they choose to be decently housed and to
bring up their families in comfort and security.

The Gauteng Provincial Government, led by the ANC, has in the past five
years made progress in providing our people with housing, thus restoring
dignity to those who live in poor communities.

In the current financial year alone, the Gauteng Provincial Government has
provided the poor people with 64 000 houses - far exceeding the target of
58 000 they set for themselves for the current financial year, ending in
March 2009. This has resulted in 318 000 people having proper shelter and
enjoying security of tenure for the first time in their lives.

The ANC endorses the principle that all South Africans have a right to a
secure place in which to live in peace and dignity. We believe that housing
is a human right. Thank you.

                            DRUG ABUSE IN SCHOOLS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr R RABINOWITZ (IFP): Chairperson, the IFP notes with concern the
increasing gangsterism in the Western Cape, fuelled by the drug intake,
especially tik. Drugs are freely available in schools to children and
teachers say the drug abuse is out of control in some schools.

We are equally concerned that the social fabric is so fractured in many
schools that there is no hierarchy of discipline between violent students
and the police. Parents, teachers, headmasters and mistresses, and student
leaders have lost control and play no role.

We have made excellent progress in providing antiretrovirals for pregnant
women and the newborn. But we appear to be bringing children into a world
where they are condemned before birth. We have removed special courts to
deal with children and replaced them with special provisions in all courts.
Yet, even prosecutors are disturbed by the lack of support for children and
young raped girls in their courts.

As politicians we may talk glibly of moral regeneration but, clearly, we
seed our society with the wrong values and we have undermined authority. It
is our freedoms that have inadvertently done this. Our goal should be to
create a harmonious society. But when we fail to do this, as it appears
that we have, we need more urgent and creative solutions from the Minister
of Education and the Minister of Justice. Therefore, we are looking to you
to act urgently in these regards. Thank you.

                  COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION IN FIGHTING CRIME

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs D M MOROBI (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC has long recognised that the
police service and government agencies cannot fight crime alone. In meeting
this challenge, they require the involvement and active participation of
all communities and all sections of society.

The Gauteng Provincial Government, led by the ANC, embarked on a campaign
focussing specifically on what they term the “trio crimes.” These are
residential, business and vehicle robberies. Since the start of the
campaign in July this year, 1 333 suspects have been arrested. The campaign
focuses on identifying, tracing, arresting and effectively prosecuting as
many perpetrators as possible while closing the space for criminals to
operate in the province.

The national struggle for freedom led by the ANC was a critical overarching
vehicle to bring about peace, security and stability to our society. In
dealing with issues of crime, the movement proceeded from the premise that
a rising quality of life also meant an improvement in the safety and
security of citizens wherever they might be. Thank you.

                   SHODDY WORKMANSHIP IN MOGOBA COMMUNITY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms J A SEMPLE (DA): Chairperson, the shoddy workmanship of the toilets
being built in Mogoba settlement near Putfontein in Ekurhuleni is an
absolute disgrace. The summer rains in Gauteng have barely begun. But by
the registration weekend, about 38 toilets had actually fallen down. Most
are so badly built, and the foundations are so shallow that there are
cracks all around the base. The toilets lean dangerously at a 45º angle.

This past week has seen continuous rain. More of the toilets will have
fallen down as we speak. It is highly unlikely that they will still be
standing, never mind being usable, in a year’s time.

Trenches are dug, left open and unmarked. There is no electricity. So, it
is difficult to see the deep open pits. A member of the community has
already fallen into one of these trenches. He broke his pelvis and
subsequently died.

Before some arrogant ANC Minister accuses me of cheap politicking, I have
the pictures to prove it. I have seen this complete disregard for human
life and safety with my own eyes.

Apart from the shocking waste of taxpayers’ money and the fact that the
contractor should be fired, the democratic process and the community’s
participation are completely disregarded. Where is the ANC ward councillor,
and what is the highly acclaimed Community Development Worker doing? DA
members are ignored at ward committee meetings. They are beaten up and
their shacks are burnt down when they try to raise these issues. The ANC
had better wake up and improve service delivery, otherwise they will be in
for a big surprise at next year’s election. The community is not prepared
to put up with bad service and useless public representatives. The voters
will make their voices heard through the ballot box.

                  ALEXANDRA CONSTITUENCY OFFICE ON HOUSING

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S D MOTUBATSE-HOUNKPATIN (ANC): Chairperson, I rise here on behalf of
the Alexandra constituency office.

The Alexandra community held a workshop recently discussing, among other
things, the Constitution of the Republic and economic rights. There was
special focus on the right to housing. The community looked at the Freedom
Charter once more, which talks about housing security and comfort. They
appreciate the work done by our government in housing delivery, and they
committed themselves to fighting corruption in the housing delivery system.

However, the community wishes to strengthen the part of security as
enshrined in the Freedom Charter. They request that a system of
documentation be put in place, especially with regard to RDP housing, so
that there can be a list of all the people who are the dependants of the
registered tenant. They believe this will strengthen the security against
unscrupulous people who like to buy houses or take houses if the registered
tenant dies or passes on. So, the request is that there should be a
registration of tenants. This does not imply reinstating or bringing back
the permit system as it was in the 50s and 60s or before our democracy. We
should have a register that will allow all the people to have security as
they live in their houses. I thank you. [Applause.]

           AVAILABILITY OF SPORTS FACILITIES TO ALL SOUTH AFRICANS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M M NTULI (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC believes that sport and recreation
are integral parts of reconstructing and developing a healthier society.
Accessibility and affordability of sport to all South Africans, including
those in rural areas, the young and the elderly, must be realised
immediately.

The ANC-led government is constantly broadening access to sports
facilities, particularly to the poor. At this point, our government is
building a sports and recreation facility in the area of Meshweshwe in
KwaZulu-Natal. This sports facility is expected to be completed in December
2008. It will have the following facilities: ablution, change rooms,
palisade fencing, grassed football pitch, concrete grandstands and combo
courts. This year alone, our government has built 50 sports facilities
throughout the province, particularly in rural areas. These developments
have also facilitated the transfer of skills in areas like sports fields
grass planting, drainage and irrigation erection, fencing and bricklaying.

The ANC believes that it is important to ensure that sports and recreation
facilities are available to all South Africans, regardless of race, creed
or gender. Thank you.

    INTERVENTION IN KWAZULU-NATAL IN TERMS OF SECTION 100 OF CONSTITUTION

                      CONSTRAINTS ON OPERATION OF SCOPA

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, the statement made by the hon
Bonhomme is a subject of the Ministerial statement and discussion
immediately hereafter, so I think we should just leave the response to
that. The hon Bekker suggested that we should impose section 100. He did
not say which part of section 100 in respect of KwaZulu-Natal should be
imposed. Wherever we view section 100(1)(a), we have observed the
requirements of Chapter 2 of the Constitution, which requires co-operative
governance. It has always been done co-operatively.

We have a brand new Member of Parliament today who was once an MEC in some
province where section 100(1)(a) was applied. He would be able to attest
the fact that it was co-operative. In the context of the Department of
Health in KwaZulu-Natal, the key issue that is driving the cost is the
Occupational Specific Dispensation which is been applied in respect of
nursing staff. It is a matter which we are very conscious of. We have
discussed it at some length with both the MECs of Finance and of Health.
This matter is going to be resolved. It’s not as though there is
carelessness or anything. I think that in respect of the Occupation
Specific Dispensation, OSD, it is entirely circumstantial.

The hon Trent did himself a great disservice because he started on the
wrong footing. There is a greater chance of chickens growing teeth and than
of the DA becoming the government in this country any time soon [Laughter.]
Because he did himself such a disservice it was a preamble, and everything
else had to fall away. But we observed the issues. I think that the hon
Godi, who at last count was not a member of the ANC, and who is the
Chairperson of Scopa, is probably in a better position to speak, because we
have no ability to do that on behalf of Scopa. I thank you.

           AVAILABILITY OF SPORTS FACILITIES TO ALL SOUTH AFRICANS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chairperson, we would like to thank
the hon Ntuli for the remarks that she made. We would like to point out
that that was not happening in only one province. It was happening
throughout the country in a much smaller way than we would have wanted it
to happen. For that reason the discussions between the Minister for
Provincial and Local Government and me are at an advanced stage.

We thought that with the return of the Municipal Infrastructure Grants to
the department, we would be able to move much faster. This is so, because
although this government is wielding power, it does so in a very hostile
environment, because the legacies of the past stubbornly continued to haunt
our society and our communities. Unless the balance of forces around the
finances and the resources changes, our communities will be expected to
wait a little longer, and this would be undesirable.

The little bit that we did, by way of providing kit for poor children -
black and white - and by providing travel-abroad opportunities for those
who showed talent, as selected by their federations, makes a bigger
difference in the lives of our children. Even though the playing facilities
were not sophisticated, they offered our children something that made it
possible for them to be exposed or to expose their talents to the talent
scouts and develop their skills.

We are looking forward to a further partnership with the private sector,
which is showing great interest, because we must continue to initiate
partnerships in this environment. They are showing great interest in
assisting, especially where MECs like those in KwaZulu-Natal are
overzealous. We encourage that overzealousness in insisting on social
responsibilities from those who are receiving money from the government to
build other facilities. We are not going to compete with housing or schools
and clinics, but nevertheless, we should get something from our social
partners. I thank you.

                        EDUCATION SUMMIT IN GUGULETHU

                  ALEXANDRA CONSTITUENCY OFFICE ON HOUSING

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, we
commend the role of the parliamentary constituency offices to engage the
organs of people’s government and broader civil society on issues of
service delivery and societal development.

The Gugulethu and Alexandra statements presented this afternoon were
examples of active roles that Members of Parliament – in fact all public
representatives - might play. As a Department of Public Service and
Administration, we created a unit that is going to interact with Parliament
so that we follow up on the issues that communities raise, as contained in
members’ constituency reports. We would like to encourage members to do
their work, so that on those issues that need follow-up, we would be there
to assist that they are followed up on.

Hi endlelo leri ha tshemba leswaku hi ri Palamende ya Rixaka ya
Swifundzhankulu na le ka timasipala hi nga swi kota ku humelerisa pfhumba
ra hina ra Batho Pele loko hi kota ku hlangana na vayimeri va tiko na
mintlawa ya vaaki-tiko hinkwayo, hi kanerisana no burisana na vona hi
timhaka ta vukorhokeri bya tiko. Swi na nkoka leswaku hi endla sweswo
hikuva xidemokirasi xa hina xi vula tano. Inkomu. (Translation of Xitsonga
paragraph follows.)

[In this way we believe that, as the National Council of Provinces and
municipalities, we can make the Batho Pele campaign a success if we meet
with the national representatives and community groups to plan and discuss
matters around service delivery. It is important to do it in this way
because this is a democratic expectation. Thank you.]

              ALLEGED CORRUPTION AT SAA SENIOR MANAGEMENT LEVEL

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Chairperson, I am responding to the
comments on SAA. I would like to say that indeed the reports in the media
about SAA are worrying. Therefore, I would like to assure the House that we
are going to follow up and address any problems that we might have with the
SAA.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr A C Nel): No! Are our nation’s hands in safe
hands? [Laughter.]
                  COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION IN FIGHTING CRIME

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, I want to commend the hon
D M Morobi on her statement. Her statement is underpinned by the need of
strengthening partnerships in our communities as a contribution to fight
crime and create more stable and safer communities.

I must say that owing to what she said, I think we should take this
opportunity to thank South Africans from different walks of life. To date,
on this call of partnership, we have met a number of people together with
their traditional leaders, who have their own suggestions on how to
strengthen our communities by partnering with government to fight crime.

Regarding Business Against Crime, a pilot project was launched last week
which aims to strengthen this partnership as we come together with the
private security companies as well. We have had a hand in this, and there
have been some contributions from religious leaders who have come to the
fore and said they also want to be counted, and they have given some
suggestions insofar as that is concerned.

In the past few weeks, we have been calling everyone, including those who
are in the journalistic fraternity, to assist in this fight against crime
because if we do this and strengthen our community structures in their
different forms, be they community policing fora, community safety fora,
neighbourhood watches, business watches, street committees - all of them -
we would be able to reap the fruits, as the hon member has alluded to here,
of apprehending suspects. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

                        EDUCATION SUMMIT IN GUGULETHU

                            (Minister’s Response)

UNGQONGQOSHE WEZEMFUNDO: Sihlalo, ngifuna ukuqala ngokuthi ngibonge kakhulu
uQabane umama uRamakaba-Lesiea ngokuthatha umsebenzi weANC ophuma
kwiziphakamiso zasePolokwane awenze ukuthi kube umsebenzi wehhovisi lakhe
laseGugulethu.

Sivumelene ukuthi imfundo sizoyibeka phambili kakhulu kwi-ANC nanokuthi
sizosebenzisana nabazali, nabantwana kanye nothisha ezikoleni ukuze
abantwana bonke babone ukuthi imfundo yabo siyayilungisa futhi bathole
imfundo enhle kakhulu. Ngiyambonga-ke umama uRamakaba -Lesiea ngomsebenzi
wakhe eGugulethu. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, I would like to start by saying
thank you very much to Comrade Ramakaba-Lesiea for taking the Polokwane
resolutions of the African National Congress and making them part and
parcel of her Gugulethu constituency schedule.

We agreed as the ANC that we are going to make education a priority. We
further agreed that we are also going to work together with parents,
learners and teachers in schools so that all learners can realise that we
are making their education better so that they can get good quality
education. I therefore thank hon Ramakaba-Lesiea for her sterling work in
Gugulethu.]

Ke a go leboga mmê. Ke a itse gore o motho yo o tshwarang thipa ka fa
bogaleng. O itse tiro e e tshwanetseng gore re e dire. Fa re ne re dumalana
kwa Polokwane re ne re sa dumalane fela gore re kwale dilo tse dintle mo
dipampiring, re dumalane ka gonne re batla go bona tshweetso ya rona ya go
dira. Ke a go leboga e bile ke batla gore tiro ya gago e gole. Fa e le gore
o tlhoka thuso ya rona, re tla go thusa. Re tla leka go dirisana le wena le
go go thusa ka tiro e ntle e o e dirang.

Ka kgang e ya bana ba ba dirisang diritibatsi le bojalwa mo dikolong, re
tshwanetse go oketsa tiro e re e dirang. Re dira tiro e ntsi go fedisa
tiriso ya dilo tse di maswe tse mo dikolong tsa rona, mme potso e re
batlang go e botsa IFP ke gore, rona re le baemedi mo Palamenteng re dira
eng? Rona re le batsadi fa re bona bana ba rona ba tsena mo mathateng a, re
dira eng? A re bua le bana ba rona kwa gae? Fa go ne go siame kwa gae, o ne
o ka se fitlhele ngwana a dira dilo tse. Ga re a tshwanela go lebisa dilo
tsotlhe kwa lefapheng la thuto. A re faneng matsogo, re dirisane. Motsadi,
ngwana, morutabana le mongwe le mongwe yo o nnang mo gae, rotlhe re
dirisanye go lwantsha mathata otlhe a. Ke a leboga. [Legofi.] (Translation
of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[Thank you, Madam. I know you will act in the best interests of the
situation. The resolutions we took in Polokwane were not just good on
paper, but as a policy document to guide our implementation. I thank you
and I would like to wish you everything of the best in your endeavour. We
pledge to offer our help. We promise to work together with you in your
undertakings.

We must do something about the children who do drugs and use alcohol at
school. We are doing a lot to try and put a stop to their involvement in
these bad things but the question I want to ask the IFP is: What are they
doing as representatives in Parliament and as parents? Do we talk to our
children? If all was well at home, a child would not have been exposed to
such things. We should not make it the responsibility of the Department of
Education to do everything. Let us join hands to work together. A parent, a
child, an educator and everyone at home, let us face these problems
together. I thank you. [Applause.]]


                         THE GLOBAL ECONOMIC CRISIS


                                 (Statement)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson and hon members, the global economy is
presently living through its deepest crisis since the Great Depression of
1929. Around the world, people’s representatives like us are engaging with
the impact of this crisis on their respective mandates. I want to express
sincere appreciation for this opportunity to address the National Assembly
on what we know about the crisis. Earlier today we had an opportunity to
discuss these matters in great detail with the members of the Portfolio
Committee on Finance. Important as those discussions were found to be, we
recognise that the challenges before us cannot be confined to one or other
portfolio committee. The nature of the challenges is such that they affect
the very fundamentals of all of our work – the crisis indeed gnaws at the
contract that we have with the people of South Africa; indeed it compels us
all to ask about our ability to contribute to a deep and durable democracy
that will lift millions of our people out of a life of grinding poverty.

First and foremost, this is a crisis of the developed world. Loose credit
extension in the years since the dot-com bubble burst in 2001 and large
fiscal deficits in the USA have increased the debt of households and
governments alike. These debt levels have become unsustainable. The popping
of these bubbles has had, and will continue to have, a large global impact.

Many countries not at the centre of the current turmoil will suffer
terribly and tragically. As firms in developed countries strive to repair
their balance sheets, they tend to sell everything and repatriate resources
back to their home base. This has implications for us, as it has for many
emerging economies, despite the fact that the epicentre of this crisis does
not lie within our shores. The depreciation of our currency, the rand, in
line with many other emerging market currencies is testimony to these
developments. Of particular concern is Africa. Strong rates of growth in
recent years are at risk, as commodity prices fall and countries are forced
to pay back capital. These fears pose the risk that there will be greater
demands for protection from fearful populations and, less benignly, cynical
adventurers. This is the state of the world, and it cannot be allowed to
continue.

If we look at recent events, we recognise that the causes of all this can
only be paraphrased here today. Over the years, banks purchased vast
quantities of loans used for house purchases in the United States. As
interest rates were increased in 2006 and 2007 in that country, many of
those debtors began to default, putting at risk the value of all the
housing loans. This uncertainty has resulted in the share prices of
financial and nonfinancial companies falling, affecting lending operations
between the banks.

Financial institutions involved in property, such as Northern Rock in the
UK, failed, while other institutions experienced increasingly large losses
on their investments in the housing markets. Losses of $200 billion were
predicted in the early days of the crisis. Estimated losses now stand at an
estimated $1.4 trillion, according to the IMF. Central banks in advanced
economies responded by announcing co-ordinated action to address short-term
funding markets, establishing temporary currency swap arrangements, and
injecting liquidity into the markets. Sovereign wealth funds were tapped
for funding for UBS, Morgan Stanley and Merrill Lynch and interest rates
have been cut sharply.

These actions did little to stem the tide, however. Investment banks in the
US failed, such as Lehman Brothers, were bought for a song at $2 a share –
that was Bear Stearns - or changed their regulatory stripes to access a
deposit base, and this happened in the case of both Goldman Sachs and
Morgan Stanley. Official support from the US Treasury and the Federal
Reserve to the insurance company AIG now exceeds $150 billion. Governments
have committed about $4 trillion of support to financial systems around the
world. About $661 billion of write-downs and losses have been acknowledged
so far.

The signs of the spreading economic malaise are abundant. In the quarter to
September 2007, Volvo Trucks sold about 42 000 truck units. In the same
period this year, the quarter to September, they sold just 175. The cost of
dry bulk shipping charter rates as it appears on the Baltic Index, plunged
by 71,9% in October. Whatever ships you want, they’re available, the costs
have dropped. Suddenly, the world is a very different place. General
Motors’ share price has fallen 88% this year, to $3 a share, which is the
lowest price for a General Motors’ share since 1946. GM, Chrysler and Ford,
the giants of Detroit, have requested a bailout of some $25 billion as car
sales in the US dropped 32% compared to the same period last year.

The world’s equity markets have declined precipitously. Since 1 October
this year the US Dow Jones Industrial Average has fallen by about 36%.
Brazil’s Bovespa has dropped by 45%. Russia’s RTS Index has declined by
71%. Our JSE All Share Index has fallen by roughly 30%.

One of the great sources of ballast in the world economy has been the rapid
growth of China, which has contributed on average 20% of the world’s growth
in the last 5 years. With a gigantic population and rapid economic growth,
China has been both a great importer of raw materials and commodities from
the rest of the world and a great exporter too. China’s demand for
commodities contributed to the commodity price boom the world experienced
over the past 6 years.

But China has its own challenges. Each year China must create 10 million
net new jobs to absorb new entrants into the labour market and people who
move from the rural into the urban areas. The most recent indications
suggest that growth in China has begun to moderate, resulting in lower
imports and putting downward pressure on commodity prices. Chinese GDP
growth slowed to 9% in the 3rd quarter of this year, from 11,9% last year
and 11,6% in 2006. The IMF forecasts Chinese growth next year will be down
to 8,3%.

Commodity prices have responded quickly. The price of platinum has dropped
47% since 1 January this year. Gold prices have fallen by over 13% and oil
prices by 31%. Coal prices remain 40% higher than they were in January, but
have declined by 31% since 1 October this year. Falling prices for oil and
other commodities and the major outflows of capital from emerging markets
in the middle of October signalled that we have entered a new phase of the
crisis. Economic conditions have deteriorated worldwide. Despite this, the
global economy will continue to grow in 2009, with all of the growth
deriving from developing economies.

World output will fall from 50% in 2007 to 3,7% in 2008 and to 2,2% next
year. Advanced economies’ GDP growth at 1,4% this year will fall to minus
0,3% next year. African growth is expected at 5,2% for this year and 4,7%
for 2009. Against this backdrop it is important that we take a view of all
of these events on the South African economy.

Commodity price changes alone have an ambiguous effect on South Africa, but
we should be under no illusions about the fact that our economy will suffer
along with the rest of the world. The financial crisis is giving way to a
real economy slowdown. Some countries will bear the full brunt of both the
financial crisis, as lending and borrowing has come to a halt, and the
economic crisis. Exports and imports will fall.

In South Africa we have experienced at least part of the financial shock.
Our exchange rate has depreciated sharply and the prices of our equities
and bonds have fallen far. Yet our sound and well-regulated banking system
is not dependent on foreign lines of credit and our exposure to toxic
assets has been nearly nonexistent. Some firms with extensive international
operations have seen losses, but even these have been small, relatively
speaking. Our public debt levels are low and our level of foreign currency
debt is even lower. This helps to lower our vulnerability to financial
shocks.

Global economic weakness in trade and investment, however, will have more
far-reaching effects. Declining commodity prices and lower growth in major
trading partners will lower demand for South African exports and reduce the
income we derive from them.

Only one part of our challenge is to ensure an appropriate short-term
response. In the long term, we need to ensure that our firms and our people
are more productive, more export-oriented, and with higher saving and
investment. We need to be able to achieve much higher economic growth rates
with a sustainable current account.

It is becoming clear, however, that at least in the medium-term, our
aspirations for more rapid economic growth and our capacity unfortunately
do not match.

Our policies have been appropriate to our macroeconomic challenges in
recent years. We have set a monetary framework that targets a low and
stable rate of inflation over the long term. As a small economy, we can
expect that inflation will sometimes fall outside the target, and we have
experienced such an occurrence this year and last from sharply rising food
and oil prices, but we are not alone in this – nearly all countries have
missed their implicit or explicit inflation targets over this period. What
matters is that we have a framework that is flexible enough to ensure that
we achieve low inflation over time and with due regard for economic growth.
The economic and social costs of a prolonged period of high inflation or
deflation caused by wayward or ill-conceived monetary policies cannot and
should not be tolerated by a democratic society.

On the fiscal side, we have endeavoured since 2005 to raise saving in the
economy and create fiscal space. We did this for two reasons: One was to
offset the negative effects of rapidly growing domestic demand on inflation
and the competitiveness of the economy; the other was to create financial
saving to expand demand, should economic growth fall sharply.

Now we can prudently maintain a healthy growth rate in government spending
while keeping public borrowing modest and sustaining low long-term interest
rates. As growth slows, however, it is likely to become more difficult to
maintain a positive government saving rate. Continuing to focus spending on
capital and public infrastructure helps to keep saving up, and so we have
opted to continue to emphasise our public infrastructure commitments, the
expansion of our energy production capability, and to ensure readiness for
the World Cup, among others.

A good track record in financing investment in human capital in health,
education and skills development will also be maintained. These commitments
will help to raise the economy’s growth rate in the present as investment
spending is maintained, and in the future contribute to rising potential
growth of the economy. Closing the gap between the 6% economic growth rates
we aspire to and the realities of slower growth we are now experiencing,
requires a renewed effort to reform our economy.

Reform is needed to propel investment. The purchases of South African bonds
and equities by foreigners accounted for almost half of South Africa’s
financing needs between 2002 and 2007. About $20 billion per year, that’s
roughly R200 billion at today’s exchange rate, is needed to finance our
current account deficit. So, as people make these calls for new exchange
controls and for isolating South Africa, we need to remember that that gap
in financing our investment is in the order of R200 billion a year. If we
impose harsh measures on foreigners, we won’t get that money and then we
will have to slow down growth. Continuing to attract foreign investment
implies the need to maintain confidence in our macroeconomic policies and
to raise the growth rate of the economy.

There is no shortage of good and bad ideas. Our task is to find the good
ones and move forward with the policy articulation and implementation.
Raising the cost of economic activity and restricting our ability to trade
is obviously not the right path for our country. We live in a world where
our domestic industries, such as the domestic auto or metals industries,
are intimately and irrevocably linked to the rest of the world. The
indiscriminate dispensing of cash to firms that lobby for help will also
not raise incomes and create jobs. We have made financing available for
industrial policy. It is time that economically sensible plans are
articulated for public review and support.

Our focus on government’s contribution to reducing the costs of economic
activity and expanding infrastructure needs to be matched by investment and
productivity growth in the private sector. There is room for policy
adjustment in a range of sectors to facilitate investment in new businesses
and growth in employment, particularly in network industries. New power
generation, greater responsiveness to environmental needs, expanding our
access to advanced telecommunications, the redevelopment of water and
transport infrastructure, among other things, imply fertile ground for
public and private partnership and new economic activity.

Let us be clear, the global crisis enjoins us to take forward our efforts
if we intend to permanently reduce unemployment, increase incomes, and
lower poverty. Our macroeconomic policies are sufficiently flexible to
address a prolonged economic downturn, as demonstrated in the shift to a
fiscal deficit in the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement. We have a good
understanding of what the international community is doing to combat
economic weakness, and we understand the need to address our own local
economic challenges.

Our domestic efforts to address the global economic crisis need to find
external resonance in the reform of the international financial
architecture, in the reform of the multilateral institutions, and in the
renewal of global commitment to mutual accountability. A co-ordinated
international approach to the financial sector is obviously also needed.

The international financial and economic crisis is in large part about the
failures of national and cross-border regulatory regimes in assessing and
managing the risks building up in financial institutions and systems. In
Sao Paolo and in Washington, at the G20, we discussed how to address these
problems in a durable and credible way in coming months. On a national
basis, it was noted that policy frameworks need to maintain fiscal
sustainability. There is little gain to be had from a new massive build-up
of imbalances. We cannot allow a crisis caused by a rise in debt and cheap
credit to be followed in 10 years’ time with another crisis caused by the
same thing.

To make headway, Ministers of Finance and Central Bank Governors have been
asked to look at a range of issues in the financial markets, with deadlines
set for next year. Particular attention needs to be placed on sound
regulatory policies and the application of standards for accounting,
auditing and transparency. Each country will therefore have to adopt its
national plan, based on the common principles for reform. We will each have
to assess to what extent both our fiscal and monetary policies support the
internationally agreed principles. More importantly, we will need to ensure
better co-ordination and co-operation, not only between our own financial
regulators, but between our regulators and those of other countries,
particularly in regulating financial institutions that operate in more than
one country. I will be convening a meeting of all our financial regulators,
as well as the SA Reserve Bank and National Treasury, to ensure that as
South Africa we give effect to the common principles for reform, and to
facilitate our full participation in global standard-setting institutions
and the Financial Stability Forum.
In conclusion, we have the good fortune of being able to stand on the
shoulders of those who have preceded us, and so we understand much about
what has gone wrong in the world economy and what is required to deal with
it. The effects, however, will be with us for the foreseeable future, and
so we need to think carefully about how we reach our own domestic economic
goals in this new environment. Our macroeconomic framework is sound and,
because of the choices we have made in the past, we have the resources and
policy space to set an appropriate response to the evolving economic
downturn. We need, however, to address the microeconomic and regulatory
constraints to more rapid economic growth. This implies a renewed social
dialogue, one part of which will be the development of a national approach
to financial markets regulation and reform, but addressing our long-term
growth and employment challenges requires a broadening of that dialogue.
Much needs to be done to achieve our aspirations. Those aspirations are of
a country that has shed a history of poverty. When looking at the issues in
the global financial crisis at the moment, it is important to remind
ourselves continuously of what we are doing here as Members of Parliament
and what is in the nature of our contract with the people. Thank you very
much.

Mr S J F MARAIS: Chairperson, by now everybody is aware of the effects of
global economic turmoil on our economy. The statement by the Minister and
this debate confirms the seriousness of its current and potential effects
on South Africa.

It is expected that this crisis will pass, given the nature of economic
cycles. The role of government must be an attempt to smooth this cycle. A
fiscal discipline and a prudent policy approach are essential in weathering
the storm at our front door.

Die huidige fiskale beleid, waarby die inflasieteikens ingesluit word, het
bygedra tot ons vermoë om die wêreld se ekonomiese krisis relatief goed te
kon hanteer, tot so `n mate dat ons nie in `n resessie verval het nie;
ondanks die feit dat daar sekere aspekte daarvan in sommige bedrywe
aanwesig is. Ekonomiese aksieplanne waartoe die regering en al die
rolspelers verbind behoort te wees, is noodsaaklik. Die President het in `n
antwoord op `n vraag van my gereageer dat die Nywerheidsontwikkelingsbeleid
genoegsame stukrag sal gee om nie net vaste buitelandse beleggings te lok,
maar ook om Suid-Afrika se uitvoerbedryf so te stimuleer dat ons minder
afhanklik van portefeuljebeleggings sal wees om die tekort op die
betalingsbalans te finansier. Ons weet dit het nie gerealiseer nie.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The current fiscal policy, which includes the inflation targets,
contributed to our ability to cope relatively well with the global economic
crisis, to the extent that we were not plunged into a recession, despite
the fact that certain aspects thereof are present in some industries.
Economic plans of action, to which government and all the role-players
should be committed, are essential. In reply to one of my questions, the
President responded that the Industrial Development Policy would provide
sufficient drive not only to attract foreign investments, but also to
stimulate South Africa’s export industry in such a way that we would be
less dependent on portfolio investments to finance the deficit on the
balance of payment. We know this did not materialise.]

What is firstly required from us is to assure that we have an FDI policy
that would attract FDIs for employment-driven production and with a focus
on exports implemented so as to stimulate the employment and capacity-
building in South Africa with incentives to the performing employers. These
will increase employment and wealth creation and savings; increase the
foreign capital earnings and reserves; improve the currency volatility and
stability and decrease the dependency on state grants.

Secondly, initiate public-private partnerships, and not increased central
control by government; and thirdly, all need to support and promote a
prudent fiscal policy that will best assist in establishing investors’
confidence and sentiments and all must refrain from statements that will
damage these objectives.

In Sake-Rapport van Sondag 16 November is gewaarsku teen ondeurdagte
ekonomiese beleidsuitlatings deur politici wat beleggersvertroue,
werksgeleenthede en werksekerheid ernstig in gevaar stel. Daar word gewys
daarop dat die onsekerheid oor die ANC se toekomstige ekonomiese
beleidsrigting van die redes is waarom ons soewereine kredietgradering
afwaarts aangepas is en waarom buitelandse beleggers hulle geld onttrek as
gevolg van risiko verskansingsoptredes. Hoewel dit gegrond mag wees op
sentimente en persepsies, bewys dit dat die noodsaaklikheid dat die
ekonomiese beleid nou gesteun moet word en behoort veral die ANC-
woordvoerders en hulle alliansievennote dieselfde beleidsuitsprake te maak
en nie `n indruk van die teendeel te skep nie. Voorsitter, ons moet die
vermoë toon om die uitdaging vir ekonomiese krisis nou en in die toekoms
met `n doelgerigte ekonomiese beleid die hoof te bied en behoort die
Minister se beleidsinisiatiewe gesteun te word. Ek dank u. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The Sake-Rapport of Sunday 16 November 2008 warned against rash economic
policy statements by politicians that would endanger investor confidence,
job opportunities and job security. It is noted that the uncertainty
regarding the ANC’s future economic policy trends is one of the reasons why
our sovereign credit grading was adjusted negatively and why foreign
investors are withdrawing their money due to risk-entrenching behaviour.
Although this could be based on sentiment and perceptions, it proves that
the necessity of the economic policy should be supported now. ANC-
spokespersons and their alliance partners ought to make the same policy
statements and not create the impression of the contrary. Chairperson, we
must demonstrate the ability to deal with the challenge of an economic
crisis through a purposeful economic policy, now and in the future, and the
Minister’s policy initiatives should be supported. I thank you.]

Mr N SINGH: Chairperson, congratulations on your appointment to the high
chair. I hope it is secured. The meltdown of global financial markets has
left the world in crisis, with some of the most prosperous countries even
facing recession, and we heard that from the hon Minister. We, in the
developing and emerging economies, have also been harshly affected by this
crisis, even though we were not directly involved with the dealings which
led to this untenable situation. But such is the nature of globalisation.

To say that South Africa is removed from these troubles, would be very
naïve and uninformed. With our integration into the global economy, we are
affected by international events and movements in the global markets. The
volatility of the rand against the currencies of our major trading
partners, as well as the increase, and then the sharp decline in the prices
of the commodities which we are exporting, are just some examples of how
connected the global environment is and the effect that it has on people in
South Africa.
The gloomy economic state in which we now find ourselves has put a serious
damper on our growth targets and will influence our economic and
developmental plans, as well as have a detrimental effect on efforts to
combat poverty and unemployment.

This, Chairperson and members, is worrying, considering the slow progress
that has been made in combating poverty and creating employment over the
years. Innovative plans and strategies are needed if we are to try and
limit the suffering that this will have on the poorest members of our
society, who will no doubt be the harshest affected by this crisis. We are,
however, glad that the Minister of Finance has reassured the South African
public that the banking system and financial institutions can weather the
current financial crisis.

An interesting feature of the economic turmoil is the development of
relationships and the interactions between governments and the private
sector in trying to overcome this crisis. These relationships are very
important, and here in South Africa government, the private sector and
labour must interact honestly and closely with each other to ensure that we
do overcome this crisis with the least amount of damage.

In conclusion, we hope that there will not be any fundamental changes to
the ANC's economic policies in the long term as a result of pressure from
its alliance partners. And I say long-term because of the principle that
they will be a majority party, but the indications are that it will not be
so. Reassurances are needed in this uncertain climate if we are to comfort
current investors and to attract new foreign investors. Thank you. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Mr J BICI: Chairperson and hon members, it is an unfortunate fact that we
as a country have little impact in averting the global financial crisis,
even though the actions of irresponsible bankers far from our shores will
surely affect us too.

Global economic turmoil leads to capital flights, the effects of which we
have already seen amply demonstrated on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange,
JSE, in the past two months.

In times of international risk-aversion, a developing country such as ours
can ill-afford creating policy uncertainty, but unfortunately the ANC
alliance partners seem less concerned with this, and more concerned with
stamping their ideological mark on the ANC and the future government. Thank
you.

Mr L W GREYLING: Chairperson, the ID believes that in order to minimise the
ripple effect of the global financial crisis on our economy, we must
implement a more relaxed monetary policy that will ease down our interest
rates.

South Africa has largely been sheltered from the direct impacts of the
crisis. However, we are already being affected by the accompanying slump in
commodity prices, as well as the economic slowdown in our export markets.

We in the ID believe that it remains imperative that we also introduce a
fiscal stimulus package that invests in our dire infrastructure and human
capacity needs.

The thunder will pass, Minister, but we must ensure that we make the
necessary investments now so that we can take full advantage of economic
upswing when it finally does come. Thank you.

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, the ACDP wishes to thank the Minister for his
comprehensive briefing on the global economic crisis and his Treasury’s
role in addressing that from a South African perspective.

There can be no doubt that whilst we will weather the global economic
storm, we will continue to experience spill-over effects such as currency
volatility, high inflation, slowing economic growth and sell-offs on our
equity markets.

However, prudent fiscal and monetary policy has shielded us to a large
degree and our economy is resilient enough. Our regulatory framework is
strong enough to weather the storms.

We, as the ACDP, also welcome the G20 meeting that took place this weekend
and we are looking forward to studying our national plan, which will form
part of the G20’s action plan aimed at restoring global economic growth and
reforming financial systems.
The sad aspect of this crisis is that people living in poverty are and will
continue to be hardest hit by the financial crisis. This situation in our
view is grossly unfair and cannot be allowed to continue, and it must be
addressed in the international forums. Thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, it is without question that every economy has
been severely hampered by the rand-dollar situation and that local
inflation by no means creates any alleviation. It is a matter that the MF
strongly feels about that global countries have to address and be united in
their attempts to resolve.

As a new South Africa we have been in the infancy stages of addressing our
nation’s challenges, of which poverty is our greatest, and the global
economic crisis has certainly not served to assist us in this plight.

We are concerned as to whether things will turn around and stabilise or
descend into greater disaster, leaving our people at an even greater
disadvantage.

In view of the recent G20 meeting, the MF supports the submission made by
our hon President. We further feel that the First World countries have a
crucial role to play in ensuring that some relief is offered to the Third
World countries.

The MF feels that if we can urge relief in respect of Africa’s foreign
debt, this will certainly assist us in the era of crisis and aid the fight
against poverty. Thank you.

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, the FD commends the Minister of Finance on his
thorough briefing on the global economic crisis. In his thought-provoking
book, The End of History and the Last Man, Francis Fukuyama illustrates
that a capitalist system features as the most accepted economic system of
the future.

However, we have seen that capitalism without an accountability regime
framework in place has the potential to destabilise nations at great
financial costs. The global economic crisis is a warning that when the
wealth of the world resides in the hands of a few nations, a crisis occurs
and the rest of the world faces the risk of national instability and
insecurity.

There is clearly a need for a new economic dispensation. A new economic
value system is needed to move away from business as usual.

In conclusion, the FD commends the Minister of Finance for the austere
macroeconomic policy over the past 10 years. Had it been any different, we
would have been drowned by this global crisis. I thank you.

Mr K A MOLOTO: Recently, I was listening to the testimony of the Chairman
of the Federal Reserve System, Ben Bernanke, before one of the committees
of the US Congress, requesting the Congress to approve the $700 billion
rescue package.

One congressman said the following to Chairman Bernanke: "Wall Street had a
party, got drunk and broke chairs. American citizens were not invited to
the party and now they are expected to pay for the damages caused by Wall
Street." The analogy was simple and reflected great frustration at the way
events unfolded.

We are living in very difficult times. The financial press is replete with
information on bank failures, bailouts, plunging stock markets and threats
of global recession. These are very disturbing developments and raise
serious concerns among all citizens of the world.

Therefore, it is crucial that we understand the origins of this crisis and
its current manifestation so as to be able to appreciate its likely impact
on the South African economy. The global economic crisis we are facing
today has been caused mainly by a combination of deregulation and low
interest rates in the US.

Joseph Stieglitz explains it better. He says the following: “After the
collapse of the technology bubble, the economy needed a stimulus. But the
Bush tax cuts didn't provide much stimulus to the economy. He further
points out that instead, this put the burden of keeping the economy going
on the Fed and it responded by flooding the economy with liquidity.”

Of course, under normal circumstances, the economy would have grown, but as
Stieglitz had pointed out, the economy was already overinvested and so the
extra money wasn’t put to productive use. Instead, the consequent low
interest rates and easy access to funds, in Stieglitz’s words, encouraged
reckless lending. The infamous interest only, no down payment, no
documentation supply mortgages fuelled the current global crisis.

Financial innovation and deregulation have introduced complex financial
structures and instruments. Securitisation and derivatives are at the heart
of this financial innovation. Securitisation simply means the pooling
together of loans and selling such repackaged loans to other investors.
Home loans, credit card receivables and automobile loans were securitised.
This process involves a lot of players.

Let me briefly explain this process and the role of different players with
a view to illuminating the course traversed in the development of this
crisis.

A classic securitisation process works in the following manner: A potential
homeowner approaches a bank or mortgage broker to get a loan to buy a
house. The bank would provide the loan to the applicant and sell the
repackaged loan to a Special Purpose Vehicle. The loan is permanently
removed from the bank's balance sheet and the potential risk is transferred
to other investors. The Special Purpose Vehicle would then sell bonds to
different types of investors. The bonds held by these investors are
expected to be serviced by monthly bond repayments made by homeowners.

The asset-backed securities unravelled negatively when interest rates
increased and homeowners were unable to be refinanced at more favourable
interest rates as expected.

Three fundamental problems arose immediately from this type of originate-to-
distribute transactions. Firstly, the bank or mortgage brokers earn a fee
for originating loans, and the more loans generated, the bigger the
origination fee earned. That can serve to be a perverse incentive to
disregard all established practices of risk management and adequate
screening of clients. This resulted in a lot of so-called sub-prime clients
getting loans without undergoing a thorough credit check or verification.

Secondly, the credit rating agencies misled investors by rating these
subprime-backed bonds as triple A, thus implying that they are of good
quality and low risk. The reality is that we all now know that that
information was incorrect and misleading. Issues of conflict of interest
arose in the majority of these cases. The rating agencies were paid by the
issuers of these bonds.

Wall Street, on the other hand, assisted in selling these toxic assets or
mortgages around the world. When the truth finally came out about the true
nature of these bonds and their values, there was panic in the market.
Banks refused to lend to each other in the interbank market as they
attempted to avoid contamination. Short selling of bank shares, as a result
of such negative market information, compounded the problem. Wall Street
has created a serious credit crisis with far-reaching implications for the
financing of the real economy.

The announcement of rescue packages and provision of liquidity to these
financial institutions was an attempt to reduce the interbank rate.
However, the problem of the interbank market still persists. Credit is not
flowing to households and corporate sectors.

The impacts of the activities of Wall Street are now seriously working
their way through the main streets. People are losing houses in the US and
consumer spending has dropped significantly. Businesses in the US are
unable to finance productive activity and struggling to obtain short-term
financing for payrolls. Workers are being retrenched.

This is a global environment in which South Africa is finding itself. South
Africa can take comfort in the fact that its banking system is not exposed
to these toxic assets and our banking system is rated among the best. The
bank of international settlements considers the Bond Exchange of South
Africa to be highly liquid, more so than even some of the developed
countries. It is much easier and quicker to buy and sell bonds in South
Africa. South African capital markets are well developed and matured.

We should also take comfort in the fact that our foreign debt is minimal
and a lot of it has long-term maturity. The public finances are in good
shape. We are on course to undertake major infrastructural developments.
The industrial tax incentives contained in this year's budget would assist
in building our industrial capacity and create sustainable jobs in the long
term.

The storm will pass and we are definitely poised to achieve great things.
Of course, there will be a bit of pain when we go through the storm. We
will ride through this storm with conviction, but we are poised to achieve
great things in the long term.

As a Christian, I have been taught never to focus on the storm lest I sink
due to fear. Focusing on the storm breeds immense fear and obscures the
bigger picture.

Focusing narrowly on the current price of platinum is counterproductive.
Mining is also a long-term business venture, which requires a long-term
view.

I am also encouraged by the words of Roger Baxter, the chief economist of
the Chamber of Mines, who had the following to say, “Mining is a long-term
game where one doesn’t simply stop activities for a year and come back.”

Auto sales in the US and Europe might be experiencing serious reductions,
but the fact of the matter is that this storm will pass.

It is very important that South African companies should take a long-term
view. Our massive infrastructural development projects will boost our
export capacity in the long term.

There is no time to focus on boom and bust. When the storm settles, only
long-term visionaries will gain a competitive edge.

In conclusion, allow me to congratulate the hon Nene on his appointment as
the Deputy Minister of Finance. I know he will do well. I have always
valued his guidance and leadership in the ANC study group and the portfolio
committee. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

                     MEDIUM-TERM BUDGET POLICY STATEMENT

             (Consideration of Report of Joint Budget Committee)

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

                     MEDIUM-TERM BUDGET POLICY STATEMENT

         (Consideration of Report of Portfolio Committee on Finance)

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

  That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

                     MEDIUM-TERM BUDGET POLICY STATEMENT

                                  (Debate)
Mr B A MNGUNI: Hon Chairperson, hon Ministers and colleagues, we debate
this Medium-Term Policy Statement, not as a mini budget, as it is sometimes
referred to, amidst the turmoil of financial crisis that has a great
potential for global economic meltdown and recession in one of the biggest
economies in the world, the USA.

The Medium-Term Policy Statement provides the framework within which the
2009 budget is to be drafted, including indicative figures for two
succeeding years. It gives an indication of government’s assessment of the
state of the economy; fiscal framework; budget priorities; and the division
of revenue between national, provincial and local governments.

We have been informed by the Minister after the policy statement was
tabled, that the South African economy will remain unscathed by the
financial crisis that is wreaking havoc in developed countries, which might
be least expected to have such a phenomenon, due to their advanced and
sophisticated financial systems and best world practices. It has been said
that our economy’s resilience to these financial woes is due to tough
decisions that were taken a couple of years earlier on macro-economic
policy, banking regulation, gradual exchange control liberalisation,
introduction of inflation targeting and the counter-cyclical approach to
fiscal policy.

Accordingly, these economic factors have not only shielded us from the
financial contagion effects, but have also made us benefit from the
economic global environment that is prevailing. However, despite these
fundamentals being in place, National Treasury has made a point that the
global financial crisis will indeed affect the trajectory of our economy.

During public hearings on policy statement, the group economist of Sanlam,
Mr Jac Laubscher, pointed out that the global financial crisis is
indicative of a recession. According to Mr Laubscher, developed countries
are said to be going through a recession, which would be characterised by
two successive quarters of negative growth, while developing countries
would be characterised by growth recession – there would still be positive
growth, at a much lower rate.

The International Monetary Fund forecasts global growth of 3% in 2009.
According to its own definition, any economic growth that is less than 3%
would be classified as a recession. The political implications for
governance structures globally, are less revenue for policy implementation.
Coming closer to home, National Treasury has stated that the global
financial crisis would have implications for the domestic economy.
Therefore, the growth trajectory that has been attenuated would have far-
reaching implications for the country’s revenue as the corporate profits
would have also dipped in the process.

The resultant domino effects of these events might culminate in a situation
where a better life for all is not realised at the expected time of
delivery for the majority of the people, as compared to what we have
committed ourselves to. We are less likely to escape the damage that would
be done in the real economy by this phenomenon. There is a looming mass
retrenchment in the mining sector, due to a massive drop in the prices of
tradable resources.

One has to take solace from the fact that the Federation of Unions of South
Africa, Fedusa, also acknowledged the context within which the 2008 Medium-
Term Policy Statement was tabled, stating that the challenges from the
fiscal side for the next three years was to counteract the adverse effect
of the external factors, including banking and credit crises in developed
countries. This brings to light the fact that at least unions and, by
inference, the general public, do understand and appreciate the global
economic conditions the country is faced with.

As stated in the portfolio committee report, Fedusa pointed out that in the
light of the global challenges ahead, special attention needs to be paid in
South Africa to lifting the rate of national savings, as this is necessary
in order to construct a more expropriated economy and to create a more
labour-intensive growth trajectory. The National Treasury pointed out that
investment growth is going to remain the key driver of growth over the
medium term.

In support of other commentators at the hearings, Business Unity South
Africa, Busa, raised a concern that demand-driven growth was not
sustainable and that it was critical to focus on unlocking supply-side
growth. Accordingly, Busa pointed out that government infrastructure
investment programmes should provide the necessary supply-side stimulation
to the economy.

The monetary policy could not do much to prevent supply-side shocks, such
as oil and food price increases, from having first-round effects on
inflation. The monetary policy committee had to be mindful of the impact of
these shocks of inflation expectations and of the need to act against the
emergence of generalised inflation pressures. Inflation has breached the
upper limits since April 2007.

According to the National Treasury, the exchange rate volatility may result
in higher inflation in the short term, but falling oil prices and lower
food costs would help to bring inflation back to the 3% to 6% target range.
As stated in the report, the expected movement of the Consumer Price Index,
CPI, towards the target range is partly as a result of the introduction
from January 2009 of a new target measure of inflation in the form of
headline Consumer Price Index for all urban areas.

The committee has previously been informed that the current account deficit
poses no threat to financial stability and the economy as there were enough
capital inflows to finance it. Accordingly, surplus capital inflows fully
financed current account deficit for the first half of 2008. It has been
expected to be the average of 8,3% over the Medium-Term Policy Statement.
As stated in the policy statement, the gradual increase of the current
account deficit is a reflection of South Africa’s mismatch between savings
and investment.

According to Laubscher, portfolio inflows, commonly known as hot money,
move swiftly around the world, seeking to return by trading in stocks,
bonds, and currencies. He further stated that the current global financial
circumstances and the way of financing the current account deficit may be a
workable solution.

Finally, the policy statement states that sound macroeconomic management
will stand South Africa in good stead in the period ahead, cushioning the
economy and households against shock and providing a platform for long-term
growth. The ANC’s economic policy has always been forward-looking, and
aimed at improving the lives of ordinary citizens. It is through the
vision, the dedication of the ANC leadership and cadreship in political
office, and the civil service that the country stands shoulder-high amongst
its peers on the global economic stage. I thank you.

                  WELCOMING OF VISITORS FROM CZECH REPUBLIC

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Thank you, hon member. Before I
call the next speaker, I was informed that in the gallery we have visitors
who are members of the delegation of the Committee on Constitutional and
Legal Affairs, of the Chamber of Deputies of the Parliament of the Czech
Republic. We would like to recognise them. [Applause.]

Mr S J F MARAIS: Chairperson, as we know the Medium-Term Budget Policy
Statement, MTBPS, which the Minister of Finance tabled on 21 October 2008,
is not a mid-year budget as commonly known, but importantly provides the
framework on which the 2009 budget is to be constructed. It is also the
obligation of the National Treasury in terms of section 28 of the Public
Finance Management Act to annually table a multiyear budget projection for
revenue, expenditure and key economic projections. In this process, it
gives an indication of government’s assessment of the state of the economy,
the fiscal framework, the budget priorities and the division of revenue
between national, provincial and local governments.

The analysis of the current economic crisis indicates that the global
economic downturn will certainly have negative effects on the South African
economic growth and development. As part of the global economic village,
our economy will get a cold when major economies sneeze, and our medium-
term economic outlook must reflect a policy to best weather these economic
storms.

In this regard the DA is pleased that the Minister has stuck to his well-
known and prudent fiscal policy regime and the 2008 budget announcements
which contain pragmatic elements to provide for social welfare and
educational needs, but also that it must reassure investors that not only
will their investments be safe over the medium-term but that South Africa
can offer a better return on the investments than other emerging markets.

In order to effectively reassure investors and to positively influence
their sentiments, it will be required from government and the ANC alliance
not to make negative economic statements and create unrealistic
expectations. This will not only jeopardise the investor’s confidence and
sentiments, but also the task of the Ministry of Finance in support of the
prudent fiscal policy regime and to attract enough foreign investments to
fund the growing deficit on the balance of payments.

Our economic policy outlook must incorporate the realities of the current
global economic climate relative to our domestic developmental, social
investment and other economic needs. Investors’ perceptions and sentiments
reflect their expectations of future risk and potential returns on the
investments in relation to other alternative options.

Negative sentiments will influence, amongst others, the credit rating of
South Africa, as we’ve just experienced. This can have a major influence on
the cost of foreign borrowings, which again can fuel domestic inflation
expectations. This can also threaten the economic growth outlook and
eventually employment and work security.

Van die belangrikste uitdagings wat ons die hoof móét kan bied om te
verseker dat ons steeds ekonomiese groei in die toekoms kan ervaar, sluit
in: groei in veral buitelandse vastekapitaalinvesterings; die stimulering
van groei via die aanbodkant van die ekonomie; die bevordering van uitvoer-
en werkskeppende groei in veral die vervaardigings- en produksiesektore -
dit sal die druk op die groeiende betalingsbalans verlig, wat al reeds neig
na 9% van BBP, en verder sal dit ook ons kwesbare afhanklikheid van
portefeuljebeleggings verminder – die liberalisering van arbeidswetgewing,
juis met die doel om groter indiensname en kapasiteitbou aan te moedig, wat
sal lei tot ’n afname in armoede; die verdere liberalisering van ons
belastingbedeling, veral ten opsigte van klein en mediumgrootte
ondernemings, waar die grootste potensiaal vir indiensname gesetel is; ’n
verdere verlaging in huishoudelike skuld, wat verwag word teen 1,6% in
2009, asook huishoudelike verbruik, wat teen 2009 voorsien word om teen
2,8% te groei, wat grootliks die gevolg is van die verhoging in
rentekoerse, en brandstof-, voedsel- en elektrisiteitspryse.

Die aangepaste fiskale besteding sal die begrote surplus verander na ’n
aangepaste tekort van minder as 2%, wat binne perke is, gegewe die huidige
ekonomiese klimaat.

Die DA besef dat die ekonomiese realiteite, pragmatisme en omstandighede
deeglik in aanmerking geneem moet word met die beoordeling van die
ekonomiese beleidsaankondiging. Volgens ons mening het die Minister en die
Nasionale Tesourie alle faktore deeglik in aanmerking geneem, en hoewel die
DA sekere klemverskille sou aanmoedig, steun ons minister Manuel se
aankondigings en sal ons met groot verwagting uitsien na die
begrotingsaankondiging van 2009. Ek dank u. [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Some of the most important challenges that we have to make a stand against
in order to ensure that we can still experience future economic growth,
include: growth in foreign fixed capital investments in particular; the
stimulation of growth via the supply side of the economy; the advancement
of export and job-creating growth in the manufacturing and production
sectors in particular – this will lessen the pressure on the growing
balance of payments, which is already heading towards 9% of GDP, and will
furthermore also decrease our vulnerable dependence on portfolio
investments – the liberalisation of labour legislation, precisely with the
aim of encouraging greater employment and capacity building, which will
lead to a decrease in poverty; the further liberalisation of our tax
dispensation, in particular with regard to small and medium enterprises,
where the greatest potential for employment exists; a further decrease in
household debt, which is expected at 1,6% in 2009, as well as household
consumption, which is expected to grow at 2,8% in 2009, which is largely
the result of the increase in interest rates, and the price of petrol, food
and electricity.

The adjusted fiscal spending will change the budgeted surplus to an
adjusted deficit of less than 2%, which is within bounds, given the current
economic climate.

The DA realises that the economic realities, pragmatism and circumstances
must be carefully taken into account with the evaluation of the economic
policy announcement. In our opinion the Minister and the national Treasury
took all the factors carefully into account, and although the DA would
encourage certain differences in emphasis, we support Minister Manuel’s
announcement and look forward to the budget announcement of 2009 with great
expectation. I thank you. [Time expired.]]

Mr N SINGH: Chairperson, I would also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate hon Nene on his appointment and commend him on the excellent
manner in which he chaired our meetings.

The failure to create the jobs needed to meet the demands of our growing
population, as well as the failure to eradicate poverty and to make real
inroads into rural development, is very worrying and is a huge obstacle to
our development and prosperity.

The current economic slowdown will exacerbate these problems and make it
even more difficult for the poor to escape their lives of poverty. We in
the IFP believe that a strong focus on microeconomic policies and the
removal of impediments to job creation in the labour market is vital if we
are to overcome these problems and attract the investment needed to take us
into a higher growth level.

We also need to harness the entrepreneurial spirit of our people and make
it easier for them to start up and operate their own businesses, and this
would also mean having access to finance. We therefore reiterate our
proposal that an urgent forum, comprising government, business and
representatives of the labour unions, be convened to discuss these
important issues.

The IFP was encouraged by and agrees with the comments made by the hon
Minister of Finance regarding the need to look at our labour market policy
if we are to achieve our employment targets. The commitment to increase
spending on infrastructure is not only welcomed but also necessary to
increase growth and development.

It is, however, important that this infrastructure spending be focused on
the long-term growth and developmental needs of our country and not just on
the 2010 World Cup. While this event is important and will provide a major
boost to our economy and development, and must thus be well supported, we
must look beyond 2010 when considering the infrastructural needs of our
country.

In the statement there is also a contingency reserve of R36 billion for
unforeseen and unavoidable events. While we agree with this, we believe
that there should be more clarity on what constitutes an unforeseen and
unavoidable event. If it is the disaster that has occurred recently in
KwaZulu-Natal in the Molweni area, if it is what has happened in the
Western Cape, and if there is need for timeous intervention and funding,
then we will support this wholeheartedly. Just to indicate, there is a main
road in KwaZulu-Natal, R102, near where I live, that has been inoperable
for two years as a result of flood damage.
Even if we do formulate the best and most innovative plans and provide the
necessary funding, we will not improve the lives of many who are still
suffering as a result of fiscal indiscipline that is so obvious in some
provinces and municipalities, should it continue. Taxpayers have to get
value for money and for every rand that the taxpayer puts in, we must get
one rand’s value. Needless to say, our tax-collection system is about the
best in the world, with them collecting hundreds of billions.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the recommendations stated in the
committee report that time for public engagement on the MTBPS was far too
short. While this engagement was very constructive and informative, we hope
that there is more time for engagement in the future. Thank you.

Mr J BICI: Chairperson, hon members, the reality of the budget process is
that it is not realistic or constitutionally possible to effect any major
budgetary shifts midstream through the budget cycle. Another constraint
that cannot be overlooked is that the current executive is an interim
structure which will be careful not to impose policy or budgetary
imperatives on the incoming executive that the ANC expects to elect in the
2009 polls.

There is also a further need for making no sudden policy shifts, since the
global markets are in turmoil and developing countries like South Africa
are threatened with a flight of foreign capital. It is a pity that whilst
the MTBPS pursues this objective, the SACP and Cosatu are saying the
opposite. In this context the UDM expected a budget statement that holds
the course with no real changes.

The UDM would like to see a clearer budgetary commitment to stimulating the
economy with a view to job creation, as well as bigger cash injections for
the fight against crime and to improve the salaries and working conditions
of teachers, nurses and other government workers. Thank you.

Mr L W GREYLING: Chairperson, the ID welcomes the more expansionary stance
that is being taken in this year’s Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement. It
is now clear that the global financial crisis will have a negative effect
on our economic growth prospects and, in particular, our commodity exports.
It is in times like these that the corporate sector reverts to a
survivalist mode and that the government needs to step in with a fiscal
stimulus package. We must use the stimulus package to address our most
obvious constraints to sustainable economic growth, namely inadequate
education and skills, physical infrastructure and a competitive and
productive environment for industry and economic service development.

When it comes to infrastructure spend, the ID has noted the concern in your
policy statement that our current infrastructure is heavily import-
intensive. What we really need to do is focus on how we can stimulate the
local industrial base and create employment for South Africans.

In particular, Eskom intends spending R700 billion on nuclear plants which
will be built by a foreign company with very little linkages to our local
industry.

The ID believes that we should rather be looking to invest money in
renewable energy, the vast majority of which can be built by local
industries. This would, in turn, create thousands of jobs for our people.
It is these types of initiatives that need to be employed during this
difficult period to ensure that we improve our manufacturing base and
create the maximum number of jobs for each rand that the government spends

It is one thing to put aside money for infrastructure spend, but spending
it is a different thing altogether. In this regard the ID is extremely
concerned that the very departments entrusted with the task of building
infrastructure are the same departments that are guilty of continual
underspending on their budgets.

The ID maintains that we now need a government that can spend its money as
effectively as it collects it. Thank you.

Ms L L MABE: Chairperson, the last Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement
report presented is the last of the Third Parliament and it reflects on the
road ahead for the next Parliament, on issues that it should take up to
accelerate the work done by this Parliament. So, we need to remember that
this is the last one for this Parliament in order to prepare the next
Parliament to take up issues that affect our people.


The economic slowdown and the projected decline in revenue may require
changes in the medium-term budget proposals and we must be prepared, as
Parliament, when those changes are proposed by the next leadership. This in
turn will place greater importance on domestic policies, with the need to
ensure that funds are directed at those sectors and programmes which have
the greatest impact on the lives of South Africans, and this is quoted from
our report on the MTBPS.



This MTBPS makes provision for enhancing medium-term priorities, although
not to a large extent. Generally, the committee welcomes and supports the
statement, but there are some issues that need to be taken on board by
government. I will reflect on some of the priorities and my colleague, hon
Schneeman, will do the same with the remaining priorities.



One of them is to improve the provision of health services. Health is
central to the lives of our people. We welcome the funding for the National
Health Insurance System and appeal to government to put sustainable plans
in place and financial support for its proper implementation. As funds are
allocated there should be a proper implementation plan so that as
Parliament, as the portfolio committee and the Joint Budget Committee, we
can follow up on whether the plan is implemented or not. As we interacted
with the Human Sciences Research Council prior to the presentation of the
statement, they indicated that 60% of maternal deaths are due to treatable
diseases.



Fa 60% ya dintsho tse di tlhagelelang tsa bommê fa ba belega di tlisiwa ke
malwetsi a a alafegang. Se, se raya gore go na le phoso mo Lefapheng la
Boitekanelo. Phoso e, rona re le Palamente, jaaka re tlhophilwe ke
batlhophi re tshwanetse go e baakanya, gore bomme fa ba belega ba seka ba
tlhola ba tlhokafala mmogo le bana ba bona, mo go sa tlhokegeng teng.



Ke rata gore ke bowe gape ke re ee, ke nnete go na le tswelelopele e e
dirilweng mo go fokotseng dintsho tsa bommê le bana ka nako ya pelegi.
Fela, jaaka fa ke bua, re tlhoka go itse gore lefapha le tlile go dira eng
gore e re fa re bua ka madi a re a ba neelang re bo re itse sentle gore
bana ba, jaaka re le bommê mo Palamenteng, re bone gore ba a phela ka gore
ke bona ba re lebeletseng bokamoso mo go bona. (Translation of Setswana
paragraphs follows.)



[When 60% of maternal deaths are due to treatable diseases, this means
there is something wrong in the Department of Health. We as Parliament,
elected by the people, have to rectify this mistake so that when women give
birth they do not lose their lives and babies unnecessarily.



Again, I would like to agree that it is true that there have been
developments aimed at reducing maternal and infants’ death. But now, as I
speak, we need to know what the department is planning to do so that when
we discuss the funds allocated to them, we as women in Parliament make sure
that these infants survive, because they are the future.]



Although we support the allocation of more financial resources to health,
we also want to see an improvement in the supply chain management. We are
very concerned as a committee that you will, for example, find that a
hospital in Kimberley procures from companies in Gauteng. Why such a
distance for waste disposal? How can it procure from Gauteng? How can linen
be washed and cleaned in Gauteng? That is not fair to our people and we
therefore say procurement must also be done from local companies, so that
local economic development can be realised. [Applause.]



We also say that as medication is procured, it must be on time, and not
always at the 11th hour or at the end of the financial year; we expect
medicine to be available because money is made available for it.



On crime prevention and security we always say, even as we did last year
during the MTBPS, that the cluster should have an integrated approach so
that Correctional Services, Justice and the police know what one another
are doing, so that their approaches can be enhanced to ensure that crime is
reduced, but we have discovered that this is not the case.



We welcome the fact that more financial support will increase the number of
specialised police personnel, but they should be accompanied by a visible
decrease in the level of crime. As we employ more police, crime must also
decrease; as we employ more police, we need to have more detectives, who
can prepare convincing statements that can stand the test of time in court
because we want more people to be convicted and sentenced to jail.



At the same time, as I talk about jail, it’s our concern as the Joint
Budget Committee that in 2002, the former President, Comrade Thabo Mbeki,
announced that six prisons would be constructed. Unfortunately, the
statement says there’ll be six more new prisons. We tried to interrogate it
and communicated with the Department of Correctional Services to ensure
that the six announced in 2002 are not the six that are supposed to be new.
Unfortunately, there was no response. We also say that, as the department,
as we welcome funding proposals for those six new prisons, the correctional
services must give the portfolio committee and the Joint Budget Committee
an implementation plan of how those prisons would be constructed and
completed.



On rural development and agrarian reform, we say that agrarian reform is
central to the policy of this government and there’s no way we can move
away from it because we want to alleviate poverty, we also want to ensure
that there is food security. As a developmental state, we must have food
security.



We interacted with the Department of Land Affairs and Agriculture because
last year we raised a concern that they did not work hand in hand. At least
now they have convinced us that they’ve started to work together. The
challenge is that we expect Land Affairs to speed up processes to meet the
2014 target. Last year, they were not convincing. They did not show that
they could achieve that plan. There were some technicalities that cropped
up but we still stick to that 2014 target.



I also want to say that the reason we are concerned about agrarian reform
is the fact that agriculture employs more people. As we support it, we must
also ensure that more people are employed and not machinery, because there
is a tendency to move towards using more machinery. There is a tendency of
ensuring that, instead of taking up their responsibility of providing more
food, people would rather opt for game farming. We questioned it during our
interaction with the department.



With respect to industrial reform, initiatives that government has in place
must be balanced between promotion of competitiveness and protection of the
existing industries. For instance, the textile industry is dying and
efforts that are there to assist the motor industry must also be used for
these textile and clothing industries to ensure they survive because these
are the main employers in that sector. Therefore, there must be a broader
sustainable industrial strategy, which as a developmental state must be
prioritised. Remember, we produce natural resources and they must be used
to ensure that we develop more industries to create more employment. We
welcome the new face of the Expanded Public Works Programme that is
intended to transfer skills, but also create longer-term employment. We’ve
been concerned that employment created was short-term.



I can’t leave out state-owned enterprises. Our view is that they must work
together with government on developmental objectives. They can’t work
parallel to what government is doing. There must be that integration to
ensure that they support our developmental initiatives.



Before I complete, we emphasise, as a committee, that co-ordinated and
integrated planning is paramount, whether it’s in the justice and security
cluster or in the economic or social sector. An integrated planning
approach is very important. Departments must stop working in silos. This is
one government; all departments have to work together.



Finally, I want to thank all the departments, including the Human Sciences
Research Council and the Public Service Commission, because they gave us
information when we interacted with them, which we used when we called
departments to appear before us.



Rra, ke a go leboga. Re le ANC le tshegetsa puo e. Rare, ... [Chairperson,
thank you. The ANC supports this Budget Vote. We say ...]



... phambili ngomzabalazo, phambili! [... forward with the struggle,
forward!]



Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, amidst radically altered political and economic
conditions, the ACDP welcomes the hon Minister of Finance’s assurance that,
whilst there is global financial turmoil, the thunder will pass and we will
weather the storm. The medium-term statement provided the much-needed
assurance that government’s prudent fiscal and monetary policy that has
shielded South Africa from the global financial crisis affecting other
emerging markets will not be altered.

The crisis will, however, result in a slowdown in our economic growth. This
will result in decreased job opportunities, rising prices, reduced exports
and reduced taxes that would have been collected. This was factored into
the policy statement with lower economic growth forecasts and revenue
estimates.

Whilst there was huge pressure for more popular spending, thankfully no
radical shifts in monetary and fiscal policy were announced. This would
have sent the wrong message to foreign investors, already jittery due to
the financial crisis.

In this regard, the ACDP appeals to left-leaning Members of Parliament to
tone down calls for major shifts in economic policy. This, particularly, in
light of the fact that the financial crisis has already jeopardised South
Africa’s foreign capital inflows. We cannot afford to further destabilise
the economy by political posturing, particularly, in the run-up to next
year’s elections.

Our large current account deficit that is financed by speculative short-
term capital inflows would also be affected and is also an area of concern
that was addressed. Whilst this deficit remains our Achilles heel, the
country’s low debt ratio, large cash holdings, and significant foreign
exchange reserves in the region of        $32 billion will serve to cushion
the economy during this global meltdown.

The ACDP supports the limited increases in public spending in the amount of
R170,8 billion over three years that was announced. We particularly welcome
the focus of the policy statement to include the enhancement of the quality
of education, improving health care, fighting crime, delivering housing,
water, electricity, sanitation and addressing poverty.

We would like to touch on the issue relating to the credit ratings. It is
regrettable that our rating has been reduced from “stable” to “negative”.
Surely, as South Africa we are the victims in this whole situation and as
the ACDP we share the views expressed by Treasury about the credit rating
of Fitch and Spoor, which is not supported by our recent history and
overlooks certain material facts about current macroeconomic and fiscal
frameworks. We cannot allow ourselves to be negatively affected by this
credit rating – as I’ve mentioned, we are the victims – and, surely, these
are the issues that have to be addressed when looking at the global
financial institutions.

In general, the ACDP will, however, conclude by saying that we support the
Medium-Term Statement and believe that tough fiscal and monetary decisions
will be taken to enable us to weather the storm. I thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, the global crisis has the developed world and
the developing world in limbo, while economists may see some light for a
developing country such as South Africa, even though at a slower rate of
growth. The Minority Front cannot contain its concerns when we look at the
volume of people affected by the scourge of poverty, unemployment and
minimal service.

Even though a low growth figure is a bit positive, it is the reality of the
exceedingly high cost of living and the cost to poverty-stricken families
of getting by today, that we really need to take into consideration. The
inflation rate of 11% has earned an 11% wage increase.

People are battling to sustain even more from a small income. This is the
sore reality of our current economic climate and, certainly, there should
be fiscal issues to cushion it. The hon Minister of Finance has rightly
described it as a financial storm.

The MF hopes that the additional allocation of R170,8 billion over the next
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework, MTEF, shall address many of our
challenges and sustain effective growth even in these trying times. While
tax revenues do not look as grim, we are certain that the hon Minister and
his brilliant team shall, by next year’s budget, have devised some relief.

The MF acknowledges that the National Treasury has had to change its growth
forecasts, reducing the gross domestic product expectations with all its
uncertainty. We need to earnestly examine the situation so as to reduce
external vulnerability. The MF, however, notes the efforts to increase
investment and employment to stimulate higher economic growth.

We thank the hon Minister and his able team for putting the band aids where
we need them. The MF hopes that our strategy shall sustain effective
economic growth and rather assist in bringing poverty down. The MF supports
the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement. I thank you.

Mr G D SCHNEEMANN: Chairperson, the spending projections contained in the
Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement continue to build on the commitments
which the ANC has made to create work and fight poverty and to make local
government work well.

It also sets up the context and direction of policy, which enables
departments to plan and budget for the next three years. If departments are
able to do this, there should be no reason for underexpenditure and not
meeting targets.

These spending projections determined by this ANC-led government move us
closer towards achieving the goals and objectives of the Freedom Charter.
They also clearly demonstrate the continued commitment of the ANC to the
Freedom Charter and ensure that the aspirations of those gathered in
Kliptown on 26 June 1955 are realised.

We in the ANC join those who were in Kliptown in 1955 when they said: “And
we pledge ourselves to strive together, sparing neither strength nor
courage, until the democratic changes here set out have been won.”

In particular, allocations are made which strengthen the following clauses
of the Freedom Charter: “The land shall be shared amongst those who work on
it.” This is demonstrated through the policy priority which government has
placed on the redistribution of land and its implementation, which has been
emphasised by the Joint Budget Committee: “The doors of learning and
culture shall be opened”. No-fee schools are being expanded, new schools
are being built and old infrastructure continues to be upgraded. “There
shall be houses, security and comfort”. Over 2,6 million houses have been
built.

We have no doubt that our government continues to put the people of South
Africa first and prioritises spending that will create a better life for
all. The Joint Budget Committee held hearings on the Medium-Term Budget
Policy Statement, MTBPS, and interacted with the Department of Housing, the
Department of Transport and the Department of Education, as well as the
Human Sciences Research Council.

Spending on housing over the MTEF period will see R44,7 billion allocated
through the Integrated Housing and Human Settlement Grant. The Joint Budget
Committee, JBC, welcomes the increased allocation and is confident that
this will help to accelerate housing delivery and a reduction in the
housing backlog.

However, there will have to be greater co-ordination between all relevant
departments so that as housing projects are planned, so too is the
necessary infrastructure such as police stations, schools, clinics and
recreational facilities. This means that departments must talk to each
other, plan and budget together. The days of working with a silo approach
must come to an end.

A point of concern is whether sufficient funds are allocated towards the
eradication of informal settlements by 2014. The Department of Housing
indicated that with current allocations over the MTEF, they may not be able
to meet this target. Together with the National Treasury, they will need to
prioritise both financially and in terms of human resources to ensure that
this target is met.

With the continued rise in the cost of building materials, more emphasis
should be placed on using alternative construction methods such as those
which have been showcased that the Eric Morobi Housing Innovation Hub in
Tshwane. Many of these methods provide a house which is cheaper to
construct, bigger in size and of sound quality.

The increased allocations for school infrastructure, which will improve
existing facilities with priority to the provision of libraries, sports
fields, laboratories, Grade R classrooms and infrastructure for learners
with special needs, are welcomed.

Funding should not only be provided for the provision of facilities but
must also provide the resources so that these facilities achieve the
results which they are meant to. Well-resourced libraries will help to
improve the reading skills and knowledge of our children. Sports equipment
will help to produce sports stars of the future. Laboratories with the
correct equipment will produce scientists.

One of the disturbing facts presented to the JBC during its interaction
with the Department of Education, the Department of Health and the Human
Sciences Research Council was the number of schools and clinics without
access to sanitation and water despite considerable achievements having
been made in the provision of these services.

Tomorrow is World Sanitation Day, but children in 1 532 schools, or six
percent of our schools, will have to wait to celebrate. Therefore, the JBC
calls on all related departments to work together to ensure that by the end
of the 2009-10 financial year no school or clinic should be without
sanitation.

The Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement provides funding for promoting
energy efficiency and investment in renewable energy sources. Serious and
urgent consideration should be given to the use of alternative forms of
energy such as solar power in those schools and clinics which do not have
access to conventional forms of electricity.
The National Student Financial Aid Scheme has been an effective policy
measure, with many students being able to further their studies. Continuous
evaluation is required from the Department of Education to ensure that the
intended target groups do indeed receive this much-needed funding. The
employment of more teachers will not only reduce learner or educator
ratios, but will also improve the quality of learning, teaching and
results. The establishment of a unit to evaluate school and teacher
performance is welcomed, although it is not clear what funding will be
provided, and more clarity will be required in this regard.

The JBC was informed that one of the contributors to absenteeism in certain
high schools is transport problems. There is a need to clarify who is best
placed and responsible to perform this function. The school nutrition
programme provides much-needed sustenance, and often the only form of
sustenance, to learners and is to be extended to all secondary schools in
quintiles one, two and three; more work needs to be done to ensure that
sufficient budget allocations are made.

Significant allocations are made for the provision of public transport
infrastructure, although much of these funds will go to 2010 Fifa World Cup
host cities. It is important to ensure that our people experience the
benefit of safe, affordable and reliable public transport. Throughout the
hearings and in fact over the past four years, an area that has become
increasingly evident to the JBC is that there is insufficient
interdepartmental co-ordination, co-operation, planning and budgeting.
Underexpenditure is often related to poor planning and budgeting.

We therefore fully support the recent alliance economic statement on the
need for a high-level planning, evaluation and monitoring capacity in
government and a proposed planning commission which would ensure the
alignment of all work of government departments.

The Freedom Charter belongs to all South Africans who embrace it. I would
call on all South Africans to register to vote in 2009 and join the ANC in
realising the dreams and hopes of all the people who gathered in Kliptown
in 1955. Together with the ANC, we will create a better life for all South
Africans. I thank you.
Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, the Federation of Democrats welcomes and
supports the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement. We have all been warned
that global economic growth will be sluggish for several years. The market
has become very volatile, and foreign investors will not be kind to
emerging markets, as we have seen when investors recently took more than R8
billion out of the country.

The Minister of Finance has predicted that we have to downscale our growth
rate to around 3% over the next few years. The current global financial
crisis was brought about by the policies of the developed countries. The
time has come for a review of current global market imbalances. If Germany,
Japan, and other First World economies are facing a recession and shedding
jobs every day, we must thank God that we can still talk of a 3% growth.

To access global funds, it has always been prescribed that emerging markets
must tighten their belts by introducing austere fiscal measures to contain
overspending. However, when financial crises strike the richer nations, who
themselves ignored the fiscal discipline demanded by them for smaller,
developing economies, developing nations, despite their sound fiscal
policies, continue to lose out from accessing funds as the rich countries
bail out only their own financial sectors and at the expense of development
in emerging markets.

South Africans need to be sheltered from the fallout of the current global
financial crisis. As the Minister has stated in his speech, the crisis will
be with us for a number of years still, since we have a situation where the
rich have become richer and the poor have become poorer before the current
crisis. The impact of the global financial crisis will be even more
critically experienced amongst the poorest of the poor. I thank you.

Dr D T GEORGE: Chairperson, the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement
provides a snapshot of deteriorating economic conditions within which our
economy needs to compete.

Two significant events occurred in 2007 which are impacting on our economic
performance. In August 2007 credit markets froze when trust between banking
counterparties broke down. This resulted in a liquidity crisis in the
international financial markets and fallouts in real economies across the
world.

A decline in global consumption and the withdrawal of investor capital from
our emerging market will further enlarge our current account deficit and
impact on the value of our currency. Hedge funds are offloading many of
their assets, including gold, causing the price to fall along with other
commodities. This is unusual, given that the gold price usually increases
during economic turmoil, to our benefit.

In December 2007 events at Polokwane highlighted concern over future
economic policy. Uncertainty over policy continuity has increased perceived
risk and calls for unworkable policy shifts have frightened market
participants. Proposals to position government at the centre of our economy
have eroded confidence in our sustainability and demonstrate our
vulnerability to experimentation with failed economic systems.

Our economic prospects have deteriorated substantially in the past eight
months. Macroeconomic projections indicate the extent to which South
Africans will feel the brunt of the economic downturn. Fitch and Standard
and Poors have downgraded their economic outlook for South Africa from
stable to negative. This makes the cost of credit even more expensive.

The role of government is to help ensure that the downturn is shallow and
short. Government needs to stimulate the economy without dominating or
commanding it. It needs to intervene through effective fiscal policy, and
we broadly support its approach. Fortunately, our banking system does not
require rescue, so attention can be applied to three immediate needs:
preventing job losses, providing a safety net for the vulnerable and
accelerating job creation. This can be achieved through improving the ease
of doing business; simplifying the tax regime; providing incentives to
business, especially small and medium enterprises, to retain its work
force; implementing a wage subsidy and income support; addressing
uncompetitive labour laws; and accelerating public-private partnerships.

There appears to be a broad consensus that developed economies are heading
for recession, and developing economies for slower growth. Our economy
needs to be perceived as a stable and secure investment destination. Our
fiscal stance, to date, has promoted that objective. Through appropriate
interventions, the downturn can become less painful and our fundamentals
can be improved to accelerate the upturn when it inevitably comes. Thank
you.

Ms N R MOKOTO: Good afternoon, Chairperson, members, and people in the
gallery, the debate on the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement has come at
a very critical stage of the economic developments around the world.

In that case, very serious reviews and considerations have to be taken in
order to place our economy on a platform to better respond to the current
challenges facing the world as a whole. Our government has been very
proactive and, through the strong supportive measures centred on policies
and relevant institutions, it has, to a certain extent, assisted in
cushioning the economy from the global pressures of volatility.

Chairperson, during the past 14 years, government has gradually and
effectively strengthened its fiscal position whilst, at the same time, it
has ensured stability in the public finances. It has, therefore, been able
to support sustainable economic growth through the increase in public
spending on key priorities like boosting the investment in infrastructure
and social and economic development.
Whilst we appreciate the proactive approach of government, especially of
National Treasury in the choices they have made for us, we are also mindful
of the fact that it also calls for prudent action on our part as citizens,
state-owned enterprises, government departments, and the private sector. We
must heed the call to improve our culture of saving and to reduce debt and
reckless consumption, particularly as we go into the festive season, as
this will further cushion us from the harsher effects of global volatility.


For the past five years, government’s fiscal position has been adjusted to
respond to cyclical factors, and last year a budget balance was introduced
which also allowed for a budget surplus. The advantage was that government
better positioned itself to increase social spending on major priorities.

For the coming year, it has been projected that there has been a weakening
in the structural budget balance, mainly due to high expenditure. The state-
owned enterprises are also playing a strong-arm, or bigger role, in driving
this investment. At the same time, revenue trends also reflect moderation.
The buoyancy of the recent years has dissipated, giving effect to reduced
gross tax revenue as a percentage of gross domestic product, GDP. Much of
this decline represents a natural reduction in cyclical components of
revenue as economic growth and commodity prices retreat from relatively
high price levels and, as the economy begins to pick up in 2010, revenue
collection and prices will also stabilise.

For several years our government has been able to reinforce the progressive
character of the tax system. The factors behind this strong revenue
performance included legislative changes to broaden the tax base, to reduce
loopholes, and to create a more efficient revenue service. Through both
policy reforms and improved administration, government has increased the
efficiency, fairness and progressiveness of our tax system whilst reducing
the impact of high marginal tax rates.

South Africa’s main sources of tax have been income tax, VAT and corporate
income tax. Improved revenue administration and a growing economy have
enabled our government to make significant tax reforms over the past
decade. The current tax reforms that are under way include the replacement
of the Secondary Tax on Companies with a dividend tax. It is proposed that
the general fuel levy should be shared with metropolitan municipalities and
further tax instruments are being suggested for the municipalities.

With regard to personal income tax, the 2009 Budget will again provide
relief for individuals to compensate for the effects of inflation. The nett
results of these reforms include rate reduction, adjustments to brackets,
base broadening in the form of capital gains tax, closing of various
loopholes, and improved enforcement. It is apparent that a considerable
erosion of the company tax base occurred when the rate was 40%, while a
broadening of the tax base, higher growth, and improved compliance efforts
have resulted in significant increases in this revenue category since 2001.

Hon members, the VAT zero rating is widely talked about – that is, whilst
zero rating of basic foods and paraffin is intended to assist the poor,
higher-income households also benefit from this concession. It is our view
that most of the cases ... The ANC supports the statement. Thank you. [Time
expired.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Siyabonga kakhulu; Sihlalo, ngaphambili! [Thank
you very much, Chairperson!]

I would like to thank the Joint Budget Committee for the work they have
done on the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement, because, as is evident
from the report published in the ATC today, and also from the contributions
of members here this afternoon, the committee set about its task to produce
a diligent and detailed process. I think it is remarkable that Parliament’s
oversight is as strong as it is, and I hope the hon Trent is aware of this.

I think that the broad message that we built the Medium-Term Budget Policy
Statement around, which was focused on the storm and the fact that it will
pass, has been well received by members here.

The report reflects the complexity of the present economic circumstances. I
think it is also important, as reflected in the earlier discussion, that
since the tabling of the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement on 21 October,
global circumstances have actually deteriorated somewhat, although we have
had a series of meetings that have allowed us to explore options for a
turnaround, along with a number of other countries.

I would like to concur that there is broad agreement on the key budget
priorities over the next three years. These are: education, health,
fighting crime, investing in built environment infrastructure and improving
rural livelihoods.

We appreciate that Parliament broadly supports the division of revenue
among the three spheres because this decision is a critical decision,
ensuring that government’s priorities are funded, and that subnational
governments have the resources to deliver on government’s priorities.

One of the issues we clearly have to give attention to now is to improve on
the alignment between the three spheres of government, especially in those
areas where we have concurrent powers, and part of the work that we are
exploring is the estimates of national expenditure that will in fact
construct such an alignment and ensure that parliamentary oversight over a
function, and not just a function in a sphere, might be considerably
improved.

The Joint Budget Committee makes ten recommendations, as published in the
ATC. I would like to concur with each of these recommendations, and I
undertake to share this with my colleagues in the executive, especially in
those areas where better alignment is called for between different
functions: education, water, etc. I will communicate this with my
colleagues and ensure that by the time we return in February with the
Budget, these issues have been taken account of, and, very importantly,
that we can reflect on these issues also in the measurable objectives in
the estimates of national expenditure.

In respect of co-ordination and the measurable objectives, a series of
several intergovernmental forums have been set up to improve on co-
operation between the three spheres and also within a sphere, but
Parliament also has a role to play in this regard. Raising it here, as the
Joint Budget Committee does in its report published in the ATC, is
important but there needs to be constant follow-up, and I hope that, even
beyond the elections, this will be part of the way in which the oversight
of Parliament is undertaken.

Secondly, departments compose their measurable objectives as part of their
strategic plans and table them for scrutiny here in Parliament. I’d like to
agree with the point that the very excitable hon Trent made earlier. It is
not frequently that we recall what you said, Mr Trent, so let’s celebrate
that today! [Interjections.] Parliament has not actually looked at annual
reports this year. Now, if you haven’t looked at the annual report, how are
committees then prepared to engage with strategic plans going forward? I
just happen to be of the view that it is a major omission, because the
fundamental purpose of parliamentary oversight over the work of the
executive then does not receive the necessary attention.

So beyond the report as published in the ATC, and knowing that departments
have published measurable objectives, Parliament needs to know that
departments actually stick to what they made the commitments for. There is
a kind of contract about what the money will buy, and that oversight
function is a function best performed by Parliament.

Lastly, despite the gloomy international economic outlook, because of the
tough decisions we took earlier on, we will be able to finance our spending
plans over the next three years. We have the fiscal space to protect
spending on infrastructure and social services, because it is these
investments that will ensure that we grow faster when indeed the storm has
abated.

The Budget that will be tabled in February will take account of the
recommendations and views of the committee, and we will endeavour to
continue engaging with these issues that the report raises way beyond the
Budget on 11 February next year.

Thank you very much, Chair. [Applause.]

      INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS FROM PUBLICLY FINANCED RESEARCH AND
                              DEVELOPMENT BILL

                           (Consideration of Bill)

Mr G G OLIPHANT: Chairperson, Ministers and Deputy Ministers present here,
let me also congratulate the newly appointed Ministers and Deputy Ministers
who are here and those who are not here. I also greet the Chairpersons and
deputies behind us, as well as the Chief Whip and Deputy Chief Whip of the
Majority Party. Welcome to all the new members who joined Parliament today
and on the other days. [Applause.]
Today we are dealing with some amendments that arose from a Bill that we
debated here in Parliament. We are happy to report that the Portfolio
Committee on Science and Technology met on 24 October 2008 and adopted
unanimously amendments that the National Council of Provinces proposed for
our consideration, relating to the Intellectual Property Rights from
Publicly Financed Research and Development Bill. The Bill was approved by
the National Assembly on 21 August 2008 and sent to the NCOP for
concurrence.

The two amendments proposed are of a technical nature and essentially
clarify that choice, in respect of intellectual property emanating from
publicly financed research and development, shall be owned by the
recipient. Where the recipient prefers not to retain ownership of the
intellectual property or not to obtain statutory protection thereof, that
choice must be made in accordance with the regulations and any guidelines
published in Nipmo, the National Intellectual Property Management Office,
by notice in the Gazette or other provisions applying in this regard.

Secondly, the Bill addresses the right of intellectual property creators in
institutions to benefit-sharing. For instance, intellectual property
creators at an institution and their heirs are granted a specific right to
a portion of revenue that accrues to that institution.

What we are saying is that if you are a creator at an institution that
receives some royalties relating to this intellectual property, you or your
heirs must benefit from that. There is a legal criterion that facilitates
this. So, I’m not going to get into the details, because we have debated
this law before.

The committee was satisfied that the omission and/or corrections suggested
by the NCOP do not change the substance of the Bill as approved by the
National Assembly.

To illustrate the critical importance of this piece of legislation in
relation to economic growth and competitiveness, let me just repeat some
examples that we gave at the CSIR, Council for Scientific and Industrial
Research, conference held yesterday – and it continues today – as
achievements. The CSIR that we are talking about is funded by the public
and boasts many achievements of technological excellence and innovation.
Amongst these is, for instance, the Heavy Vehicle Simulator, which is a
mobile laboratory that allows engineers to assess the performance of new
road designs using accelerated testing techniques.

This scientific tool for measuring scientific competence optimises the
structural design of roads and minimises the life cycle cost of the road.
The CSIR, for instance, informed us that the United States of America and
China have adopted this world-class system to develop infrastructure in
their own economies.

Deputy Minister Hanekom will be happy to know about the lithium battery
technology that is used in many power tools or devices. Soon, it is
expected that this technology will also be deployed in battery-powered
motor vehicles. Although South Africa does not have a battery cell
manufacturing industry, our country has recently announced its plans to
develop a battery car. A prototype car was recently announced at the Paris
Motor Show. The fact that CSIR has key patents in the lithium battery field
provides us the freedom to operate and establish a battery cell or battery-
manufactured operation.

There are many examples; another excellent example of our research
excellence is the Bioartificial Liver Support System that is intended to
extend the lives of patients suffering from acute liver failure - and the
list is long. Regarding the last example I gave, Ntate Mokoena, what
science will do to assist you when you have this condition is to drain all
the blood out of your body and pump into you a lot of oxygen so that you
remain alive. It will also purify the blood and try and treat some
conditions in your liver. That is what it is able to do. The marvels of
modern science! Our country is at the cutting edge of this technology.

People die owing to the condition of liver failure. Transplants are
expensive and it’s also very difficult to get liver donors and so on. So,
we are excited that the next Parliament has the prospect of overseeing some
of these pieces of legislation - this one and the others that we adopted
during the course of this year.

Let me wish all political parties a peaceful election campaign, all members
a restful season and, obviously, an overwhelming victory for the ANC in the
next election.

Mr J P I BLANCHÉ: Mr Chairman, may I ask the member a question?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Well, you still have time, hon
Oliphant. Will you take a question?

Mr G G OLIPHANT: I shall, Chairperson. Go ahead, sir.

Mr J P I BLANCHÉ: Now that Mr Lekota and Mr Shilowa have left the ANC, is
there any intellectual property left in the ANC?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): You wanted a question.

Mr G G OLIPHANT: I was hoping for a much more intelligent question than
that. [Interjections.] No, no, no! I shall not say that any ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Please, hon member, you offered to
answer the question!

Mr G G OLIPHANT: I shall not say anything about our former comrades. They
are just lost, that’s all. Basically, like the President of the ANC, Jacob
Zuma, said ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon member, your time has expired.
I need to rescue you now. [Laughter.]

The hon Oliphant started off by welcoming me, even though I’ve been in the
Chair for a whole year. I don’t know whether the hon member is bidding me
farewell; you don’t know these things. Maybe he knows something that I
don’t.

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move that the
Bill, as amended, be passed.

Agreed to.

Bill, as amended, accordingly passed.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION – STRATEGIC
                                  WORKSHOP

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION - OVERSIGHT
                   VISIT TO VAAL UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY

Prof S M MAYATULA: Chairperson, I will start off by congratulating two
members who were part of the compilation of this report and who have left
us. These are very important reports. What I need to do first is to
indicate where to find this in the ATC, because I am not going to go
through what is contained in it. The first one relates to the workshop we
had at Gordon’s Bay as a portfolio committee; the second one relates to our
visit to the Vaal University of Technology.

I want to start off by congratulating two members of the portfolio
committee who have left us. They were part of the process when we were
dealing with these things. I am referring to hon Matsomela, who has since
been promoted to the position of Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on
Public Service and Administration. [Applause.] I am also referring to Adv
Gaum, who has since been promoted to the position of Deputy Minister in the
Department of Education. [Applause.] As a committee we do pride ourselves
on exporting leaders to different areas - Deputy Ministers, Ministers and
chairpersons of committees. So we hope that they are going to fare well in
their new lives.

On the workshop of the portfolio committee held at Gordon’s Bay on 9 to 11
March, I want to again acknowledge, in particular, hon Ben Mthembu in his
absence. Hon Ben Mthembu was a driving force behind this programme and he
had a real passion for quality of education. Unfortunately, he has also
left the committee. In particular, what we did in that workshop was to
invite people from outside. We invited Prof Christie to deal in particular
on thinking outside the box regarding issues about general education. We
also invited Prof De la Rey again to come from outside and deal with issues
on higher education.

I would really appreciate it if people who are not part of the committee
could go to the ATC dated 27 August, 2008. It was good to hear Prof
Christie again indicating the achievements of this government. Let me just
read a few achievements Prof Christie, from the Cape Peninsula University
of Technology, mentioned in the first decade: More equitable distribution
of state resources, for example no-fee schools; and the redesigning and
restructuring of the system of education. She was happy with the increased
access to our schools, the improvement in school provisioning, moving
towards the achievement of education for all. She was also able to go
through some of the challenges that are facing us. She referred to the
quality of education, how our children are failing at international tests
for reading, writing and arithmetic. If I cross over to Prof De la Rey, she
was able to bring a SWOT analysis about our higher education, looking at
what the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats are - and again
it was a breath of fresh air to see somebody from outside. In the same
workshop we were able to get first-hand information from our comrade, hon
Bapela, regarding the new model of oversight. As a committee we were really
happy to ask: What does it tell us? I wish this could also be taken to
other committees, because this is a very important model that is going to
assist us. In that workshop we were even able to plan ahead up to and
including 2011, so this is kind of a Bible and basis we are going to be
using to see how we are going to take education forward. Let me put that
aside.

When it comes to our visit to the Vaal University of Technology, we had to
go there because of the turmoil, the strife and the strike, and because we
got letters from different stakeholders. If one reads this report you can
see how we were able to get the different stakeholders, unions, the
teachers and management to share how they feel about their university.
During the presentation from all stakeholders, one could sense the
mistrust. In 2006 the rector of that university was dismissed. He is still
appealing. The new rector came and one could sense that these two
stakeholders, the management and other different stakeholders, did not see
eye to eye. They are not working together and the new management has not,
as yet, been accepted. What we could read was that there was a sense of
fear. Different structures are fearful of victimisation. They say if you
stand and say anything as a structure, chances are you are going to be
dismissed.

We tried to reason with the management that our democracy allows us to
think whatever way we want to think and it is very important to accommodate
everybody. So we did make some recommendations and, again, if one were to
read this report, you can see that it is an objective report, taking all
sides into account and indicating the state of affairs in that university.
On behalf of the portfolio committee, I propose that these reports be
adopted.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move that the
reports be adopted.

Agreed to.

Reports accordingly adopted.

   Consideration of twenty-seventh report of standing committee on public
  accounts – housing subsidies to municipal employees and administration of
         low-cost housing by certain provincial housing departments

    Consideration of twenty-eighth report of standing committee on public
             accounts – independent complaints directorate (ICD)

    Consideration of twenty-ninth report of standing committee on public
                      accounts – Inkankala water board

 Consideration of thirtieth report of standing committee on public accounts
                           – magalies water board

    Consideration of thirty-first report of standing committee on public
                       accounts – Namakwa water board

    Consideration of thirty-second report of standing committee on public
                    accounts – bushbuckridge water board

    Consideration of thirty-third report of standing committee on public
          accounts – construction education and training authority

    Consideration of thirty-fourth report of standing committee on public
  accounts – department of health and welfare sector education and training
                             authority (HWSETA)

    Consideration of thirty-fifth report of standing committee on public
     accounts – local government sector education AND training authority

Mr N T GODI: Thank you very much, Chairperson. As you indicated, the nine
reports that we are tabling relate to the Auditor-General’s report on
housing subsidies to municipal employees and administration of low-cost
housing projects by certain provincial departments. The report deals with
the challenges that we identified as well as the recommendations that we
have made to improve and ensure that this kind of maladministration,
blended with corrupt practices, does not re-occur.

The second report is the annual report of the Independent Complaints
Directorate, which is a qualified audit. The major issues of concern relate
to weakness in internal controls and a lack of monitoring, which is a
product of a high vacancy rate, including the fact that that entity does
not have a permanent head or director. And, I think this is the third year.


The other four reports relate to the Water Boards such as the Inkangala,
Magalies, Namakwa and Bushbuckridge water boards, who have all received
qualified audits. If one looks at the challenges that face these entities
which perform a very important and critical role in the rural areas, one
finds that they are similar. There is a lack of audit committees or
internal audit, a lack of segregation of duties, a lack of fraud prevention
plans, and general weakness in the internal control processes. We are
calling on the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry to heavily
intervene to ensure that these institutions are sufficiently capacitated to
discharge their responsibilities to our people.
The last three reports are the reports of the Setas. We have the
Construction and Education and Training Authority, which for quite some
time has not been showing any signs of improvement, as a disclaimer. There
are serious control weaknesses and skills shortages.

We have questioned why the Minister has not yet intervened because it
appeared that things were merely moving from bad to worse with no prospect
of improvement. And if one looks at the current public small parcel
explosive detection system, Speds, amongst the various stakeholders it does
indicate a Seta that is experiencing serious problems.

The same thing applies to the Health and Welfare Seta. It also had a
disclaimer of audit opinion indicating a complete breakdown in the state of
affairs. The last one is the Local Government Seta, which has a qualified
audit opinion. But, if one looks at the reports of these three Setas there
are basically the same challenges. They are governance issues; lack of
internal controls and proper monitoring systems.

I am convinced, as hon members and comrades will have seen in the reports,
that we as a committee have made firm proposals in terms of what needs to
be done. It remains for our colleagues in the Portfolio Committee on Labour
to assist us in terms of the inner monitoring of the challenges that are
there, as well as the executive. Some of these administrative challenges
persist to a point where they certainly become political challenges where
the executive needs to intervene to ensure that corrective measures are
taken, especially as recommended by Parliament. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr T R MOFOKENG: Thank you, Chairperson. I think the chairperson covered
enough when he spoke about qualifications, be they adverse, disclaimers or
qualified audits. Those are the normal terms which are used in transactions
of books – when you qualify books. On qualifications, when people get
qualified they should not think that they are qualified to be promoted.
They are qualified to be dismissed. [Laughter.]

Disclaimer means that there was no talk – the CEO could not even know
whether he was coming or going. Therefore the opinion from the auditors has
to be a disclaimer. It is in such thing that when he gives emphasis of
matter it shows problems. Let me express myself on the reports of
provincial housing departments and the Independent Complaints Directorate.

Chairperson, when the representatives of our people met at Kliptown in
1955, to chart together a vision of our country as expressed in the Freedom
Charter, they included a clause that says: “There shall be houses, security
and comfort!” They went further to say: “All people shall have the right to
live where they choose, be decently housed, and to bring up their families
in comfort and security.”

Section 26 of the Constitution states that: “Everyone has the right to have
access to adequate housing.” The state must ensure the progressive
realisation of this right.

According to the Department of Housing, over 2,3 million houses have been
constructed under the government housing subsidy scheme, from April 1994 to
March 2007. Whilst this has gone some way towards fulfilling the aims of
both the Freedom Charter and our country’s Constitution, we have to admit
that more still needs to be done.

It is our duty as Scopa to ensure effective monitoring of those tasked with
realising the noble aspirations of our people. Additionally, we should
always remember that the financial reports that we analyse affect human
beings.

Building defects were identified in 737 of the 970 houses inspected by the
audit team. The defects included, amongst others, the following: walls and
foundations were severely cracked; gaps between the outside walls and the
roofs; roofs of houses were leaking; general basic services were either not
installed or not connected to the bulk supply.

So, this confuses us, and we don’t know whether there are any inspectors.
Really, if you undertake quality control and go to inspect, you then ask
yourself, how is it that a house that was not even built more than two
years ago, starts cracking? These are the problems that we seem to be
facing.

When the audit was conducted, the following provinces were covered: Free
State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo, Mpumalanga and the Western Cape.
The criteria which need to be met for eligibility include marital status,
residency, age, monthly household income, whether previous benefits have
been received from government funds, or whether it is a first-time property
owner. Those are some of the things that are needed.

With regard to the Independent Complaints Directorate, for the 2006-07
financial year, a qualified audit opinion was expressed by the Auditor-
General on the financial statements of the ICD. Before elaborating on the
details of the audit report, it is important that we remind ourselves of
the crucial responsibility that has been entrusted to the ICD.

Section 53(2) of the South African Police Act stipulates that the
Independent Complaints Directorate may, upon receipt of a complaint,
investigate any misconduct or offence allegedly committed by a member;
investigate any death in police custody or as a result of police action;
and may investigate any matter referred to the directorate by the Minister
or a member of the executive council.

It is disappointing, therefore, that the ICD did not have a full staff
complement, whilst it had to deal with an increase in complaints. The
Auditor-General reported that out of 535 approved positions only 231 had
been filled in the 2006-07 financial year. Due to critical management
positions being vacant, policies and procedures were not properly monitored
to detect and prevent noncompliance. This can only negatively affect the
work of the ICD, and unduly prejudice those the directorate is meant to
serve. The Standing Committee on Public Accounts therefore recommends that
the accounting officer reassesses the organisational structure, and
requests more funding from National Treasury, if needed, to ensure that the
entity delivers on its mandate.

Secondly, the Auditor-General reported the following shortcomings with
regard to fixed assets: The valuation of assets amounting to R29 319 000,
including adjustments of R7 093 000, could not be verified due to
inadequate documentation. Assets were not always bar-coded, and assets
valued less than R5 000 are not supposed to be included in the register
according to the regulations of the auditors and the Treasury.

The committee recommends that the accounting officer ensures that an
appropriate document management system is implemented to control all source
documentation and ensure that accurate reconciliation is done; that assets
are recorded and bar-coded; and that there is compliance with the National
Treasury prescript which requires that assets with a value of less than R5
000 should not be listed as capital assets in the financial statements.

Thirdly, the following control weaknesses were identified with regard to
leave benefits: Leave forms were not properly filled in, resulting in them
not being properly captured on persal; leave forms were not always
completed and approved before staff went on leave.

Hon members, I think this is a problem that we are having in most of the
departments. You find that a CEO is suspended for almost two years with no
case going on, and in certain departments there would be an acting CEO –
for the whole two years. The first CEO is suspended with full pay. Now,
this is unbecoming behaviour. If somebody goes for two years and gets fully
paid while suspended with no hearing, then one is surprised as to what is
really going on.

That is why I say, let us try to be serious and assist each other. I appeal
to the Ministers and their Deputy Ministers – Scopa has more than 35
Ministers. It is the only committee that has so many Ministers, but none of
these 35 Ministers have attended Scopa’s meeting.

They have never been in a study group of Scopa. So, I have now come to the
level of a Whip in exposing the Ministers in this House. Because where we
are supposed to discuss these, in the study group, they are not there. Now,
where should we plan and discuss these things? You really cannot pump out
money and then just leave. I am talking here about R29 319 000, which I am
now proposing that this House accept as a loss, and forget about the R29
million which got lost. This is what we have always said.

Today we are proposing and putting forward that hon members should accept
the loss of R29 319 000 to go down the drain and accept this report.
Therefore, the report should be accepted with such a loss of an amount, and
it’s not for the first time. Thank you.

Mr J J M STEPHENS: Chairperson, I must immediately thank the hon Mofokeng
for what he said here today, because he has underlined an extremely
important point about Minister’s non-attendance at Scopa. The DA has asked
for that to happen a number of times, yet it never did. We are extremely
happy that such a view is now also being supported from the ANC benches. It
would be a marvellous development if on each occasion that we call
departments to the committee we would have both the departments and the
Ministers present.

The Committee on Public Accounts called four water boards to appear before
it to deal with the findings of the Auditor-General regarding their
finances. It is deeply disturbing to note the complete inability of these
boards to function at acceptable standards. The Magalies Water Board, for
example, is one of the biggest of its kind in the country. Yet it lacks
properly developed policies and procedures to comply with generally
accepted practices and applicable legislation. It must be stressed that no
acceptable explanation could be put forward by the board’s representatives
at the meeting for the lack of, for example, an operational audit section.

It must be said that it was still better than other boards, such as the
Inkankala and Namakwa Water Boards, which both totally lacked an audit
committee, and the Bushbuckridge Water Board, which, despite having such a
committee, at least nominally, had no internal audit done at all during the
previous year. In all cases the committee’s report now before Parliament
demanded a progress report within 60 days of the adoption of the report by
this House.

These results are illustrating the importance of the oversight work that
Parliament does through its Committee on Public Accounts. I am so glad that
the hon Minister of Finance also raised the whole question of oversight.
But therein lies a concern, because Scopa does not have the ability to deal
fully and effectively with all the follow-up reports and investigations
that would be required to complete the job. On a previous occasion in this
House, I have requested that portfolio committees should follow-up on the
work done by Scopa. I know that some of them did, but they were
unfortunately a minority.

It would not be an overstatement to suggest that the oversight work done by
Scopa was the most important work of Parliament as far as oversight was
concerned. The Auditor-General’s work would all be in vain, were it not for
the fact that Parliament, through Scopa, takes up his findings and holds
the departments and entities to account. This work was absolutely essential
for the effective functioning of the nation as a delivery vehicle for the
people. It was not a luxury but a necessity. The work was essential and
must carry on despite whatever else was happening.

This is why we are perturbed by the present state of affairs, as was
pointed out by my colleague hon Trent in his member’s statement. Scopa’s
work must be continued, despite an impending election. The affairs and the
best interests of the nation cannot be deserted and abandoned because
members have to get themselves re-elected. We have been entrusted to look
after the affairs of our people. The trust is sacrosanct - we dare not
violate it.

The seriousness of the challenge faced by our democracy is illustrated by
the fact that for the 2007-08 year, the Auditor-General gave only five
departments clean audit reports. Nine departments received qualified
reports and had had them for six consecutive years. About 11 others had
emphasis of matter and other matters cluttering their reports - one
department of state and one entity received total disclaimers of opinion.

It is true that elections are important. They are important for democracy
to function. But nothing, not even elections, could be allowed to cause a
discontinuation of good governance. Both are essential for a successful
democracy. I would appeal to Madam Speaker and to all the Whips of all the
parties in Parliament, to arrange matters in such a way that it never
happens again that Scopa’s work gets interrupted and discontinued as in the
present case.

The work that is not done now could not be done later. What is not done
this year is not going to be done at all, because after the elections the
new financial year will be upon us. I thank you. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Mr H J BEKKER: Chairperson, the Report of the Standing Committee on Public
Accounts before us for consideration today highlights some of the
weaknesses of the institutions that are meant to be working for the people
of South Africa in the improvement of their lives. A common theme among the
reports of the various water boards considered, was the inadequacy with
regard to internal audit controls.

In most instances, there were no audit committees in place and no internal
audits were performed in the year under review. However, realities should
also be faced considering Namaqualand, for instance, where enormous
distances of water pipelines are supposed to be maintained, but where there
are very few customers or consumers, because of the sparsely populated
area. The Department of Water Affairs should, in this case, give more money
to them.

The audit of the six provincial housing departments, which focused on
municipal employees who should not have received a subsidy or who should
have received a reduced subsidy, identified some very worrying shortcomings
with regard to the administration of subsidy applications, as well as the
administration of housing projects. Some of these include: Municipal
employees submitting outdated and misrepresented information on their
subsidy applications. Here we are talking of outright fraud and self-
enrichment. Why are these employees not fired? There is no way in which you
could be tolerant of that. This government is too tolerant of fraud.
Regarding the inadequate management measures for the safekeeping of
completed application forms, or the fact that these have not been kept in
safe custody, was this done on purpose to conceal fraud or mismanagement? I
am asked that question.

The reply we got from the Director-General was that there was a lack of
capacity. Imagine the capacity that is needed by the person who is doing
the filing. If the person is taught for one week, he or she would know how
to file. The ownership of houses has not been transferred to the
beneficiaries, although payments have been made to developers. Building
defects in respect of 737 of 970 houses inspected imply that 75% of the
houses turned out by the Department of Housing are defective. We are not
going to tolerate that. The correctness of payment made to developers could
not always be verified as the departments could not provide supporting
documents indicating payments for construction of houses.

Had there been colluding between the tenderers and the municipal employees,
considering that so many people have fought so hard and waited for so long
for houses, and that some were even forced to live in makeshift houses in
bad condition, that is simply unacceptable. I thank you. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, in report 27 great concerns are expressed over
the affairs of the Department of Housing, which the MF wants to address in
the light of the recommendations made by the Standing Committee on Public
Accounts, Scopa, and monitored by them.

Report 28 has made it clear that the Independent Complaints Directorate,
ICD, needs to address the shortfall in vacancies and leadership.

Further, the policy concerns expressed in report 30 on the Magalies Water
Board need to be given serious consideration, and similarly the management
of the Namakwa Water Board in report 31 needs attention so that they may
realise their mandate. Report 32 seems to have picked up a similar loophole
in Bushbuckridge Water Board regarding which the MF express the same
sentiments.

Recommendations made by Scopa on the remaining reports, equally, require
earnest attention.

The MF reiterates the importance for us to govern the system of
transparency, to encourage accountability, and Scopa is the leading drive
force in ensuring that this is upheld in the area of public accounts. Thank
you, Chairperson.

Mr D M GUMEDE: Chairperson and hon members, on the occasion of the 10th
Anniversary of the Association of Public Accounts Committees, the former
Speaker of the National Assembly, Dr Frene Ginwala, said:


  The struggle against apartheid was not simply about the right to vote,
  important as it is. It was also about a new kind of society, about new
  values which we have embodied in our Constitution; values such as
  equality, nonsexism, accountability, responsiveness, openness,
  transparency and a just administration.

These values are the basis for our governance and the context within which
we view our country’s government and its entities.

Having said that, I shall start with the Inkangala Water Board – and I
shall deal with Orders numbers 9 to 15 on the Order Paper. In this entity,
there was no audit committee, there was no internal audit and there was
noncompliance with the Water Services Act - they had a qualified report as
a result. The committee recommends that they have to correct this within 60
days and report back.

The next entity was the Magalies Water Board, which also has a qualified
audit opinion for the 2006-07 financial year. They have no internal audit,
they lack all controls, and a fraud prevention plan was developed and not
implemented. The annual report went on to say that transactions had no
supporting documentation and there was a lack of appropriate policies and
procedures.

The committee recommended that the internal audit section should be fully
operational. Monitoring controls should be put in place and reconciliations
should be made.

The Standing Committee on Public Accounts requested that progress reports
be sent to Parliament within 30 days. That is a progress report.

For the Namakwa Water Board, problems were of a similar nature and they did
not have a Chief Executive Officer, CEO, as well. They were also required
to report on their progress within 60 days.

The Bushbuckridge Water Board had the same problems but, on top of that,
the municipalities that were served by the Bushbuckridge Water Board owed
the board a large amount.

The board had to recover R644 651 million that was irregularly paid in the
2003-04 financial year, and they had inefficient recording keeping. The
committee has recommended that this be corrected and a progress report be
sent to Parliament within 60 days of the consideration of that report by
Parliament.

We request that management should enforce the relevant laws and
regulations. What has to be clear to all of us is that if there are no
controls, then there are leakages like theft, fraud and waste, which in
turn lead to less delivery; and in these instances it will eventually mean
that the communities supplied by these water boards may eventually have no
water. Let us remember that where there is pure water there is life and
where water is contaminated it can be deadly. And this depends on how we
exercise our controls.
We have experienced and survived Eskom blackouts, and they were bad. The
same experience with water will surely be more devastating, if not deadly.

Focusing on the Skills, Education and Training Authorities, Setas, under
the Department of Labour, which are listed as Orders number 13, 14 and 15
in our Order Paper, we start with the Construction Education and Training
Authority  and continue up to the Local Government Sector Education and
Training Authority, which is number 15.

The problems in the Setas include a lack of leadership; that is, they have
periods of time without a CEO, and some of them without Chief Financial
Officers, CFOs, which then causes a lack of leadership.

Over and above this, these entities were found to be lacking in capacity
and also lacking in skills, which resulted in poor governance and which has
also resulted in the irregular awarding of tenders worth R14 million, among
others. This resulted from ineffective internal auditing and their audit
committees were less effective and furthermore irregular in the issuing of
tenders, and a disregard for applicable laws was experienced in these
departments as a result of a lack of leadership, a lack of capacity, a lack
of skills and noncompliance with regulations.

The committee requests support from the relevant portfolio committees and
Parliament.

In conclusion, let me quote John Rohn.


  To be successful you don’t have to do extraordinary things. Just do
  ordinary things extraordinarily well.

The Public Finance Management Act, PFMA, and the laws of our motherland do
not require extraordinary effort or extraordinary intelligence. They do not
require extraordinary expertise that is not there. They simply ask of us to
do what we can, and to do it as we ought to. This will make us realise the
dreams of our forebears at Kliptown when they adopted the Freedom Charter.

Looking at the performance of a number of departments and the number of
public entities of which the majority where not qualified, not well-managed
and not well-governed, that journey was a dream begun by the Freedom
Charter. We, indeed, shall get it right. Thank you very much, hon
Chairperson.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the reports be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Reports accordingly adopted.

The House adjourned at 18:24.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           FRIDAY, 24 OCTOBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker
   1. Membership of Committees

    a) Ms. M J J Matsomela has been elected as Chairperson of the Portfolio
       Committee on Public Service and Administration with effect from 24
       October 2008.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology on the
      Intellectual Property Rights Bill from Publicly Financed Research and
      Development Bill [B46B – 2008], (National Assemby – sec 75), dated 24
      October 2008.


      The Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology, having considered
      the Intellectual Property Rights from Publicly Financed Research and
      Development Bill [B 46B – 2008], (National Assembly – sec 75), and the
      amendments proposed by the National Council of Provinces
      (Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 04 September 2008, p
      1668 - 1669), referred to the Committee, reports the Bill with
      amendments [B46C – 2008].

                           FRIDAY, 31 OCTOBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) Judicial Service Commission Amendment Bill [B 50B – 2007] – Act No
         20 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 22 October
         2008).
      2) Air Services Licensing Amendment Bill [B 25B – 2008] – Act No 21 of
         2008 (assented to and signed by President on 22 October 2008).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Government Employees Pension
        Fund (GEPF) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008 [RP 148-2008].


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the Reconstruction and
        Development Programme Fund for 2007-2008, including the Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008 [RP
        269-2008].

     c) National Treasury – Consolidated Financial Information for the year
        ended 31 March 2008 [RP 268-2008].

     d) Draft Regulations issued under Section 75B of the Income Tax Act,
        1962 (Act No 58 of 1962) prescribing administrative penalties in
        respect of non-compliance.

2.    The Minister of Communications

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Independent Communications
        Authority of South Africa for 2007-2008, including the Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2007-2008 [RP 239-2008].


3.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

     a) Government Notice No 949 published in Government Gazette No 31380
        dated 5 September 2008: Declaration of intention to propose
        extensions to and exclusions from, and a buffer zone for the fossil
        hominid sites of Sterkfontein, Swartkrans, Kromdraai and the
        environs (Cradle of Humankind), in term of the National
        Environmental Management: Protected Areas Act, 2003 (Act No 57 of
        2003).

     b) General Notice No 1138 published in Government Gazette No 31415
        dated 15 September 2008: Second Edition Environmental
        Implementation and Management Plan (EIMP) – March 2008.

     c) Government Notice No 1054 published in Government Gazette No 31461
        dated 3 October 2008: Declaration of Land to be part of Augrabies
        Falls National Park, in terms of the National Environmental
        Management: Protected Areas Act, 2003 (Act No 57 of 2003).

     d) Government Notice No 1055 published in Government Gazette No 31461
        dated 3 October 2008: Declaration of Land to be part of Agulhas
        National Park, in terms of the National Environmental Management:
        Protected Areas Act, 2003 (Act No 57 of 2003).

     e) Government Notice No 1056 published in Government Gazette No 31461
        dated 3 October 2008: Declaration of Land to be part of Mapungubwe
        National Park, in terms of the National Environmental Management:
        Protected Areas Act, 2003 (Act No 57 of 2003).

     f) Government Notice No 1057 published in Government Gazette No 31461
        dated 3 October 2008: Declaration of Land to be part of Namaqua
        National Park, in terms of the National Environmental Management:
        Protected Areas Act, 2003 (Act No 57 of 2003).

     g) Government Notice No 1058 published in Government Gazette No 31461
        dated 3 October 2008: Declaration of Land to be part of Marakele
        National Park, in terms of the National Environmental Management:
        Protected Areas Act, 2003 (Act No 57 of 2003).

     h) General Notice No 1264 published in Government Gazette No 31495
        dated 6 October 2008: Submission of names of persons fit to be
        appointed to serve as members of the South African Tourism Board,
        in terms of the Tourism Act, 1993 (Act No 72 of 1993).

     i) Government Notice No 1108 published in Government Gazette No 31516
        dated 17 October 2008: Regulations on the Stilbaai Marine Protected
        Area, in terms of the Marine Living Resources Act, 1998 (Act No 18
        of 1998).

     j) Government Notice No 1109 published in Government Gazette No 31517
        dated 17 October 2008: Notice declaring the Stilbaai Marine
        Protected Area under section 43 to be a marine protected area, in
        terms of the Marine Living Resources Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of 1998).

     k) Government Notice No 1110 published in Government Gazette No 31517
        dated 17 October 2008: Draft notice of fees payable in respect of
        applications for, and the issuing or granting of rights, permits
        and licences, in terms of section 25 of the Marine Living Resources
        Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of 1998) for recreational scuba diving in the
        Maputaland and St Lucia Marine Protected Areas; and in the Stilbaai
        and proposed Border Region Marine Protected Area upon declaration.

4.    The Minister of Trade and Industry
     a) Government Notice No 732 published in Government Gazette No 31226
        dated 4 July 2008: Guidelines for the sub-programme Enterprise
        Investment Programme (Manufacturing Investment Programme).


     b) Government Notice No 733 published in Government Gazette No 31226
        dated 4 July 2008: Guidelines for the sub-programme Enterprise
        Investment Programme (Tourism Support Programme).


     c) Government Notice No 758 published in Government Gazette No 31232
        dated 18 July 2008: Accounting Officer – profession whose members
        qualify in terms of section 60: Chartered Institute of Business
        Management, in terms of the Close Corporation Act, 1984 (Act No 69
        of 1984).


     d) Government Notice No 772 published in Government Gazette No 31247
        dated 18 July 2008: Incorporation of an external company as a
        company in the Republic of South Africa: Rocsi Holdings (Pty) Ltd,
        in terms of the Companies Act, 1973 (Act No 61 of 1973).


     e) Government Notice No 836 published in Government Gazette No 31301
        dated 8 August 2008: Standards matters, in terms of Standards Act,
        1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


     f) Government Notice No 924 published in Government Gazette No 31371
        dated 29 August 2008: Media, Advertising and Communication M (MAC)
        Sector Charter on Black Economic Empowerment, in terms of Broad-
        Based Black Economic Empowerment Act, 2003 (Act No 53 of 2003).


     g) Government Notice No 957 published in Government Gazette No 31402
        dated 5 September 2008: Incorporation of an external company as a
        company in the Republic of South Africa: HIS (PTY) LTD, in terms of
        Companies Act, 1973 (Act No 61 of 1973).


     h) Government Notice No 66 published in Government Gazette No 31443
        dated 26 September 2008: Standards matters, in terms of Standards
        Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


5.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

     a) Report and Financial Statements of Inkomati Catchment Management
        Agency for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008 [RP 138-2008].


National Assembly

1.    The Speaker
     a) Letter from the Minister of Arts and Culture dated 29 October 2008,
        to the Speaker of the National Assembly explaining the delay in the
        tabling of the Annual Reports of the Arts, Culture and Heritage
        Institutions for 2007-2008.

        In terms of section 65(1)(a) of the above-mentioned Act the Annual
        Reports and Financial Statements, and the Audit Reports on those
        Statements of the Arts, Culture and Heritage Institutions listed
        below were tabled late or have not been tabled.


        National Arts Council (NAC)
        The Audit for 2007/08 was completed timeously and the Audit Report
        submitted to the NAC Council by 31 July 2008.


        The Draft Annual Report was subsequently completed but due to a
        misunderstanding in respect of the timeframes allowed for the
        completion of the Report, the Foreword by the new Chairperson of
        Council was received late.


        This delayed the printing process and the Annual Report only
        forwarded to the Department in late September 2008 and was tabled
        in Parliament on 10 October 2008.


        Robben Island Museum
        The RIM Council suspended three senior employees in January 2008
        including the CEO and CFO pending the outcome of a forensic
        investigation into possible mismanagement of the institution.


        Consequently the Audit was delayed and the Audit report for 2007/08
        only issued on 26 September 2008.


        In the light of the above-mentioned situation RIM has not been in a
        position to submit their Annual Report for 2007/08 for tabling in
        Parliament.


        Yours sincerely




        signed
        Z PALLO JORDAN
        MINISTER


     b) Letter from the Minister of Communications dated 28 October 2008,
        to the Speaker of the National Assembly explaining the delay in the
        tabling of the Annual Reports of the Independent Complaints
        Directorate (ICASA) for 2007-2008.

        In terms of section 65 of the Public Finance Management Act of 1999
        as amended, I hereby table the ICASA 2007/2008 Annual Report.


        I wish to apologise for the late tabling of the ICASA 2007/08
        Annual Report. The reason for the delay was due to unforeseen
        internal procurement processes within ICASA. This further impacted
        on the delay in the printing of the annual report.


        Yours sincerely




        signed
        IVY MATSEPE-CASABURRI, MP
        MINISTER
                           MONDAY, 3 NOVEMBER 2008


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Withdrawal of Bills

    The Minister for Intelligence Services withdrew the following Bills on
    30 October 2008:


    (1)    Protection of Information Bill [B 28 - 2008] (National Assembly
         - sec 75).


    (2)    Intelligence Services Amendment Bill [B 37 - 2008] (National
         Assembly - sec 75).


    (3)    National Strategic Intelligence Amendment Bill [B 38 – 2008]
         (National Assembly - sec 75).

TABLINGS

National Assembly

The Speaker


1.    Submission of Private Member's Legislative Proposals

    The following private member's legislative proposals were submitted to
    the Speaker on 16 October 2008 in accordance with Rule 234:
       a) Legislative proposal on the establishment of a feed-in tariff to
          finance the use of renewable energy (Dr R Rabinowitz)


       b) Legislative proposal on outlawing the use of transfats in food
          prepared for sale to the public (Dr R Rabinowitz)

    Referred to the Committee on Private Members’ Legislative Proposals and
    Special Petitions for consideration and report.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Mediation Committee on the Mandating Procedures of
      Provinces Bill [B8B – 2007] and [B8D – 2007] (National Council of
      Provinces – sec 76(2)), dated 22 October 2008:

      The Mediation Committee, having considered the Mandating Procedures of
      Provinces Bill [B8B – 2007] and [B8D – 2007] (National Council of
      Provinces – sec 76(2)), as well as the papers referred to it, reports
      that it has agreed to a new version of the Bill [B8F – 2007].

                         WEDNESDAY, 5 NOVEMBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

    (1)    Social Housing Bill [B 29D – 2007] – Act No 16 of 2008 (assented
        to and signed by President on 1 November 2008).

    (2)    Insurance Laws Amendment Bill [B 26B – 2008] – Act No 27 of 2008
        (assented to and signed by President on 1 November 2008).

      3) Jurisdiction of Regional Courts Amendment Bill [B 48D – 2007] – Act
         No 31 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 1 November
         2008).

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Assembly


    (a)     The vacancy which occurred in the National Assembly owing to
       the resignation of Mr T D H Ramphele with effect from 1 October
       2006, has been filled with effect from 31 October 2008 by the
       nomination of Ms T M A Gasebonwe.


    (b)     The vacancy which occurred in the National Assembly owing to
       the resignation of Ms P G Mlambo-Ngcuka with effect from 25
       September 2008, has been filled with effect from 31 October 2008 by
       the nomination of Ms A C Mashishi.


    c) The vacancy which occurred in the National Assembly owing to the
       resignation of Mr E G Pahad with effect from 25 September 2008, has
       been filled with effect from 31 October 2008 by the nomination of Ms
       S B Moiloa-Nqodi.
    d) The vacancy which occurred in the National Assembly owing to the
       resignation of Mr R Kasrils with effect from 25 September 2008, has
       been filled with effect from 31 October 2008 by the nomination of Mr
       F C Fankomo.


    e) The vacancy which occurred in the National Assembly owing to the
       resignation of Mr F S Mufamadi with effect from 25 September 2008,
       has been filled with effect from 31 October 2008 by the nomination
       of Ms F J Wright.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

      (a)   Proclamation No 42 published in Government Gazette No 31525
        dated 20 October 2008: Commencement of the Diamond Export Levy Act,
        2007 (Act No 15 of 2007) and section 21 of the Diamond Export Levy
        (Administration) Act, 2007 (Act No 14 of 2007).

      (b)   Government Notice No R1140 published in Government Gazette No
        31529 dated 23 October 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1365), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

     a) Government Notice No 1021 published in Government Gazette No 31443
        dated 26 September 2008: Standards matters, in terms of the
        Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).

        Please Note: The above item replaces item 4(h) under Tablings of
        the Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of 31 October
        2008, as published on page 2031.

3.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy

     a) Report of the Mine Health and Safety Inspectorate for 2007-2008 [RP
        261-2008].

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

     a) Letter from the Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry, dated 29
        October 2008, to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of
        section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No
        1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual
        Report of the Inkomati Catchment Management Agency for 2007-2008.


        TABLING OF ANNUAL REPORT: INKOMATI CATCHMENT MANAGEMENT AGENCY
        2007/8


        In terms of section 55(1)(d) of the Public Finance Management Act,
        1999 (Act No 1 of 1999) [the Act], public entities must submit
        within five months of the end of their financial year their Annual
        Report and Financial Statements to the Executive Authority (in this
        case the Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry), for scrutiny.
        Within one month after receipt of the report and financial
        statements it must be submitted for tabling in Parliament in terms
        of section 65(1)(a) of the Act.
        The Inkomati Board submitted 500 Copies of the Annual Report and
        Financial Statements within the prescribed period however; these
        copies were delivered to an official of the Department who has
        subsequently left the Department, resulting in the late approval
        process for the tabling.


        This is the first catchment management agency established and
        protocols and communication lines are still not ideal. These issues
        are being urgently addressed by the Department.


        In terms of section 65(2)(a) of the mentioned Act, the Minister
        must, upon failure to table the Annual Report and Financial
        Statements within six months of the end of the financial year,
        table a written explanation in Parliament to give reasons why the
        Report was not tabled. I trust that the reason for the delay is
        clear and in future, the Department will ensure that the catchment
        management agency will submit on time and follow communication
        protocols.


        The Annual Report of Inkomati Catchment Management Agency Water
        will mow be tabled in Parliament.


        Yours sincerely


        signed
        MRS L B HENDRICKS MP
        MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY

                          THURSDAY, 7 NOVEMBER 2008

TABLINGS

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker
    (1)     Submission of Private Member's Legislative Proposals

        The following private member's legislative proposals were submitted
        to the Speaker on 20 June 2008 in accordance with Rule 234:


          a) Legislative proposal to repeal the Diocesan College Council,
             Rondebosch Act, No 11 of 1891 (Cape of Good Hope) (P A Gerber)


          b) Legislative proposal to repeal the Natal Ecclesiastical
             Properties and Trust Act, No 9 of 1910 (Natal) (P A Gerber)


        Referred to the Committee on Private Members’ Legislative Proposals
        and Special Petitions.


    (2)     Papers tabled

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Special Investigating
             Unit (SIU) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2007-2008 [RP 214-2008].


          b) Letter from the Minister of Housing dated 30 September 2008, to
             the Speaker of the National Assembly explaining the delay in
             the tabling of the Annual Reports of Thubelisha Homes for 2007-
             2008.

             NON-COMPLIANCE WITH SECTION 55(d) OF THE PUBLIC FINANCE
             MANAGEMENT ACT (PFMA) WITH REGARD TO THE ANNUAL REPORT OF
             THUBELISHA


             Please find enclosed copy of a self-explanatory letter received
             from the Accounting Officer of Thubelisha, which serves to
             inform you of the non compliance with section 55(d) of the
             Public Finance Management Act 1 of 1999 (PFMA) by Thubelisha, a
             public entity under the control of the Department of Housing,
             for your noting.


             The Accounting Officer is confirming that the Annual Report of
             Thubelisha ca not be tabled before 30 September 2008 due to the
             non-completion of its audit.
             Yours sincerely


             L N Sisulu, MP
             Minister of Housing

                          TUESDAY, 11 NOVEMBER 2008
ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent


    1) Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 11 November 2008:


          a) Consumer Protection Bill [B 19D – 2008] (National Council of
             Provinces – sec 76(2)).


          b) National Conventional Arms Control Amendment Bill [B 45B –
             2008] (National Assembly – sec 75).


          c) Higher Education Amendment Bill [B 34 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Message from National Council of Provinces to National Assembly in
     respect of Bills passed by Council and returned to Assembly


    (1)    Bills amended by National Council of Provinces and returned for
         concurrence on 11 November 2008:


         (a)      National Environmental Management Amendment Bill [B 36D –
             2007] (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).


             The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on
             Environmental Affairs and Tourism of the National Assembly.


         (b)      National Qualifications Framework Bill [B 33D – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).


         (c)      General and Further Education and Training Quality
             Assurance Amendment Bill [B 35D – 2008] (National Assembly –
             sec 76(1)).


             The Bills have been referred to the Portfolio Committee on
             Education of the National Assembly.

     (2)    Bills, subject to proposed amendments, passed by National
         Council of Provinces on 11 November 2008 and returned for
         consideration of Council’s proposed amendments:


          a) Provision of Land and Assistance Amendment Bill [B 40B – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 75) (for proposed amendments, see
             Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 22 October 2008,
             p 1975).


             The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on
             Agriculture and Land Affairs of the National Assembly for a
             report on the amendments proposed by the Council.


          b) Mine Health and Safety Amendment Bill [B 54B – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 75) (for proposed amendments, see Announcements,
             Tablings and Committee Reports, 24 October 2008, p 2023).


          c) National Radioactive Waste Disposal Institute Bill [B 41B –
             2008] (National Assembly – sec 75) (introduced as National
             Radioactive Waste Management Agency Bill [B 41 – 2008] (for
             proposed amendments, see Announcements, Tablings and Committee
             Reports, 17 October 2008, p 1921).


             The Bills have been referred to the Portfolio Committee on
             Minerals and Energy of the National Assembly for a report on
             the amendments proposed by the Council.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1. Twenty-Seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts on
   the report of the Auditor-General on Housing Subsidies to Municipal
   Employees and the Administration of Low-Cost Housing Projects by certain
   Provincial Housing Departments, dated 21 October 2008.


   BACKGROUND

      On the 31st of March 2008, a transversal performance audit at six
      provincial housing departments was approved. The audit focused on
      municipal employees who should not have received a subsidy or who
      should have received a reduced subsidy as a result of their employment
      and income status.


      The following provinces were covered by the audit:
      • Free State
      • Gauteng
      • KwaZulu-Natal
      • Limpopo
      • Mpumalanga
      • Western Cape


      There were a number of criteria which needed to be met for
      eligibility. Those included aspects such as marital status, residency,
      age, monthly household income, whether previous benefits had been
      received from Government funds, and whether it was a first time
      property owner.


      The following shortcomings were identified with regard to the
      administration of subsidy applications:
     a. municipal employees misrepresented their income on the application
        forms and supplied outdated information to the  provincial housing
        departments;
     b. the subsidy application forms were not always provided to the
        Auditor- General as the provincial housing departments did  not
        have adequate management measures which ensured the safe keeping of
        completed subsidy application forms.


      The following shortcomings relate to housing projects administration:
     a. Numerous instances were identified where the ownership of houses
        was not transferred to the beneficiaries although payments had been
        made to developers for completing the top structures;
     b. Provincial housing departments could not provide the Auditor-
        General with all the supporting documentation indicating payments
        made to developers for the construction of low-cost houses.
        Therefore, the correctness of payments made to developers could not
        always be verified;
     c. Building defects were identified in 737 of the 970 houses inspected
        by the audit team. The defects included, amongst others: walls and
        foundations were severely cracked, gaps between the outside walls
        and the roofs, roofs of houses which were leaking, general basic
        services were either not installed or not connected to the bulk
        supply, etc.

      The Committee recommends that provincial housing departments should
      introduce improved measures to ensure that:
     a. applicants submit adequate proof of income and updated payslips;
     b. applicants submit supporting documentation regarding spouses and
        dependents;
     c. affidavits must accompany application forms;
     d. there is collaboration with municipalities where applicants are
        employed with a view of instituting disciplinary action  against
        municipal employees who made false affidavits, and legal action
        should be considered accordingly;
     e. measures are instituted to ensure the safe keeping of completed
        subsidy  application forms;
     f. where properties were allocated to individuals who should have been
         disqualified as a  result   of their household income,
        consideration should be given to give those properties to
        qualifying applicants and that   forensic investigations into
        corruption and collusion are conducted;
     g. contracts with developers include retention and penalty clauses to
        ensure that contractors   will forfeit money for bad workmanship;
     h. disciplinary actions are taken against inspectors who certified on
        inspection certificates that  top structures had been successfully
        completed by developers when the general condition of the houses
        was  poor and unsatisfactory; and
     i. there is integration of their database with that of SARS to verify
        eligibility through PAYE information.


3.    CONCLUSION

The Committee expressed its dissatisfaction with the progress made by the
Department of Housing to correct deficiencies identified by the special
audit. The Committee further requests the National Department of Housing
and the provincial housing departments to ensure that corrective measures
are implemented to rectify the shortcomings identified. SCOPA should
monitor the above recommendations on an ongoing basis and that regular
progress reports are submitted to the Committee, the first of which should
be six months after the adoption of the report by the National Assembly.
Report to be considered.

1. Twenty-Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts on the
   Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor General on the Financial
   Statements of the Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD) for the year
   ending 31 March 2007, dated 21 October 2008.

   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts (SCOPA) heard and considered
   evidence on the Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on
   the financial statements of the Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD)
   for the financial year ending 31 March 2007.

   For the 2006/07 financial year a qualified audit opinion was expressed by
   the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the ICD. SCOPA,
   therefore, requests the Accounting Officer to urgently address the
   following:

1. Fixed Assets
The Auditor-General reported the following shortcomings with regard to
fixed assets:
 a. The valuation of the assets amounting to R29 319 000, including
    adjustments of R7 093 000 could not be verified due to inadequate
    documentation;
 b. assets were not always bar-coded; and
 c. assets valued less than R5,000 (minor items) which were not supposed to
    be included in the asset register were included.


The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures that:
 a. an appropriate document management system is implemented to control all
    source documentation and ensure that accurate reconciliation is done;
 b. assets are recorded and bar-coded;
 c. there is compliance with the National Treasury prescript which requires
    that assets with a value of less than R5000 should not be listed as
    capital assets in the financial statements.

2. Vacancies
The Auditor-General reported that out of 535 approved positions only 231
were funded for in the 2006-07 financial year.  Due to critical management
positions being vacant, policies and procedures were not properly monitored
to detect and prevent non-compliance.

The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer reassesses the
organisational structure, and requests more funding from National Treasury
to ensure that the entity delivers on its mandate.

3. Leave Benefits
The following control weaknesses were identified:
 a. leave forms were not properly filed, resulting in them not being
    properly captured on PERSAL; and
 b. leave forms were not always completed and approved before staff went on
    leave.
The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures compliance
with human resources policies and guidelines.

4. Conclusion
The Committee noted with concern the internal controls as reported by the
Auditor-General and requests that the issue of leadership and key vacant
positions are addressed as a matter of urgency to ensure the efficient
operation of the entity. Reports on progress made with regard to issues
identified should be forwarded to the Committee within 60 days after the
adoption of this report by the National Assembly.

Report to be considered.

2. Twenty-Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts on the
   Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor General on the Financial
   Statements of the Inkankala Water Board for the financial year ending 31
   June 2007, dated 21 October 2008.


    The Standing Committee on Public Accounts (SCOPA) heard and considered
    evidence on the Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor General on
    the financial statements of the Inkankala Water Board for the financial
    year ending 31 June 2007.

    For the 2006/07 financial year a qualified audit opinion was expressed
    by the Auditors on the financial statements of the Board.


      The Auditors reported the following shortcomings:
       a. there was no audit committee;
       b. no internal audit was performed during the year under review;
       c. essential controls such as segregation of duties was not complied
          with; and
       d. there was non-compliance with the PFMA and Water Services Act.


    The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer urgently ensures
that:
     a. an audit committee and an internal audit section are put in place,
        and
     b. there is compliance with relevant rules and regulations.

     Conclusion
    The Committee further requests the Department of Water Affairs and
    Forestry to intervene in  ensuring that there is stability within the
    Board and that an updated report on all problems identified, are
    forwarded to the Committee within 60 days after the adoption of this
    report by the National Assembly.

     Report to be considered.


3. Thirtieth Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts on the
   Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor -General on the financial
   statements of the Magalies Water Board for the financial year ending 31
   June 2007, dated 21 October 2008

   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts (SCOPA) heard and considered
   evidence on the Annual Report and the Report of the Auditors on the
   financial statements of the Magalies Water Board for the financial year
   ending 31 June 2007.

   For the 2006/07 financial year a qualified audit opinion was expressed by
   the Auditors on the financial statements of the Board.

  The Auditor-General reported the following shortcomings:
   a. an internal audit section was not fully operational;
   b. monitoring and control within the Board did not function properly;
   c. a fraud prevention plan was developed but not implemented; and
   d. due to a lack of approved policies and procedures, transactions were
      not supported with documentation.

  The Committee therefore recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures
   that:
a. the internal audit section of the Board is fully operational;
   b. monitoring controls are put in place, particularly with regard to
      reconciliations and ensuring that building contracts and projects are
      managed effectively; and
   c. a fraud prevention policy is developed, and implemented, and that
      policies and procedures are approved as a matter of urgency

  Conclusion
  The Committee noted with concern the state of internal controls in the
  entity and requests the Board to ensure that policies and procedures are
  developed, approved and monitored to ensure compliance to applicable
  regulations. An updated report on the progress regarding the issues
  raised, must be forwarded to the Committee within 60 days after the
  adoption of this report by the National Assembly.
  Report to be considered.

4. Thirty-First Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts on the
   Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor General on the Financial
   Statements of the Namakwa Water Board for the financial year ending 31
   June 2007, dated 21 October 2008.

   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts (SCOPA) heard and considered
   evidence on the Annual Report and the Report of the Auditors on the
   financial statements of the Namakwa Water Board for the financial year
   ending 31 June 2007.
   For the 2006/07 financial year an unqualified audit opinion was expressed
   by the Auditors on the financial statements of the Board.

  The Auditors reported the following shortcomings:
   a. there was no audit committee;
   b. no internal audit was performed during the year under review;
   c. essential controls such as segregation of duties was not complied
      with;
   d. the Board does not have a CEO; and
   e. the Board will not be able to repay the loan from the Development Bank
      of Southern Africa.


 The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer urgently ensures that:
   a. an Audit Committee and an internal audit section are put in place; and
   b. staff with suitable skills and experience are appointed.

 Conclusion
The Committee requests that the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry
intervene in ensuring stability within the Board so that the Board can
realise its mandate. The Committee requests a report on the issues
identified to be submitted within 60 days of the adoption of this report by
the National Assembly.

Report to be considered.

5. Thirty-Second Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts on the
   Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor General on the financial
   statements of the Bushbuckridge Water Board for the financial year ending
   31 June 2007, dated 21 October 2008.
   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts (SCOPA) heard and considered
   evidence on the Annual Report and the Report of the Auditors on the
   financial statements of the Bushbuckridge Water Board for the financial
   year ending 31 June 2007.
   For the 2006/07 financial year a qualified audit opinion was expressed by
   the Auditors on the financial statements of the Board.


   The Auditors reported the following shortcomings:
    a. no internal audit was performed during the year under review;
    b. the municipalities were not paying the money owed to the Board;
   c. forensic investigations concluded that an amount of R644 651 was
      irregularly paid during the 2003/04 financial year, that amount has
      still not been recovered; and
    d. the internal control environment regarding safe keeping of records
       was inefficient.


   The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer urgently ensures
       that:
    a. an internal audit section is put in place;
   b. the Board, with the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry and all
      the role players, address the matter of non payment of water by the
      municipality;
   c. the Board reports to Parliament on progress with regard to the
      forensic investigation within 60 days of the adoption this report by
      the National Assembly; and
    d. policies and procedures are documented and complied with.


   Conclusion
   The Committee requests that the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry
   to intervenes and ensure that there is stability within the Board so that
   the Board can realise its mandate and that the Committee be provided with
   a progress report within 60 days of the adoption of this report by the
   National Assembly.


   Report to be considered.

7. Thirty-Third Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts on the
   Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the financial
   statements of the Construction Education and Training Authority for the
   financial year ending 31 March 2007, dated 21 October 2008.

   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts (SCOPA) heard and considered
   evidence on the Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on
   the financial statements of the Construction Education and Training
   Authority (CETA), for the year ended 31 March 2007.


   The Committee noted the disclaimer audit opinion expressed by the Auditor-
   General.  The Committee raised its concerns on the following matters and
   reports as follows:

   1. Capacity and skill
   The report highlighted that the Chief Financial Officer  resigned in
   February 2006. A new Chief Financial Officer was appointed in April 2006.
   The Chief Executive Officer was suspended and a new Chief Executive
   Officer was appointed in March 2008.
   The Committee is concerned about the lack of skills and the significant
   control weaknesses identified.


   The Committee recommends that the Accounting Authority ensures that:
     a) improvements of human resource control policies and procedures are
        implemented and that recruited staff meet the required standards;
   b) salaries of senior management staff  should be market related;
   c) the reasons for staff turnover are reviewed, and strategies are
      established and implemented to eliminate the problems encountered;
   d) the Chief Financial Officer and financial staff receive training; and
   e) feedback is given to the Committee on the departmental action plan to
      address the high vacancy rate.


   2. Governance issues
   The Committee noted the following shortcomings:


   a) internal control policies and procedures were not developed for the
   National Skills Fund;
   a) there was lack of systems and controls due to various policies not
      developed;
   b) there was no supporting documentation provided for commitments
      disclosed to the value of R35 047 million for projects which have
      already expired, as well as for contingent assets amounting to R12 982
      million;
   c) non compliance with applicable legislation; and
   d) double payments to service providers and other control weaknesses over
      learnership disbursements and administration.


   The Committee recommends that the Accounting Authority ensures that:
   a) management establishes monitoring controls that prevent and detect
      errors on the annual financial statements;
   b) reconciliation of total commitments, as well as contingent assets, are
      provided to the auditors, together with relevant supporting
      documentation;
   c) the outcomes are evaluated and legal opinion with regards to rights
      and obligations are obtained. Correction of prior year adjustments
      errors are made in terms of Generally Recognised Accounting Practice;
   d)  mandatory grant payments are made quarterly;
   e) evaluation of governance and risk environment as well as development
      and implementation of policy to govern the environment are done; and
   f) an update on forensic investigation regarding the suspension of the
      Chief Executive Officer is provided.
The Committee requests the Accounting Officer to provide a progress report
on all the abovementioned issues within 60 days after the adoption of this
report by the National Assembly.

Report to be considered

8. Thirty-Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts on the
   Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the financial
   statements of the Department of Health and Welfare Sector Education and
   Training Authority (HWSETA) for the financial year ending 31 March 2007,
   dated 21 October 2008.

   The Standing Committee on Public Accounts (SCOPA) heard and considered
   evidence on the Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on
   the financial statements of the Health and Welfare Sector Education and
   Training Authority (HWSETA), for the year ended 31 March 2007.

   The Committee noted the disclaimer audit opinion expressed by the Auditor-
   General.  However, the Committee raised its concerns on the following
   matters and reports as follows:

Capacity and skill
   The Committee noted the following:
   a. the previous Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer were
      suspended in June 2006 and both resigned in August 2006;
   b. a new Chief Executive Officer was appointed in December 2006 but was
      suspended in June 2007 and dismissed in July 2007;
   c. no Chief Financial Officer appointment was made for the remainder of
      2007;
   d. the Chairperson of the Board resigned on 31 March 2007; and
   e. a new Chairperson of the Board resigned on 30 November 2007 and
      another Chairperson was appointed on 24 January 2008.

   The Committee recommends that the Accounting Authority ensures that:
   a. all errors that occurred due to a lack of capacity and skills are
      corrected;
   b. appropriate training is provided to all employees especially in
      finance; and
   c. management institutes adequate monitoring controls to ensure that all
      transactions are correctly recorded in the financial statements before
      they are submitted for audit purposes.

Governance
   The annual report highlighted the following:
   a. an amount of R14 million irregular expenditure was disclosed for non-
      compliance with the supply chain management and payments made in
      contravention of the Skills Development Amendment  (SDA) regulation on
      mandatory grants;
   b. no reliance placed on the work of the internal audit committee as
      there was no internal audit function for the first six months of the
      financial year;
   c. representation in the Accounting Authority was not equal between
      employer and employee organisations in accordance with the Skills
      Development Amendment Act  (SDA) 13(3)iii;
   d. the human resource plan was not approved by the Executive;
   e. non-compliance with applicable legislation; and
   f. significant reliance was placed on voluntarily contributed government
      levies of R22 million, the absence of which would compromise the
      normal day-to-day running expenses and cause the HWSETA to exceed the
      legal limit on administrative expenditure.


   The Committee recommends that the Accounting Authority ensures that:
   a. management implements monitoring controls verifying that payments for
      mandatory grants are made only if Work Place Skills Plan (WSP) and
      Annual Training Report were submitted on time;
   b. management considers the effect of government levies not being
      received and develops a strategy to ensure that the entity remains a
      going concern;
   c. HWSETA has an internal audit function and that it performs in terms of
      its mandate throughout the year;
   d. employees are charged with governance design and implementing controls
      to ensure that the board members of HWSETA are at all times
      representative of employees and employers on an equal basis;
   e.  there is revision and/or drafting of appropriate policies and
      procedures; and
   f. tenders and awards are advertised in the Government Tender Bulletin
The Committee requests the Accounting Officer to provide a progress report
on all the abovementioned issues within 60 days after the adoption of this
report by the National Assembly.

Report to be considered.
              9. Thirty-Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Public
                 Accounts on the Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-
                 General on the financial statements of the Local Government
                 Sector Education Training Authority for the financial year
                 ending 31 March 2007, dated 21 October 2008.

The Standing Committee on Public Accounts (SCOPA) heard and considered
evidence on the Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the
financial statements of the Local Government Sector Education and Training
Authority (LGSETA), for the year ended 31 March 2007.

The Committee noted the qualified audit opinion expressed by the Auditor-
General.  The Committee specifically raised concerns on the following
matters and therefore reports as follows:

   1. Governance issues
   The annual report highlighted the following:
   a. ineffective internal audit function and audit committee;
   b. no contracts for the Board (Accounting Authority) stating acceptance
      of their responsibilities;
   c. supply chain management framework has not been implemented and this
      issue has been highlighted in the reports of the past three years;
   d. non-compliance with applicable legislation;
   e. LGSETA invested in an endowment policy, however, the life insured by
      the policy is that of the former financial manager who resigned in
      April 2007; and
   f. objectives disclosed as per the strategic plan were not specific
      enough to address the overall target as set by the National Skills
      Development Strategy.


The Committee recommends that the Accounting Authority ensures that:

a.    .proper policies and procedures are implemented as a matter of
   urgency to ensure control over investments;
b.    an adequate supply chain management framework is approved by the
   Board;
c.    quarterly internal audit reports are produced and implemented;
d.    audit committee meets at least twice a year and ensures sufficient
   numbers attend to obtain the necessary quorum;
e.    LGSETA, in consultation with the Department of Labour, establishes
   specific SETA targets that would result in achieving the overall targets;
   and
f.    only performance objectives/information that are in line with the
   strategic plan are approved.


   2. Capacity and skills shortage


   For the past two years, the position of the Chief Financial Officer had
   not been established in LGSETA and its responsibilities had not been
   assigned as required by Treasury Regulation.
   The vacancy of a Chief Financial Officer and financial manager resulted
   to:
a.    Financial statements submitted for audit purposes required
   significant material adjustments.
b.    Adequate explanations and documentation to support the provision of
   levy income could not be provided.
c.    Accounts receivable and accounts payable were being netted off in
   contravention of Generally Recognised Accounting Practice.
d.    Material irregular expenditure of R5,2 million relating to mandatory
   grants paid to employers in contravention of the Skills Development
   Amendment(SDA)  regulation.
e.    There was non-compliance with applicable legislation.


The Committee recommends that the Accounting Authority ensures that:
      a.    a Chief Financial Officer is appointed and delegated the
      responsibility;
      b.    all errors that occurred due to lack of capacity and skills are
      corrected;
      c.    appropriate training is provided to all employees especially in
      finance;
d.    revised and/or drafts of appropriate policies and procedures in
accordance with accounting standards are made;
e.    management implements monitoring controls to ensure that payments for
   mandatory grants are made only if the Work Place Skills Plan (WSP) and
   Annual Training Report (ATR) were submitted on time ; and
f.    management implements monitoring controls to prevent irregular
   expenditure and establish a system to record those that have been
   incurred.

The Committee requests the Accounting Officer to provide Parliament with a
progress report on all the abovementioned issues within 60 days after  the
adoption of this report by the National Assembly.

Report to be considered

 10. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry on the
     Companies Bill [B61B- 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 6
     November 2008:


     The Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry, having considered the
     subject of the Companies Bill [B61B – 2008] (National Assembly – sec
     75), and the proposed amendments of the National Council of Provinces
     (Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 17 October 2008, p
     1918), reports the Bill with amendments [B61C – 2008].

                         WEDNESDAY, 12 NOVEMBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent
   1) Bill passed by National Council of Provinces on 12 November 2008:


         (a)      National Railway Safety Regulator Amendment Bill [B 32B –
             2008] (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Message from National Council of Provinces to National Assembly in
     respect of Bills passed by Council and returned to Assembly


    (1)    Bills amended by National Council of Provinces and returned for
         concurrence on 12 November 2008:


         (a)      Tobacco Products Control Amendment Bill [B 7D – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).
             The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Health
             of the National Assembly.


         (b)      Second-Hand Goods Bill [B 2D – 2008] (National Assembly –
             sec 76(1)).


             The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Safety
             and Security of the National Assembly.


         (c)      Prevention of and Treatment for Substance Abuse Bill [B
             12D – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).


             The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Social
             Development of the National Assembly.

     (2)    Bill, subject to proposed amendments, passed by National Council
         of Provinces on 12 November 2008 and returned for consideration of
         Council’s proposed amendments:
          a) Medicines and Related Substances Amendment Bill [B 44B – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 75) (for proposed amendments, see
             Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 23 October
             2008, p 2017).


             The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Health
             of the National Assembly for a report on the amendments
             proposed by the Council.

TABLINGS


National Assembly


The Speaker

        1) Amending Draft Notice and Schedule submitted in terms of section
           2(4) of the Judges Remuneration and Conditions of Employment Act,
           2001 (Act No 47 of 2001), determining the rate at which salaries
           are payable to Constitutional Court judges and judges annually,
           with effect from 1 April 2008, for approval by Parliament.

            Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and
            Constitutional Development for consideration and report.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

CREDA INSERT REPORT - T081112e-insert1 – PAGES 2074-2081


                         THURSDAY, 13 NOVEMBER 2008



ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Bills passed by Houses—to be submitted to President for assent

      (1)   Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 13 November
      2008:

          (a)    Methodist Church of Southern Africa (Private) Act Repeal
                 Bill [B 68—2008] (National Assembly—sec 75).
           (b)   Dutch Reformed Churches Union Act Repeal Bill [B 69—2008]
                 (National Assembly—sec 75).
           (c)   The Apostolic Faith Mission of South Africa (Private) Act
                 Repeal Bill [B 71B 〉
           (d)   Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 76—2008] (National
                 Assembly—sec 77).
           (e)   Eskom Subordinated Loan Special Appropriation
                (2008/09—2010/11 Financial Years) Bill [B 77—2008] (National
                Assembly—sec 77).
           (f)   Finance Bill [B 78—2008] (National Assembly—sec 77).
           (g)   Government Employees Pension Fund (Condonation of
                Interrupted Service) Bill [B 79—2008] (National Assembly—sec
                77).
          (h)    Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 80—2008] (National
                Assembly—sec 77).
          (i)    Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 81—2008] (National
                 Assembly—sec 75).

TABLINGS

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker
      (a)   Reply by the Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry to
           recommendations in the Report of the Portfolio Committee on
           Water Affairs and Forestry (Hearings on the Strategic Plan and
           Budget Vote 34: Department of Water Affairs and Forestry), as
           adopted by the House on 10 June 2008. Referred to the Portfolio
           Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

CREDA INSERT REPORTS - T081113e-insert1 – PAGES 2090-2135.


                          FRIDAY, 14 NOVEMBER 2008
ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

    (1)    Correctional Services Amendment Bill [B 32F – 2007] – Act No 25
        of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 8 November 2008).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
1.    REPORT TO THE JOINT COMMITTEE ON ETHICS AND MEMBERS’ INTERESTS ON THE
      FINDINGS OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL WITH RESPECT TO THE AUDIT OF THE
      DISCLOSURE OF INTERESTS BY MEMBERS

      On 13 November 2008 the Joint Committee on Ethics and Members’
      Interests met at Room V227 Old Assembly Building to consider the
      report of the Auditor General on the alleged non-disclosure by Members
      of Parliament.


      Present
      Chairperson: Landers, LT (ANC)
      National Assembly
      De Lille, P (ID)
      Delport, JT (DA)
      Dudley, C (ACDP)
      Gumede, DM (ANC)






      Gxowa, NB (ANC)
      Njobe, MAA (ANC)
      Rajbally, S (MF)
      Seaton, SA (IFP)
      National Council of Provinces
      Dlulane, BN (ANC)
      Matlanyane, H (ANC)
      Moseki, AL (ANC)
      Oliphant, M (ANC)
      Ralane, TS (ANC)


      Apologies
      National Assembly
      Baloyi MR (ANC)
      Nwamita Shilubana TLP (ANC)
      Radebe BA (ANC)
      Ditshetelo, PHK (UCDP)
      National Council of Provinces
      Ntwanambi ND (ANC)
      Tolo BJ (ANC)


      Staff
      Adhikarie Z, Mahomed F, Isaacs F


      The Auditor General conducted an investigation on the completeness of
      the Register of Members’ Interests as part of the 2007 financial audit
      of Parliament.  As a result they submitted details of fourteen Members
      who had allegedly not disclosed.


      In terms of the procedure, correspondence was sent to the Members on
      the 30 July 2008 to seek their responses to the allegations.


      The report details the companies that the Members have allegedly not
      disclosed; it outlines the Members responses, as well as the findings
      with recommendations as to sanctions where appropriate.
      In findings related to resignations from companies and close
      corporations, it was noted that the process to effect resignations are
      not solely in the control of the person concerned.  The procedures at
      Company and Intellectual Property Rights Organisation (CIPRO) require
      that signatures of other partners/membership/directors are required to
      finalise resignations.  The consequence of this is that after an
      individual has resigned from a company or a close corporation they are
      dependent on other parties to effect the change.  It is for this
      reason that Members have been given the benefit of the doubt, where
      they indicated that they have resigned.


      In considering penalty, in respect of dormant companies it is noted
      that the Committee made numerous efforts to assist Members to fully
      comply with the disclosure requirements of the Code.  Arrangements
      were made with CIPRO to avail their services which allowed an
      individual Member to check his/her disclosure details.  About 300
      Members participated in this process of checking.


      Note 3 on the disclosure of interests form specifies that dormant
      companies must be disclosed.  It is further noted that the Joint
      Committee on Ethics and Members’ Interests have in numerous reports
      adopted by the National Assembly and the National Council of
      Provinces, resolved that Members must disclose dormant companies.


      Abram, S Mr
      It is alleged that the Member did not disclose the following:
      Company Information
      Closeprops 169 Registration number 2005/088057/23
      Closeprops 170 Registration number 2005/088053/23
      Ithute Tswelopele Solution Registration number 2000/0209072/07
      Members’ response
      Mr Abram responded that Closeprops 169 and 170 are property holding
      Close Corporations in which he has 50% interests, these properties
      were disclosed.


      Mr Abram indicates that he had resigned from Ithute Tswelopele
      Solution and is trying to establish why the resignation was not
      affected.


      Findings
      There is no breach of the Code with respect to Closeprops 169 and
      Closeprops 170 as these companies were disclosed in the land and
      property section of the Register of Members Interests.  The Member is
      advised that the full name of the Close Corporation must be included
      in the Register.


      With regard to Ithute Tswelopele that as he had resigned there is no
      breach of the Code of Conduct.  The Committee agreed that Mr Abram
      must ensure that the resignation is rectified with CIPRO.


      Bonhomme, TJ Mr
      It is alleged that the Member did not disclose the following:


      Company Information
      Newlands Mashu Community Development Centre Registration number
      1995/003138/08
      Member’s response
      In his response Mr Bonhomme indicated the Newlands Mashu Community
      Development Centre is also known as the Kwa Mashu Newlands
      Permaculture Centre which was disclosed.


      Finding
      There is no breach of the Code of Conduct for Members of Parliament
      as the interest was disclosed.


      Holomisa, GBH Mr
      It is alleged that the Member did not disclose the following:


      Company Information
      Amalgum Investments Twenty   Registration number 2003/015387/07
      Beat the Clock Investment         Registration number 2006/034220/07
      Ebaleni Property Holdings         Registration number 2006/031986/07
      Holomisa Investments              Registration number 2000/006258/23


      Members’ response
      In his response Mr Holomisa indicated that he had disclosed Amalgam
      Investments and Holomisa Holdings in the category shares and financial
      interests.  Ebaleni Property Holdings and Beat the Clock Investments
      are new interests and had been disclosed in his 2008 declaration.
      Finding
      There is no breach of the Code.


      Maluleka, HP Mr


      It is alleged that the Member did not disclose the following:


      Company Information
      Bay View Trading 20    Registration number 2006/177896/23


      Members’ response
      In his response Mr Maluleka indicated that the company is dormant and
      apologized for the omission.


      Finding
      Mr Maluleka has not fully disclosed, as required and is in breach of
      the Code.


      Sanction
      It is noted that the company is dormant.  In similar cases the Joint
      Committee recommended that Members be issued with a fine.


      The Committee therefore recommends that the penalty is a fine of R500
      for the non-disclosure of directorship in a company.
      Mashiane, ML Ms


      It is alleged that the Member did not disclose the following:


      Company Information
      Mabopane Community Services Organisation Registration number
      1997/003926


      Members’ response
      Ms Mashiane in her response said that the Mabopane Community Service
      Organisation is a not for profit organisation which need not be
      disclosed. Accordingly there is no breach of the Code of Conduct for
      Members of Parliament.


      Matsomela, MJ Ms


      It is alleged that the Member did not disclose the following:


      Company Information
      Jeids Five Marketing Registration number 1997/046999/23


      Members’ response
      In her response Ms Matsomela indicated that the company has been
      dormant since inception and that she will follow up and would advise
      the Committee accordingly.


      Finding
      Ms Matsomela has not fully disclosed, and is in breach of the Code of
      Conduct for Members of Parliament.


      Sanction
      It is noted that the company is dormant.  In similar cases the Joint
      Committee recommended that Members be issued with a fine.


      The Committee therefore recommends that the penalty is a fine of R500
      for the non-disclosure of directorship in a company.


      Mentor, VMP Ms
      It is alleged that the Member did not disclose the following:


      Company Information
      Vakazi Holdings Registration number 2003/004864/06


      Member’s response
      Ms Mentor has indicated that she had resigned from the company six
      months after she was appointed as director.  She had formally resigned
      and asked the company to remove her as director.


      Finding
      There is no breach as Ms Mentor had resigned, She must ensure that her
      resignation is finalized at CIPRO.


      Mlangeni, A Mr


      It is alleged that the Member did not disclose the following:


      Company Information
      Centers’ for Community Development      Registration number
      1993/000070/08
      Havtoohav Investments             Registration number 2004/029269/07
      Ndiza Empowerment Technology      Registration number 2000/017077/07
      Orlyfunt Holdings                       Registration number
      2003/014960/07
      Orlyfunt Strategic Investments          Registration number
      2004/030159/07
      Pacific Height Investments              Registration number
      2006/039622/07
      Inkwenkwezi Gold                  Registration number 2004/002172/07
      Comorant Investments 22                 Registration number
      2004/002172/07


      Member’s response
      In his response Mr Mlangeni indicated that the Centers’ for Community
      Development was placed under provisional liquidation, the company was
      formed to assist veterans of the struggle and is an article 21
      company.  He had derived no benefit from it.


      Mr Mlangeni resigned from Ndiza and Crowned Comorant.


      In a further response Mr Mlangeni apologised for his non-disclosure.
      He said that Orlyfunt Strategic Investments and Orlyfunt Holdings are
      subsidiaries of Matodzi which he had disclosed. He concedes that he
      should have disclosed the entities.


      He said that he had agreed to the directorships in Havtohave
      Investments and Inkwenkwezi Gold but these entities never “took off”.


      Mr Mlangeni also submitted an affidavit from Mr TR Jones of Pacific
      Heights, in which Mr Jones states that he had not informed Mr Mlangeni
      when the company was registered.


      Findings
      There is no breach in respect of the Centers’’ for Community
      Development, as this is a not for profit organisation and it need not
      be disclosed in terms of the Code of Conduct..


      In respect of Pacific Heights, the company was established in 2007,
      the period of the audit was for the 2007 year, this together with the
      affidavit from Mr Jones  shows that this may have been an omission, Mr
      Mlangeni should be given the benefit in this regard.


      Mr Mlangeni is in breach for the non-disclosure of Orlyfunt Strategic
      Investments and Orlyfunt Holdings, Havtohave Investments and
      Inkwenkwezi Gold


      Penalty


      It is recommended that Mr Mlangeni be fined R500 per entity for the
      non-disclosure of directorships in Orlyfunt Strategic Investments and
      Orlyfunt Holdings, Havtohave Investments and Inkwenkwezi Gold, a total
      fine of  R2000 is recommended.

      Ngcengwane, ND Ms


      It is alleged that the Member did not disclose the following:
      Company Information
      Mfingwana Projects Enterprises          Registration number
      2002/053090/23
      African Pearl Trading 17                Registration number
      2005/060146/23
      MMDZ Trading Enterprises                Registration number
      2006/208148/23
      Pathway to Educational Achievement      Registration number
      1998/013884/08
      Vathisa Vuthela Technologies      Registration number 2005/060933/23
      Just us Women Business Enterprise       Registration number
      2003/067822/23
      Mahlanga Business Enterprises           Registration number
      2004/063705/23
      Mountain Hill Property            Registration number 2002/097108/23


      Member’s response
      In her response Ms Ngcengwane indicated that:
      Mfingwana is active but currently dormant.
      She has no recall of African Pearl Trading and intends resigning.
      MMDZ is an active enterprise.
      She has resigned from Pathway for Educational Achievement
      Vathisa Vuthela Technologies has not taken off and she has no contact
      with her business partner.
      Just us Women Business Enterprises – she has resigned from the
      company.
      Mahlanga Business Enterprises, she has no recall of this company and
      would like to resign from this company.
      Mountain Hill Property, she intends resigning from this company.


      Findings
      The Committee gives Ms Ngcengwane the benefit of the doubt regarding
      her resignation for Pathway for Education Achievement and Just Us
      Women Business Enterprise and therefore finds that there is no breach
      in this regard.  She must ensure that the resignations are finalized
      at CIPRO.
      In respect of non-disclosure of the following companies, Mfingwana
      Projects Enterprises, Vathisa Vuthela Technologies, Mountain Hill
      Property and MMDZ Trading Enterprises, the Committee finds that Ms
      Ngcengwane is in breach of the Code of Conduct for the non disclosure
      of directorships.


      With respect to African Pearl Trading 17 and Mahlanga Business
      Enterprises, the Registrar obtained the copies of the Close
      Corporations founding documents which Ms Ngcengwane had signed.


      Penalty
      With respect of Mfingwana Projects Enterprises, Vathisa Vuthela
      Technologies, Mahlanga Business Enterprises, Mountain Hill Property,
      African Pearl Trading, the Committee notes that these companies are
      dormant and subsequently finds that the Members must be fined R500 for
      each non disclosure, R2500 in for the dormant companies.


      With respect to MMDZ Trading Enterprises which is currently trading.
      It is noted that the company was established in 2006 and that Ms
      Ngcengwane had disclosed in 2008. The Committee recommends that Ms
      Ngcengwane be fined R1 000 for the non disclosure of this company.


      The total recommended penalty is R3500.


      Ntuli, SB Mr


      It is alleged that the Member did not disclose the following:


      Company Information
      Bensat Construction                     Registration number
      1998/023522/23
      Modern Era Construction and Projects    Registration number
      2006/001900/23
      Siphiwe Montessori School               Registration number
      1996/009654/08


      Member’s response
      In his response Mr Ntuli has indicated that his business partner in
      Bensat Construction passed away a few years ago.  The Company has been
      dormant since.  He indicated that he has no knowledge of Modern Era
      Construction Projects. Mr Ntuli said that he resigned from Siphiwe
      Montessori School which is now closed.


      Finding
      The Registrar obtained copies of the founding statement for Modern Era
      Construction. Mr Ntuli was asked to verify his signature on the
      documents of Modern Era Construction; he indicated verbally that the
      signature is not his, but has not submitted a written response despite
      numerous requests from the Office of the Registrar.


      Mr Ntuli was afforded ample opportunity to respond, his failure to do
      so leaves the Committee no choice as it must base its findings on the
      bases of the signatures on the forms. The Committee finds that Mr
      Ntuli is in breach of the Code of Conduct for the non-disclosure of
      directorships. in respect of Modern Era Constructio. He conceded that
      he was aware of Bensat Construction and is therefore also in breach in
      this regard.


      Penalty
      As both these companies are dormant it is recommended that Mr Ntuli be
      fined R500 per entity, a total fine of R1000.


      Nzimade, LPM Mr
      Company Information
      CBR Education and training for
      Registrationumber:2001/006621/08
      Empowerment
      Eyathu Sonke Drives Training      Registration number 2001/051404/23
      Secretariat of the African Decade       Registration number
      2003/027026/08
      of persons with Disabilities


      Member’s response
      That CBR Education and Training for Empowerment are non-profit
      organizations.
      Mr Nzimande indicated that Eyathu Sonke is dormant.


      Findings
      Mr Nzimande has breached the Code of Conduct for the non-disclosure of
      his directorships in Eyathu Sonke Driving School.
      Secretariat of the African Decade of Persons with Disabilities and CBR
      Education and Training for Empowerment are not for profit
      organizations, accordingly
      Mr Nzimande is not in breach of this respect.


      Penalty
      Eyathu Sonke is dormant; the Committee recommended a fine of R500.


      Ramotsamai, CMP Ms
      Company Information
      Full Swing Trading 530       Registration number 2005/028722/23


      Member’s response
      Ms Ramotsamai has indicated that she was under the impression that she
      had resigned from this company.
      Finding
      Ms Ramotsamai should be given the benefit of the doubt with regard to
      her resignation from the company.  Ms Ramotsamai must ensure that her
      resignation is finalized at CIPRO.  Accordingly there is no breach of
      the Code of Conduct.


      Smith, VG, Mr
      Company Information
      Nambiti Nextwave Consulting       Registration number 2003/012765/07
      Euro Blitz 48                           Registration number
      2002/012907/07
      Hlanganani Investment             Registration number 2001/001423/07
      Leshema Finance Management        Registration number 1994/041151/23
      Services


      Member’s response
      In his response Mr Smith indicated that he had resigned from Nambiti
      Nextwave.
      Euro Blitz trades as Qulemar (Pty) Ltd and has been disclosed.  The
      record shows that he has resigned from Hlanganani.  Leshema Finance is
      a dormant company.


      Findings
      There is no breach with regard to Nambiti Nextwave, Euro Blitz and
      Hlanganani Investment.  In respect of Leshema Finance, Mr Smith is in
      breach of the Code. Mr Smith must ensure that his resignation from
      Nambiti Nextwave is finalized.


      Penalty
      It is noted that Leshema Finance is dormant; it is recommended that he
      be fined R500.


      Woods, GG Mr
      Company Information
      Berg Street Three Properties            Registration number
      1985/011149/23
      Imbenge Group                     Registration number 1997/001649/07
      Imbenge Properties                      Registration number
      1997/001145/07


      Member’s response
      Mr Woods indicated that he was of the view that Berg Street Properties
      was deregistered. He indicated that he has no recall of the Imbenge
      Group and Imbenge Properties.


      The Registrar obtained the founding documents for Imbenge Group and
      Imbenge Properties from CIPRO these show that Mr Woods did not sign
      the founding documents.


      The Auditors listed on the founding documents indicated that they did
      not have any documents for the companies.


      Findings
      It is recommended that Mr Woods be given the benefit of the doubt with
      regard to Berg Street Properties. As there is not evidence to indicate
      that Mr Woods consented to being appointed as a director for Imbenge
      Group and Imbenge Properties.


      Accordingly there is no breach of the Code of Conduct. Mr Woods must
      ensure that he advises CIPRO and removes himself from the companies
      concerned.


      The Committee adopted the report unanimously.


      Report to be considered.


2.    REPORT OF THE JOINT COMMITTEE ON ETHICS AND MEMBERS’ INTERESTS ON THE
      COMPLAINT AGAINST MINISTER BMN BALFOUR.

      On 13 November 2008 the Joint Committee on Ethics and Members’
      Interests met at room V227 Old Assembly Building to consider the
      complaint against Minister BMN Balfour.


      Present:
      Mr L Landers Chairperson

        National Assembly
        De Lille, P
        Delport, JT (DA)
        Dudley, C (ACDP)
        Gumede, DM (ANC)
        Gxowa, NB (ANC)
        Njobe, MAA (ANC)
        Rajbally, S (MF)
        Seaton, SA (IFP)


        National Council of Provinces
        Dlulane, BN
        Matlanyane, H
        Moseki, AL
        Oliphant, M
        Ralane, TS


        Apologies
        National Assembly
        Baloyi MR (ANC)
        Nwamita Shilubana TLP (ANC)
        Radebe BA (ANC)
        Ditshetelo, PHK (UCDP)


        National Council of Provinces
        Ntwanambi ND (ANC)
        Tolo BJ (ANC)


        Staff
        Adhikarie Z, Mahomed F, Isaacs F

        The Joint Committee on Ethics and Members’ Interests received a
        complaint which referred to a payment allegedly made by Kgwerano
        Financial Services for a Volkswagen Touareg.5.0 V10. It is alleged
        that the Minister had failed to declare payment by Kgwerano as
        required by the Code of Conduct for Members of Parliament


        The Code of Conduct for Members of Parliament stipulate in terms of
        paragraph 8(f) and (g) which require that Members must disclose:


        (f) Gifts and hospitality:
             (i) A description and the value and source of a gift with a
             value in excess of R1500;
             (ii)      a description and the value of gifts from a single
             source which
                 cumulatively exceed the value of  R1500  in any calendar
                 year;  and
             (iii)     hospitality intended as a gift in kind.
        (g) Benefits:
             (i) The nature and source of any other benefit of a material
             nature;  and
             (ii)      the value of that benefit.


        The Committee considered the information provided by:
            • The complainant,
            • The response by Minister Balfour which included documents
              such as the lease agreement for the vehicle, statements of
              the account, his personal bank statements, and a supporting
              letter from the bank,
            • The Department of Transport on the Public Office Bearers
              Motor Scheme,
            • a signed affidavit by a director of Kgwerano Financial
              Services,
            • The Committee also received a signed affidavit from Mr Litton
              on behalf of Wesbank


        In making its findings the Committee the Committee noted the signed
        affidavit from Mr Litton of Wesbank Head of Risk, in which he
        confirms the following under oath:


           1. The Minister Balfour entered into a lease agreement with
              Kgwerano Asset Finance a division of First Rand Bank Limited
              on 21 February 2006 for the lease of a new Volkswagen Touareg
              5.0 V10 TDI TIP.
           2. The vehicle matched the details contained in the invoice from
              Northcliff Volkswagen.
           3. The original contract term of the vehicle was extended, and
              in terms of bank procedures a new contract number was
              allocated.
           4. He confirms that they did not finance two vehicles and the
              contracts relate to the Volkswagen Touareg 5.0 V10.
           5. Wesbank draws regular monthly instalments from Minister
              Balfour from his personal bank account for payment of the
              motor vehicle.
           6. In supplementary affidavit Mr Litton responds to the
              allegation of a settlement letter, he explains that a
              settlement letter is sent out when one account is closed. In
              this instance the first account was closed to reschedule the
              payments, he confirms that there was no lump sum payment.

        Findings
        In light of the above the Committee found unanimously that the
        allegation that the Minister received a gift in the form of a
        payment for his motor vehicle was not substantiated, consequently
        there is no breach of the Code.


        Report to be considered.

1.    Report of the Joint Budget Committee on the Medium-Term Budget Policy
      Statement, dated 12 November 2008.

The Joint Budget Committee, having considered the Medium-Term Budget Policy
Statement (MTBPS) referred to it, reports as follows:

INTRODUCTION
The Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement (MTBPS) comes at a time of severe
turbulence in the global economy. This is the last MTBPS to be introduced
in the Third Parliament. The economic slowdown and projected decline in
revenue may require changes in medium-term budget proposals.  This in turn
will place greater importance on domestic policies, with the need to ensure
that funds are directed at those sectors and programmes which have the
greatest impact on the lives of South Africans.

The Committee once again agreed to focus on selected sectors and
departments: those expected to be prioritized over the medium-term or those
that have experienced specific budgeting and performance challenges. These
are reflected on in the report. In preparing for the MTBPS, the Committee
drew on a range of submissions including government’s “Towards A Fifteen
Year Review”, and reports of the Auditor-General (AG) and the Financial and
Fiscal Commission (FFC). The Human Science Research Council (HSRC) and the
Public Service Commission (PSC) were also invited to present on relevant
research and findings.

In keeping with Committee practices, Members of relevant portfolio and
select committees were invited to participate in proceedings. The
participation of sector committees remains fundamental to Parliament’s
engagement with the MTBPS as they are able to bring detailed knowledge of
departmental policies and practices to deliberations.

This report is divided into three sections. The first reflects on the broad
medium-term priorities, the second focuses on specific sectors and
departments while the third sets out the Committee’s recommendations.

BUDGET PRIORITIES AND THE DIVISION OF REVENUE
The downturn in the global economy and various domestic constraints are
expected to curtail South Africa’s economy initially, with growth
anticipated to slow to around 3 per cent in 2009, before rising to 4.3 per
cent by 2011. Revisions to tax policy and a shift in the budget balance
allow for the expansion of the fiscus and support for government’s
priorities despite the slowdown in growth.

The challenges in implementing concurrent functions have, at times, led to
serious misalignment between policies and resource allocations, and between
allocations and outputs. The Committee welcomes the proposed reforms in the
local government equitable share formula, in order to take greater account
of fiscal constraints in poor municipalities.

The Committee supports the additional R170.8 billion proposed in the MTBPS
for the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) partially to offset the
effects of higher inflation on salaries, social grants, fuel and capital
projects. There will also be a tranche of R60 billion made to Eskom.

The MTBPS reflects a continuing emphasis on employment creation and poverty
alleviation. Specific medium-term budget priorities, as presented, include:


    • Enhancing the quality of education;
    • Improving the provision of health care, particularly for the poor, to
      reduce infant, child and maternal mortality rates;
    • Reducing the levels of crime and enhancing citizen safety;
    • Expanding the built environment to improve public transportation and
      meet universal access targets in housing, water, electricity and
      sanitation; and
    • Decreasing rural poverty by taking steps to raise rural incomes and
      improve livelihoods by extending access to land and support for
      emerging farmers.

PUBLIC SPENDING PRIORITIES

Enhancing the Quality of Education

Education is central to overcoming poverty and inequality. The MTBPS
proposes additional funding for the sector through an upward adjustment to
the provincial equitable share, to accommodate the extension of no-fee
schools, and a further R4 billion to support the National School
Nutritional Programme (NSNP). Government has also indicated it will step up
funding for school infrastructure and enhance safety and security. A new
conditional grant for the recapitalization of technical high schools is
also envisaged.

The Committee agrees that attention should be given to quality teacher
training. Greater attention should also be given to technical training to
address the needs of the economy. Early Childhood Development (ECD) and
adult education are further priorities. A co-ordinated approach to ECD is
particularly significant as it provides an opportunity to reverse long-term
trends in the sector. There is also an urgent need to address the backlogs
in school infrastructure, including overcrowding and access to basic
services such as water and sanitation, and to ensure that all funds
allocated are effectively and efficiently utilised.

The Committee has taken note of challenges with specific education
programmes, including disparities with the implementation of the no-fees
policy and the NSNP. The Department of Education (DoE) should therefore
develop and enforce specific guidelines to achieve better outcomes.

While progress has been recorded in expanding education opportunities,
international comparisons confirm that the sector is under-performing, and
that allocated resources are not producing the desired outcomes. As
acknowledged in government’s Fifteen Year Review, “the quality of services
leaves much to be desired….This has much to do with management and service
culture in the actual units (schools and hospitals).”

Improving the Provision of Health Services

The health sector continues to face a number of acute challenges including
access to primary health care and the fight against HIV/AIDS and
Tuberculosis. Progress in reducing maternal and infant mortality has also
been slow.  As highlighted by the HSRC, around 60 per cent of maternal
deaths are due to treatable diseases. A severe shortage of health
professionals and inadequate infrastructure has compounded these
difficulties. Funding for the health services currently accounts for 3.4
per cent of GDP and 11.8 per cent of consolidated government expenditure.



The MTBPS indicates that further resources will be made available for
phased-in salary adjustments associated with the occupation-specific
dispensation (OSD), as well as for new medicines and treatments. Additions
to conditional grants total R1.8 billion over the next three years, mostly
to support the HIV and AIDS grant and hospital revitalization. The
Committee has taken account of various proposed reforms, including the
establishment of a National Health Insurance System (NHI), which will
require financial support and an effective implementation plan. The NHI
will ensure that all citizens will have equitable access to health services
and thereby promote socio-economic development.



While further financial support will be required to reinforce health
services, emphasis must also be given to improving management, training and
information systems within the sector. Salary adjustments must be
accompanied by improvements in overall working conditions. Steps must also
be taken to ensure that there is sufficient capacity to drive government’s
HIV/AIDS programmes. Deficiencies with procurement, waste management and
response times for emergency services are further concerns. All these
matters will require dedicated attention. In overcoming these challenges,
the Committee believes there is a need to identify best practices in better
performing health facilities and replicate these throughout the sector.


Crime Prevention and Security

Departments in the justice and protection services have not worked together
optimally to achieve their objectives. The Committee therefore welcomes the
decision to revamp the criminal justice system as announced in 2008. This
is expected to result in enhanced integration, co-operation and improved
performance, although progress with this initiative should be carefully
monitored.


To alleviate shortcomings in the police services, especially over visible
policing and investigative capacity, an amount of R6.5 billion was
allocated to Department of Safety and Security (DSS) over the medium-term.
The MTBPS suggests that further support will be directed at increasing the
number of specialized police personnel and improving information and
management systems. Additional resources and more personnel should
correspond to a marked decrease in the crime rate.
Delays in the adjudication process remain among the most serious
constraints to the justice system. According to the 2008 Estimates of
National Expenditure (ENE), the aim is to reduce the backlog in court cases
by 5 per cent each year over the MTEF period. While the Committee has noted
an improvement in financial management within the DoJCD, with a reduced
level of under-expenditure in 2007/08 compared to previous years, further
attention is needed to ensure that allocated funds translate into
progressively improved performance. The linkages between the department’s
strategic plan and budget may require further refinement in this respect.

Overcrowding within the prison system has been a long-standing problem,
which has negatively affected the ability of the Department of Correctional
Service (DCS) to rehabilitate offenders. To alleviate overcrowding, the
budget allocated an additional R2.9 billion to the DCS, mostly for the
construction of prisons. The Committee finds it unacceptable that the
construction of prisons, as previously announced in the State of the Nation
Address in 2002, have yet to be completed. Furthermore, the six prisons as
stated in the MTBPS do not appear to be new projects. Clarity must be
provided by the Department.

Ultimately, the ability of the justice and protection services to achieve
the desired outcomes depends, to a large extent, on the level of inter-
departmental co-ordination and information sharing. This extends to
departments such as Home Affairs, Transport and traffic enforcement in the
case of events such as the 2010 Soccer World Cup.



The Committee believes that the performance of the justice and protection
services should be closely scrutinized to ensure that Parliament is in a
strong position to assess budget proposals against outputs and outcomes,
and ultimately ensure value-for-money.


Expanding the Built Environment

Public infrastructure and capital investment are necessary for sustained
growth, employment creation and the hosting of a successful 2010 World Cup.
Much of the investment is earmarked for the built environment, specifically
for low-cost housing, public transport, electrification programmes, health
facilities, schools, water and sanitation. The Committee welcomes the fact
that capital expenditure is set to reach 11 per cent growth by 2011/12. The
MTBPS proposes additional funds for a number of key grants and programmes
including R4.1 billion for the infrastructure grant to provinces and R4.3
billion to municipalities. As previously emphasised, it is critical that
funds earmarked for national priorities such as bulk infrastructure are
spent for their intended purposes.

The Committee supports the additional funds proposed in the MTBPS for
housing and community development although it notes that the Department of
Housing (DoH) has acknowledged that these resources will be insufficient to
meet the target of eradicating informal settlements by 2014. As highlighted
by the Committee in previous reports and underlined in the MTBPS,
shortcomings in planning, capacity and intergovernmental co-ordination
continue to hamper the delivery of quality houses.

Additional resources must be complemented by measures to improve
administrative efficiency and reporting systems. All housing units should
comply with the norms and standard as prescribed in the Breaking New Ground
Strategy. Innovation and alternative construction methods are also needed
to mitigate rising construction costs. The Committee has expressed concern
that the DoH did not appear to have made provision for an allocation for
the Housing Development Agency.

Efficient transport systems are pivotal for economic growth and the 2010
Soccer World Cup. The Committee welcomes the recognition by government that
access to integrated public transport should be prioritized.
Notwithstanding this, budgeting and organizational challenges such as
vacancies, a shortage of technical skills and deficiencies in monitoring
and co-ordination continue to pose challenges. The current allocation for
taxi-recapitalization is insufficient and the Committee supports the
position that this should be reviewed by the Department of Transport (DoT).
Government needs to re-establish rail networks especially in rural areas.
In addition, the process of shifting freight from road to rail should be
accelerated as this will reduce both the costs of road maintenance and
improve transport efficiency for rural and urban communities. The proposed
allocation of funds in the MTBPS to upgrade ports should assist in
improving logistics.

The Committee concurs with the recommendations of the Financial and Fiscal
Commission (FFC), specifically that the process of classifying roads should
be finalized, and that the location of the responsibility for the provision
of learner transport should be clarified. The Committee has also identified
serious deficiencies with the funding model for the Road Accident Fund
(RAF). Urgent reform is needed to stabilize the fund before 2010.

Clean water and sanitation are essential for socio-economic upliftment.
While considerable progress has been made in expanding water services and
sanitation, the Committee believes that the departments of Water Affairs
and Forestry (DWAF) and Education should work towards halving the number of
schools and clinics without water. It is unacceptable that there is under-
expenditure while there are still more than a thousand schools without
access to safe water. It is incumbent on DWAF and other departments to
ensure that no school or clinic is without toilets by the end of the first
year of the MTEF.

Although the MTBPS has allocated an indicative R3.1 billion for bulk water
infrastructure over the next three years, the Committee’s injunction to the
respective departments is that they ensure integrated planning and co-
ordination to ensure that these resources are effectively and efficiently
used as planned.

In addition, the Committee remains concerned about the maintenance of
public facilities, particularly schools, hospitals, police stations and
correctional centres. Co-ordinated efforts are required between the
Department of Public Works (DPW) and other departments and entities to
address the evident challenges in this regard.

Rural Development and Agrarian Reform

Agrarian and land reform are integral to government’s rural development,
poverty alleviation and food security strategies. As food security is vital
the Committee urges that departmental capacity be increased and the vacancy
rate be reduced. It is essential that resources are properly aligned and
that post-settlement support is significantly improved so that the
productivity of the agricultural sector can be increased. The Committee
notes the new approach developed by the Department of Land Affairs (DoLA)
to achieve an affordable and sustainable land reform which includes the
development of new financial measures, human resource programmes and
relevant products. The Committee urges the department to accelerate land
redistribution and reform.

Industrial Development and Employment Creation

Sustainable economic growth and industrial development is directly linked
to a sustainable energy policy and strategies and is essential for
government to accelerate employment creation and reduce poverty by 2014 and
beyond. While the Committee largely agrees with the various industrial
policy initiatives, the Committee urges government to ensure that such
initiatives are balanced with the need to promote competitiveness and
protect existing industries such as textiles and clothing industries.
Government support must be carefully targeted and ultimately create
sustainable industries.


The Committee welcomes the new phase of the Expanded Public Works Programme
(EPWP) which is intended to develop and transfer skills and create longer-
term employment. The implementation of this programme needs to be carefully
monitored.

Accelerating skills development must be in alignment with the prescripts of
a developmental state. Together with the financial support for EPWP and
SETAS, attention should be given to refining the programmes, curricula and
operations of these initiatives in order to meet market demands. The
Committee has taken account of progress with the Joint Initiative on
Priority Skills Development (JIPSA) and urges all social partners to invest
in this initiative.

The State-Owned Enterprises (SOEs) are key partners in industrial
development and the public infrastructure build programme. Despite the
expanding role of the SOEs in the economy, the Committee maintains that
there is a need to review these enterprises to enhance their contribution
to the developmental state and ensure that state funds are effectively
utilized. In particular, efforts are needed to ensure SOE projects are
closely aligned with government’s priorities and that they are more closely
monitored by the various oversight authorities.

RECOMMENDATIONS

Based on its observations, the Committee recommends the following:
1.    Co-ordinated and integrated planning is paramount. It is essential
    that national, provincial and local development plans are closely
    aligned.  Such measures must be implemented both vertically, between
    the spheres of government, and horizontally, within and between
    clusters and departments. To ensure co-ordinated planning, government
    should consider setting cross-cutting performance indicators for the
    respective departments.

2.    Further steps should be taken to ensure that funds allocated through
    equitable shares and the various grants are utilized for their intended
    purposes and fulfil national priorities.

3.    The Committee previously called on departments and entities to ensure
    there is a stronger correlation between human resources plans and
    budgets, and to develop innovative recruitment and mentorship
    programmes, as well as measures to safeguard against the loss of
    institutional memory.

4.    Government should prioritize training for specialized, managerial and
    administrative skills in the public service, for example, in education,
    health, trade and police services. In addition, government should
    reopen specialized institutions like nursing and teaching colleges.

5.    Given the inadequate maintenance of many public facilities,
    government should enhance co-ordination and monitoring, especially
    between the Department of Public Works (DPW) and other departments and
    entities.

6.    Further measures are required to address the evident weaknesses and
      lack of overall co-ordination in government procurement processes. For
      example, departments should procure certain services from local
      communities.
7.    Noting the existing agreement between the departments of Health and
      Defence to make hospitals more accessible, the Committee recommends
      that this be expanded to provide emergency services.

8     The Department of Housing should provide a detailed plan on how it
      intends to eradicate informal settlements in specific areas.

9.    The deficiencies in the funding model for the Road Accident Fund
      (RAF) should be urgently addressed. The Department of Transport should
      report to the Committee on measures taken and the timetable for
      implementation.

10.   The departments of Water Affairs and Forestry, Education and Health
      should work together to halve the number of schools and clinics
      without access to safe water and sanitation by the end of the first
      year of the MTEF.

The Committee would like to thank the Public Service Commission and Human
Science Research Council for their contribution. Finally, the Committee
would like to extend its appreciation to all those who participated in the
proceedings and contributed to the compilation of the report including the
research team and secretariat.

Report to be considered.


“Annexure”: Submissions and Presentations

National Departments
Agriculture
Education
Health
Housing
Land Affairs
National Treasury
Transport
Water Affairs and Forestry

Research Organizations

Public Service Commission
Human Science Research Council

Other Submissions

J Laubscher: Sanlam
G Ballim:  Standard Bank
D Roodt: Efficient Group
Federation of Unions of South Africa (FEDUSA)
People’s Budget Campaign



National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs on the study
tour to Western Sahara and Algeria, dated 20 August 2008.

The Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs having been invited to attend
the commemoration of the 35th Anniversary of the launching of the armed
struggle in Western Sahara on the 20 May 2008, and proceeded to undertake a
study tour to Algeria from 24-26 May 2008, reports as follows:

PURPOSE

The Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs undertook a study tour which
coincided with the Commemoration of the 35th Anniversary of the launching
of the armed struggle against the Spanish colonialism on the 20 May 2008.

Due to the briefing by the South African Ambassador it was necessary to go
directly to Western Sahara where celebrations were taking place.  This trip
took part of the delegation about 5 days and the remaining two members of
the delegation missed the flight to the destination.  The celebration took
place at two places, the Smara and Tifariti settlement camps.

The Committee then proceeded to undertake a study tour to Algeria in order
to meet with the Algerian Parliamentary Committee on Foreign Affairs as
well as the Speaker of the Algerian Parliament to discuss and improve the
inter-parliamentary relations between the two countries.

DELEGATION
The delegation comprised of Dr Albertina Luthuli (leader of delegation), Mr
Patrick Sibande, Mr Sipho Siboza, Mr Joseph Seremane and Ms Dineo Martin
(Committee Secretary)

FINDINGS

There was a high level composition of international representatives in
attendance from several countries, official delegations, civil society, non-
governmental, pressure and interest groups mainly from the Western Europe,
these included: African Union (Commissioner of Social Affairs), Algerian,
Angola. Tanzania, Nigeria, Namibia, Mauritania, Ethiopia, Lesotho, Cuba,
Bolivia, Venezuela, Iran, Italy, Spain, Brazil and Palestinian Liberation
Organisation (PLO).

Demonstrations at Smara refugee camp

On the 18 May 2008, the Saharawi Prime Minister Mr Abdelkader Taleb Oumar
welcomed and thanked the delegates for their continued support of the
Saharawi people in their sacrifice to gain freedom and independence. He
indicated that they will continue to engage Morocco until they achieve
their independence.

The celebrations included the following participants:
    ▪ Saharawi Union of Women
    ▪ School Parades
    ▪ Children of Sarahawi – young and older
    ▪ Military Parades

The themes emanating from all the activities shown clearly the
determination to fight for freedom and independence.

Address by H.E. Mr Mohamed Abdelaziz, Secretary-General of the Frente
POLISARIO and President of the Saharawi Republic

The President began his speech by emphasising that the occasion was to
commemorate the launch of a heroic and long struggle for liberation by the
Saharawi people, and that the event was taking place in one of the
liberated zones of the Saharawi Republic. He recalled the heroic resistance
of the Zemla uprising of 1970 which gave birth to the inevitable launch of
the struggle for self-determination under the Frente POLISARIO on 20th May
1973.

The President stated that the struggle for self-determination of the
Saharawi people continued despite persistent attempts by the Government of
Morocco, to intimidate abuse and undermine ordinary Saharawi people through
torture, detention and forced disappearances. In spite of such harsh
treatment, the resolve and determination of the Saharawi people has
remained steadfast throughout the years.

Naming Morocco as the occupying power, President Abdelaziz used the
occasion to among other things, called upon the international community to
intervene, and urge Morocco to release Saharawi prisoners of conscience,
account for more than 500 civilians that have disappeared and the release
of 150 prisoners of war. Concomitant to this, the President called upon the
international community, to mandate MINURSO to protect, observe and report
on human rights violations in Western Sahara. He criticised the continued
existence of the “Moroccan Wall”, which stands at 2500 kilometres in
length, which not only divides the Saharawi people but results in huge
human suffering due to landmines and anti-personnel mines planted along the
wall.
The President’s speech re-iterated that the dispute over Western Sahara is
a conflict between colonialism, injustice and tyranny, pursued by Morocco,
on the one hand, and the international legality and respect for the
principles of the United Nations (UN) Charter on the other hand. As such,
the UN and the rest of the international community, is duty-bound to defend
international legality and support the cause of the Saharawi people in
their pursuit for  self-determination and to denounce colonialism that
still persist into the 21st century. Historically, with the adoption of the
UN-OAU Settlement Plan, the Frente POLISARIO has spared no effort in the
struggle for a just and lasting solution in Western Sahara.

Accordingly, the President used the occasion to renew Frente POLISARIO’s
commitment towards finding a solution based on the respect for the
principles of the UN Charter and any counter attempt, which seeks to
override the legitimate rights of the Saharawi people, will not succeed.
While remaining critical of the positions of Morocco that undermine the
rights of the Saharawi people, he commended the positive stances taken by
some Moroccan parties that respect these rights and further urged the
Moroccan people to co-operate with the Frente POLISARIO in order to find
mutual solution to the crisis on the basis of international law.

While expressing his gratitude for the support from the Government of
Spain, the President used the occasion to remind Spain of the need to take
clear positions in support of self-determination in line with its moral and
legal responsibility towards the Saharawi people.  The President expressed
his gratitude for the support and solidarity that the Frente POLISARIO has
enjoyed from African Governments such as Algeria and South Africa as well
as Latin American Governments such as Cuba, Venezuela and Brazil. He also
appreciated the solidarity expressed by liberation movements from Africa,
among others, the African National Congress (ANC), the Chama Cha Mapindouzi
(CCM) of Tanzania and the South-West African People’s Organisation (SWAPO)
of Namibia. He regarded the continued supports of these fraternal
organisations and Governments as confirmation to the statement made by the
South African President H.E. Thabo Mbeki that ”the freedom of Africa will
be incomplete until Western Sahara has been decolonised”.

Destruction of landmines

Western Sahara is considered to be one of the most heavily land –mine
affected regions in the world. After years of colonial and post-colonial
conflict, land-mines and unexploded ordnance (UXO) litter the landscape.

Estimates on the number of mines in Western Sahara range from 200,000 to
ten million. The exact number and distribution of explosive remnants in the
territory is not known, making the determination of resources needed to
address the problem a matter of guess work.

On the 21 May 2008, the delegates witnessed the destruction of 2000
landmines and other explosive remnants of war (including cluster
munitions). The Saharawi Arab Democratic Republic (SADR) in conjunction
with Landmine Action, a United Kingdom based non-governmental organisation
executed this task.

Since 2005, the SADR and the Landmine Action have been responsible for
humanitarian de-mining activities on the east of the berm. Funding had been
received from the government of the Federal Republic of Germany and the
Princess of Wales Trust.

Messages of support from the Foreign Delegates

Messages of support and solidarity from foreign delegates, included the
following:
We resolve that:
    ▪ the respect for the principle of the decolonisation and legitimate
      right of self-determination of the Saharawi Arab Democratic Republic,
      with the inclusion of the option of independence;
    ▪ the centrality of the principle of international legality in the
      resolution of the conflict in the Western Sahara;
    ▪ the respect of human rights, especially in the occupied areas of the
      SADR as recommended by the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights;
    ▪ the immediate removal of the ‘Wall of Shame’ separating the Saharawi
      territory, which contains millions of landmines, including
      antipersonnel mines;
    ▪ pressure should be brought on  Spain to fulfil its historical,
      judicial and moral responsibility with respect to its former colony of
      Western Sahara and
    ▪ call on the international community (especially the United Nations)
      to fulfil its obligations with regard to the inalienable right to self-
      determination and decolonisation of the Western Sahara.

South Africa reaffirmed its support for the U N Resolutions 1754 and 1783
calling on parties to negotiate with the view of reaching a solution that
guarantees the Saharawi people, their inalienable rights and self-
determination.  The U S and France should help in speeding up the process
of the Western Sahara.

The occasion was concluded by the final declaration calling on the
international community, especially U N, to fulfill its obligations with
regard to the peoples inalienable rights, self determination and the
decolonization of the Western Sahara.

Prime Minister address to South African delegates
The Prime Minister of the Saharawi Republic, Mr Abdelkader Taleb Omar met
with the delegation from South Africa. Prime Minister Omar thanked the
support received from the delegates of South Africa and promise that
Saharawi government would never forget the support and courage given by the
government and people of South Africa.

He observed that the POLISARIO Front had always been inspired by the heroic
struggle for liberation of South Africa, under the leadership of the
African National Congress, the oldest Liberation Movement on the Continent,
led by great leaders such as President Nelson Mandela and the late Oliver
Tambo.

He further stated that when the time comes for Africa to receive a
permanent seat in the UN Security Council, it should certainly be offered
to South Africa, given its commitment to peace, security, stability and
development of the Continent. The POLISARIO Front and Saharawi people will
surely support such decision.

The Prime Minister extended his warm regards to President Thabo Mbeki and
Foreign Minister Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma.

Meeting with H.E Mr Maqethuka, South African Ambassador to Algeria

On the 24th May the delegation met with the South African Ambassador to
Algeria, Mr Maqethuka. The Ambassador outlined the programmes that the
South African government will be assisting the Saharawi with:
    ▪ South Africa will sponsor a programme to assist with unplugging of
      landmines. Donations will be in the form of vehicles;
    ▪ South African Embassy was in touch with the Saharawi people from
      time to time;
    ▪ South Africa is treating Saharawi embassy as a separate mission from
      Algeria and
    ▪ There is a budget to deal with issues of health and sport.

On Algeria, the Ambassador indicated that there were good political and
economic relations between the two countries.

Meeting with the Foreign Affairs Committee and the Speaker of Parliament in
Algeria

On the 28th May the delegation met with Members of the Algerian Portfolio
Committee on Foreign Affairs. It was indicated that the Algerian government
regards South Africa as its brother state. The same Committee previously
met with Ms Baleka Mbete, Speaker of South African Parliament and Mr Job
Sithole, Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs in
November 2007.

It was said that South Africa and Algeria have a good working relationship
but that it can be developed more at a multilateral level. As the founding
members of NEPAD, both countries have contributed positively towards the
independence of the Continent.

There were women who fought for liberation in Algeria but they were still
in prisons. It was acknowledged that, although South African democracy was
still young, there was a large representation of women in Parliament
compared to Algeria.

In responding to concerns whether there was any policy or working plan on
illegal immigrants, it was emphasised that South Africa was against any
country that used terror to attack other countries. South Africa was
somehow still battling with the definition of terrorism. South Africa does
not promote housing people in refugee camps whether they were in the
country legally or illegally. They all get integrated into the South
African society.

The Speaker of the Algerian Parliament indicated that the relations between
the two Parliaments were growing, taking into cognisance the visits that
have already taken place and those that were on the way.

Conclusion

The South African delegation had the privilege of meeting the President,
Prime Minister, Foreign Affairs Committee and the Speaker of both Algeria
and Western Sahara. The culmination of these courtesy calls took the form
of expression of appreciation to the presence of the South African
delegation and the continuance of the support which South Africa was giving
them.  The Saharawi people further encouraged South Africa to continue
spearheading the solidarity critically sought by them in their struggle for
freedom and independence.

Observations
    ▪ The Saharawi people under the leadership of the POLISARIO Front are
      prepared to resort to the armed struggle if the current negotiations
      do not yield their desired outcome of decolonisation and self-
      determination that will lead to independence.
    ▪ The younger generation that grew up during the cease-fire are
      increasingly becoming disillusioned and impatient. They are prepared
      to take up arms any given moment. Such position is largely influenced
      by the resolution of the 2007 POLISARIO Front Conference, where the
      leadership was tasked to consider the merits of resuming the armed
      struggle
    ▪ There exists a need for the popularisation of the struggle for
      decolonisation of Western Sahara in the Continent and beyond.
    ▪ There was almost a total absence of the media from Africa in the
      South of Sahara, including South Africa, which has an international
      television channel dedicated to Africa news.
    ▪ Women and children were seen spending their days without doing
      anything constructive.
    ▪ There were no sporting or entertaining facilities and Members
      observed boredom, especially amongst the children.
    ▪ Camp situation has taken effect on all the people in the camps and
      it made the situation very painful to observe.
    ▪ Men were either truckers or in the army.
    ▪ International community were also assisting with donations.
    ▪ The delay in negotiations took too long and failure in reaching an
      agreement is frustrating.
    ▪ There were no proper sanitary facilities.
    ▪ There were many health problems like dust allergies and teeth
      infections.
    ▪ Health facilities were not easily accessible.
    ▪ There were those who feel that talks with Morocco were not taking
      them anywhere.
    ▪ Despite all hardships, the Saharawi people both young and old, men
      and women remain warm, dignified and committed to their cause, as
      their slogan proclaims: ‘Freedom or Martyrdom’.

Recommendations
      The Committee recommends that:
    ▪ pressure should be put on Spain to discharge its duties of ensuring
      the smooth process of decolonisation of the Western Sahara;
    ▪ both South Africa and Algeria should work together to resolve the
      problems in the Western Sahara;
    ▪ trade links between South Africa, Western Sahara and Algeria should
      be strengthened;
    ▪ Parliamentary relations in the form of visits should be encouraged
      between South Africa, Western Sahara and Algeria;
    ▪ South African Missions in the European Union, especially Madrid,
      Paris, Brussels, the Hague and Rome should enhance the lobby for the
      decolonisation of the Western Sahara and work closely with the civil
      society/social movements that are sympathetic to the struggle of the
      POLISARIO Front;
    ▪ there is a need to engage the South African Broadcasting Corporation
      (SABC) to ensure that its reporters cover the issues concerning the
      Western Sahara, at a given interval, including those journalists
      posted abroad; and
    ▪ the forthcoming Summit of the African Diaspora, to be held in South
      Africa, should be utilised to invigorate and consolidate the support
      of the progressive international solidarity movement, social movements
      and the civil society organisations for the just cause of the Saharawi
      people.

Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Public Service and
      Administration on the nomination of National Public Service
      Commissioners, dated 14 November 2008:

Parliament is obligated, in terms of Section 4(1) of the Public Service
Commission Act, 1997 (Act No. 46 of 1997) to nominate National
Commissioners to serve on the Public Service Commission. The nomination of
the Public Service Commissioners was referred to the Portfolio Committee on
Public Service and Administration, on the 29 August 2008, for consideration
and report.

The Committee advertised for three positions of National Public Service
Commissioners on the 05 September 2008. The Committee received 218
applications. A multi-party sub-committee of the Committee was elected to
conduct the short-listing and interviews for the Committee. The following
candidates were short-listed and interviewed on the 12th and 13th November
2008:
   1. Mr. G P Bogatsu,
   2. Mr. V Clapper
   3. Mr. M J Malahlela
   4. Ms. N J Mxakato-Diseko
   5. Ms. S S Nkosi
   6. Ms. M J Ralefatane
   7. Ms. S Rohan
   8. Mr. M Solari
   9. Ms. R Udit
  10. Mr. D Van Wyk

The sub-committee gave due consideration to candidates’ qualifications,
experience, gender, disability, age and race during the process. The sub-
committee reported its findings to the Portfolio Committee.

The Portfolio Committee deliberated and consequently recommends the
following persons for appointment as National Public Service Commissioners:
   1. Ms. N J Mxakato-Diseko
   2. Mr. M J Malahlela
   3. Ms. S S Nkosi

In the event that any of the above candidates is not available to serve on
the Commission; the Committee recommends that the following candidates, in
the order that they appear below, be considered for appointment:

   1. Mr. G P Bogatsu
   2. Mr. D Van Wyk

Report to be considered.

                          MONDAY, 17 NOVEMBER 2008

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

CREDA INSERT REPORTS - TO81117e-insert1 – PAGES 2175-2189.


                          TUESDAY, 18 NOVEMBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent
    (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly on 18 November 2008:


          (a)    Intellectual Property Rights from Publicly Financed
              Research and Development Bill [B 46D – 2008] (National
              Assembly – sec 75).


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Arts and Culture


      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Vote 13 – Department of Arts
          and Culture for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
          General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
          of Vote 13 for 2007-2008.

2.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of Amatola Water for the year
          ended 30 June 2008, including the Report of the Independent
          Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
          2008.


      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of Umgeni Water for the year
          ended 30 June 2008, including the Report of the Independent
          Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
          2008.
National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

        a) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the Monitoring
           Fact Sheet on Complaints Lodged with the Public Service
           Commission during the 2007/2008 Financial Year – July 2008 [RP
           197-2008].


      (b)   Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the Founding
           Document on Organisational Performance Assessment in the Public
           Service – September 2008 [RP 263-2008].


        c) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the
           Consolidated Report on Inspection of Service Delivery Sites:
           Department of Education - September 2008 [RP 174-2008].


     d) First Report of the Rules Committee of the National Assembly, 2008:

CREDA INSERT - T081118e-insert1 – PAGES 2206-2211


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

CREDA INSERT REPORTS - T081118e-insert2 – PAGES 2213-2260.



