---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 18 June 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2008-06-18
---

WEDNESDAY, 18 JUNE 2008
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:07.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment  of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

               NO NOTICES OF MOTIONS OR MOTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, I have been informed that the
Whippery have agreed that there will be no notices of motion or motions
without notice today.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 34 – Water Affairs and Forestry:

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Chairperson of the NCOP, Deputy
Chairperson, Minister Erwin, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, please join
me in wishing President Mbeki a very happy and prosperous birthday, and we
wish him many, many more. [Applause.] We wish him good health, prosperity
and all the best for the future.

Hon members, let me remind this House that the ANC in 2004 made the
commitment to the people of South Africa that, if elected, it would provide
more households with water; speed up the provision of water and sanitation;
provide free basic water; invest in infrastructure to enhance the
competitiveness of our economy; facilitate broad-based economic
empowerment; create jobs through the Expanded Public Works Programme and
create a better life for our people.

I believe that my department has gone a long way to achieve these policy
objectives and through the work we do and the budget allocation, we
continue to change peoples’ lives for the better. Our work supports the
delivery of clean water and adequate sanitation, and our activities in the
forestry sector continue to make a positive impact on the lives of ordinary
South Africans. We are well aware of the many backlogs still faced by our
people, particularly women and children, and people with disabilities, and
we are committed to working in a “Business Unusual” manner to address these
backlogs.

The impact of bringing clean water and adequate sanitation to a household
has a far-reaching impact on health and hygiene and on the economic and
social status of that household. We have seen this impact when we visited
communities and interacted with them. Very recently, during our Sanitation
Week, we visited Inanda in KwaZulu-Natal and witnessed the difference that
water and sanitation services have made to that community, in particular
the alternative technology used for the provision of sanitation.

We have seen the positive impact on communities as a result of having
ensured that all clinics in South Africa are provided with water and
sanitation services. The impact of this was clear when we visited a clinic
in the Amathole District Municipality in the Eastern Cape. The 91 clinics
that had no access to water and sanitation services have now been provided
with these services. A further 254 clinics that had facilities below the
required standard also had their infrastructure upgraded to the required or
acceptable standard.

Whilst celebrating these achievements, we forged ahead to remove the
backlog in services to schools. To date we have serviced 69 schools that
had no access to basic water and 51 schools that had no access to basic
sanitation. The impact on the lives of these learners and their ability to
perform at school, as a result of having adequate sanitation services, is
significant.

During this International Year of Sanitation, we are committed to working
in a “Business Unusual” manner to further extend the gains we have made in
providing sanitation. Last year, in partnership with provincial government
and municipalities, we successfully removed 94% of the bucket toilets in
the established formal areas and we remain committed to removing the
remaining backlog of 23 000 buckets in the Free State, Northern Cape and
Eastern Cape. This work will be completed by September this year.

We are now seeing approximately one million more people receiving access to
both water and basic sanitation services every year, and we are very proud
of our achievement of having met the Millennium Development Goals’ target
of halving the number of people without water and sanitation.

Access to water services has improved from 59% to 88% and basic sanitation
from 48% to 73%. Since 1994 to date, we have serviced 18,7 million people
with water and 10,9 million people with access to basic sanitation. I am
encouraged by the leadership and commitment of the MECs, mayors, Premiers
and councillors in all the provinces to ensuring that water and sanitation
services delivery are given top priority.

It is important that we work very hard to ensure that provinces and
municipalities are able to meet our targets and are given all the support
they require to do so. Part of our support as a department has seen us
deploying engineers to municipalities across the country, training 80
sewerage treatment plant operators in the Free State, and supporting
municipalities to ensure that they deliver quality and up-to-standard
drinking water to their communities.

We are also deploying our water boards to areas where particular problems
have emerged. Currently, Bloem and Amathole Water Boards form part of an
intervention initiative that is meant to address the problems that we are
currently experiencing in the areas of the Ukhahlamba and Ndlambe District
Municipalities in the Eastern Cape, and the expertise of Rand Water is
being used to assist with the problems faced in Delmas.

The quality of our drinking water is a priority for us, and significant
progress has been made to establish the Department of Water Affairs and
Forestry as the Water Services Regulator. Through our efforts, alongside
the Institute of Municipal Engineers and with the support of the SA Local
Government Association, Salga, a challenging two-year project to monitor
the drinking water quality of all 169 Water Services Authorities, WSA, has
been successfully put in place.

To date, close to 90% of all WSAs are submitting their drinking water data
on a timeous and ongoing basis. The result has been an overall improvement
in the quality of drinking water and the creation of an enabling
environment to ensure the effective management of drinking water.

Of those municipalities on the system, close to 95% report that their water
quality complies with the national drinking water standard. The
achievements here are impressive, as a survey in 2005 showed only 50% of
municipalities had this information; and the successful implementation of
this system has been recognised both locally and internationally.

Our department and its partners have received two awards in recent weeks,
one from the National Science and Technology Forum and the second from the
International Water Association.

As a priority, we are giving attention to the municipalities that are not
yet reporting on their drinking water quality and those where drinking
water quality failures have been detected. Drinking water quality is not
something we can compromise on, and I will be further engaging
municipalities at a municipal indaba to be held later this year.

Two days ago, at the Youth Day celebrations marking the 32nd anniversary of
16 June, President Mbeki, had this to say, and I quote:

    Whereas the youth of 1976 used stones and barricades against repressive
    forces, today’s youth should use education and skills to fight poverty
    and unemployment.

My department has been supporting efforts to develop the youth by creating
opportunities for learning through various programmes. Our efforts are also
responding to the challenges of scarce skills, especially in the technical
field, which has been identified as a risk area for both government and the
private sector. As promised in 2007, we have established the Water and
Forestry Learning Academy which to date has had an intake of 122 graduates
who will benefit immensely from workplace experience and they will be able
to register as professional engineers or technicians.

We have forged partnerships with nine higher education institutions and two
professional bodies, and have awarded 105 bursaries to students studying
towards qualifications in the technical fields. We have also been
supporting the energy and water sector education and training authority,
Seta, as well as the forestry Seta as part of our efforts to address the
skills shortages in these sectors.

Water gives life, and creates economic opportunities. In recognition of
this need to provide support to resource-poor emerging farmers, we
supported the lands claim project at Hoedspruit in Mpumalanga which
benefited 500 individuals. In the Northern Cape, financial assistance to
the value of R2,3 million was given to farmers through the Vaalharts,
Kakamas and Boegoeberg Water User Associations. We are also continuing with
our Water Allocation Reform Programme. In the Mhlathuze River catchment in
KwaZulu-Natal, we have provided sufficient water for 4000 hectares of new
irrigation for emerging farmers.

In the Free State, the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry, Dwaf, has
signed a memorandum of understanding with the Department of Agriculture and
Land Affairs, paving the way for the joint implementation of the Water
Allocation Reform Programme. Feasibility studies for the river utilisation
of the Thaba Nchu scheme and for the allocation of 3000 hectares of water
rights from the Orange River are nearing completion.

Our ability to successfully allocate water for economic development
requires that we develop our water resources and protect those scarce water
resources we already have. The protection includes preventing unlawful
water use, particularly by the irrigation farmers. The evidence we have is
that, in the Vaal River system, the amount of unlawful water used is
equivalent to the water yield in the Mohale Dam in the Lesotho Highlands
Water Project. In other words, the water being stolen can be supplied to
approximately 8,5 million households using 100 litres per month. We are
speedily moving to curb this unlawful water use.

Our second area of water resource protection, of course, is to fight
pollution of water resources. Here we are implementing the waste discharge
charge system and upgrading our efforts as regulator to combat non-
compliance. I must say that we are also trying to increase the capacity of
the enforcement unit in the department. We are taking our role as
regulators seriously. We will be taking a tough stance with regard to
transgressions. Pollution in all its forms will not be tolerated and we
will leave no stone unturned in dealing with the polluters.

The National Imagery and Mapping Agency, Nima, amendment, brought to this
House in collaboration with the Department of Environmental Affairs and
Tourism, is one of the initiatives aimed at strengthening my hand as the
Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry to curb the growing scourge of
pollution. This task is huge and I need all the support and tools
necessary, and hence I appeal to the House to support us in our efforts to
protect and conserve this national resource. I’m looking forward to the
deliberations of the select committee in this regard.

Unfortunately, some of the pollution is the result of sewage spills into
our water resources from municipal water waste and water treatment plants.
While, as a regulator we are, and must, adopt a tough stance because of the
negative impact which it has on health, the community and the environment,
we recognise that there are challenges in some municipalities in local
government.
In those cases we offer support to the municipality with emergency short-
term measures, minor refurbishments to contain the problem and assist them
with drafting longer-term water and sewerage infrastructure master plans.
And, of course, we do all this in collaboration with the Department of
Provincial and Local Government and the SA Local Government Association,
Salga.

Another important initiative that I would like briefly to talk about - it’s
well-known to members – is the Working for Water Programme. This is also an
initiative to protect our water resources because it deals with the alien
species which tend to be water guzzlers. During the last financial year we
cleared 140 000 ha of the new areas and provided almost 550 000 ha for
follow-up treatment.

We need to develop and expand our water resource infrastructure to meet the
increasing demand for water as our economy grows and the standards of
living of our communities improve. My department has a responsibility to
ensure that there is enough water to support economic growth and to meet
social needs.

This means we will need to develop new infrastructure and also to
rehabilitate existing infrastructure. In the current year, R1,2 billion
will be spent on the establishment of new water resources infrastructure
and R415 million on the rehabilitation of existing infrastructure.

We are progressing well with Hluhluwe, Inyaka and Nandoni government Water
Works through which we provide 2,4 million people with drinking water in
the rural communities in the KwaZulu-Natal, Mpumalanga and Limpopo
provinces. This financial year we will be starting the Umdloti River
Development Project, raising the Hazelmere Dam, developing the Mooi-Mngeni
system and constructing the Komati Abstraction Works and pipelines for the
water supply to Eskom’s Duvha Power Station in Mpumalanga.

To support our efforts to provide infrastructure, which is needed to meet
the Asgisa growth target and to ensure a well-developed and well-maintained
water resource infrastructure, we are hoping to establish in the near
future a National Water Resource Infrastructure Agency.

The Bill to establish this agency has already been tabled in the National
Assembly and it is under consideration by Parliament. I would like to
inform members that this agency was decided on after due consideration of
many alternative options for best managing the water resource
infrastructure in the country. Now we will see the incorporation of the
Trans-Caledon Tunnel Authority, TCTA, into an agency together with our
department’s infrastructure branch. We are hoping the benefit of this will
be that they’ll be able to attract finance from capital markets for the
development of water resource infrastructure. That will then free up
government funds to enable us to deal with our other sociodevelopmental
needs.
With regard to forestry, we are continuing with our plans to increase the
area under afforestation. The department is undertaking an extensive study
to assess the potential for the afforestation in the country. This study
will provide empirical information on the parts of the country that are
suitable for afforestation. In the areas where land suitability has already
been identified, such as the Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal, we are
speedily rolling out the programme.

Less than a month ago, we signed the Broad-Based Black Economic
Empowerment, BBBEE Charter for the forestry sector, which will go a long
way to creating more opportunities for black people in the forestry sector
as well as the expansion of the sector. We are very supportive of the
initiatives to include communities in empowerment programmes and we have
seen some of our own forests being transferred to dispossessed communities.


As part of the settlement of a successful land restitution claim, we have
recently transferred the ownership of the forest assets to the Mbazwana and
Manzengwenya community in Northern KwaZulu-Natal. We will very soon be
making an announcement about a settlement of the Dukuduku and the Futhululu
forest issues in KwaZulu-Natal.

Forestry remains an important contributor to the economic growth and to the
development of the rural communities. Through our Forestry Enterprise
Development Programmes we are supporting these communities. For example, in
Gauteng a nursery co-operative was initiated; it is in the process of being
registered. In North West, a turnaround strategy, including the planting of
the hybrid eucalyptus, has been compiled for the Mooifontein Plantation. In
Limpopo, the Vhembe and Mopani small growers have established and
registered a co-operative, which is encouraging because this will result in
small growers equipping themselves to compete in the market.

Last year, Mpumalanga, KwaZulu-Natal, the Eastern Cape and Western Cape
experienced devastating veld fires with a total area of 63 964 ha of
plantation area being burnt to the ground. This is a significant increase
over previous years and has badly affected the industry.

To combat veld fires, a total of 20 fire associations and national fire
danger rating flags in 12 schools have been established. Later this year my
department will be rolling out the national fire danger rating system which
will be collaborating with the SA Weather Service to serve as an early
warning system for the likelihood of the occurrence of veld and forest
fires.

This system is an important tool for integrated fire management and a
budget of R400 000 has been set aside for technical support. In addition, a
countrywide firewise awareness campaign costing about R3 million will be
run this year.
To conclude - my time is running out - our efforts to create a better life
for our people have seen us using local skills and businesses in many of
our projects. I want to share this information with you: Just in the past
financial year we created 24 249 jobs,   8 400 for women and 8 400 for the
youth, through our National Sanitation Programme.

We also created 30 210 jobs through the Working for Water Programme. Of
those jobs 16 340 jobs were for women, 6 600 for the youth and 599 for
people with disabilities.

We have also created jobs through the Working on Fire programme; and as we
celebrate Youth Day we recognise the 1 384 jobs and youth employment
opportunities that have also been created in the construction of water
infrastructure.

Finally, I would like to thank the Director-General, Miss Pam Yako, and her
team, seated in the gallery, for their support; and the staff in the
department from the provinces and all over for their hard work and
commitment.

I would also like to thank the Select Committee on Land and Environmental
Affairs, under the leadership of the hon Reverend Moatshe, for the
important oversight they do over our department. Hon members and
Chairperson, I request the House to support my department’s budget of R6,6
billion. Thank you.
Mnr A WATSON: Voorsitter, agb Ministers, agb kollegas, u weet, Mpumalanga
is bekend as die voorsiener van krag, ontspanning en bykans alle vorme van
voedsel, maar min mense besef die belangrike rol wat my pragtige provinsie
vervul in die voorsiening van water aan Suid-Afrika.

U sien, daar in die Hoëveld van Mpumalanga, in die omgewing van Ermelo,
Breyton en Chrissiesmeer, vorm daar ’n uiters belangrike waterskeiding
waarvandaan daar vier van Suid-Afrika se belangrikste riviere ontstaan. Die
bekendste hiervan is natuurlik die Vaalrivier, wat ook verantwoordelik is
vir die vorming van die Vaaldam, wat aansluit by die Oranjerivier en
dwarsdeur ons land vloei tot waar dit by die see by Oranjemund, aan die
voet van Namibië, invloei.

Dan is daar die Usuturivier, waarvan nie baie mense weet nie, wat suid-oos
vloei dwarsdeur Swaziland waar dit bekend is as die Lusutfu en uiteindelik
in Mosambiek die see bereik as die Suthurivier.

Aan die ander kant van die waterskeiding ontstaan nog die Groot- en Klein-
Olifantsriviere wat in ’n noordwestelike rigting vloei, ’n draai maak by
Loskopdam en dan uiteindelik in ’n ooswaartse rigting die Krugerwildtuin
bereik.

Die vierde rivier waaroor ek vandag breedvoerig wil uitbrei, is die
Komatirivier. Uit hierdie belangrike rivier, wat eers noord vloei en dan
oos, ontstaan die Nooitgedachtdam in die omgewing van Carolina en die
Vygeboomdam naby Badplaas. Daarna vloei die rivier ook Swaziland binne om
weer by Mananga die Republiek binne te vloei; en by Komatipoort sluit die
Krokodilrivier daarby aan voordat dit in Mosambiek invloei as die Inkomati.

Tussen die Nooitgedacht- en die Vygeboomdamme is daar egter een van die
grootste wateringenieursnalatenskappe waarvan min mense bewus is. Die
Nooitgedachtdam is gebou om die Hendrina-omgewing en die belangrike
steenkoolmyne en kragstasies van die gebied met water te voorsien.

Soos ek reeds genoem het, vloei die Komatirivier weer anderkant die
Nooitgedachtdam uit om verder af die Vygeboomdam te voed. Die Vygeboomdam
is egter ook ’n reservoir vir die stelsel, want as die watervlak van die
Nooitgedachtdam laag raak, word die water weer van die Vygeboomdam af
bergop gepomp om die Nooitgedachtdam te voed sodat daar altyd water is vir
die belangrike voorsiening van die kragstasies en die steenkoolmyne.

Hierdie is ’n unieke pompstelsel en pypstelsel wat u gerus kan gaan besoek
as u daar kom. U weet, enige stelsel moet deurlopend in stand gehou word,
en veral toe daar nou begin is met mnr Erwin se kragstasies wat hulle weer
in werking wil stel om die kragkrisis te help verlig, is die Departement
van Waterwese en Bosbou herhaaldelik gewaarsku dat die pypstelsel van die
Nooitgedachtdam opgeknap en opgegradeer moet word en dat uitgediende
pompstasies weer in werking gestel moet word.

Intussen is die Komatikragstasie weer besig om uit die spreekwoordelike
dode op te staan en die waterverbruik het die hoogte ingeskiet, maar u
departement, agb Minister, het egter nie sy kant gebring nie. Die pyplyn,
die lewensaar van die gebied, kan nou nie die benodigde water lewer nie.
Intussen is daar ongeveer twee jaar terug ook besluit om, as bykomende
maatreël, die afvalwater van die Optimummyn daar naby weer te suiwer en dan
deur te pomp na die Hendrina omgewing.

Die impakstudies is voltooi; die perseel vir die suiweringswerke is bepaal,
maar, o wee, daar is nog niks verder gevorder met die installering van die
stelsel nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, hon Ministers and hon colleagues, you know that
Mpumalanga is known as a supplier of power, recreation and just about all
types of food, but few people realise the important role played by my
beautiful province in the supply of water to South Africa.

You see, there in the Highveld of Mpumalanga, in the vicinity of Ermelo,
Breyton and Chrissiesmeer, an extremely important water-parting takes place
from which the four major rivers of South Africa spring. The most prominent
of these, of course, is the Vaal River, which is also responsible for
forming the Vaal Dam, which links up with the Orange River and flows right
across our land into the sea at Oranjemund, bordering on Namibia.

Then we have the Usutu River, not known to a lot of people, which flows
south-easterly through Swaziland, where it is known as the Lusutfu, finally
reaching the sea in Mozambique as the Suthu River.

On the other end of the water-parting the Big and Little Olifant Rivers
also take shape and flow in a north-westerly direction, making a detour at
the Loskop Dam and eventually winding in an easterly direction to reach the
Kruger National Park.

The fourth river about which I will go into some detail today is the
Komati. From this major river, at first flowing to the north and then to
the east, the Nooitgedacht Dam is formed in the vicinity of Carolina, as
well as the Vygeboom Dam near Badplaas. This river then also enters
Swaziland,returning to the Republic at Mananga, and at Komatipoort it is
joined by the Crocodile River before it flows into Mozambique as the
Inkomati.

Between the Nooitgedacht Dam and the Vygeboom Dam, however, lies the
heritage of one of our largest water engineering feats, of which few people
are aware. The Nooitgedacht Dam was constructed to supply water to the
Hendrina region with its vital coal mines and power stations.

As I have already mentioned, on the far side of the Nooitgedacht Dam the
Komati continues to flow, feeding the Vygeboom Dam further downstream. But
the Vygeboom Dam is also a reservoir for this system because, when the
water level of the Nooitgedacht Dam drops, water is pumped back uphill from
the Vygeboom Dam in order to feed the Nooitgedacht Dam, thereby maintaining
its level at all times for the continuous supply of water to the power
stations and coal mines.

It is a unique system of pumps and pipes, which members should go and view
if they are in the area. You know, any system requires continuous
maintenance, and in particular when Mr Erwin’s power stations were going to
be refurbished so as to assist in alleviating the energy crisis, the
Department of Water Affairs and Forestry was frequently warned to restore
and upgrade the pipeline of the Nooitgedacht Dam and refurbish the obsolete
pump stations.

Meanwhile the Komati power station has arisen from the proverbial dead and
water usage has skyrocketed, but your department, hon Minister, has not
done its share. The pipeline, the lifeblood of the region, is now unable to
supply the required water. And in the interim, as an additional measure, it
was decided about two years ago to recycle the wastewater of the
neighbouring Optimum Mine and pump it back to the Hendrina region.
The impact studies have been completed; the site for the water treatment
plant has been determined, but oh dear, no progress has been made with the
implementation of the system.]

Now, hon Minister, we not only have load shedding, but we also have water
shedding – and most probably as a result of mind shedding!

U departement moet nou die mooi praatjies los, agb Minister, en dringend
aandag gee aan die waternood in die Hendrina-omgewing. Ek wonder of u
enigsins bewus is daarvan dat die streng waterbeperkings ook ’n uiters
negatiewe uitwerking het op skole, klinieke, sakeondernemings en die
gemeenskap in sy geheel. Ek verneem dat daar in ’n stadium geen water was
nie en dat dit later, elke dag vanaf sewe-uur in die oggend tot vieruur,
totaal afgesny is.

Almal besnoei natuurlik nou waterverbruik en die toestand het, as gevolg
daarvan, effe verbeter, maar waterbeperkings word steeds toegepas, met tye
wat daar geen water is nie. Dit is ’n skreiende skande en ’n mens kan maar
net wonder waar elders hierdie probleem ook sy kop gaan uitsteek. Hoe meer
kragstasies in werking gestel word, hoe meer moet daar steenkool gemyn word
en hoe meer water is nodig. Ek hoop dat hierdie waarskuwing betyds u ore
bereik.

Hierdie is nie water wat onder deur die brug is nie, agb Minister, dis
water wat opgevang, gesuiwer en terug gepomp kan word. Agb Minister, ek sou
ook graag tyd wou gehad het om ’n bietjie met u te gesels oor die
besoedeling van die Loskopdam vanuit die nywerheidsgebiede van Witbank en
Middelburg deur die Groot- en Klein-Olifantsrivier waar daar nou duisende
visse vrek. Die krokodille vreet die verrotte vis en hulle vrek ook op die
hope, en ek hoop dat u dringend aan hierdie probleem aandag sal gee sodat
ons natuurbewaring ook nie sal skade ly deur die nalatige werk van u
departement nie. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Your department should cut out the flowery language, hon Minister, and
give urgent attention to the scarcity of water in the Hendrina region. I
wonder if you are at all aware of the fact that the strict water
restrictions are also having an extremely negative effect on schools,
clinics, businesses and the community as a whole. I believe that at one
stage there was no water whatsoever and that, subsequently, on a daily
basis from seven o’clock in the morning until four o’clock in the
afternoon, the supply was cut off altogether.

Of course, now everybody is cutting down on water usage and the situation
has improved somewhat as a result, but the water restrictions are still in
force and at times water is simply not available. This is a crying shame
and one can only wonder where else this problem is going to rear its head
as well. The more power stations are brought online, the more coal will
have to be mined and the more water will be required. I hope this warning
reaches your ears in time.

This is not water under the bridge, hon Minister, but it is water that can
be collected, purified and pumped back. Hon Minister, I would have liked
some time to discuss the pollution of the Loskop Dam from the Witbank and
Middelburg industrial areas, through the Big and Little Olifant Rivers, and
where thousands of fish are now dying off. Crocodiles are eating these
rotting fish and are also dying in numbers, so I hope that you will give
urgent attention to this problem and that our nature conservation won’t
also suffer because of the negligence of your department. I thank you.]

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Modulasetulo, Matona a Mafapha ao a hlomphegago,
badiredi ba mmušo, maloko ao a hlomphegago, ... [Chairperson, hon
departmental Ministers, public servants, hon members ...]

... comrades and compatriots, throughout the developing world lack of
access to clean water is one of the defining criteria of poverty.

Ke rata go botša maloko le Matona ka seo se ilego sa nhlagela. Ke rometše
bana gae ga-Masemola. Mokgekolo, ka go hloka meetse, o ile a ba fa kiribane
gore ba sepele ba ye go mo gelela meetse. Ba rile ge ba gelela meetse, ba
hwetša digwagwa dithutha ka mo meetseng ao. Ba ile ba kga meetse ba
thabile. Gosasa ge letšatši le hlaba gomme bana ba re ba nyaka meetse a go
hlapa meno, mokgekolo o ile are ba tšee wona meetse ale ba hlape meno ka
wona. Ba ile ba botša koko wa bona gore digwagwa di be di rutha ka meetseng
ao, ka fao ga ba a nyake. Ba ile ba nyaka mogala gomme ba nteletša ba re ke
tle ke ba tšee ka ge koko wa bona a sa ba sware gabotse.

Bjale, lehono ke rata go botša Tona ke re: Gabotsebotse, o mme wa
makgonthe. Ge ke bolela bjale, go na le dipompi tšeo di ntšhago meetse Ga-
Masemola. Bana ba ka ge ba e ya gona ga ba sa na bothata. Ba kgona go ya
gomme ba fetše matšatši ba bona koko wa bona. Ba ipshina ka go hlapa meno
gape ba boye ba re ge ba le go koko wa bona go swana le ge ba dutše ka gae.
Ba a iketla gape ba robale ba ipshina ba tseba gore ba tlo ja bogobe bja
makgonthe bja go apeiwa ka meetse a nnete - esego ale a sediba. Ke meetse
ao a buletšwego pomping.

Bontši bja badudi ba Afrika-Borwa ga ba kgone go fihlelela ditefelo tša
meetse. Ke ka fao mmušo o ilego wa tla ka lenaneo la “Free Basic Water”. Se
se dirilwe ka go tseba gore Molaotheo wa Afrika-Borwa o akaretša le bao ba
itlhokelago, ba dikobo di magetleng. Eupša lenaneo le le bolela gape ka bao
ba šomišago dilitara tša go feta tšeo di beilwego. Ba swanetše go di
lefela. Ge e le gore o šomiša dilitara tša go feta tšeo mmušo o rego go
swanelegile gore o ka di šomiš a kantle le go di lefela, tseba gore ke
maikarabelo a gago bjalo ka modudi yo mongwe le yo mongwe wa Afrika-Borwa
go bona gore dilitara tšeo di a lefelwa. Se se ra gore badudi ka moka ba
Afrika-Borwa, maloko ao a hlomphegago ao a lego mo, le badiredi ba mmušo
bao ba lego mo, ba swanetše go ithuta go seketša meetse. Moswana o re:
Šikiša dira le molapo, mphago wa dira ke meetse. Se se ra gore, ...
(Translation of Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[I would like to inform members and Ministers about what happened to me in
the past. My children went to visit my mother at Ga-Masemola. As there were
no taps, the old lady provided the children with a wheelbarrow and ordered
them to go and fetch water. They found frogs swimming in the well they were
to fetch water from. The next morning when the children wanted to brush
their teeth, the grandmother ordered them to use the very water which they
fetched from the well the other day. They told their grandmother that frogs
were swimming in that well, therefore they did not want to use the water.
They called and requested me to come and fetch them because they thought
their grandmother ill-treated them.

Therefore, I would like to say to the Minister today: you are actually a
real mother indeed. There are taps at Ga-Masemola as I speak. My children
no longer encounter problems when they visit. They are now able to visit
their grandmother for days. They enjoy brushing their teeth and say that
when they are at their grandmother’s house, it feels like they are at home.
They relax and sleep happily knowing that they will eat porridge which is
cooked with clean water and not with the water from the well. It is water
which runs from the tap.

Most South African citizens cannot afford to pay for water services. That
is why government introduced the programme of ‘Free Basic Water’. This was
done with the knowledge that the Constitution of South Africa includes even
the poverty-stricken people. This programme, however, refers also to those
who use more litres than they ought to. This implies that all citizens of
South Africa, hon members and public servants who are present, must learn
to save water. The Elders say: we must always save water. This means ...]

... whatever we do as a nation, as communities, as villages, as families –
let’s teach our children how to save water, because water is life.

Mmušo o leka go dira gore le batho ba kua dinageng-magae tša go swana le bo
Limpopo, moo go bego go se na le methopo ya meetse eupša go tshephilwe fela
meetse a didiba le a go tšwa dinokeng le melapong go swana le ao ke bego ke
bolela ka ga wona a go bonwa ke bašemanyana ba ka, ba kgone go hwetša
meetse ao a hlwekilego. Ke ka lebaka leo re bago le bothata ge badudi ba
falatša meetse fase ba sa hlomphe seo e lego bohwa le bophelo bja diphidi
kamoka go akaretšwa le badudi ba Afrika-Borwa ka moka.

Afrika-Borwa ke naga yeo e nago le meetse ao e lego gore ga a nene. Go
tloga go nyamiša go bona badudi ba sa iše kgopelo ya mmušo ya tsheketšo ya
meetse felo. Ge go hlomilwe dipompi mo mibileng go leka go dira gore ka
moso di tle di kgone go fihlelela badudi ka gae, o hwetša batho ba bagolo
ba buletše yona pompi ye ke rego e fepa mokgekolo mme wa ka kua gae gomme
meetse a falala fase. O hwetša bana ba eme mola ba enwa ka diatla.

Bjalo ka mmušo wa ANC re re tlhobaboroko ye nngwe ke go rengwa ga dihlare.
Mola batho ba bolelago gore bona ge ba tšhumile dihithara ka mo gae ba
šomiša mohlagase gape ga ba tutele, ba nyaka dikgong ka kua tle. Bjalo re
re, badudi ba Afrika Borwa, tsebang gore bohwa bja rena le maphelo a rena a
ka mo diatleng tša meetse. O ka sepela le naga ye ka moka o se na sa go ja,
efela ge o na le lebotlelwana goba galase ya meetse, o ka kgona go phela go
fihlela mo o yago gona.

Re dira kgopelo go Lefapha la Merero ya Meetse le Dithokgwa gore ba
lebelele malwetši ao a hlolwago ke meetse ka leihlo le ntšhotšho. Go
tšhilafala ga meetse ke tlhobaboroko kudu le go rena ba ANC. Re swanetše go
ba le mananeo ao ka wona maloko a Ntlo ye e hlomphegago ye ba tlago leka
gore ba tšwe ba ye ditikolong tšeo ba šomelago go tšona tša dikarolokgetho
tša bona ba bone gore ba ruta batho ka go se tšhilafatše meetse.

Meetse a bohlokwa kudu. Ke ka baka leo lefapha la gago Tona le kgonago go
dira gore go be le mananeo ao elego gore batho ba ba go wona. Ke bile gona
go le lenngwe la mananeo a kua tikolong ya ka ya karolokgetho ya Ga-
Mmalebogo. Ke thabile kudu ka baka la gore lenaneo le le hlagile ka morago
ga gore batho ba tšwe mo thelebišeneng ba e nwa meetse moo go bego go
biloga mo fase; ba e nwa le diphoofolo; ba bangwe ba hlatswetša kua; ba
bangwe ba gelela a mangwe a go hlapa kua; gomme ba bangwe ba gelela a go
nwa.

Ke a tseba gore go na le bothata bjo bogolo ga bo Morena Thetjeng moo e
lego gore meetse ga a gona. Bjale ke re, Morena Thetjeng, tseba gore sello
sa gago se tsene mo ditsebeng tša Tona. O bone, o kwele. O tla phethagatša
seo se swanetšego go dirwa ka baka la gore re mmušo wo o hlokomelago batho.
Ga re mmušo wa go sepela fela. Re mmušo wo o dirago gore batho ba kwešiše
ge re na le diphoso gore phoso ke ya go dirwa ke mang le mang yo e lego
motho ge a sepela. Ge o šoma, phoso e swanetše go direga ka mo morago.

Bjale, bothata bjo bongwe bjo bo lego gona ke bja gore ge mmušo o beetše
batho diphaepe mo go itšego, badudi ba lesa bana ba eya go swamolola
dipautu mola diphaepeng. Ge diphaepe tšela di se sa šoma, ba a bowa ba
lebelela mmušo gore o ba thuše ka diatla. Na molato ke wa mang? Ekaba ke wa
rena batswadi, badudi ba Afrika-Borwa goba badudi ba motse woo? Ge mmušo o
beile pompi mola, ba swanetše ba ye ka moka ga bona gomme ba ngwathelane
meetse ao a lego gona ba kgone go phela.

Kua go Mmasepala wa Blouberg go na le bothata bja meetse kudu, mohlomphegi
Tona. Bothata bjo bo ka mokgwa woo e lego gore batho ka moka ga bona ge ba
hweditše bonnyane bja meetse, ba lwela meetse ao. Re swanetše go leka go
boledišana le ba mmasepala wo gore re ba fe bokgoni bja go tseba gore
badudi ge ba nyaka meetse, IDP e swantše e thome ka meetse. Ge e le go ya
ka nna, lefapha la gago Tona le be le swanetše go hwetša tšhelete ye nngwe
ya go feta ye o e hwetšago gabjale gore o tle o kgone go phethagatša
dinyakwa tša batho ba kua Ga-Mmalebogo le ba Afrika-Borwa ka moka.

Se se lego gona ke gore pula e na ka morago ga sebaka kua Limpopo. Bjale,
meetse a hlokega. Badudi ka moka ba swanetše ba itote. Ke a leboga.
[Legoswi.] (Translation of Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[The government tries to ensure that even people from rural areas like
Limpopo, where there were no water resources, are able to access clean
water since in the past, people only relied on water which came from rivers
and wells like the water I referred to earlier. That is the reason we have
a problem when citizens waste water. They do not realise that water is the
source of life.

South Africa is a land with an insufficient water supply. It is
disappointing to see citizens ignoring government’s plea to save water.
When taps are placed so that people can access water, you find elderly
people running and spilling the very water which helps my mother. You find
children drinking water using their hands.

Another problem that the ANC government is faced with is deforestation.
People said that they use electricity and switch heaters on at home, but do
not get warm; hence they subsequently resort to fetching wood. We therefore
say to all South African citizens that our life and wealth are dependent on
our water supply. You can travel around without food, but if you have a
small bottle or a glass of water you can survive.

We appeal to the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry to scrutinize
diseases caused by unclean water. Unclean water is a huge problem, even to
us as the ANC. We must have programmes in place whereby members of this
august House will go to their constituencies and teach people about
maintaining clean water. Water is of paramount importance. That is the
reason your department, Minister, is able to launch programmes in which
people participate.

I participated in one of these programmes in my constituency. I am very
glad, because this programme was launched after people on television were
seen drinking unclean water with animals; some people were doing laundry,
some were taking a bath whilst others drank the very same water.

I know there is a water scarcity problem where Mr Thetjeng lives. Therefore
Mr Thetjeng, you must know that the Minister heard your voice. She will do
what she is supposed to as we are a government which makes people
understand that we do make mistakes, because to err is human. There will
always be a fault when one works hard.

Another problem is that when government lays pipes, adults allow children
to disconnect the bolts from these pipes. When the pipes no longer operate
properly, they come back and expect the government to assist them. Whose
problem is it? Is it the problem of the parents, the South African citizens
or the residents? When government places taps, they must all share the
available water supply in order to survive.

Honourable Minister, there is a huge problem with regard to water scarcity
at the Blouberg Municipality. The problem is such that people fight over a
small amount of the available water supply. We must try to speak to the
municipality and capacitate them to know that – the Integrated Development
Plan, IDP, must start with the supply of water as their top priority. In my
view, your department is supposed to be allocated a bigger budget in order
to meet the requirements of the people at Ga-Mmalebogo and the rest of
South Africa.

The fact is that it only rains after a long period of time in Limpopo.
Therefore there is a scarcity of water. [Applause.]]

Mor P MOATSHE: Mmusakgotla, Ditona le Ntlo ka kakaretso, Motswana a re
tlhapi solofela leraga metsi a tšhele o a lebile. A re tsaya sego o ntlele
metsi mme o tsenye letlapa. (Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[Rev P MOATSHE: Madam Speaker, Ministers and the House at large, Motswana
once said that one should not cry over spilled milk. He further continued
to say that if one is sent to carry out a task, he should do it with all
his might.]

Many national departments, in their budget submissions as well as their
strategic plans, recognise the challenges encountered by South Africa.
Broadly, these include but are not limited to poverty eradication and
building the capacity of the state to implement government policies in
order to create a better life for all.

The initiatives to meet these challenges are underpinned by the principles
outlined in Asgisa, the government programme of action, as well as the
imperatives as listed for water, sanitation and forestry in the state of
the nation address.

With regard to the specific challenges confronting the Department of Water
Affairs and Forestry, the Minister’s statement in the Strategic Plan 2007-
2008 and 2009-2010, notes the following in delivering on the mandate of
Asgisa:

   ... the building of new infrastructure and the need to bring on board all
   beneficiary communities and stakeholders during planning, implementation
   and management of the infrastructure; the supply of water and timber as
   critical inputs into the economy, and the creation of opportunities for
   broad-based empowerment and small business development ... to
   establishment of a national water resources infrastructure agency to
   manage and develop our national water resources infrastructure for
   economic development and access to water for social needs ...

The department has been given a mandate by the Cabinet to implement an
acceleration plan for the service and delivery of water and sanitation in
collaboration with the provinces and municipalities.

Lenaneophethogo la tsamaiso ya kabelo ya metsi le go dirisa maatlatetlelelo
go fitlhelela maikaelelo a a lokologileng a moruo go nna a ntlhantlha, go
tlisa mowa o moša mo tsamaisong ya dikgwa le go atolosa mekgwa ya tsamaiso
ya dikgwa; tiragatso ya tshomarelo ya metsi le tsamaiso e e lolameng ya ba
ba batlang metsi; tsamaiso ya dipeeletso mo mafaratlhatlheng le
mafaratlhatlhakabo a bo masepala go siamisa neelano ya ditiro; ke magato a
ntlha a ditekanyetsokabo go lepalepana le seemo sa lefapha se se fetogang.
(Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[The acceleration plan to supply water seeks to provide water authorities
with a clear understanding of an economic objective, which brings about new
ideas in the forestry industry and afforestation. The implementation of
water conservation as well as proper water management skills can help to
meet the demands in water supply; investing in the municipality’s
infrastructure may improve service delivery and help create jobs. It should
be the budget’s priority to deal with the changing situation in the
department.]

The purpose should be to ensure that all people in South Africa have access
to adequate, sustainable, viable, safe, appropriate and affordable water
and sanitation services and that they use water wisely and sparingly and
practise safe sanitation.

Go netefatsa gore batho botlhe ba Aforika Borwa ba fitlhelela tiriso e e
rileng ya metsi le tiriso ya kgelelo ya leswe e e dirang ka ngwaga wa 2014,
ka go baya tsamaiso e e tlhwatlhwa, e e tla kgontshang ditheo tsa selegae
go ya ka melawana ya kabelo ya ditirelo. Go tlhokomela gore dikolo tsotlhe
tse di se nang ditirelo di fitlhelelwe ke ditirelo tsa kabo ya metsi a a
phepha le kelelo ya leswe e e dirang sentle, le gore maokelopotlana kgotsa
ditliliniki a jaanong a se nang ditirelo, le a a se nang ditirelo tse di
lekaneng a bone ditirelo mo dingwageng tse di neng di kailwe ke lefapha ...
(Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[In order to ensure that all people in South Africa receive basic water and
sanitation services by 2014, we have to develop an effective administrative
strategy which will be implemented at local government level in accordance
with service delivery policies and legislation. Furthermore, we have to
ensure that all schools which are currently experiencing a lack of clean
water supply and proper sanitation services are provided with these
services, and that mini hospitals or clinics who are currently receiving
inadequate services are also provided with proper services as determined by
the department ...]
... so that this budget contributes to facilitating the provision of
regional bulk infrastructure by 2011 by developing the national
implementation framework.

Our forests must be protected at all costs. We must ensure the sustainable
management of all forests, woodlands and plantations by enforcing the
National Forest Act of 1998 and associated regulations. We must also reduce
incidents of veld, forest and mountain fires in line with the National Veld
and Forest Fire Act by implementing fire management and warning information
systems and publishing monthly reports.

We must contribute to economic development and poverty eradication by
implementing the National Forest Act, The Million Trees Programme and
establishing mechanisms to promote enterprise development in the sector.

South Africa has made significant strides in sanitation delivery. Since
1994, more than 11 million people have benefited from the government’s
sanitation programme. More than 91% of bucket sanitation systems that
existed prior to 1994 in informal settlements were supposed to be removed
by the end of April 2008 as a special category of the government’s
sanitation programme. The Minister will respond to this question of where
we are in terms of this promise to eradicate the bucket system in informal
settlements.

Le fa go nnile le magato a puso e a tsereng tebang le ntlha e, tshotlhelelo
e nnile bonya, ya tlhoka teketekano, ya tswa mo motlhaleng wa go fitlhelela
maikaelelo a Millennium Development Goals. (Translation of Setswana
paragraph follows.)

[Even if steps have been taken by the government in relation to this
matter, there has only been a minimal breakthrough in that regard, and it
has been derailed from its Millennium Development Goals objective.]

The second African Conference on Sanitation and Hygiene held in February
2008 in Durban is one major regional activity on the International Year of
Sanitation calendar, which provided a platform for African Ministers to
launch the International Year of Sanitation in Africa and to assess the
progress, challenges and lessons to be learnt in order to achieve the
sanitation Millennium Development Goals in Africa.

Kapa Bokone ya re e na le dinoka tse pedi tse di nang metsi a mantsi fela
ga go a dirwa gore go nne le matamo a a ka tsholang metsi a a ka thusang ka
nako ya komelelo. Ga ke itse gore jaaka Kapa Bokone e le porofense ka bo
yona, maano a lefapha ke afe go ba tshegetsa mo ntlheng eno gore ba
somarele metsi ka nako ya dipula tse di nang di le namagadi gore ka nako ya
komelelo ba bo ba na le metsi a ba ka ikaegang ka ona.

Re rata gore rona re le komiti re tshegetse tekanyetsokabo e ya lefapha,
mme re eleletse Tona le lefapha nako e e namagadi, mme pula ya matsorotsoro
e nele lefatshe la rona gore segwagwa se utlwiwe se lela mo meeding le mo
melatswaneng go supa gore tota pula e tshologile ka makatlanamane. Ke
leboga komiti e e tshegeditseng tsamaiso e. Ke a leboga. Pula!

MALOKO A A TLOTLEGANG: A e ne! [Legofi.] (Translation of Setswana
paragraphs follows.)

[Northern Cape says it has two flowing rivers which has a lot of water but
there are no dams which were built to store water that would help during
times of drought. Since the Northern Cape is a province on its own, I do
not know what plans the department has in the pipeline to ensure that water
from these downpours is being stored so that in times of drought it can be
used.

We would like to mention that we, as the committee, support this Budget
Vote of the department, and we would like to wish the Minister and the
department everything of the best. Let the rains fall in our land in
abundance, for frogs to be heard croaking in streams and rivulets from
afar, showing that we have indeed experienced sufficient rainfall. I thank
the committee which supported this process. Thank you. Cheers!

HON MEMBERS: Let it rain! [Applause.]]
Mr M A MZIZI: Sihlalo, ngiyabonga koNgqongqoshe bobathathu. Ngithi
okumhlophe kodwa! [Chairperson, I thank all three Ministers. I greet you
all!]

There is no doubt that the budget presented before us is a most important
budget. We can live without food for a long period, but we cannot live
without water for any given period. The IFP is aware of the challenges of
the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry, Dwaf. We also welcome the
move by government to engage in establishing a National Water Resources
Infrastructure Agency to manage and develop our national water resources
infrastructure for economic development and access to water for social
needs.

There are many other programmes that government will roll out, such as
water resources management. This is to ensure that the country’s water
resources are protected, used, developed, conserved, managed and controlled
in a sustainable and equitable manner to the benefit of all people.

May I also touch on forestry, which is also one of the programmes that is
of utmost importance? In this programme, government undertakes to ensure
the sustainable management of the department’s plantations and indigenous
forests in order to realise their optimal social, environmental and
economic benefits and to promote rural development through policy-making,
regulation, facilitation and monitoring and evaluation.
The IFP also urges government to endeavour to reduce incidents of veld,
forest and mountain fires in line with the National Veld and Forest Fire
Act through an implementation system and by publishing monthly reports.

Ngqongqoshe, laphayana ngasendaweni ebizwa nge-New Eersterus ngasePitoli
abantu bakhona kuthe ekuhambeni kwesikhathi babhala incwadi yezikhalazo
beyiqondise khona impela eMnyangweni. Isikhalo sabo kwabe kungamanzi. Udaba-
ke ababekhala ngalo elokuthi uhulumeni wasekhaya wabanikeza amanzi
ngamathange ayegcwele izimpethu okwaze kwadinga ukuthi bawachithe lawo
manzi. Ekuhambeni kwesikhathi-ke uhulumeni wasekhaya wabanikeza amanzi
kodwa bathi lawo manzi awanalusizo ngoba afika emini abantu besemsebenzini,
bayaqambe bayafika akusekho manzi. Angazi-ke wena, Mama, ukuthi
uzokwenzanjani. Ake uthi ukukhwathakhwathaza ubone ukuthi uMnyango
ungabasiza kanjani laba bantu.

Sizosho-ke, siyi-IFP, ukuthi isabiwomali onikezwe sona asikhule njalo ngoba
amanzi phela yinto esingeke sikwazi ukuphila ngaphandle kwayo. Umzwile
naloya mame waseLimpopo oke wakhuluma wathi amaxoxo adlalela phakathi.
Ngeke bawaphuze kodwa-ke ixoxo isele phela. Uma lingekho ixoxo emanzini
kusho ukuthi awekho amanzi. Ngiyabonga. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs
follows.)

[Minister, at or near a place called New Eersterus near Pretoria, the
community once wrote a letter of grievance and addressed it directly to the
department. They were complaining about water. Their main complaint was
that the local government gave them tanks of water which were full of
maggots which they ended up having to spill. After a while the local
government delivered water for them, but that did not help them because
water was delivered during the day when people were already at work and by
the time they came back home there was no water. I do not know what you are
going to do, Madam, but just try and make a plan for the department to see
how they can assist these people.

As the IFP, we are saying that the budget allocated to you must always be
increased because we cannot live without water. You also heard that woman
from Limpopo who said that the frogs are playing inside the tanks. They
cannot drink that water, but then a frog is a frog. If there is no frog in
the water, it means there is no water. Thank you.]

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Chairperson, hon Ministers and hon members, I believe
that the history of mankind has been greatly influenced by the availability
of water. The availability of clean, potable water was probably one of the
most important deciding factors in the choice of human settlement and
development.

In the semi-arid South Africa, water has probably played the defining role
in our nation’s history. It is therefore not surprising to find that the
right of access to a basic water supply and sanitation is a constitutional
right which enables government to protect and promote the right to water
for every individual.

Since 1994, one of the greatest challenges that government has faced has
been to provide basic services and/or upgrade the inferior and rapidly
declining infrastructure for the majority of South Africans. For many of
these people, this infrastructure was either nonexistent or, at the most,
very basic.

Furthermore, access to social and domestic infrastructure was restricted
mainly to urban areas, and people in rural areas had few services. In 1994,
only 20% of rural dwellers had access to electricity, 35% to clean water
and 5% to adequate sanitation. Even in the urban areas, at least a fifth of
households could not access these services. Besides the obvious benefits of
receiving clean, safe water and sanitation, such service delivery also aims
to improve the quality of life and contributes to poverty alleviation.

In this regard government has made significant progress since 1994. Access
to piped water improved from 59% in 1994 to 86% in 2007, which implies that
71% of the backlog has been addressed well ahead of the Millennium
Development Goals of halving the backlog by 2015. Furthermore, between
April 2007 and March 2008, access to free basic water increased from 73% to
77%.

What is, however, of great concern to the select committee is, firstly, the
problems encountered with the quality of water in the Delmas District
Municipality, and more recently in the Ukhahlamba District Municipality,
which has resulted in the deaths of several babies in the last three
months.

Allow me at this time to thank the Free State department of Dwaf, namely Mr
Ntili and his team, for their quick response to a request from their
colleagues from the Eastern Cape for assistance with this incident.

The Ukhahlamba tragedy should never have happened. What is even more
disturbing is the fact that when the portfolio committee in the NA called
for public hearings and invited various municipalities to discuss these
very important matters around water quality, two municipalities from the
Free State did not even turn up for these hearings, thereby showing a total
lack of concern and disregard for their responsibility towards the
wellbeing of the citizens.

As most members in this House know, the most consistent problem raised by
the community during our Taking Parliament to the People programme in Parys
in the Free State, which, by the way, is one of the municipalities that did
not turn up, was the poor quality of water. These complaints by the public
were substantiated by the personal experience of the members. I therefore
call upon the relevant Ministers, the SA Local Government Association,
Salga, and the provincial MECs to immediately become involved to rectify
this unacceptable attitude by certain municipalities who are at the
coalface of delivery.

Secondly, what is of further concern is that, according to the Joint Budget
Committee’s Third Quarter Expenditure Report for the 2007-2008 financial
year published in the ATCs of 10 June 2008, it is reported in a review of
capital expenditure that 18 departments spent less than 50% of their
allocated budget by December 2007, of which the Dwaf has spent less than
20%, notwithstanding the fact that “water infrastructure leaves much to be
desired”.

The report further indicated, and I quote:

  Of the adjustment budget of R436 million, the Department of Water Affairs
  and Forestry spent only R90 million ...

That is 19%.

  The department therefore looks like it is repeating the trend of
  underexpenditure for this category while there are many infrastructure,
  water and sanitation backlogs in communities.

I have been informed by Bloem Water Board, which is also the implementing
agent for water projects in the Ukhahlamba District Municipality, that the
current contract with this district municipality is to come to an end at
the end of June 2008. To date, they have not been able to get the
municipality to confirm whether or not they would like them to remain as
service providers. The consequences of this delay could be that Bloem Water
will be forced to leave, and the community will suffer again.

With regard to water quality, I am pleased to report that Bloem Water did
not experience any water quality failures in the 2007-2008 financial year.
This is contrary to adverse and false media coverage in this regard,
especially by the Afrikaans media in the Free State where the DA actually
had a field day. This is as a result of the existence of the water quality
monitoring forum comprised of Mangaung Local Municipality and the Dwaf
regional office in the Free State.

Chairperson, I still have a minute so I just want to respond to the hon Mr
Watson.

Mnr Watson, waterbeperkings is nie ’n nuwe ding nie. Ons het dit selfs
gedurende die apartheidsjare gehad. So ek weet nie waarom julle hier kom
kla nie, want dit lyk vir my julle het ’n baie kort geheue. Ek dink die
rede is seker omdat die DA nog ’n nat-agter-die- ore party is.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Asseblief! Wees meer korrek met hierdie goed.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr Watson, water restrictions are nothing new. We even had them during the
apartheid years. So I do not know why you have come here to complain,
because it seems to me that you have a very short memory. I believe the
reason is probably because the DA is still a greenhorn party.
[Interjections.] Please! Be more correct with these things.]

Minister, the select committee supports your budget. Thank you very much.

UNGQONGQOSHE WEZAMANZI NAMAHLATHI: Ngiyabonga, Sihlalo. Ngicela ukubonga
amalungu ale Ndlu wonke ngokuthi azoxhasa lesi sabiwomali sezamanzi
nezamahlathi. Ngizobuyela kuMnu uWatson kodwa ngifuna nje kengiqale ngomama
Matlanyane ngithi ukhulume njengomzali ngempela. Singajabula ukuthi nabanye
abangamalungu ale Ndlu benze lokhu okwenzayo ukuthi iqiniso ulisho, futhi
nezinkinga lapho zikhona nazo uzibeke. Siyajabula ukuthi izingane zakho
angeke ziphinde zilokhu zibalekelana futhi zixoshana nezingwenya ngoba
uhulumeni kaKhongolose uwalethile amanzi njengoba ebeshilo ukuthi
uzowaletha.

Okunye engikuthandile enkulumweni yakho yilo mlayezo okade siwukhuluma
sisodwa, singuMnyango esifuna ukuthi nabanye abantu abafana nani basisize
ukuthi siwusakaze, wokuthi leli zwe lethu iNingizimu Afrika yizwe lesomiso.
Kufanele noma ngasiphi isikhathi uma sisebenzisa amanzi siwasebenzisa
ngokuwonga, noma siyageza noma sigeza amazinyo noma siyawasha. Lento
ekhulunywa umama lapha ukuthi sithi sesinifakele amapayipi azimele bese
niwayeka amanzi axhaxhaze adlale izingane lokhu okungalungile, futhi
anifuni ukuthi nitshelwe ngayo. Kubalulekile ukuthi abantu abafana
namalungu ale Ndlu asisize ngoba siyakwenza bandla okusemandleni ethu thina
singuMnyango ukuthi sisakaze lo myalezo yokongiwa kwamanzi. Siyadinga
ukuthi nani nisisize.

Nimzwile-ke umama ethi bayafuna ukuthi amahhovisi ezinhlangano zepolitiki
ezigceme asize ngendlela ezahlukene angase asize ngazo ukuthi kusabalale lo
myalezo wokusebenzisa amanzi ngobuhlakani. Ngiyethemba ukuthi uMqondisi
Jikelele woMnyango kanye nezikhulu zilalele futhi bazozama indlela yokuthi
umyalezo ufinyelele kumalungu ale Ndlu, lesi sishayamthetho, ukuze akwazi
ukusisiza ukusakaza umyalezo wokusebenzisa amanzi ngobuhlakani. Ngiwuzwile
nomyalezo owushilo ukuthi kufanele abantu bafundiswe ngezifo zasemanzini.
Konke-ke lokho sikuthathele izinyathelo singuMnyango. Sithi siyabonga
kakhulu.

Uma ngibuyela lapha kuMnumzane wami we-DA, ubaba uWatson, ngitsheliwe
ukuthi lezi zinto ozikhulumile azilona iqiniso, ikakhulukazi le ndawo
okhuluma ngayo i-Nooitgedagt Dam. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs
follows.)

[The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Chairperson, I would like to
thank all the members of this House for coming to support this Budget Vote
for Water Affairs and Forestry. I will go back to the hon Watson, but I
want to start with the hon Matlanyane, by saying that you have spoken like
a real parent. We would appreciate it if other members of this House could
do as you do by telling the truth, and to point out problems if there are
any. We are happy that your children will no longer be running away from or
chasing crocodiles since the ANC-led government has supplied water as it
has promised.

What I also liked in your speech is the message that we have been
discussing alone as a department which we want other people like you to
assist us in disseminating - that our country, South Africa, is a droughty
country. We should at all times, whenever we use water,  use it sparingly
whether we are bathing, brushing teeth or washing clothes. What hon
Matlanyane says here is that after we have installed tap water pipes for
you, you then leave them leaking extensively; leaving children playing with
them, which is really not right and you do not want to be told about that.
It is important that people like the members of this House assist us
because we, as the department, do our best in disseminating this message of
saving water. We need your assistance.

You have heard the hon member saying that they want the constituency
offices of political parties to assist in any way possible to disseminate
this message of using water sparingly. I hope that the director-general of
the department and the officials are listening and that they will find a
way for this message to reach the members of this House, so that they are
able to assist us in disseminating the message of using water sparingly. I
have also heard your message that people should be taught about water
diseases. We, as the department, have taken steps regarding all that. We
say thank you.

If I can go back to my colleague, hon Watson, I am informed that these
things you spoke about are not true, more especially in this area you are
talking about, the Nooitgedacht Dam.]

In fact, I’m informed that this dam is one of the 42 dams that we,
ourselves, identified as being a problem and which we are rehabilitating.
The R1,2 billion is part of the money that will be used for the dam. This
dam upgrading project is part of the Usuthu-Vaal integrated system that
provides water to Gauteng and important industries such as Eskom and Sasol.


You said that studies were conducted and nothing was done. We did actually
respond to a request from Eskom and other water users for a new supply of
water to the Camden and Komati Power Stations.

You have attacked the integrity of the pipeline by saying that the pipe is
not strong enough to withstand the volumes of water. My information is that
the integrity of that pipeline is in order and that it is of the highest
standard for supplying the required demand for water to the two power
stations in Mpumalanga.

We, as a department ... [Interjections.] Why is the water what?

Mr A WATSON: [Inaudible.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Excuse me, hon Minister. Mr Watson, it’s
unprocedural to ask questions whilst you are seated. If you want to put a
question, please raise your hand and I’ll give you an opportunity to do so,
and the Minister will respond.

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Thank you, Chairperson. Really,
I’m trying to give information so that people don’t repeat these things. He
can say them if he doesn’t know, but once he knows, it’s different.

Nyamezela umamele. Nam ndinyamezele ngela xesha ubuthetha. [Be patient and
listen. I did that when you were talking.]

As a department we have done an in-depth technical analysis of the pipeline
to ensure that the required demand can be delivered to Eskom, and this we
did in collaboration with them. So whatever it is you wanted to say about
the pipeline is not correct. We have responded and we are upgrading it; it
is all in order.

The pollution you mentioned regarding the area of Loskop is an issue of
concern. As I said in my speech, pollution of whatever kind is not going to
be tolerated, and we are tightening the screws. We are going to be taking a
very strong stand on this matter.

We have taken steps to deal with municipalities that are polluting our
water resources. I have issued them with notices. I have even gone
personally to deliver some notices to some of the farmers and some of the
municipalities, giving them 30 days to respond. We are going to take legal
action as a department after that period has expired.

Coming to the pollution in Loskop Dam, it is the result of the acid mine
drainage. As you said yourself, hon Watson, there are a lot of mining
activities going on there.

We have just finished the refurbishment of the Brakspruit Treatment Works,
which we hope will assist with alleviating the problems, because the water
will then be purified before being discharged in that area. Furthermore, a
new management contractor has been appointed and will be in place soon.
This, we hope, will enhance the capacity in that area.

The hon Rev Moatshe, the chairperson of the committee, raised quite a few
issues. I’d like to say to him that the issue of scarcity of water in the
Northern Cape is an issue that we have looked at. We are currently busy ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order, hon Minister! Yes, hon Thetjeng?

Mr O M THETJENG: Chairperson, I just want to put a question to the Minister
on an issue which was raised by Ms Matlanyane. [Interjections.] Yes, I am
asking that through you, Chairperson.

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Chairperson, after I have
finished what I have to say. I have two minutes and 42 seconds, and I still
have a few responses to make. Really, if the question is a burning one, we
can talk about it outside.

Mr O M THETJENG: Yes, it’s a very burning question!

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: With regard to the Northern
Cape, we are currently doing a feasibility study in relation to building a
dam there. As the hon member said, water just runs off there and there is
no way of capturing it. We are working with all the basin states, namely
Lesotho, Botswana, South Africa and Namibia. We hope that this will be
finalised towards the end of this year, and then the dam will probably be
built after 2011. But the issue of water scarcity in the Northern Cape is
something that we are very well-versed in.

We have noted the issues around Asgisa and the concern around the provision
of water and sanitation services in schools and clinics. Hon members,
you’ll remember that we missed our target of providing our schools with
water and sanitation by 2005. We are working on a new target. However, let
me say that progress has been made. There isn’t a clinic in South Africa
without water and sanitation services; if you find one, please let me know.


There were 91 clinics that had no access to water whatsoever, and 110 that
had absolutely nothing with regard to sanitation. By December 2007 we had
dealt with those clinics. When we finished with those, we went back to look
at those that had a less than satisfactory standard of service, those that
were inadequately serviced. There were 256 of them in the whole country,
and all of them have been upgraded.

We have something like five clinics that are being completed currently, but
there’s no clinic in South Africa that doesn’t have water and sanitation
services.

We have started with a few schools. Already we have provided 62 schools
with sanitation services and 90 schools with water. The difficulty with
schools was to get the information from the Department of Education that
would tell us how many schools there were and the level of service
available to them.

I think that the schools programme has been more challenging than the
clinics programme. However, we are working on the problem with the
Department of Education. I’m running out of time.
I want to say that I have addressed in my speech the issue of the bucket
eradication programme. I said that we have reached 94% completion
countrywide and that there are three provinces that have experienced
problems, and none of us could foresee them when we agreed on targets.

Regarding topography, the contractors have encountered rocky areas, and
this has caused delays. In one instance the community said no to any
alternative forms and insisted that they only wanted water-borne
sanitation. So we are constructing the dam and we will be getting water.
Although toilets and everything else have been built, you need
infrastructure such as pipelines in order to bring water to the area.

Ngaphandle kwalokho, baba uMzizi, mayelana namanzi e-Eesterus, ngicabanga
ukuthi into esesizokhuluma ngayo ngaphandle ngoba phela isikhathi sami
sesiphelile. [Besides that, hon Mzizi, regarding water supply in New
Eersterus, I think we can talk about it outside because my time is up.]

Regarding the quality of water, Mr Van Rooyen, I think I have explained
what we are doing. For us as a department and as a government, it’s totally
unacceptable that children should die, as happened at Ukhahlamba. There are
many factors that contributed to those deaths, but we take responsibility
for the fact that the water should, in the first place, not have been the
cause of this diarrhoea.

We have taken all possible measures to be hands-on regarding the problem of
Ukhahlamba. As I indicated, we have asked water boards to assist us, and we
have also deployed people such as engineers and other people, who are
looking at waste water treatment plants and operators. A whole lot of
things are involved, but the department is intervening around the health
and hygiene messages to assist the community to know how to deal with
issues of sanitation, and all of that.

We have noted the issues that have been raised. Regarding the issue of
underspending, I am unable to respond to it right now. However, all I know
is that we have spent our money very well in this current financial year.
If there’s an area where we underspent, it was an area where we were
waiting for authorisation around the De Hoop Dam, as well as the issue of
transferring staff to municipalities. Other than that, we have spent the
money that was allocated to us and I hope that the budget you are approving
for us today is going to go a long way towards bettering the lives of our
people.

Ngiyabonga, Mhlalingaphambili. [Thank you, Chairperson.]

Debate concluded.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 8: Public Service and Administration

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, hon
members, officials and guests who are in the gallery, I want to say that I
am honoured to stand before you this afternoon to participate in the policy
debate on Budget Votes Nos 8, 9 and 10, which are outlined in the National
Treasury’s Estimates of National Expenditure.

This particular occasion gives me an opportunity to give an account of the
substantial work we have done in the portfolio in the past year, and to
give an indication of the programmes and projects for which we intend
utilising the funds to be voted for the current financial year. I look
forward to this debate in the spirit of Danton’s audacity, and I want to
say one does so in the spirit of “audacity, again audacity, and always
audacity!”

 We are at a particular point, as the President of the Republic said in the
 state of the nation address, and I would like to quote him:


    Let me therefore make bold to say that this historical moment demands
    that our nation should unite as never before, and strain every sinew of
    its collective body to address our common challenges, and keep alive the
    dream that has sustained all of us as we travelled along the uncharted
    road towards the creation of the South Africa visualised in our
    Constitution.


 I would argue that this particular portfolio reflects that in a very real
 sense, and this portfolio initially consisted of three institutions. In
 1999, when I was privileged to be appointed Minister, the Department of
 Public Service and Administration had been established three years before
 to support the Minister for the Public Service and Administration in
 revamping the policy framework. The Public Service Commission, in its
 current constitutional role of being directly accountable to the National
 Assembly as an independent monitor of Public Service delivery and personnel
 practices, had also been in existence for three years.


 The SA Management Development Institute, Samdi, was established in 1999 to
 provide training especially for the upper echelons of the Public Service.
 These three institutions represent Votes No 8, 9 and 10 that I am debating
 with you today.


 The portfolio has expanded over the last 10 years to respond to the
 specific needs that have arisen. The year 1999 saw the establishment of the
 State Information Technology Agency, Sita, which was created to consolidate
 the state’s IT interests in order to secure greater return on investment
 for government’s substantial expenditure on IT. The Minister for Public
 Service and Administration is the sole shareholder in Sita on behalf of
 government. In 2003, the Centre for Public Service Innovation was
 established as a facilitator for development and implementation of
 innovative practices. Following extensive research into the medical
 industry, the Government Employees Medical Scheme, Gems, was created in
 2005 to bring to public servants equitable access to affordable and
 comprehensive health care benefits.


 Notwithstanding the diversity within the portfolio, what ties us together
 is our shared purpose and responsibility to transform the SA Public Service
 into a formidable and effective vehicle, capable of supporting the
 socioeconomic development that South Africa and her people need; a public
 administration capable of ensuring human safety and security to each and
 everyone and ensuring the dignified existence of all our people within a
 human rights framework. It should work in a trajectory of perpetual
 improvement and elevation for all and provide support for the poor in order
 to erase the sharp disparities that marked the livelihoods of the
 privileged and the underprivileged.


 On 10 December 2008, the world will celebrate the 60th anniversary of the
 Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Article one states and I quote:


    All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are
    endowed with the reason and conscience ... and should act towards one
    another in a spirit of brotherhood.

The UN Secretary-General, Ban Ki-moon, last year said, and I quote:


  It is our duty to ensure that these rights are a living reality – that
  they are known, understood and enjoyed by everyone, everywhere. It is
  often those who most need their human rights protected who also need to be
  informed that the declaration exists – and that it exists for them.


The South African Constitution gives expression to the principles of the
declaration in the Bill of Rights and section 10 of the Constitution
states, and I quote:

  Everyone has inherent dignity and the right to have their dignity
  respected and protected.


Rights to equality, life, freedom and security of person, housing,
healthcare, food, water, social security, education, information and just
administrative action, amongst other things, are conferred upon people.
This imposes a duty on the Public Service, as the administrative arm of the
democratic government, to uphold the dignity of all the country’s people by
ensuring the adequate and equitable provision of services and the
progressive realisation of the rights contained in the Constitution. In the
three terms of democratic governance since 1994, the Public Service has
been transformed with a view to enabling it to radically improve service
delivery to the people while strengthening good governance.


Now lest we forget, let me remind all of us again that the multiple Public
Services of the apartheid state and Bantustans were rationalised into one
Public Service for all the people of South Africa.


The Public Service policy was comprehensively revised through amendments to
the Public Service Act and the promulgation of a streamlined, simplified
set of Public Service regulations. The regulations allowed managers the
discretion to manage the resources according to their unique circumstances
within the framework of generally applicable norms and standards.

Let me continue and reflect on Samdi. Samdi has recently been reconstituted
as a public sector academy for Public Service training. The new institution
will be named the Public Administration Leadership and Management Academy,
or Palama. In Sesotho it means “ascend” or “get aboard”. We will name the
new building that Palama will occupy later in July the Z K Matthews
Building.


The implementation of the new strategy for Palama is to move from being a
competitive provider on a small scale to becoming a collaborative
facilitator of large-scale provision. This will entail far more extensive
change and a five-fold increase in the availability of training to the
three spheres of government by the end of the next three years.

This change will be made possible through collaboration with provincial
academies to facilitate the provision of training by a broad range of
institutions and individuals within the Public Service, the higher
education institutions, further education and training colleges and the
private sector. In many instances, the academy will be engaging in training
trainers rather than conducting the training themselves.


The planning for the massified induction programme that we have identified
has been completed and trainers have been trained in selected national
departments to ensure that sufficient capacity is created for the roll-out
of the programme. A total of 304 trainers have been trained in the
provinces and the roll-out will be monitored and evaluated on a regular
basis in order to ensure that problems experienced during the
implementation are identified timeously and that corrective steps are
effected.

I have issued a directive making the Massified Induction Programme
compulsory for all new public servants. Successful completion of the
induction course is now a precondition for the confirmation of probation of
new incumbents to the Public Service. Heads of departments have the
responsibility to ensure that systems and processes are in place for the
successful implementation of the induction programme.

Another area of massification is capacity-building on monitoring and
evaluation. There is a range of courses being offered. It is envisaged that
Public Service officials will be able to specialise in monitoring and
evaluation at various levels, from certificates to diplomas, through to
Bachelor’s, Honours, Master’s and doctoral degrees.

On the Public Service Commission, we are all aware that it has been created
constitutionally. Annually, since 2002, the commission has compiled and
tabled reports in Parliament on the status of the Public Service. These
reports consolidate a number of reports on various areas, which include
financial misconduct, anticorruption, professional ethics, conflict of
interest, Batho Pele principles and citizens’ satisfaction surveys.

The commission also applies its transversal Public Service monitoring and
evaluation system annually to sample departments to assess their quality of
administration. Since the inception of the system, 75 departments were
evaluated at national and provincial levels.
Since 2000, the PSC has been involved in the facilitation of the evaluation
of performance of heads of departments. Through this process, heads of
departments are held accountable for the implementation of government
programmes. They also established the national anticorruption hotline in
2004, and over 3 666 cases have been referred to government departments for
processing.

I would like to use this opportunity to thank the Public Service
Commission, the Chairperson, Prof Sangweni, the commissioners and the
office of the PSC for a job well done.

In line with the need for compliance with the regulatory frameworks, which
includes the requirement for Public Service and local government managers
to enter into performance agreements with their supervisors, our assessment
has been that compliance has been unacceptably low. Consequently, the
President announced in the state of the nation address in February this
year that this project should be one of the 24 Apex Projects.

Project 15, as it is known, also deals with the filling of vacancies in top
management positions in the Public Service and local government. Penalties
have been applied on managers who failed to entered into a performance
agreement with their supervisors and those who do not comply will not
qualify for any performance incentive, including pay progression. Maybe
this is something you would like to monitor as you work in your provinces.
On the Public Service Amendment Act of 2007, this legislation requires that
Ministers and MECs take disciplinary action against heads of departments
who breach the regulatory framework. It similarly requires that these heads
take action against officials who fail to comply with the prescripts.

The legislation also strengthens the Public Service Commission’s authority
and establishes a collaborative relationship between the PSC and the Office
of the Auditor–General.

The Public Administration Management Bill has recently been tabled before
Parliament, and essentially this Bill is to ensure that we establish a
single, integrated, normative framework that would allow for optimal
alignment between systems, policy priorities and organisational cultures so
that government could function as a single Public Service, where citizens
would reap the benefits of receiving their services under a single and
unified framework.

On ICT services, I’d want to state that the next-generation e-government
programme is an integral part of the access strategy of government and it
will be implemented in phases, starting with the e-enablement of six
services, that is, an application for an ID, a child birth certificate,
foster grants, pensions, maintenance and notification of death.

A programme management office has been established to ensure the roll-out
of this programme. The Office of the Government Chief Information Officer,
OGCIO, located in the Department of Public Service and Administration, will
also conduct three reviews focusing on Sita’s performance, government call
centres and Information Communication Technology, ICT procurement
expenditure. The results will be made known later this year and will be
used to further strengthen the implementation of the next generation of e-
government.

In terms of our Batho Pele thrust, earlier this year the Know Your Service
Rights Campaign was launched which is an important pillar of Batho Pele
revitalisation. A booklet, to be translated in all official languages, will
be distributed to all service delivery points of social cluster departments
and the Thusong centres across the country. I am sure that many of you have
noted that the President launched the 100th Thusong centre at Inhlazuka
recently. On that occasion, he said, and I quote:


  All of us know very well that information is power. Those who have
  information can use it the way they want, especially if the rest of the
  people do not have the information. So, let us use this centre to empower
  ourselves with information and knowledge about everything that government
  is doing, as well as the services that are due to our communities.

The Community Development Workers Programme, CDW, is another important
programme to ensure that we reach people where they live. It was launched
in 2003. We intend to employ an additional 4 000 CDWs in the next three
years in addition to the 3 000 already deployed.

Recently in Limpopo a new cohort of fully trained CDWs graduated from the
University of Venda. Speaking at the graduation ceremony at Thohoyandou,
Premier Moloto gave this message to the graduates, and I quote:


  Go to the people; live among the people; learn from the people; plan with
  the people; work with the people; be honest with the people; start with
  what the people know; build on what the people have; teach by showing and
  never run away from challenges.


These words capture very well the nature of the task facing community
development workers in South Africa.

The CDWs who received their national certificates in community development
were from five provincial districts, namely the Vhembe, Capricorn, Mopani,
Sekhukhune and Waterberg districts.

Regarding this Centre for Public Service Innovation, we know that the
awards have become an important vehicle for entrenching excellence in the
delivery of public services by recognising innovative projects and
initiatives around the country, especially in the provinces.

The 2007 Innovator of the Year award was shared between two provincial
departments, namely the Port Elizabeth Department of Justice and
Constitutional Development office in the Eastern Cape, led by Adv Klaasen,
and the Mpumalanga provincial eye care programme, led by Dr Varghese. Adv
Klaasen introduced an electronic case flow management system, which enabled
them to reduce their turnaround time for custody and access disputes
investigated in the office from a national target of 24 weeks, or six
months, to an average of 10,6 weeks.

The doctor, whose surname I didn’t pronounce too well, single-handedly
initiated the eye care programme in Mpumalanga province in 1994. This must
be lauded. The Centre for Public Service Innovation, OGCIO, is also a
partner and online regional centre for the United Nations’ public
administration network. You can read more on that in the documented, more
detailed speech which you should see as an extension of this.

We have also acceded to the African Peer Review Mechanism, APRM, on 9 March
2003 in Abuja, and I think we can now say that we are ready to present our
second report to the forum when its next meeting takes place and this item
is on the agenda. In the report we reflect on both our progress and our
challenges.
One of the issues that we should raise is that the APRM report did identify
the potential challenge of xenophobic violence. This is a matter that we
have seen through the pockets of the intracommunity xenophobic violence
that have taken place in our country. We, however, have also seen
responses. To this end I am also able to give you the SMS number that has
been set up - it is 36282 -for public servants and members of the public to
send messages and to commit R5,00 for the reintegration of people who have
been displaced.

Regarding the anticorruption capacity-building programme, which will be
implemented this year, the aim of the programme is to strengthen
competencies to prevent, detect, investigate, prosecute and monitor
corruption by law enforcement officials, anticorruption practitioners and
public officials. We do a fair amount of work on the African continent, and
there is much to be spoken about but no time to cover it all today.

I want to state that our work is still going well in the Democratic
Republic of Congo and in other countries with whom we have bilateral
relations. You can find out more about that in the written document.

I want to go on and look at the area of personnel expenditure. Resolution 1
of 2007 states very clearly that, for 2008, the cost of living adjustment
will be National Treasury’s forecast for the Consumer Price Index for the
fiscal year 2008-2009 plus 1%. To this end, we have announced an increase
of 10,5% for the cost of living adjustment for this year.

In the event that the actual inflation figure is lower than the projected
inflation, the difference will be added in 2009. So we intend applying and
sticking to both the letter and the spirit of Resolution 1 of 2007.

There’s much to be said around the occupational-specific dispensation, OSD,
and I would like to indicate that we have implemented all those as required
by the agreement. The development and implementation of the OSD for social
workers, health professionals and correctional officials will be undertaken
in this current year.

Let’s talk about the gem in our crown. The gem in our crown is the
Government Employees Medical Scheme, Gems. This year, Gems’ membership has
grown by 256 000, covering more than 600 000 people. It is now the largest
restricted medical scheme in the country, and member growth consistently
exceeds 500 applications per day. It is significantly more than 53% of the
employees who did not previously enjoy access to a medical scheme subsidy
provided by government who have enrolled as members. In this province, the
Western Cape province, almost 40% of Public Service employees are Gems
members. This is something we should really laud.

The 2007 negotiations highlighted a number of challenges. In this regard
there was clearly a need, identified and captured in Resolution 1 of 2007,
that we should have a public sector summit. This summit will be held in
September 2008. Unions have identified underlying concerns to be addressed,
such as outsourcing, agentisation, minimum wages, resourcing of the Public
Service and the working environment of public servants.

We have also indicated that in addition to those issues, as an employer, we
would like to engage unions on the performance and productivity of the
Public Service, which we see as critical.

We have achieved much of which we can be proud. We have prepared the
terrain, often painstakingly, for endeavours that will only pay off in
years to come. Some of our endeavours are already established and are
bearing fruit, but both in this portfolio and across the broad terrain of
government there have been tremendous successes and we look forward to even
more.

In conclusion, I’d like to do two things. Firstly I want to commend and
thank all the public servants that have selflessly engaged in endeavours to
make the change required. I’d like to thank the directors-general, the
chairs of the various entities, the boards and all teams across the
portfolio of Public Service and Administration for the work they have done.


As in many instances, I still say that we still have some more ground to
cover. We will and should respond to the call by the President that we will
stretch every sinew, and I think on 18 June, it being his birthday, we say
that we make this commitment not only to the President of the Republic, but
also to the people of the Republic of South Africa, to the people of our
region and to the people of the world. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr D A WORTH: Chairperson, hon Ministers present and hon members, firstly I
would like to thank the Director-General, Dr Levin, and his department for
the briefing given to our committee. The Minister has just concluded what I
consider a very good annual salary increase for the public servants, and in
a lighter vein I would suggest we ask the Minister to negotiate the
increases for us poor Members of Parliament. [Laughter.]

The aim of the Department of Public Service and Administration is to lead
the modernisation of the Public Service by assisting government departments
to implement their management policies and systems and structural solutions
within a generally applicable framework of norms and standards in order to
improve service delivery.

We must all agree that access to quality government services is an
important weapon in the fight against poverty. The Minister has already
tabled the Public Administration Bill in the National Assembly and, if
passed, we will see the introduction of a single Public Service. The Public
Service is, I must add, the biggest employer in the country and employs
over a million people.

According to the Public Service Commission, PSC, Report, one of the eight
Batho Pele Principles is the principle of value for money. This principle
states:

  Public services should be provided economically and sufficiently in order
  to give citizens the best possible value for money.

The Batho Pele White Paper states:

  ... a transformed South African Public Service will be judged by one
  criterion above all: its effectiveness in delivering services which meet
  the basic needs of all South African citizens.

The Public Service Commission Report also highlights misconduct in the
Public Service; the most common cases being absenteeism, dishonesty, poor
performance, sexual assault and the misuse of state vehicles, amongst other
things.

Human resource constraints and skills shortages are problems that are
mentioned often. These shortages cause many problems and present a
significant obstacle to service delivery, such as ever-increasing staff
mobility resulting in a high turnover that affects a range of jobs from the
most senior positions to the frontline departments, causing scarce skills
to be used inefficiently such as social workers, nurses and doctors having
to do unnecessary administration work; and catastrophic failure due to
inadequate quality, quantity or timing of delivery in sectors such as
health and social development.

It was noted in the PSC report that there was a general lack of
accountability in the Public Service. Many officials commented that poor or
even a complete lack of performance is rewarded in the same way that good
performance is rewarded. What makes matters worse is that high performance
is often rewarded through increased responsibilities with no proportional
benefits, which is unfair and demoralising.

The Department of Provincial and Local Government has stated, for instance,
that only 73% of municipal managers have signed a performance contract; the
others refused for various reasons. We have taken note of what the Minister
said and I am very pleased to hear that and we will be watching the
situation carefully.

Have you ever read or heard of a head of department or municipal manager
not being paid his or her bonus because of poor or underperformance? The
bonus is merely regarded as part of the salary package despite half the
municipalities, for example, not performing or being riddled with
corruption. Personnel convicted of fraud or corruption just simply apply
for work in another state department.
The Minister’s department has stated that the masses of the people must be
guaranteed the same level of service wherever they interact with
government, be it at local, provincial or national level. The department
states that inherent in the Single Public Service is a programme to ensure
that the best and brightest are attracted and retained; that there is
efficient use of technology which is simple to use with procedures; and to
instil a pride in them for working for the people. Most of these remained
major challenges under the Single Public Service and surely it would be
better to expand and improve those silos or areas of excellence, rather
than to reduce everything to a poor common denominator.

The new legislation seeks to create a new single pension and medical aid
for all levels of government. The DA, along with a number of unions,
believes that this will affect the members’ existing rights and benefits as
well as their right to voluntary association. Secondly, the legislation
seeks to create a uniform salary structure across all levels of government,
the cost-effectiveness of which remains unknown.

The proposed Single Public Service Bill will also empower the Minister to
set norms and standards on a wide range of personnel and public
administration practices, which in essence centralises power and enables
the ANC to force its own policies on local government. Local elections
would become irrelevant as city officials would now be controlled by
government policy at a national level.
It is clear that the Public Service is in disarray and is failing to
deliver the benefits and basic services voters are entitled to. Drastic
changes need to be made, but the DA firmly believes that the Single Public
Service is not the solution. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S SHICEKA: I want to add my voice to those who have congratulated the
President on his 66th birthday today.

Chairperson, the Minister, colleagues, comrades and friends, today I am
standing in front of you to present our views, our reflections, on the
department, for the last time in this Third Parliament. This input will
reflect on the four years that I have been deployed to lead this committee
and raise issues which I think those who follow in my footsteps will be
able to take forward as we move ahead.

The ANC as an organisation has placed a supreme priority on the Public
Service as it knows that the lives of the people can only be improved if
this delivery arm is accountable, transparent, efficient and effective. The
Public Service at all levels of government and at all centres of
administration is transformed in ways that ensures adequate capacity and
skills promoting vision and creativity are in place.

The Department of Public Service and Administration is the department in
government that is leading the modernisation of government to ensure that
this government is responsive to the needs of our people. This department
must make sure that it utilises the ICT methods in the delivery of services
to our people.

In South Africa today there is no economic centre of activity that is
without electricity. This means, in essence, that all government
departments are supposed to have at least a computer to provide services.
However, in Flagstaff, emaMpondweni, in Cala and eNgcobo, there is no
computer for the Department of Home Affairs.

This means people do not have access to important government documents that
will ensure that their lives are improved. We believe that the department
must ensure that these basic necessities are in place. When we mention ICT,
we are talking about something that has to be done and implemented so that
when a child is looking for a birth certificate, they will be able to find
it.

When we are looking for the needs that must be met in that area, there must
be access. We commend the department for the development and implementation
of the community development workers, CDWs. This initiative is aimed at
enhancing the implementation of Batho Pele principles, particularly access
to services for our people. The CDWs are pivotal to bringing government
closer to the people and ensuring participative democracy.

We think that this programme should be rolled out in all wards across the
length and breadth of our country. At the same time, hon Minister, we
believe that there must be national norms and standards. It must not be a
free-for-all provinces as is happening now in terms of what has to be
there. In addition to that, the resourcing of the structures should be
similar.

One of the major things that we are excited about is that the CDWs are
going to be able to have access to laptops so that, wherever they are, they
are able to ensure that information is accessed. At this point that has not
been achieved in some areas and we believe that it has to be dealt with
because it is a good concept and it is a good idea. It must therefore be
implemented in a way that takes our country forward in that respect.

We, as the committee, are confident about the future of the Public Service
- a Public Service that is conscious of our people, a Public Service that
responds to the needs of the people, a Public Service that has zeal,
passion and commitment. The majority of the public services in South Africa
are based in provinces and that is why the Bills are always tagged as being
section 76 Bills. Therefore we believe that the provinces must play a role
in assisting the national government in their attainment of the national
objectives, particularly around the issue of political oversight. We
believe that provinces are not playing that role sufficiently. Great
strides have been made in the transformation of the Public Service,
particularly around representativity and the issue of middle management.
But we believe that there is still a lot that needs to be achieved around
the issue of representativity, particularly of women and people with
disabilities.

We hope that the goals of 2009 of having 50% women’s representativity will
be achieved. We hope that when you respond you will tell us how far we are
at this point because March 2009 is around the corner; it’s not far from
now. The 2% target for people with disabilities must be achieved by 2010
and we hope that you will be able to assist us by telling us where we are
with this.

The fight against corruption, which has been led vigorously by the
Minister, is one of the flagships of this government. The zero tolerance
that has been shown by the ANC-led government has paid dividends. Over 80%
of corrupt activities that have been identified have been exposed by our
systems and not by any other person. It’s we who are dealing with this
corruption because we believe that corruption has no role in our place.
However, we believe that the issue of disclosures around financial
interests is an area that is a challenge. It’s an area where we believe an
improvement has to be made. It is an area in which we believe executive
authorities must take responsibility, and take charge of it because this
issue is an issue that can cause some blurring of lines in terms of what
needs to be done.

These disclosures, colleagues, are about looking at registerable interests
and must be disclosed by the senior management service. They cover these
areas: shares and other financial interests in private and public companies
and other corporate entities recognised by law. The other area is
directorships and partnerships, remunerated work outside the Public
Service, consultancies and retainerships, sponsorships, gifts and
hospitality from a source other than a family member and other ownerships
of and interests in land, property, whether inside or outside the Republic
of South Africa.

The implementation of this financial disclosure of interest was started in
2000. These disclosures have shown that there are some challenges that have
to be dealt with. For instance, in the Eastern Cape, Northern Cape and the
Free State, less than 50% of disclosures were submitted but in North West
there was 100% compliance in that province. The Department of Health has
only submitted once since 2000. This means they’ve only submitted once in
an 8-year period. The Department of Housing only submitted these financial
disclosures twice.

We believe that this situation needs to be improved. The Independent
Complaints Directorate, ICD, the Department of Public Service and the
Department of Transport submitted 100% of disclosures last year. The
Treasury and the Department Safety and Security have also submitted 100% of
disclosures in the last two years.

We don’t see your department, hon Minister, in this issue. We believe that
as the department that is leading this process, it must lead by example. It
must ensure that these matters are dealt with. We hope that these matters
will be addressed.

I want to conclude by saying thank you to the team that we’ve worked with
over this period under difficult circumstances. I would also like to thank
the department for co-operating with us in dealing with the issues, the
staff for their commitment and dedication and, of course, my family. Thank
you.

Mr A L MOSEKI: Modulasetulo, mme Matlhoahela o a bo a ntshwenya mme ga ke
batle gore a ntshwenye. [Chairperson, Ms Matlhoahela is disturbing me and I
don’t like what she does.]

Comrade Minister, Comrade Sibiya and colleagues, we are debating Budget
Vote No 8, and this Budget Vote, as the Minister and the chairperson of the
committee said, is a tool that must be used by the department to ensure
that it executes its transversal responsibilities.

Selo santlha se re tshwanetseng go se bua ke gore ka Sedimonthole 2007
lekoko la ANC le kopane kwa Limpopo kwa Polokwane go buisana. Mo
dipuisanong le ditshweetso tse lekgotla le le ditsereng ke gore re tsena mo
kgatong ya bobedi ya dingwaga di le someamabedi tsa kgololosego ya Aforika
Borwa. Kgwetlho e re lebaganeng le yona ke gore re natlafatse temokerasi ya
rona e e golang. Potso ke gore re dira eng fa re natlafatsa temokerasi ya
rona le gore re dirisa didiriswa dife?

Selo santlha fa re natlafatsa temokerasi ya rona ke go nna le badiredipuso
ba ba nang le lerato le boineelo mo setšhabeng sa bona; e bile ba na le
bokgoni. Selo se, se botlhokwa ka gonne batho ba rona ba lebeletse
badiredipuso le puso go tlisa ditirelo tse di maleba tse ba di solofetseng.


Mo kopanong e re neng re e tshwere le puso, e eteletswe pele ke mokaedi-
kakaretso wa lefapha, sengwe se se tlhageletseng le fa re ne re engwe ka
lefoko ke Khomišene ya Ditirelo tsa Botlhe [Public Service Commission] ke
gore ka ngwaga wa 2000 Kabinete e amogetse letlhomeso la go tlhotlhwafatsa
ditlhogo tsa mafapha ngwaga le ngwaga. Mo ngwageng wa ntlha fa letlhomeso
le tsenngwa tirisong le ne la atlega thata ka gonne 80% tsa ditlhogo tsa
mafapha di ne tsa itlhagisa gore di tlhotlhwafatswe. E ke pegelo e re e
boneng gotswa go PSC. Dingwaga tse di latetseng ngwaga wa 2002 go bonagetse
phokotsego mo go itlhagiseng ga go tlhotlhwafatswa.

Ka 2004-05 go ne ga oketsega go se kae mme morago ga foo
ga fokotsega gape. (Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[The first thing we should mention is that, during December 2007, the ANC
converged on Polokwane in Limpopo for discussions. During the discussions
at the conference, it was resolved that South Africa has entered its second
decade of freedom. The challenge facing us is to strengthen our young
democracy.  The question is: What is it that we are doing in the effort to
strengthen our democracy and what kind of mechanisms are we going to put in
place?

The first thing to embark on in an effort to strengthen our democracy is to
have public servants who are passionate about as well as dedicated to their
nation. This is important, because our people depend on public servants and
the government for service delivery.

During the meeting with the government, led by the director-general of the
department, one of the points raised during a presentation by the Public
Service Commission was that, during the year 2000, Cabinet approved the
performance evaluation of the heads of departments framework, which was
supposed to be conducted annually. The first year it was successfully
implemented, because 80% of the departmental heads availed themselves for
performance evaluation. This is according to the report received from the
PSC. After the year 2002 the number of departmental heads who availed
themselves for evaluation decreased.

There was a slight improvement in the year 2004-05, and later, a decline.]

By the time of the briefing on this report, it was quite clear that only
29% of the heads of departments had availed themselves for evaluation. That
was in March or April. Clearly, if we are to have a Public Service
cadreship that is able to deliver service as expected by our people, the
Public Service must be able to submit the public servants for scrutiny and
evaluation so that we can identify gaps in terms of service delivery,
capacity and, over and above that, are able to develop the proper
strategies to ensure that gaps are closed. If that does not happen we will
have problems.

One of the problems that we identified from that report is that it would
appear the executive authorities seem not to be hands-on with regard to
ensuring that heads of departments avail themselves for evaluation. We
therefore, Minister, want to suggest to you as a committee that the
executive authorities should begin to be hands-on around these issues so
that, by the end of the day, when we are held accountable as government,
the machinery at the forefront of ensuring quality service is delivered
should be adhering to the norms and standards as set by our government.

Having said this, the area I was requested to focus on is that the Public
Service in turn tells us that the Single Public Service Bill before us
appears as if it is going to add more responsibilities to its workers once
passed. Therefore, it is important for government to ensure that the
planning takes into account those challenges once this Bill has been
enacted in order to capacitate the Public Service in terms of personnel, so
that when the local government workers are incorporated into the broader
Public Service and become part of the Public Service, they will be
sufficiently catered for as the PSC continues to do its work.

With those few words we want to take this opportunity to thank the
department for having done what it said it would do when it presented its
strategic plan in the year 2006-2007. With the challenges that still remain
we are satisfied that the department is moving in the right direction. The
select committee therefore supports the Vote as presented to us. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Chairperson, I will begin with a quote from something
that appeared in ANC Today four years ago. It said:

  The scarcity of skills in the Public Service is an issue we need to
  debate. We need to review the competency in our Public Service if we are
  to ensure effective service delivery.

On page 275 of the recent African Peer Review Mechanism it says that South
Africa suffers from a severe skills shortage. It then mentions that this
shortage is most acute at the provincial and local government levels where
delivery of basic goods and services is paramount.

Volgens onlangse berigte is daar vakatures in 10,4% van die 390 000
staatsdepartemente se poste. Dit wil sê daar is 40 000 vakatures. Die
grootste vraag is na top vaardighede. Een uit elke agt poste vir hoogs
vaardige mense is vakant. Dit bring ons by so 12,5% en dit is tans 200 meer
as twee jaar gelede.

Die Weskaapse Minister van Vervoer en Openbare Werke het verlede jaar
ongeveer hierdie tyd gesê dat daar ’n 3-jaar moratorium geplaas moet word
op regstellende asksie in beroepe waar daar tekorte in bepaalde vaardighede
ontwikkel.

’n Tydjie gelede het die Vryheidsfront Plus ’n SA Talentprojek saamgestel.
Daar is mense wat gewillig en bereid is en wat oor bepaalde vaardighede
beskik, wat gewillig en gretig is om behulpsaam te wees waar daar tekortes
bestaan. Vir hierdie talentprojek wat die Vryheidsfront geinisieer het, is
daar 1 800 name, wat 143 ingeneurs, 92 MBAs, en 43 PhDs insluit. Ek wil
graag hierdie talent aan die Minister oorhandig, as sy ernstig is om die
tekorte uit die weg te ruim. En ek glo sy is - want dit is in almal se
belang om ’n doeltreffende, diensvaardige staatsdiens te hê – en dat sy
werklikwaar erns sal maak daarmee en kyk watter van die name op hierdie
spesifieke SA Talentprogramlys sy kan gebruik.

Hier is ook ander kollegas wat verwys het na die gebrek aan dienslewering,
ook in regeringsgeledere. Ons wil graag ’n bydrae lewer en ek sal so in die
verbygaan, met u toestemming, die SA Talentprojek aan die agb Minister
oorhandig. Baie dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[According to recent reports there are vacancies in 10,4% of the 390 000
posts in government departments. This means that there are 40 000
vacancies. The biggest demand is for Apex skills. One out of every eight
posts for highly skilled persons is vacant. This brings us to about 12,5%
and it presently exceeds the number of two years ago by 200.

The Western Cape MEC for Transport and Public Works about this time last
year said that a 3-year moratorium must be placed on affirmative action in
occupations where specific skills shortages have developed.

Some time ago the Freedom Front compiled a South African Talent project.
There are persons with specific skills, who are willing and keen to assist
where shortages exist. This talent project, which was initiated by the
Freedom Front Plus consists of 1 800 names which include 143 engineers, 92
persons with MBAs, and 43 persons with PhDs. I would like to hand over this
list of talented people to the Minister, if she is serious about
eradicating the shortages. And I believe she is – because it is in the
interest of everyone to have an effective, helpful Public Service - and
that she really means business and will determine who on this specific list
of talented people in South Africa she can utilise.
Here are other colleagues who have also referred to the lack of service
delivery, also in government ranks. We would gladly make a contribution and
I will in passing, with your consent, hand over the SA Talent project to
the hon Minister. Thank you very much.]

Mr M A MZIZI: Thank you, Chairperson. In supporting the budget of this
department, one has to look back to find out what the function of this
department is. I would not be far off by saying: Die appel val nie ver van
die boom af nie. [The apple doesn’t fall far from the tree.]

This is the department that is assisting government departments to
implement their management policies, systems and structural solutions
within the generally applicable framework of norms and standards in order
to improve service delivery.

The other engagement of this department is to improve the service delivery
of national and provincial departments by providing technical and other
assistance to all national and provincial departments in order for them to
develop their service delivery improvement plans.

The other important responsibility is the promotion of the regulation of
administration and employment matters in all three spheres of government by
tabling the Single Public Service Bill with the hope to develop
implementation plans by March 2009.
Lokhu kusho ukuthi kuyodinga silinde kuze kwedlule uMashi 2009 ngaphambi
kokuthi kubonakale impumelelo. Sesiyoyephula ivuthiwe uma sekufike leso
sikhathi. [This means that we will see progress after March 2009. We will
see when that time comes.]

The IFP welcomes the move by the department to improve governance and
public administration in order to improve service delivery in Africa and
other participating countries worldwide. This is in support of the vision
of efficiency and increased public participation in governance by fighting
corruption and carrying out participatory monitoring. Did I say it right?
Fighting corruption!

Angikugcizelele lokhu. Ngqongqoshe, ukulwa nenkohlakalo kusho ukulwa
nenkohlakalo kuzo zonke izikhungo zikahulumeni nangaphandle kanye nasezweni
lonke ngokubanzi esifundeni saseNingizimu ne-Afrika. Lokho sekuyosho ukuthi
i-Southern African Development Community, i-SADC, namanye amazwe
sebeyofikelela endaweni lapho sebeyothi sebefikile eKhanana ngoba
inkohlakalo iyobe isiphelile. Izinto eziningi zoniwe inkohlakalo. Uma
singalwa siyinqobe leyo mpi, siyobe sinqobe impi enkulu impela uma ngabe
inkohlakalo ingasuka. Iye ithi into iyinhle bese yoniwa yinkohlakalo.
Sikufisela inhlahla-ke, Ngqongqoshe, uma ngabe nawe uzoba ngomunye
wabazobuya kuloya nyaka ozayo ngoba phela asilindele ukuthi sisazobuya.
Uyabona sesibadala phela ngakho kungenzeka kuthiwe asithathe umhlalaphansi.
Kungenzeka nalokho, akuyona into esiyibalekelayo kodwa-ke uma unganqoba
lokhu singakahlali phansi, Ngqongqoshe, sesiyohlala phansi sakhe umkhanya
sithi sebengalona izwe ngenkohlakalo kodwa thina siye sayichitha
inkohlakalo. Imali abakunikeze yona sengathi ungayisebenzisa ngendlela,
uthuthuke bese kuphela inkohlakalo. Siyabonga. (Translation of isiZulu
paragraph follows.)

[Let me emphasise this, hon Minister: fighting corruption means to fight it
in every form, in government institutions, outside government institutions,
throughout the whole country as well as in the  Southern African
Development Community, SADC, region. And this means that SADC and other
countries will reach a stage where they will realise that they have reached
Canaan after corruption has been rooted out. Most issues were spoiled by
corruption. If we can fight and win that war, we would have won a major
battle indeed if corruption could be done away with. Good things are always
spoiled by corruption. We then wish you good luck, hon Minister, if you are
going to be deployed back here next year, because we do not expect to come
back. Look, as elderly people, we are likely to be directed to retire. That
is possible and we cannot run away from it. But, hon Minister, if you can
conquer this before we retire, we would rest and look on and say: they
could have destroyed this country through corruption if it hadn’t been for
us who got rid of corruption.  May you use the money allocated to you
correctly, develop and then do away with corruption. Thank you.]

Mr N J MACK: Thank you, Chairperson. Surely, there was something wrong
because hon Mzizi’s name does not appear there. When I got here and I saw
it was four minutes, I knew it could not be me. Four minutes could never be
me or the ANC!

Hon Minister, members, special delegates, ladies and gentlemen, it is quite
nice to participate in this debate. I had a very calm speech prepared, but
let me first start with the hon van Heerden.

Agb van Heerden, ek is bly die VF Plus het ook destyds vir die President ’n
paar name gegee. Ons was oop daarvoor en die President het gebruik gemaak
daarvan. Ons het die mense ingebring en ons het dit waardeer.

Ek is bly om te sien dat u my ‘n paar weke terug aangehaal het en u het ’n
baie goeie toespraak gelewer. Ek sien u haal weer vandag die ANC Today aan.
So u verbeter; u verbeter al die tyd, maar daar is een ding waarmee ek net
’n bietjie met u wil verskil. Dit is nie altyd te sê dat mense wat grade
het, altyd goeie werk lewer nie. Ek sien u lê baie klem op gegradueerdes
wat daar buite sit. Reg, maar daar is ook gegradueerdes vandag in
departemente, en ons as die ANC is ook nie skaam om dit te sê nie, wat lui
is en nie hul werk doen nie.

Ons moet dus versigtig wees om nie net te fokus op gegradueerders nie. Daar
is gewone mense wat nie grade het nie, maar wat geleerdheid het en wat
opleibaar is en wat die verbindtenis het om goeie werk te doen. Baie van
ons ouers, selfs my ouers, het nie ‘n hoë geleerdheid gehad nie, maar hulle
het darem toegesien dat hul kinders ’n toekoms het. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Hon Van Heerden, I am pleased to see that the FF Plus has also submitted a
few names to the President in the past. We were open to it and the
President made use of it. We brought the people forward and we were
appreciative of this.

I am pleased to see that you quoted me a few weeks back and that you
delivered a very good speech then. I notice that you are once again quoting
from the ANC Today. So you are improving; you are improving all the time,
but there is one point on which I would like to differ you. It is not
always the case that people who have degrees are always producing good
work. I notice that you are placing a lot of emphasis on graduates who are
unemployed. And rightly so, but there are also graduates in our departments
today - and we, as the ANC, are not ashamed to say this - who are lazy and
who are not performing.

We must therefore guard against focusing on graduates only. There are
ordinary people who do not have degrees, but have acquired learning, are
trainable and have the commitment to produce good work. Many of our
parents, mine included, did not have higher learning but they managed to
ensure a future for their children.]

The ANC’s anchor policy statements in the people’s Freedom Charter, the
Reconstruction and Development Programme, RDP, all the state of the nation
addresses, January 8 Statements, etc, encourage and emphasise
transformation. We want to ensure that all levels of government are
reformed. We want to ensure adequate capacity and skills through which our
programme of developing previously neglected communities can be transformed
in order to improve the quality of life of all our people.

As the ANC, we are realistic about the difficult road that we have to
navigate to achieve these objectives. I recall, hon Minister, what you said
during last year’s Budget Vote in the National Assembly, and I quote:

  The Ministry of Public Services and Administration is a complex and a
  broad portfolio. It contains two full government departments and then the
  Department of Public Service and Administration and the South African
  Management Development Institute.

The SA Management Development Institute, Samdi, is now the Public
Administration Leadership and Management Academy, Palama. Under Samdi you
have a whole range of organisations: Sita, the Centre for Public Service
Innovation, CPSI, and the Government Employee Medical Scheme, Gems. I have
just one question about Palama and Samdi, and the whole massification
programme. I just want you to ensure and give us the assurance that quality
does not go down as usual when we do massification programmes.

No one can deny that being at the helm of those entities is indeed a
demanding job. We note that since 1999, along with the ANC policy to ensure
an appropriately developed and cared-for corps of civil servants – we must
care for our civil servants – the department has designed Programme 2,
which focuses on human resource management and development purpose, which
in turn focuses on the task to develop and implement an integrated
strategy, monitored employment practices, contract human resources planning
and diversity management and improve the health and wellbeing of our Public
Service employees.

I have to skip over parts of my speech as previous speakers have already
alluded to these things. One of these is that apart from the achievements,
we are also facing many challenges. We are operating in a country marked by
huge inequalities between our people. We are still faced with strong
divides between urban and rural, rich and poor, male and female, white and
black, literate and illiterate. We also experience gatekeepers in the
process of the realisation of a better life for all. These gatekeepers
cannot be tolerated within and outside the Public Service. I will come to
this.

I have a very important thing, Minister, which I need to bring to your
attention. There is a great concern regarding qualified audit opinions. The
number of qualified audit opinions for national departments increased from
seven departments in 2004-2005 to twelve in 2006-2007. In the case of
provincial departments, although the number of qualified opinions decreased
from 64 to 51 in 2006-2007, the rate of the decrease is still not good
enough and confirms that too many departments are not meeting the required
standards. What is more worrying is that some of these departments have
actually been receiving qualified audit opinions for the last four years,
and I think that is our concern.

On the issue of Batho Pele and the issue of value for money that was raised
by the hon Darrel Worth, let me tell you about Batho Pele.

Batho Pele op die platteland waarvandaan ek kom - Beaufort-Wes, Sentraal
Karoo, die Presidensiële node, onder die armste mense van die armstes - is
daar groot sukses. Daar is ’n paar probleme, maar ek kan vir u voorbeelde
uitwys wat ek self ervaar het. My eie kind se identiteitsdokument het ek
binne veertien dae gekry.

Prince Albert, ’n plattelandse dorpie, wat my kiesafdeling was, het
persentasiegewys vir plaaslike regering die meeste kiersers geregistreer.
Dit was omdat daar ’n mobiele eenheid van Binnelandse Sake was en dit het
van die amptenare geverg om deur die nag te ry om dit te doen. Dit is
waarde vir geld vir Prince Albert se mense. Daar is nog steeds ’n paar
amptenare wat nie Batho Pele beginsels gehoorsaam nie, maar soos ons in
Afrikaans sê, dis die klein jakkalsies wat die wingerde verniel.

Ek wil vir u terugvat, want hier is lede wat Batho Pele in ’n ander opsig
sien. In die apartheidsdae met die vorige regering was die Batho Pele
anders vir my. Ek het dit ook ervaar; dan staan ons swart mense in ’n ry en
dan word daar vir ons gesê: “Gee pad, staan soontoe, dat die oubaas en die
nooi verbykom.” Vir ’n ou tannie of ouma word daar gesê: “Staan ook maar
eenkant, want die klienbaas moet ook verbykom.” Dan word hulle eerste
bedien. Dit was die Batho Pele in die ou dae.

U kan die groot verskil sien en u kan sien waar ons vandag is. Daar is
gelykheid en ons moet dit tog erken. Ek wil nie saamstem dat daar alewig
chaos in Publieke Werke is nie, agb Worth. As dit die geval was dan sou my
skoonpa nie so gelukkig gewees het dat hy elke maand sy “old-age pension”
kry nie. Daar is een of twee gevalle waar daar probleme is, maar dan is
daar regtig probleme. Wanneer ons praat van die Skerpioene wat moet ontbind
en geamalgameer word, dan is die land in chaos en daar is so baie geweld.
Daar is chaos as ’n paar van ons mense kla dat hulle swaar kry in plaaslike
regering. Die ANC ondersteun die begroting. [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Batho Pele in the rural town where I hail from – Beaufort West in the
Central Karoo, the Presidential node, amongst the poorest of the poor - has
been very successful. Some problems do exist, but I can point to examples
from my own experience. I received my child’s identity document within
fourteen days.

Prince Albert, a rural town which was my constituency, has, in terms of
percentages, registered the most voters for local government. This was
because a mobile unit from Home Affairs was stationed in town and it
required the officials to drive through the night in order to set it up.
This is value for money for the people of Prince Albert. There are still
some officials who do not heed the principles of Batho Pele, but as the
saying goes in Afrikaans, it is the little foxes that spoil the vines.

I would like to take you back, because we have members here who view Batho
Pele in a different light. Batho Pele was different for me in the previous
government during the apartheid days. I have also experienced this. Blacks
would be queuing and were then told: “Make way, stand aside, so the oubaas
and the nooi can pass.” Old ladies or grandmothers were also told: “Stand
aside, because the kleinbaas also has to pass.” They were then seen to
first. This was Batho Pele in the old days.

You can see the huge difference and you can see where we are today. There
is equality and we should acknowledge this. I would like to disagree, hon
Worth, that chaos is forever present in Public Works. If this was the case
then my father-in-law would not have been so happy to receive his old age
pension every month. There are one or two cases where problems do exist,
but then these are serious problems. When we talk about the Scorpions that
should be disbanded and amalgamated, then we will have chaos in this
country, and we already have so much violence. There is chaos when a few
people complain that they were suffering in local government. The ANC
supports the Budget Vote.] [Time expired.]

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson and
members, I must start off by thanking the chair of the select committee,
hon Shiceka, and say that, indeed, the past four years have been good
years. We’ve engaged robustly and in various ways we’ve agreed on a number
of things and at times agreed to disagree on other matters. I think that is
the spirit of oversight from the side of Parliament and particularly this
House.

The responsibility here is obviously a responsibility that takes into
account the constituent provinces and I think we should say that value has
been added through the process. I want to quote Peter Kuschka, who in 1923
said, “I would rather go naked”. And he said:

  Naked through all streets I would rather go and freeze like trees do.
  Blackness petrified. Naked through all streets I would rather go and die
  as a man who ends with suicide. Naked through all streets I would rather
  go and act like a poor dull fool you all despise. Naked through all the
  streets I would rather go, but never dress up in a suit of lies.

I thought that was important to raise today, because when we look at the
interface between the executive and Parliament it is to ensure that we are
able to engage with the truth and do so factually and not simply from an
anecdotal perspective.

Having said that, I want to look at some of the issues that you’ve raised,
hon Worth. And I want to start with the Public Administration Management
Bill that is before Parliament right now. I think it is necessary to say to
the DA, and I’ve done this in the National Assembly already, that there is
a need to go and look at that Bill, the draft that is on the table, and
engage with that rather than chase ghosts, because that Bill does not
suggest in any way that we are going to centralise powers. What it does say
is that there is a need to ensure that in one statute we have the norms and
standards that cover all three spheres of government in the areas of human
resources, anticorruption, ICT and service delivery.

When I listened to the inputs that were made today, including through you,
Chairperson, and the input by the hon Worth, I thought that is precisely
what they want. When I listen to a presentation that reflects
contradictions, I think we should say “I’d rather go naked”, than take the
approach that was taken here.
A second point that I would like to make is that the suggestion that there
is going to be an infringement on the benefits of any public servant, even
those at local government level, is also misleading. Again I’d advise you:
Go and look at the draft Bill - it has been tabled before Parliament. Look
at what it says about the macrobenefits around pension funds, medical aids,
etc. Also look at the whole question around collective bargaining. There is
no suggestion that any public servant at any level of government is going
to be any worse off. Again I’d say, I’d rather go naked than exaggerate the
truth in any way whatsoever.

On the points that were made generally around the role of the Public
Service, the role of the commission and so on, I don’t think one can
quarrel with that. I do, however, want to come to this point that suggests
that the Public Service is in disarray and that we can’t attract the
brightest and the best. I want to invite you, hon member, to look at the
people in the box on my right, and at the people in the gallery. These are
among South Africa’s brightest and best and they are proud to be in this
Public Service.

If you hold a different view, that is your opinion. [Interjections.] But I
want to say that I am proud to lead a team such as this. We also have
members of the Public Enterprise team and I am sure Minister Erwin will say
some of the brightest and best are there.

There are people who have left the private sector to come into the public
sector, precisely because they believe that this is a place where they can
make a difference. It is because they are South Africans committed to this
Constitution and they understand what the Preamble says, they understand
what the founding provisions of the Constitution say and they appreciate
that if we want to ensure that we have supremacy of the Constitution and
the rule of law, we need a sound public administration and a sound Public
Service. We will never be able to get away from that.

Yes, there are problems.

Dit is waarom die agb lid gesê het dis die klein jakkalsies wat die wingerd
vernietig. [This is why the hon member said that it is the little foxes
that destroy the vineyard.]

It’s in a forest of a million growing trees that, when one tree falls, it
makes a crashing noise. I think we should never forget that.

Hon member from the FF Plus, you know we also sometimes have this challenge
and contradiction. We hear, on the one hand, that people don’t want to come
in to the Public Service and, on the other hand, you’ve made the gesture of
ensuring that there is a CD that is given that indicates that there’s more
than a thousand people who are willing to come and work in this very Public
Service that some are ready to run down.

Let me say two things: Firstly, I’ve just been informed by hon Minister
Erwin that Eskom has also received this CD and they are evaluating it at
this point. Secondly, I also want to say that you should look at both our
legislative and regulatory frameworks and understand that we don’t have
centralised appointments. We don’t have a centralised human resource
system.

The issue that the hon member from the DA is accusing us of, of wanting to
centralise – we’re not even doing that in the amending Bill. So we can’t
centrally determine appointments of people and, as a result, we’ll have to
look at what is available and see whether the various government
departments or sectors can use the kind of people that have been captured
in this database.

I think we should also understand, when we say there are skills shortages,
that it’s in specific areas, so we won’t be able to say that every doctoral
student that has graduated and is out there may be able to be integrated.
It doesn’t mean that everyone who says I’m ready to join will be able to
come in. Our appointments are made through open competition and we don’t
intend undermining this.

What I also want to say in the spirit of “Naked through all the streets I’d
rather go, but never dress up in a suit of lies” is what we are not going
to suspend affirmative action. That is one of our policies and what we have
said repeatedly is that we are expanding the base and, through the
expansion of that base, there is the ability to ensure that we use those
skills sets as required.

So we are saying that it’s not through the suspension of a particular
policy, but rather in a targeted and focused manner that we will ensure
that we employ people who have the skills required. It should not be seen
as suspending policy, but we should look at the policy in a flexible manner
and ask how we utilise the resources required.

In terms of the last few points I need to make, I need to do so against the
challenge presented to me by the Chairperson. I want to say that, for the
last two years, 2007 and 2008, Samdi has ensured 100% financial
disclosures. In 2007 we saw 85% in the Department of Public Service and
Administration, DPSA, and there have been a number of reasons why that has
been the case, and this year we have seen 100% financial disclosures.

There is a challenge around our gender targets that should be met, because
we’ve met 33,6% at this point in time. You’ve correctly pointed out that
we’ve got less than a year left, and we need to ensure that we meet the 50%
target. There is great pressure on that component under the Deputy-Director
General, DDG, Colette Clark, to ensure that the framework we’ve put in
place can be applied across the Public Service to meet that particular
target.

In terms of disability, we’ve just crossed 1%, so we must ensure that we
meet the 2010 target. Again we look at the job access strategy and various
other approaches that we need to take in order to ensure that we respond
appropriately.

In concluding, I would like to say that, like everyone else, I am confident
about where the Public Service is going. Before I conclude, hon Mzizi, I’ve
got to respond to you. You said please make sure that we win the battle
against corruption in our lifetime. Now I am going to use a quote that I
used in the National Assembly, but I’m going to be more extensive about it.
I want to say that in our lifetime, in the two Houses of Parliament, we
could argue that we’ve put the frameworks in place to win that battle. But,
as I said earlier, we’re never going to win the battle quickly. This is
about a continuous process. Let’s just think of the words by Obiageli
Ezekwesili, the Vice President of the World Bank, Africa Region - our
Nigerian sister - she says:

   It is not just about catching the thieves, it is about having the right
   institutional and structural procedures to ensure that you prevent the
   occurrence of bad behaviour. It is more cost effective to prevent bad
   behaviour than to spend money dealing with the consequences of bad
   behaviour. I put a lot of weight on the institutional reforms, and a lot
   has happened that people are not aware of.

   People are sentimentally attached to the idea of frying some fish. If you
   can prevent these bad fish from growing, this is better. The
   institutional side of things is very important. And this hasn’t caught
   the attention of the media. In the full cycle, you need ethical
   orientation, you need structural changes to prevent the occurrence of
   corruption, and you need law and its enforcement, and the punishment of
   bad behaviour wherever it occurs. This work is important in an
   environment that had been permeated with systemic corruption. It
   demonstrates that no one is above the law, so it sends a signal that when
   you engage in corruption and you are caught, you are not going to be
   allowed to enjoy the benefits of your bad behaviour. It is a huge colony
   of issues.

I think we can proudly say that we have put the right institutional and
structural procedures in place. So, hon Mzizi, let’s not beat ourselves up.
Let’s say we’ve put that in place. We now need to see the bearing of the
fruits and we need to reap that, and this is where this House is so
important. That’s where the successors, as they come in, should ensure that
they understand what has been put in place. They need to look into the
application and make it happen.

Once again I want to say that I am proud to lead the kind of team that I
believe has of the brightest and the best. Mind you, this team is diverse
in every sense: We have young people and older people; we have Gems and the
kind of team that’s there; we have the Centre for Public Service
Innovation; there’s the Public Service Commission and Palama now; the
Department for Public Service and Administration; and the Public Service
Sector Education and Training Authority. They are from among the cream of
society. They are going to lead and they will ensure that Chapter 10 of
this Constitution is made a reality. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Thank you, hon Minister. That was
the end of the debate on Public Service and Administration. I hope the hon
Minister and the officials from the department have enjoyed being in this
House, and I hope we will continue to work together. I would also like to
thank the guests in the gallery and welcome our colleagues from the
National Assembly sitting in the gallery.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 30- Public Enterprises:
The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Chairperson, hon members of the NCOP,
ladies and gentlemen, it is certainly a privilege to once again be in the
House to table Vote 30, that of the Department of Public Enterprise. And
let me just say that I admire your fortitude, patience and strength to sit
through three budget speeches in an afternoon. That is commitment!

The role of the State-Owned Enterprises, SOEs, has evolved over the years.
We would argue that effective SOEs are crucial to the success of a
developmental state. In the 1990s investment by SOEs decreased sharply and
between 1994 and 2004 the focus was on restructuring. By 2004 a decisive
role for SOEs was defined and they were seen as being key enablers of
growth and critical to South Africa’s goals of accelerated and shared
economic growth.

From 2004 we intensified the work of restructuring these enterprises to
focus on their core business so as to deliver on the state’s strategic
intent. The work of the SOEs, particularly Transnet and Eskom, has expanded
over the past five years in order to meet the escalating demands of a
growing economy. As a result, their combined infrastructure investment
programmes now stand at almost R400 billion for the next five years.

Such a programme poses its own set of opportunities and challenges,
particularly in the energy sector. South Africa plans to double its
electricity capacity over the next 20 years, and to diversify its primary
energy source from fossil fuels to nuclear and renewable energy sources.
The estimated cost of this over the next two decades is approximately R1
trillion, a staggering figure! If it is used optimally, it could provide
South Africa with the opportunity to develop relevant design and
manufacturing capacities to globally competitive standards.

This will allow South Africa to localise a high proportion of its equipment
needs and develop export capacity as part of the global energy equipment
supply network. This is the aim of the South African Power Project, which
provides a comprehensive framework that links new investments in plant,
skills, technology transfers, as well as research and development projects,
with the procurements associated with this 20-year build programme.

In addition, the Competitive Supplier Development Programme, CSDP, which
was established last year with the objective of leveraging the planned SOE
investment programmes of Eskom and Transnet, the pebble bed modular reactor
and others into advanced manufacturing, aims to promote investment in the
national SOE supplier base and thus optimise SOE impact on industrial
development.

The success of the investment programmes in electricity and transport and
our general programme to transform SOEs depends in part on how we
systematically and meaningfully engage with the unions operating in these
industries. We have assembled a programme which involves discussions with
both the federations and sector unions around these long-term investment
programmes.

Earlier today the National Energy Regulator of South Africa, Nersa,
announced the tariff increases. For those of you who don’t know, it is
another 13% on top of the 14%. As government we welcome this difficult
decision as it will provide a degree of certainty. Nersa has also accepted
the basic smoothing approach over the next three years and also provided
for lower increases for poor households, which was the spirit of the recent
energy summit. The proposed shareholder support for Eskom will have to be
invoked and more detailed announcements will be made at a later stage.

Historical underinvestment in capacity and sustained levels of growth in
electricity demand have placed undue strain on Eskom’s generation capacity
and operational performance. Rising primary energy costs and the need to
fund the accelerated demand – side management programmes will have an
adverse effect on its cash flow. The strength of Eskom’s balance sheet is
therefore crucial if the enterprise is to successfully borrow on
international capital markets. With the announced tariff increase and the
shareholder support, we believe that we will secure this objective.

The construction of Medupi Power Station has created a real hive of
activity in the Lephalale area, with approximately 800 local people from
this area already employed in work on the construction phase. The main
contractor, Murray & Roberts, who won the civils contract, is now also in
the process of building a training centre to train 700 local people in all
kinds of trade over the next three years.

In the main, our SOEs operate in critical areas of the economy, such as
electricity, infrastructure, telecommunications and advanced manufacturing.
A lot of work has taken place in each of these SOEs in the past year, but
let me briefly touch on some of the highlights of these events.

Starting with Alexkor, the community claim to the land has recently been
resolved, which paves the way for a restructuring of Alexkor. The
settlement provides for the formation of a pooling and shared joint venture
between Alexkor and the Richtersveld community. This joint venture will put
in place a mine development plan and programme to upgrade the land and sea
diamond resources and will develop a business plan to constitute a viable
mining venture.

Transfer of Alexkor’s agricultural and mariculture assets to the community
will empower the community and create a basis for future development and
wealth creation, not only for the Richtersveld community, but for the
Northern Cape region as a whole.

With Broadband Infraco, which became a stand-alone SOE in January this
year, we have succeeded in operationalising and strengthening the national
long-distance network, as well as provisioning of additional capacity.
Infraco has increased its footprint by 30% and doubled its capacity during
this period. Infraco has provisioned route connectivity services to the
core backbone and regional expansion sites. Additional fibre routes were
added to close the long-distance ring and to provide redundant capacities.
As we have stated before, the African West Coast Cable will be prioritised
by government in order to meet 2010 objectives as well as other short-to-
medium term strategic projects.

In the case of Denel, South Africa’s defence spend has reduced by 54% in
real terms since 1990, which has driven the need for Denel’s restructuring.
In 2004 Denel was in a critical state but progress is being made in terms
of its turnaround strategy. A restructuring process has been undertaken,
focused on the corporatisation of distinct operating divisions. The
introduction of strategic equity partnerships at business unit level is
aimed at increasing market access and ensuring the transfer of global
skills, technology and manufacturing know-how to Denel.

The pebble bed modular reactor is a major developmental project and as such
requires considerable initial investment by the project partners. The
negotiation of the new shareholder’s agreement, which will create a
platform to attract additional equity partners, is currently at an advanced
stage. This project is important for a number of reasons. One of these is
the retention of very skilled professionals within the South African
industry. However, the success of the project could also have a major
positive impact on our manufacturing sector and would provide leading
technology in the reduction of greenhouse gases.

The Department of Public Enterprises’ portfolio has recently been expanded
through the acquisition of SA Express, a domestic airline focused on
secondary routes. The SA Express’ board of directors has approved the
introduction of the SA Express exclusive Cadet Pilot Programme, which is
aimed at addressing the current shortage of pilots. The airline recently
won the 2007 Annual Airline Reliability Performance Awards. These awards
were presented by Bombardier Aerospace two days ago in Canada.

The benefits of an effective regional airline, I’m sure, will be well
understood by the hon members representing the provinces. In the case of SA
Airways which was transferred from Transnet to the department on 31 March
2007, this airline was financially and operationally challenged and its
continued sustainability was dependent on the implementation of a
fundamental restructuring programme.

The focus of this programme is to return the airline to profitability which
requires cost-cutting, route and fleet rationalisation and the
implementation of more innovative revenue management practices. I believe
the results that will come out at the end of this financial year will show
that we have made very substantial progress in the restructuring process.

The financial performance of the South African Forestry Company Ltd,
Safcol, has generally been positive in the recent past and the group has a
strong balance sheet, including a positive cash position. A substantial
portion of the land on which Komatiland Forests, KLF Safcol’s main forestry
subsidiary, operates is subject to land claims. As we get a clearer picture
of the exact extent of these land claims it is clear that this may delay
the execution of the transaction to dispose of KLF, and we are currently in
detailed consultations with the Departments of Water Affairs and Forestry
and Land Affairs to address this challenge.

The strong growth experienced by the economy over the past decade, coupled
with the rapid pace of globalisation, has seen the demand for freight
traffic surpass all previous expectations. This is putting ever-increasing
pressure on an already strained freight network which is suffering from
decades of underinvestment in both fixed and operating infrastructure.

Transnet has already made some major progress towards addressing this
challenge. Transnet has over the last three years achieved financial
stability, and has focused on the reorientation of the group around its
core functions of freight transport within the rail, ports and pipeline
sectors.
Transnet has also been successful with the continued implementation of a
capital investment programme aimed at improving the quality and capacity of
its asset base over the last two years, with a combined spend of some R27
billion. Almost 60% of the planned R84 billion capital programme will go
towards capacity expansion projects, while just over 40% will be spent on
replacing outdated and unsafe infrastructure.

The R11,2 billion New Multi-Product Pipeline, NMPP, project between Durban
and Gauteng is a priority project to ensure security of supply of liquid
fuels to the Reef. The multipurpose project, the largest single project in
Transnet’s portfolio, encompasses the replacement and expansion of the
Durban to Johannesburg pipeline. The NMPP also addresses the capacity
constraints in the inland network, which services the Alrode, Tarlton,
Rustenburg, Witbank, Pretoria, Kroonstad and Klerksdorp regions. This
constraint has resulted from the increased demand requirement in these
regions.

In the case of the ports, Transnet intends to invest approximately R26
billion in the next five years between its Port Authority and Port Terminal
divisions, primarily to support the dry bulk, liquid bulk, containers,
automotive and breakbulk sectors across the seven existing commercial ports
in the new Ngqurha Port in the Eastern Cape.

Given the strategic importance of the state-owned enterprises, it is
critical that government moves towards best practice and consistent
shareholder management to both optimise performance of individual SOEs and
of the portfolio of government as a whole.

The underlying rationale for state ownership in the enterprise sector in
South Africa is a developmental one. It is the desire of government to use
its shareholding in SOEs to exercise control over strategic assets and
investment programmes in order to achieve specific developmental
objectives. However, it is becoming increasingly clear that in pursuing
such objectives a commercial approach has a number of advantages.

It imposes efficiency disciplines on the enterprises but, in so doing,
allows the enterprise to be understood by market players and, in
particular, the capital markets. This allows for two very important further
advantages – the raising of capital by the SOEs in the capital markets and
the formation of commercial partnerships with private enterprise. These
features allow the state to mobilise resources across a wide front and
allow for greater flexibility of operation.

However, such advantages have to be balanced against the fact that the SOEs
are not commercial enterprises in a pure sense. Their mandate is to achieve
longer-term strategic objectives emanating from the state, as opposed to
the marketplace alone. The challenge is to achieve strategic national
economic objectives through enterprises that are subject to the disciplines
associated with operating a commercial enterprise that achieves a
sustainable rate of return on capital, enables investment and ensures value
for money.

Governments in many countries across the globe are now evolving towards
this model of the state as shareholder. The ability of SOEs to raise
capital on the markets means that a significant amount of money can be
freed from the fiscus to fund objectives requiring direct government
funding. They are able to partner with global enterprises that are not only
able to provide additional capital but can also rapidly introduce new
technologies, business processes and markets to the country, allowing
development to proceed at a far greater pace than what could be achieved in
isolation. But these are complex entities and the oversight role of
Parliament is therefore a crucial one.

Time and resources have to be invested in our portfolio and select
committees so that they are fully equipped to effectively carry out their
oversight function. It is important for us to give full consideration to
the complex interrelationship between Parliament, the shareholder Ministry,
the board and the management of the SOEs. The sensitivity of commercial and
strategic issues dealt with by the SOEs makes it necessary to consider
exactly how the parliamentary oversight function can be carried out.
The past five years have indeed been challenging and a definite learning
curve for all of us. My hope is that we leave behind for the next
administration not only some food for thought, but also systems which will
allow the portfolio department and Parliament to have a clearer defined
mandate of their management and oversight roles and the SOEs, which are
better able to fulfil their role as enablers of economic growth and
development.

Much has been achieved, but more work lies ahead. We should not be steered
off course, and our goal of accelerated and shared growth must continue to
spur us on in spite of the challenging global economic environment.

I’d like to conclude by thanking the chairperson of the select committee,
the hon Ms Themba, and the members of that committee for all their hard
work and the very real effort they have put into doing the oversight task.
Obviously I’d like to thank the officials in my department, who are also
young, hardworking and the cream of the country, for the work that they
have done. I say this with great sincerity. It is a very active, young
department.

It’s the end of the day and I notice that I have saved a bit of time, which
is part of the efficiency of state-owned enterprises! [Laughter.] Hon
members, we would like to place this budget on the Table for your
consideration as the NCOP. Thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Thank you, hon Minister, for
saving time. I hope other members will join you.

Ms S S CHEN: Chairperson, hon Minister, my hon colleagues, ladies and
gentlemen, the key objective of the Department of Public Enterprises is to
provide an effective state-owned enterprise shareholder’s management system
and to support and promote economic efficiency and competitiveness in order
to ensure a better life for all South Africans. The performance of the nine
SOEs is extremely important in the economic sectors of transport, energy
and communication.

In the last quarter our Gross Domestic Product, GDP growth was 5,3%. In the
first quarter this year the GDP growth result was only 2,1%. The
disappointing first quarter growth is not only a result of a global
slowdown, but also because of the damaging effect of the electricity crisis
on business and industry, which were forced to contend with power outages
and power rationing.

The Department of Public Enterprises has an important role in monitoring
the planning, delivery and financing of the infrastructure of all SOEs. To
be able to achieve these goals, we need to have capable and accountable
officials in the right positions within the department.

We have argued extensively about Eskom’s poor performance since the
beginning of this year. During this time, our Minister promised various
rescue plans. Now that six months have passed, the questions in my mind
are: Have all these plans been implemented; are we monitoring the process;
has the situation and the outlook been improved; and finally, have we
revisited our policy?

Statistics from the report of the Department of Public Enterprises show
that out of 160 posts, we have 19 vacancies, of which most are at Levels 13
to 16, which is senior management. It is shocking to see that a position of
an aviation and rail sector specialist has been vacant for as long as 540
days, that of the director of risk management has been vacant for 480 days
and that of an economist has been vacant for 390 days. No wonder the
department is experiencing management difficulties!

We really would like to see an advert that proudly shows SAA voted the best
domestic airline in South Africa, not British Airways. We must, of course,
acknowledge some of the achievements and hard work of the department. For
example, it is most welcome to see that Transnet recently increased
investment in ports infrastructure. This also encourages private business
to do the same, which then benefits development, since one of the key
solutions to the South African infrastructure challenge lies in public-
private partnerships. However, Transnet must still make further
improvements in terms of operation and productivity, particularly in the
railway’s capacity and safety, as well as ensuring that their tariff
increase is closely aligned to the Consumer Price Index, CPI.

The Department of Public Enterprises’ shareholder is our entire nation. The
revenue source comes solely from the country’s tax revenue, and we
therefore expect a competent Chief Executive Officer, CEO, to manage our
investment and protect our interests. We have so many tasks ahead of us and
we look forward to our hon Minister providing us with more positive news
and reports in the near future. Thank you.

Ms M P THEMBA: Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, it is said that
change is the only constant thing in life. Nothing illustrates this better
than time. Hon Minister Erwin made his first Budget Vote address as
Minister of Public Enterprises on 14 June 2004, yet it feels as if it was
only a few months ago. How fast the years have passed!

Time progresses so speedily that it could make our actions seem static.
When we review the past four years and assess our achievements, we wonder
whether that which has kept us so busy and absorbed so much of the state’s
financial resources is indeed significant when measured against the
progress of time.

It is therefore the historic responsibility of the department to
continuously ensure that enterprises focus on their core businesses and
that they dispose of the noncore assets that no longer serve business
purposes. At the heart of the efficiency and effectiveness of these
enterprises lies the ability to plan and expand infrastructure. For these
enterprises to be sustainable they must continually develop and expand
their infrastructure.

Minister, on the occasion of your maiden speech as the newly appointed
Minister of this department, you shared a vision of how state-owned
enterprises could be utilised more effectively by the developmental state.
This vision was aligned to the broader policy trajectory of our movement in
which state-owned enterprises were idealistically viewed as the panacea for
addressing all the country's logistical infrastructure needs and as
fundamental to catapult our economy up to higher levels of growth.

By restructuring the corporate structures of the state-owned enterprises,
SOEs, to make them more focused by streamlining their managerial practices
to enhance efficiency and by leveraging their capital investment programmes
for local supplier development of our SOEs, we are going to be key drivers
of growth and development at home and on the continent.

Transnet was to provide competitive services in rail, ports and pipelines
by introducing the latest technology, improving and expanding its
infrastructure in increasing production and reducing prices. South African
Airways was going to be a core facilitator of inter-Africa trade and
tourism expansion, hence our argument that it should remain in state hands.
Denel was to play a leading intellectual role in high-value-added
manufacturing development.

Alexkor was going to provide a platform for diamond beneficiation in South
Africa; Safcol was going to contribute towards stability in the forestry
industry and Eskom was the pride of the country, a winner of numerous
international awards that boasted a huge reserve margin. My colleagues will
elaborate on the above. Our dreams were further boosted with the emergence
of the PBMR and Infraco.

Nothing was more exciting than South Africa being the leader in developing
fourth-generation nuclear technology, which is cleaner and safer. We would
not just have provided adequate energy to meet domestic demand, but we were
going to sell the portable package to our brothers and sisters on the
continent.

Infraco, our youngest baby, was to reduce broadband costs and make
telephony more affordable and accessible. We had dreams of abundant
capacity for e-learning, e-medicine and a booming service sector. Infraco’s
digital networks were to bridge the rural-urban divide and narrow the gap
between the more developed and developing sections of our economy.

So great was our intention that our budget allocation to the Department of
Public Enterprises allowed for an expenditure increase from R678,7 million
in 2004-05 to R4,6 billion in 2007-08. The combined transfer payment to
SOEs grew from R6,2 million in 2004-2005 to R4,5 billion in 2007-08. The
Minister’s task was not an easy one and we accept that reviving ailing
enterprises was fraught with challenges. Furthermore, relative to the speed
of time, a period of four years no longer seems that long to turn the
course of a huge fleet of enterprises from the trajectory of privatisation
to pivotal developmental tools.

Nonetheless, as custodians of public finances we have to account. We also
have to account when Eskom fails to meet our energy demands adequately. We
have to account when entities such as the PBMR and projects such as the
Competitive Supplier Development Programme appear not to progress beyond
the phases of research; and we have to account when there are perceived
deviations from our ideological intent.

The economic growth path championed by the ANC is pragmatic and informed by
sound economic principles and experience. The insistence that the
management of the country’s logistical infrastructure network and
particular strategic entities remain in state hands is not merely driven by
ideological favour but is based on the recognition that there are certain
market conditions that would lead to underinvestment in the private sector
if the private sector were to be the sole providers.

It is thus with puzzled interest that we observe the state exiting from
Alexkor, the dismantling of Safcol, the unbundling of SAA, the corporation
of the National Ports Authority and the increased introduction of private
ownership into co-subsidiaries of Denel.

This continued perceived path of privatisation is appearing in the context
of a Polokwane resolution for increased state intervention in the economy.
And while we have no doubt that there are sound reasons for these
occurrences, it does appear to be policy deviation that we need to account
for.

Furthermore, Minister, while we note that always having to abide by
stringent, bureaucratic measures when making decisions for SOEs within a
dynamic market is undoubtedly frustrating, we are not convinced that
creating a structure with the powers to bypass both Cabinet and Parliament
in the decision-making process, as proposed in the shareholder management
model, is necessarily the best manner in which to manage these
frustrations.

Parliament remains the ultimate accounting structure of the people and its
oversight role, though cumbersome and tedious, is an important one; hence
our insistence that the DPE Budget Vote also be brought to the NCOP, which
is the voice of the provinces and the eyes of the general public.

We also wanted this debate to laud the successes of the past four years.
Overall, when we review the performance of the department over the past
four years, there have been more successes than failures. We also know that
the victories were not easily achieved, but required management of complex
and delicate relations with a wide range of stakeholders. The Minister had
to deal with delays in respect of environmental impact processes,
impediments to the rapid accessing of public funds, input-cost volatility
and global competition for both suppliers and markets.

Without doubt, Minister, you are one of the greatest minds that our country
has ever produced. The intellectual vision that has been created would have
been of significant value to our country and our continent if all of it had
been realised.

Transnet is a sterling illustration of the success of your vision. This
company has not just been stabilised, it has been completely transformed.
Today Transnet’s business progress is so impressive that if it were listed
on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange it would compare with the best in
respect of operational excellence and financial stability. The development
of a second economy is of critical importance in a developing economy. We
support the Budget Vote. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): I just want to remind members
that we are not allowed to eat in this House. If people want to eat, they
have to go outside and eat and then come back again.

Ms A N T MCHUNU: Chairperson, hon Minister, energy savers have to be used
at all costs. Despite our being spoiled by electricity that is accessible
in towns, poor rural communities are still the losers in the face of
problems experienced with Eskom. Appropriate wind-driven technologies need
to be spread to other areas as has been tried in the Western Cape. Solar
energy and hot boxes have to be used to save energy so that industries
won’t shut down at awkward times. And we have got to find solutions - all
of us.

Trying out the Pebble Bed Modular Reactor, PBMR, may be acceptable if
nuclear energy waste is disposed of where it will not affect people’s
lives.

The IFP does support the present budget, but we’ll need to get more money
during the MTEF, in view of the escalating costs of oil and all the other
commodities that may be used for alternative energy provision.

Denel requires a budget that will resuscitate the soya processing plant or
else the plant should be moved to Mpumalanga where they grow 53% of South
Africa’s soya beans. [Interjections.]

Miso, the fermented soya bean paste used extensively in Japanese cooking,
might protect people from radiation damage. According to Dr Shinichiro
Akizuki of St Francisco Hospital in Nagasaki, doctors who attended atomic
bombed victims did not themselves suffer from radiation damage because they
drank miso soup - that is soya soup. Supporting this assertion, animal
studies show that miso increases the discharge of radioactivity from the
body and reduces the number of tumours induced by radiation.

I was a bit doubtful about the use of nuclear energy because I did not know
how it would affect the people in South Africa, knowing what radiation
does, as I have been working in the hospital for over 30 years. But now we
know that is soya the answer. Viva, soya, Viva! [Applause.]

We support the budget but the department will need more money for soya
projects and for Denel to reactivate the plant which was processing soya. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Mr D D GAMEDE: Chairperson, it is always nice to speak after the soya
episode! [Laughter.] Today, and in the past, my fellow comrades and other
hon members have said quite a lot about this important month in our
history. Let me also add my voice in honouring all those young people - and
the old - who sacrificed not only their education and social life, but also
their lives in order for us to be able to debate this Budget Vote today.
Sihlalo, we, as the ANC, support this budget. The mandate of the Department
of Public Enterprises is simple and straight-forward, that is, and I quote:



  To ensure alignment between the SOEs with sector department policies and
  regulatory authorities, while ensuring that SOEs are sustainable
  businesses that provide economic benefit to the country.

In this debate, I shall confine myself to four areas: the Pebble Bed
Modular Reactor, PBMR; Alexcor; Denel; and Safcol.

The PBMR is the brainchild of South Africa and its investors are, amongst
others, the South African government, Eskom, the Industrial Development
Corporation, IDC, and the Westinghouse from the United States. With the
challenges we face as a country in regard to electricity, the PBMR would be
one of the best solutions, as the high temperature gas-cooled reactor
technology would also enable access to electricity generation and process
heat application. Hon Minister, we should urge the department to move with
speed in advancing the development of the PBMR.

With regard to Alexcor, we are aware that it mines diamonds, and its
activities include marine and land mining in Alexander Bay. We are also
aware that the Richtersveld community made a claim for the return of its
land in terms of the Restitution of Land Rights Act of 1994. We note that
in April 2007 the Minister of Public Enterprises, Comrade Alec Erwin,
signed a land settlement agreement with that community for the return of 84
000 ha of diamond-bearing land. This is proof that, we as the ANC, walk the
talk.

The deed settlement became effective in October 2007 and effectively made
the Richtersveld community the owners of Alexcor. For this, Comrade
Minister, we salute you. The settlement entails, amongst other things,
restoring the land and mineral rights by way of transfer of Alexcor’s land
mining rights; a lump sum development grant of R50 million; R190 million
compensation as reparation payment; transferring agricultural and marine
culture assets; establishing a formal township at Alexander Bay; and
environmental rehabilitation. Only the ANC and the ANC-led government that
cares for the people can do this. Now the land has been returned to the
rightful owners, with all its benefits and with all its rights.

Denel operates in the military aerospace and landward defence environment.
As part of the process of major restructuring, Denel is also being
unbundled. In this transformation the new companies are actively seeking
equity partners locally and internationally. The ANC-led government really
considers Denel a strategic asset for its role as a custodian of South
Africa’s technological capabilities and as a driver of skills development
in the engineering and high technology fields in line with Asgisa and
Jipsa.

In 1990, the defence acquisition spend in the Republic of South Africa then
was R14,1 billion. In 2007 the defence spend was R6,5 billion, a two-thirds
reduction. This is proof that South Africa is no longer at war with itself
because most of that money was used by the then South Africa to fight other
South Africans in South Africa. But, in defence of democracy and freedom,
this amount of R6,5 billion is being used. Once more, we thank the
Minister, the department and the ANC.

However, hon Minister, we would like to see a speedy turnaround of Denel so
that it focuses on core businesses but in doing so the historically
disadvantaged should be the major beneficiaries of the equity stakes that
are to take place. And whilst doing that, government must assist in
ensuring that blacks, in particular, do benefit from these equity stakes.

With regard to Safcol, the forestry sector is an important contributor to
the gross domestic product and employment. Currently, it employs 170 000
people and contributes more than R16 billion annually to the South African
economy.

In KwaZulu-Natal options for a new forest station also exist and this would
play a significant role in the Integrated Rural Development Programme.
Safcol was also the leader in the introduction of forest certification in
South Africa, where the first local industry to be certified by the Forest
Stewardship Council, FSC, was in KwaZulu-Natal. In March 2007, a decision
was taken to privatise Komati Land Forest, KLF, by March 2009 and Safcol
has to be owned by December 2009. Now the question that we would want to
pose to the hon Minister is: Are there any land claims on this forest? If
there are, where is the process as we speak, and are we to go on with the
privatisation irrespective of the land claims?

Before I conclude, I come from KZN, which is KwaZulu-Natal. I must use this
opportunity to engage the Minister on other issues pertaining to KwaZulu-
Natal. I refer to the Richards Bay Harbour, and Richards Bay Coal Terminal,
RBCT, and want to know about such things as the possibility of the dry dock
in Richards Bay, the container terminal and the acquisition of properties
that are owned either by Transnet or Propnet or other state-owned
enterprises in the North Coast area and the disposal thereof. I would then
invite the hon Minister to Richards Bay so that we can also discuss these
issues further outside of this Budget Vote. We, as the ANC, support this
Budget Vote.

Mr J M SIBIYA: Comrades, let’s take note of the advice we got from hon
Mchunu to take soya beans very seriously. Hon Minister, departmental
officials, comrades, colleagues, and ladies and gentlemen, in part the
mandate of the Department of Public Enterprise is to ensure that the State-
Owned Enterprises, SOEs, are sustainable businesses that provide economic
benefit to the country. Following on after this part of the department’s
mandate, the Minister, in his foreword to the department’s strategic plan,
says that the primary focus of the department is to consolidate the
implemention of their mandate, which is to ensure that the SOEs continue to
support and promote economic efficiency, competitiveness and economic
growth for a better life for all South Africans.

This, indeed, is a bold statement of commitment and is greatly welcomed.
Against the background of the department’s vision, that of SOE’s playing a
role in their industry that ensures an optimal allocation of
responsibilities between the public and private sector, one would find it
relevant to request the hon Minister, in his closing remarks, to give some
general outline of the achievements of the private sector in imparting
scarce skills to previously disadvantaged individuals, as well as the
achievements of the SOEs themselves in attracting world-class skills.

The committee commends the Minister for the department’s ability to
maintain a healthy balance sheet for our SOEs, especially in the context of
our expanding and growing economy. It is also heartening to learn from the
strategic plan that the recent emergency electricity supply has brought
with it lessons to the department, including lessons in risk management and
planning.

The other commitments the hon Minister has made in the strategic plan
referred to above are, firstly, overseeing the building programmes of Eskom
and Transnet; secondly, the development of broadband infrastructure; and
thirdly, the development of key technologies in nuclear defence and
aerospace. These are a source of confidence for us.

It can only be hoped that the building of Transnet infrastructure will be
among the topmost priorities of the department in the current financial
year. The committee believes that the achievement thereof will necessarily
see some of the heavy trucks that carry loads to and from our ports reduced
or eliminated altogether, thereby halting the rapid wearing out of our
roads. On the other hand, such an achievement spells a great possibility of
new jobs being created.

As far as the wings of the nation - that is what I call SAA – are
concerned, we appreciate the fact that a fleet of new and modern aircraft
has been added. I personally have seen and flown in a number of Airbus 340-
200 aircraft. I tell you, most of them land very comfortably. Of course I
do not rule out the possibility of the role played by external factors like
weather, the skill of the pilot and tarmac surface also contributing to the
comfortable landing I am talking about. Let me say something here ...

Siku rin’wana a ndzi khandziyile laha eCapeTown ndzi ya eO R Tambo
International Airport, a ndzi tshamile ekusuhi na wanuna un’wana wo huma
eGermany. Loko hi ri karhi hi vulavula u ndzi byerile leswaku u huma
eFrankfrut, eGermany. Kutani ndzi n’ wi vutisa leswaku leswi a nga
mujeremani hikokwalaho ka yini loko a ta haleno a nga ti hi airline ya ka
vona leyi ya Lufthansa a ta hi SAA a tlhela a tlhela hi yona? Se a ku ...
(Translation of Xitsonga paragraph follows.)

[One day I was flying from Cape Town to O R Tambo International Airport and
I was seated next to a man from Germany. During our conversation he told me
he came from Frankfurt, Germany. And I then asked him why he preferred
flying SAA to and from South Africa to their German airliner, Lufthansa.
Then he said ...]

I will speak in English so that you can get the point I want to stress. Of
all the airlines I have ever flown I found only SAA to have enough leg room
- that is why I prefer SAA. Viva, SAA, viva!

There are, however, some vexing questions which need to be asked for the
sake of getting some information from the Minister. These are not seen to
be impediments as such, but they can very easily dent the reputation of the
SAA, in terms of the example I have given. Sometimes when fights are
delayed it is not easy for the staff concerned to give reasons. Sometimes
they do indicate that they are still waiting for the incoming plane, but
that is not satisfactory in most cases.

In some cases you also find that two passengers booked one and the same
seat. What went wrong? In other cases luggage goes missing or is sent to
the wrong destination. The most worrying problem is sometimes luggage is
torn, ripped open and even broken. Does the department have some measures
in place to assist the SAA to deal with some of these things because, as I
said earlier, they dent our reputation.

When we discussed these things with the department’s officials the last
time, there was an indication that the department intended to bring
together specialists, who would generally service and maintain the
aircraft. But they also felt that they will have to do some specialised
work in that they would specialise in either the aircraft wings or
fuselage. This could be used for export and we found that a very brilliant
idea. Hon Minister, can you inform us whether this idea is still on the
cards? If so, has it actually got off the ground? We feel that it will be
useful to know that.

Whereas SAA, the wings of the nation, operates a scheduled air transport
network of jet-powered aircraft comprising domestic routes, primarily
focusing on the main traffic flows in South Africa and air connections to
the key cities within the African region and cities located on the major
continents, SA Express Airways, SAX, connects to the secondary airports
within the African region. This is in collaboration with other African
airlines in the region. It is SAX, of course, not sex, please!

SAX in that context is bringing us closer to the realisation of what the
OAU Charter used to refer to as Pafmesca – the Pan-African Freedom Movement
for East Central and Southern Africa. The role played by SAX is very
strategic in this regard and we would like to see that increasing and not
for it to be operating only in Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland, Mozambique,
Namibia and even the DRC. We want to see it going a little further so that
we can expand it to Eastern, Western, Southern and Central Africa. We even
want it to go to North Africa if that is possible, but we are aware that
some of these routes might be reserved for SAA.

The building of Eskom infrastructure and expanding substation capacities to
accommodate villages that are in need of electricity is a highly welcome
development which we hope will not be overshadowed by the pending price
hikes by Eskom.

The current load shedding and outages, we feel, need to be managed a little
more than is being done. The planning and announcements thereof have gone a
long way to alert people and get them prepared for it and its
eventualities. Let me take this opportunity to commend both the Department
of Minerals Energy, DMG,and the Department of Public Enterprises and Eskom
itself - and above all, the ANC - for spearheading the Save Electricity
campaign, which has successfully brought about the saving of electricity.

We need to indicate, as the Minister in the DME said, that we need the
households and private sector to do a little more so that we can save more
electricity.
Perhaps before I continue, as I am talking about Eskom, I want to say we
all know that the DA has a habit of calling for wholesale privatisation. I
want to remind them, if they have forgotten or to inform them if they don’t
know: Firstly, the ANC, as the organisation, as the Parliament of our
people and as the head of government here in this country, is not in the
habit of feeding the fat-bellied swine. Secondly, it is not ready or
prepared to line the pockets of those who live on unearned income.

The Constitution of the Republic guarantees our people the right to
information. In pursuit of this realisation, Broadband Infraco was
established in 2006-07 as an intervention by the government to normalise
telecommunications market efficiency, to have infrastructure in the
national backbone and to have international connectivity at reduced prices.
[Interjections.] I am through, don’t worry. On the basis of the above, the
committee supports, unreservedly, Vote No 30 and urges this House to do the
same. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Thank you very much, Chairperson. As
always in this House, the speakers have done their homework and dealt with
many issues. What I would like to do is deal with some of the issues that
have been raised because I think they are important and require some
detailed answers.

Let me start with the electricity position as it stands today. As you know,
the real challenge is to reduce the demand at peak times and this requires
the savings programmes that the hon Sibiya and others have spoken about. I
would really like to stress how important that is. It is something to which
we can all contribute. It is imperative that we do it. We have to bring
down those peaks. We also have to reorganise the energy dispersal over the
whole period.

I think we have made good progress. We have reduced the number of unplanned
outages; we have built up the coal stocks again; and with assistance from a
number of countries, we are reconfiguring the maintenance schedules. So I
think we have certainly made good progress but we still have a very, very
tight period and I want to stress the need once again for demand-side
management.

We have also made good progress in calling for cogeneration and for the
involvement of the private sector and we will make some announcements on
this fairly soon. I am sure it will help us, but it will be interesting to
see exactly how much we can get from that quarter. So it is a tight period,
but I do believe we can come through this if we can achieve the demand
saving.

With regard to the vacancies in the department, there are certain positions
that have been vacant for a while. It is just very difficult to get those
kinds of specialist skills and attract them out of the private sector. In
the sector, and in dealing with aviation or ports, I think the teams we’ve
had are very good and we’ve been fortunate in attracting a number of
skilled people on a contract basis. The kinds of skills we need in a
department like the Department of Public Enterprises are very attractive to
the private sector, but I am very, very pleased with the team that we have.
I think the amount of work that they have been able to do is really
fantastic.

I did not have much time to give you much information on the rail
investment programme, but it is not insignificant at all. As you know, we
are concentrating on the corridor approach with rail, so there is
R2,7 billion invested in the Sishen-Saldanha corridor, R6,5 billion in the
Gauteng-Richards Bay corridor, R930 million in the Gauteng-Durban corridor,
R860 million in the Gauteng-Coega Corridor and R500 million in the Sishen-
Coega corridor. So there are pretty big investments planned over the next
five years for upgrading the rail corridors of those key areas.

Probably more impressive is the R10,5 billion on locomotives and
R8,9 billion on wagons that will be spent over the next five years. These
are very big programmes and here the advantages of the Competitive Supplier
Development Programme have started to be felt where there is a very
significant difference in the local content of the second order of
locomotives compared to the first. So the impact on South Africa’s industry
will certainly be significant.
Hon Themba, I believe, raised the important point that the state- owned
enterprises need to focus on their core business. I think, in the last five
years, one of the less-stated achievements is that we actually have
disposed of very significant noncore businesses. I think we have virtually
completed the noncore disposal programme in all of the major enterprises
and this has been very important.

I may as well deal with soya now. [Laughter.] Hon Mchunu, I regret to say
so, but I think it is a good thing: We have finally been able to dispose of
the soya plant and there is a BEE component to that. I would recommend that
they should probably consult you as an expert adviser. [Laughter.] We have
disposed of it and at Denel our noncore disposal programme has also been
very successful, and we are now much more focused on the core business.

Hon chairperson of the select committee, I think it is very important that
we look at what we are trying to achieve with the corporatisation of Denel
and these issues. This is not privatisation in its traditional form.
Essentially, what we have to balance in an industry like Denel is the
strategic requirements of our Defence Force and of the country as a whole.
We have to make sure that we can have sustainable businesses and, very
importantly, we need access to the most advanced skills and technologies.

What is also very important is that we need access to stable markets
because South Africa’s defence industry cannot be based only on supplying
our own Defence Force because, as hon Gamede pointed out, we have reduced
our expenditure on defence.

So access to the stable, North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Nato markets
and other large economy markets is a very, very important part of our
strategy. It allows us to export sophisticated equipment, to keep our
advanced manufacturing capacities and at some, hopefully-never-to-happen,
future crisis, if we ever have to build up our Defence Force again, we can
do so on the basis of what we have retained in the Denel stable.

I would also like to stress - because it is a very important question you
raised, hon Themba - that the proposals we make in the shareholder
management model, we would argue, actually increase the powers of
Parliament with regard to statements of the strategic intent and oversight
functions. This is why we raised it in the National Assembly and I raise it
here, that I think it is absolutely crucial that we give very serious
thought to how Parliament’s capacities, skills and time can be enhanced to
give oversight to these complex organisations.

If you look at something like the Denel situation, where we have brought in
equity partners, you will see that those are complicated agreements. There
are specific golden share provisions; there are specific legal contracts
with regard to intellectual property. So even though we may have a partner
from the private sector, there are still very important provisions in the
contracts that we have to oversee. So we are very supportive of improving
Parliament’s capacity to provide this oversight.

We would very much agree that we need new forms of energy, particularly in
the rural areas. The work done on the South African Power Project, hon
Mchunu, suggests that South Africa should probably put more effort into
researching the equipment and technology for solar power. Wind power, I
think, has been very well-developed by Europe and there are many available
technologies. Currently it remains a relatively expensive technology for
South Africa, but we will have much greater insight into this with the 100
megawatt plant that will be constructed near Vredendal.

The conclusion that we are coming to is that solar energy and equipment is
one where South Africa could have a competitive advantage. A lot of energy
and effort will go into that.

I am glad that you raised the issue of nuclear waste. This is an important
issue. One of the great advantages of the pebble bed nuclear reactor is
that the storage of the waste is a lot easier. This is so because the sites
are smaller and, because the pebbles are recyclable, the waste problems are
more manageable.

The issue of nuclear waste presents an important decision for all of us. We
have made a decision in South Africa as to how we will store it in the
interim. Essentially, this issue of the final storage of nuclear waste is a
global scientific venture in which we are all involved. It is a problem
that is 300 years or more away.

If you compare that to global warming, where all the scientific evidence
points to serious impacts within 50 years if we don’t adjust the greenhouse
gas emissions, then, I think, we can begin to understand why there has been
such a renewed interest in nuclear energy. The technology is much safer,
and the pebble bed is probably the safest of all nuclear technologies that
have been developed.

The waste problem, even though it is a problem that has to be addressed,
just as the safety of our people has to be addressed, is a problem which
really emerges over a much longer time period than the time period of
greenhouse gas emissions. This is why the world, as a whole, is having a
much closer look at nuclear energy and it is why, if we don’t commit to our
nuclear plant soon, we will fall out of the queue. Nuclear plants are being
built all over the world now. There is a massive shortage of equipment for
nuclear plants because of the resurgence of interest in nuclear energy.

Very briefly, on the issue of Alexcor, I think a very important settlement
has been reached with the Richtersveld community which has been crucial for
us, and I think we are making good progress.

With Safcol, the land claims that we have now been able to establish are
very large. There is a large number of them. It is complicated and complex.
So it is quite clear that, as we perceived last year, we will not be able
to proceed precisely with such a transaction. We have to hold fire and
engage with the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry and the Department
of Agriculture and Land Affairs to work out how we can deal with this
problem. It is a significant problem.

On Richards Bay, you know, hon Gamede, comrade, when you invite me I always
come. In terms of our long-term port planning, Richards Bay will become one
of South Africa’s premier ports. It gives us a lot of space and there are a
lot of plans for the development of the Richards Bay port over time.

On the key issues of SAA and skills with the SOEs, we will give
presentations to you, the select committee, and others, on the power
project. We have now completed an exceptionally detailed analysis of what
skills we need. I am pleased to say that I think we can complete that skill
development. I am also pleased to say that we have noticed quite a good
ability to attract back skills - not just South Africans – but to attract
skills from other countries into South Africa with the prospect of this
large energy build coming into play.

On SAA, we are doing our best to deal with those problems. One of our
difficulties is that our planes are being used exceptionally heavily at the
moment. As you see, passenger numbers are very high and this puts a lot of
pressure on the maintenance and the turnaround and that can give us some
difficulties. As you can see, our airports are very, very busy. Air traffic
in South Africa is growing rapidly.

The new fleet plan will be a long-term plan. We first have to stabilise
SAA’s balance sheet which, as I have said, is getting better. We will need
more aircraft. If we don’t get more aircraft we are going to have more
delays.

We are looking very, very closely at luggage. There are some difficulties
in the supply chain and the handling chain of luggage. We would prefer to
tighten that up and get far greater control over it as SAA, so that, if we
make a mistake, we can be held accountable. At the moment we are being held
accountable for mistakes that may have occurred elsewhere. So these are
some of the things we are looking at.

We are continuing the process of component aircraft exports. You referred
to a specific issue which is one of the key components of the A400M, namely
the wheelhouse setting and also the flange on the wings. These have been
quite interesting and challenging prospects. On the one component we are
well on schedule; on the other we are a little bit behind but that is
because of a discussion between the designers and ourselves.

We see this aerospace component industry as being an important industry for
South Africa.

Madam Chairperson, I have abused my time now, having saved some earlier. I
really apologise. This is due to the inefficiency of the Minister and not
of the SOE. [Laughter.] Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Thank you, Minister. I have
allowed you extra time because you saved five minutes previously. Thank you
very much for the debate. I also want to thank the officials of the
department for attending this session, and our colleagues from the National
Assembly as well as the hon members - even if some of them were not very
well behaved today. [Laughter.]

I have two announcements to make. One is that I have to remind members that
the deadline for the submission of disclosures is Friday 20 June 2008. So,
you have one day left. Be sure to submit it.

Lastly, I have been requested by the hon Ministers for Public Service and
Administration, Water Affairs and Forestry as well as Public Enterprises,
to invite you for a cocktail in the Old Assembly restaurant. I just want to
remind you that you must not drink and drive. [Laughter.] You should rather
drink and jive and go home later.

The Council adjourned at 17:56.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bills as section 75 Bills:

          a) Higher Education Amendment Bill [B 34 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).

          b) Intelligence Services Amendment Bill [B 37 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).

    (2)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a section 76 Bill:

          a) General and Further Education and Training Quality Assurance
             Amendment Bill [B 35 – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 76).

2.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Transport


          a) National Land Transport Bill [B 51 – 2008] (National Assembly
             – proposed sec 76) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
             notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
             31060 of 15 May 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Transport of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
             Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
             Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.


     (2)    The Minister of Minerals and Energy


          a) National Energy Bill [B 52 – 2008] (National Assembly –
             proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
             of its introduction published in Government Gazette No 31124
             of 3 June 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Minerals and Energy of the National Assembly, as well as
             referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
             classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Appropriation Bill
    [B3 – 2008] (National Assembly - sec 77), dated 18 June 2008:

       The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the Appropriation
       Bill [B3 – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 77), referred  to  it  and
       classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism  as  a  section  77  Bill,
       reports that it has agreed to the Bill.

