---
title: 'National Assembly - 08 May 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2008-05-08
---

THURSDAY, 8 MAY 2008
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:00.

House Chairperson Mr G Q M Doidge took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Dr S M VAN DYK: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I intend moving the
following motion:


  That the House debates the high amount of electricity lost by Eskom due
  to illegal connections and other forms of theft, and possible solutions
  to the problem.

Thank you.

            SOUTH AFRICAN SWIMMER NATALIE DU TOIT’S ACHIEVEMENTS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the House -

   (1)      notes that South African swimmer Natalie du Toit has qualified
         for the Beijing Olympics after coming fourth in the 10km race at
         the World Open Water Swimming Championships in Seville on Saturday,
         3 May 2008;


   (2)      further notes that she has made Olympic history by being the
         first amputee to qualify for the Games;


   (3)      recognises her outstanding achievements at events for athletes
         with disabilities and that she is the holder of numerous disability
         world records, including the record for the 50m, l00m and 400m
         freestyle, 100m butterfly and 200m individual medley;


   (4)      acknowledges that her bravery and determination have served to
         bridge the gap between able-bodied and disabled athletes thereby
         inspiring other disabled athletes to believe in themselves and to
         realise that anything is possible; and


   (5)      congratulates her on her remarkable achievements and wishes her
         well for the upcoming Paralympic Games in Beijing.

Agreed to.

                    CORRECTIONAL SERVICES AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Bill, as amended, be passed.

Motion agreed to.

Bill accordingly passed.

    NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT: INTEGRATED COASTAL MANAGEMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

Mr L ZITA: Chairperson, hon members, coastal management in South Africa has
historically been fragmented and unco-ordinated, resulting in environmental
degradation and lost economic opportunities.

The National Environmental Management: Integrated Coastal Management Bill
sets out a new and integrated approach to managing the nation’s coastal
resources. It provides for a legal and administrative framework that would
promote co-operative, co-ordinated and integrated coastal management;
preserve, protect and enhance the status of the coastal environment as the
heritage of all; ensure that coastal resources are managed in the interests
of the whole community; create equitable access to the opportunities and
benefits derived from the coast; and give effect to South Africa’s
international law obligations.

The Bill addresses 12 issues. It defines the legal status of the coastal
zone and different areas therein, as well as coastal public property, as
the property of all South Africans which is held in trust by the state on
their behalf, and provides for improved protection of and access to these
public assets.

The coastal zone is an area of land and water defined as coastal public
property, which is the common property of the people. Effective regulation
implies controls and restrictions on certain areas adjacent to coastal
public property that form part of coastal ecosystems. This is necessitated
by the need to take account of the dynamic nature of the coast and to
protect people and property from harm due to natural causes such as coastal
erosion and flooding, or new threats such as a rise in sea-level as a
consequence of global warming.

In order to secure public access to coastal public property, the Bill
requires municipalities to designate coastal access land and implores
municipalities to take environmental factors into consideration.

Special management areas may be declared to give effect to the recognition
in the White Paper that the diversity of the coast requires different
management approaches in different areas. MECs can establish coastal
setback lines to compel people to seek permission to erect or alter a
structure situated seaward of the line.

The Bill defines boundaries of coastal areas by providing procedures for
demarcating and adjusting the boundaries of coastal public property, the
coastal protection zone, special management areas and coastal access land.
Interested and affected parties have an opportunity to contribute to the
process of demarcating or adjusting coastal boundaries. Provision is made
for marking boundaries on zoning maps and endorsements by the Registrar of
Deeds.

Reference is made to “coastal boundaries” to draw a distinction between
these boundaries and zoning municipal or other official territorial
boundaries governed by other legislation and processes.

It also addresses the efficient and co-ordinated management of all
estuaries by providing that they must be managed in accordance with a
National Estuarine Management Protocol and estuarine management plans for
individual estuaries.

The Bill establishes a statutory framework for new institutional
arrangements to ensure integrated and co-ordinated coastal management. A
national coastal committee may be appointed by the Minister whilst MECs can
establish provincial coastal committees which will be responsible for co-
ordinating coastal management in each coastal province. Municipal coastal
committees for the local sphere are also envisaged.

The Bill also seeks to enhance coastal management within each sphere of
government and provides for zoning schemes to ensure that the coastal zone
is subject to effective planning and management procedures.

The current land-use planning system in South Africa is a land-based system
that essentially stops at the high-water mark. The Bill is designed to
extend that system across the land-sea interface in order to allow for
integrated coastal planning and the proactive control of the use of coastal
resources.

The Bill establishes a hierarchy of coastal management programmes. At the
top of the hierarchy is the national coastal management programme, which
the Minister must prepare and adopt within four years of the commencement
of the National Coastal Management Act. Such a framework extends to the
provincial and local level and has to be related to the integrated
development planning processes.

This Bill provides for measures to protect the coastal environment from
activities that may detrimentally affect it and creates procedures for
assessing and regulating such activities. It requires users of coastal
public property, owners and occupiers of land, coastal managers and other
responsible persons to take reasonable measures to avoid causing adverse
effects to the coastal environment.

The Bill further provides for the Minister or MEC to issue written notices
requiring measures to be taken to protect the coastal environment. It also
prohibits potentially harmful activities from taking place within the
coastal zone, unless they have been specifically authorised, requiring an
integrated environmental authorisation before undertaking specified or
listed activities within this zone. The Bill does not seek to introduce new
environmental impact assessment procedures and relies on the existing
environmental impact assessment regime.

The Bill also addresses the letting of coastal public property by way of
coastal leases and the granting of limited use rights over coastal public
property by way of coastal concessions. In this regard, it contains general
provisions relating to the temporary occupation of land within the coastal
zone for specified purposes and the amendment, suspension and cancellation
of authorisations.

Importantly, the Bill also addresses the regulation of the disposal of
effluent and waste into estuaries and the sea, including prohibiting
incineration at sea and restricting dumping at sea in accordance with South
Africa’s obligations under international law. It establishes integrated
procedures for regulating the disposal of effluent and waste into estuaries
and the sea.

Currently, the disposal of effluent through pipelines and the dumping of
waste from vessels into estuaries or the sea are controlled under different
pieces of legislation by different departments. The Bill intends to
regulate the discharge of effluent into coastal waters from any source on
land by requiring permits to authorise such discharges.

The Bill also prohibits incineration or dumping at sea of waste or other
material. It authorises the Minister to dispense with prescribed procedures
in respect of dumping in emergencies. For example, vessels in distress due
to mechanical failure may need to urgently dump cargo overboard.

The Bill also requires the Minister to develop a national action list to
screen waste and other material on the basis of their potential effect on
human health and the marine environment. In cases of refused applications,
it addresses the procedures for appeals as well as the capacity of the law
to be exercised in respect of offenders.

One of the important provisions of the Bill relates to the exercise of
power across the various spheres of government and allows, amongst other
things, for the Minister, where possible, to override MECs and for MECs to
issue instructions to municipalities.

Whilst the Bill will strengthen the effective management of our coast, we
felt, as the ANC, that it did not address the issue of residential access
by black people to the sea. As a result we inserted that, with regard to
“municipal management programmes” in clause 49 of the Bill, each
municipality should prioritise and strategise:

   ... to address the high percentage of vacant plots and the low occupancy
   levels of residential dwellings; and to equitably designate zones ... for
   the purposes of mixed cost housing and taking into account the needs of
   previously disadvantaged individuals ...

This could lay the foundation for the majority of the people of this
country to begin to enjoy the beauty of the sea and of our coastlines. The
ANC supports this Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr G R MORGAN: Chairperson, hon members, our coast is an extraordinarily
difficult area to manage. As legislators we are responsible for formulating
an appropriate response to protecting coastal ecosystem processes upon
which we all depend. Before us today is the National Environmental
Management Integrated Coastal Management Bill, a piece of legislation that
has been on the cards for more than seven years.

It is worth noting that over half of the planet's population resides in the
coastal zone, an increasing number of whom are vulnerable to flooding, sea-
level rise, destruction of wetlands and freshwater systems, and the
collapse of nearshore fisheries. South Africa's own zone is very vulnerable
and it has unique tensions and special interest groups who believe either
that they have a monopoly on ideas on how to manage the zone or that they
have exclusive use of coastal public property.

This Bill is designed to manage tensions that emerge in the coastal zone,
including the techno-orientated means of coastal defence, usually crisis-
driven and demanded by some coastal landowners and the tourist industry, as
well as problems surrounding developments that proceed with inadequate
consideration of flooding, sea-level rise, vulnerable people and
ecosystems.

The coastal zone has for too long been managed by various spheres of
governments, driven by different interests. While respecting the role of
the different spheres of government, this Bill should provide some
standardisation. Further, it brings in line all three levels of sustainable
development, namely social, economic and environmental factors.

The effective privatisation of beaches along the South African coast,
mainly due to wall-to-wall developments that prevent access to beaches,
denies the opportunity to many South Africans to access this resource,
either for leisure or for economic opportunities.

The Bill provides a means of promoting access to beaches which needs to be
viewed in the context of a public interest argument. No doubt, and let me
make this quite clear, private property and the rights of property owners
must be protected, but, where necessary and in limited circumstances, the
right of access to beaches needs to be included.

I am very happy to report to this House that the committee made an
important amendment to the draft Bill that has important implications.
Recognising the extremely sensitive nature of the coastal zone, it can be
argued that certain activities should be prohibited. For this reason the
Minister may prescribe specified activities which are prohibited in special
management areas, taking into account the purpose for which the special
management area was declared.

Many of us on this committee, including myself, are particularly concerned
about the damage that dune mining can do to the coastal zone. The unique
attributes of this zone present numerous opportunities for ecotourism as a
job creator, and these jobs are sustainable.

This Bill will arguably not be promulgated by the President in time for the
Minister to use its provisions to stop dune mining in an area such as the
Wild Coast. But it is hoped that this empowerment of the Minister will be
used responsibly and for the good of the environment. We know that the
Minister is on record as supporting ecotourism in the Wild Coast and hope
that, where possible, this Bill could be used to direct appropriate
developments in that region that will live up to real, sustainable
development.

Another amendment, that allows the Minister to exclude areas from coastal
public property for various purposes, was added to the Bill by the
committee. While it was my own view that these decisions should come back
to the National Assembly for ratification, there will be associated
consultation processes with relevant stakeholders.

I trust that the Minister will engage with this provision in good faith.
There are certain stakeholders, particularly organs of state, that will
seek relief under this amendment due to commercial contracts that were
entered into prior to this Bill. I suspect, in many cases, there is a good
case that the relevant land be excluded.

But I want to point to the broader principle of coastal public property
when acknowledging the fact that the Minister has significant powers and
needs to use them wisely, and that is that the ownership of coastal public
property vests in the citizens of the Republic and that coastal public
property must be held in trust by the state on behalf of the citizens of
the Republic.

Further, let me note in this House that the state, as public trustee of all
coastal public property, must ensure that coastal public property is used,
managed, protected, conserved and enhanced in the interests of the whole
community. Coastal public property belongs to all of us, and the government
and the responsible Minister must act in the collective interest of all the
citizens.

This Bill has good intentions, but it is going to demand a significant
amount of resources to be implemented. Like the National Environmental
Management: Waste Bill, which I will talk about later on this afternoon, it
places new burdens on municipalities, which in many cases are already
overstretched when it comes to finances and skilled staff.

Indeed, the same can be said for the Marine and Coastal Management Branch
of the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism, which is failing in
many respects, most particularly in enforcing compliance in our fisheries,
on a continual basis. This is mostly a question of available resources and
not a lack of will, though. The coastal Bill is therefore going to demand a
significant lead time for implementation and for capacity-building of staff
in all three spheres of government.

The DA will certainly support this Bill. We trust that in implementing this
Bill there will be a truly integrated approach, making use of all available
science, valuation, policy and administration, never forgetting the
important component of genuine and meaningful consultation with all
affected stakeholders. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms C N Z ZIKALALA: Chairperson, the unique beauty and charm of our coast
has no doubt played an important part in the increasing popularity of South
Africa as a tourist destination. We are experiencing increasing numbers of
visitors to our shores each year. It has also been estimated that the coast
contributes 35% of the country’s GDP. Our coast, which gives us so much,
must be protected and its beauty must be maintained and enjoyed by all
South Africans.

There are many challenges that areas along our coast face and, if not dealt
with adequately, they will increase the vulnerability of these precious and
sensitive areas. Rising sea levels, climate change, as well as pollution
and natural processes such as winds and currents, are just a few of the
many challenges that need to be considered in the planning and development
of our coastal areas.

There are many examples of the destruction of property along our coast as a
result of inadequate planning. For example, the violent storms in Durban
and surrounding areas in KwaZulu-Natal caused much loss and damage. There
are also examples of sewage and waste being dumped into the ocean and the
harm that this causes. This unco-ordinated and fragmented management of our
coastal areas has also resulted in lost economic opportunities which could
have had a positive impact on many communities, especially those in rural
areas that are so desperate for economic opportunities and upliftment.

Coastal management in our country has in the past been unco-ordinated and
therefore resulted in the degradation and mistreatment of coastal areas.
The object of the Bill before us today is stated as setting out a new and
integrated approach to managing the nation’s coastal resources in order to
promote social equity, and to make the best economic use of coastal
resources whilst protecting the natural environment.

These objects are not only admirable but also necessary if we are to
maintain our coastline and also enjoy the economic and other benefits in a
sustainable and responsible way for many generations. The IFP supports this
Bill ... [Time expired.]

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, the concept behind the National Environmental
Management: Integrated Coastal Management Bill is the adoption of a new
approach in managing the state’s coastal resources, which the ACDP clearly
supports.

The Bill addresses a number of high-priority concerns of recent years, such
as the effects of global warming and the invasion of coastal areas; the
need to define coastal protection zones; estuarine management protection
protocols; new boundaries in view of the dissolution of apartheid land
definitions; greater access to coastal areas for all; and the setting up of
control committees across all tiers of government.

The ACDP appreciates the importance of an effective coastal management
system. We believe it can permanently enhance the capacity of coastal
societies to sustain or improve their quality of life. We also recognise
the fact that, currently, the long-term capacity of ecosystems to provide
people with an adequate quality of life and sustainable wealth is being
reduced and threatened, and needs urgent attention.

We therefore believe that proactive risk management and strict regulatory
enforcement of legislation, regulations, norms and standards to facilitate
better management of the environment are of the utmost importance. We also
believe that the challenge is not only to apply technical solutions to
technical problems, but rather to sustain coastal ecosystems as healthy
life support systems and to develop government systems that foster the
necessary changes in societal values and behaviour to achieve sustainable
forms of development.

The ACDP will support this Bill. I thank you.

Mrs J CHALMERS: Chairperson, hon Minister, colleagues and comrades, it is
truly exciting today to be able to take part in this debate finalising the
National Environmental Management: Integrated Coastal Management Bill, a
Bill that is crucial to the sustainable management of South Africa’s unique
and extraordinary coastline.

The Bill has taken a long time to get to this House, the reason being that
it has had to incorporate a multiplicity of complex and critically
important issues, from ecosystems of estuaries and wetlands to burgeoning
coastal development, pollution and ensuring access for all citizens of this
country to the coastline. It has been a long and interesting process, with
full participation of all stakeholders, in order for the final result to be
a reflection of the needs of both people and the environment.

South Africa’s coast extends for approximately 3 000 km, from the Namibian
border in the west to the border of Mozambique in the east. Nearly one-
third of our population lives at the coast. Indeed, six out of ten people
live within 60 km of coastal waters. It is a national asset belonging to
all the people of South Africa and its products account for around 35% of
our national gross domestic product.

Our precious coastline is indeed a national asset, but it is one that is
under an ongoing and inevitable barrage from shoreline developers,
industrialists, holidaymakers and folk who just want to have a sea view. It
is a distinctive, complex and interconnected natural system with resources
that are finite and vulnerable to overuse and degradation.

Historically, long stretches of our coastline have suffered as a result of
decades of uncontrolled development that has given little thought to the
future. Often, short-term profit has been the name of the game. Only now
are we seeing the devastating environmental impact of such developments.

This is visible where sand dunes have been stabilised for housing with
devastating consequences to the beaches further down the coast; when
pollution causes a deterioration in marine water quality; when resources
shrink due to overexploitation of target organisms for food and bait; and
where there are reduced fresh-water inflows into estuaries. All of this
results in a loss of biodiversity and ecosystem integrity and a disruption
of the balance of natural forces that are so critical to maintaining a
healthy coastal environment.

Let us never forget that the health and continued existence of our human
race is dependent not only on the biodiversity of terrestrial species, but
also on the health status of our oceans and the narrow strip of land we
call our coastline.

One of the most exciting aspects of this new Bill is the inclusion of a
much-needed section on estuarine management. I grew up on the banks of the
Swartkops River Estuary outside Port Elizabeth. But for those without this
experience, an estuary is neither a river nor a sea, but something in
between – a protected arm of the sea into which rivers continuously pour
fresh water creating a blend of tide, current and changing salinity, unlike
that of any other environment in the world.

It is a battleground where the salty sea and the freshwater river fight for
supremacy, with final victory being denied to both. It is actually a bit
like politics. For us human beings, estuaries are an incredibly rich
resource and now, for the first time in this piece of legislation, we are
taking concrete steps to protect them for future generations.

It is interesting to note that roughly half of South Africa’s total of 279
estuaries are situated in the Eastern Cape - that very special province -
and they are important sources of food and powerful magnets for tourism and
development. So, it is critically important that they are sustainably
managed.

In a recent study coming out of the University of Cape Town, an ecologist,
Dr Jane Turpie, has estimated that the recreational value of the Swartkops
River Estuary is between R50 million and R100 million annually; the value
of fish harvested by subsistence fisherfolk there is worth between R500 000
and R1 million annually; and, most importantly, she pegs the nursery value
- that is the estuary’s role of sheltering young fish until they are big
enough to exit into the sea - at R20 million to R50 million annually. This
wealth applies to just one of our 279 estuaries.

Chapter 4 of the Bill before us states that the Minister of Environmental
Affairs and Tourism, together with the Minister of Water Affairs and
Forestry, must, within four years of the commencement of this Act,
prescribe the national estuarine management protocol. This will set
standards; establish procedures, responsibilities and minimum requirements;
identify who must prepare the plans; and specify the process to ensure that
they comply with the requirements of the Act.

This is good news indeed. It is to be hoped that the aforementioned
protocol will be in place and ready to be implemented well within the
prescribed four-year period. Indeed, this is a very timely piece of
legislation. For years now, alarm bells have been ringing as huge housing
developments and water-greedy golf estates have burgeoned along our
coastline. Very often these mansions belong to the mega rich, used perhaps
for a few weeks of the year. And there is growing concern around the
possibility of mining taking place along our precious coast. Surely that
should never be allowed to happen.

I welcome this Bill, as does the ANC. I look forward to it becoming an
integral and important part of the management of our country’s coastline,
ensuring its safety for future generations of South Africans. I thank you.
[Applause.]

The MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Chairperson, I would
like to thank members from all parties for their support. As hon members
have said, our coastline is currently not being managed and developed in a
way that optimises its resources and its opportunities. Economic and social
opportunities for wealth creation and equity are being missed while coastal
ecosystems are being systematically degraded. This Bill sets out to correct
that.
The National Environmental Management: Integrated Coastal Management Bill
which I am introducing today will replace the existing Sea-Shore Act of
1935 as well as the Dumping at Sea Control Act of 1980, and it introduces,
for the first time ever, a comprehensive national system for planning and
managing our spectacular and valuable coastal areas.

I am therefore pleased that the Portfolio Committee on Environmental
Affairs and Tourism has approved this Bill for tabling here in Parliament.
It should therefore be enacted speedily to safeguard both people and
property while at the same time promoting access to the coast and
facilitating integrated development.

Fundamentally, the purpose of this Bill is to provide a legal and
administrative framework that will promote co-operative, co-ordinated and
integrated coastal development; to preserve, protect and enhance the status
of the coastal environment as the heritage that belongs to us all; to
ensure that coastal resources are managed in the interests of the whole
community; to ensure that there is equitable access to opportunities and
benefits derived from our coast; and also to give effect to certain of our
country’s international legal obligations.

This Bill declares the seashore, the coastal waters, including the
estuaries, and South Africa’s territorial seas to be coastal public
property. It therefore also requires the state to act as the trustee of
coastal public property. This Bill will also require that appropriate
public access servitudes be established along the coast to ensure that
access for our people to our natural heritage remains unhindered.

The hon member Morgan raised this issue of access to the sea and called on
us not to damage or make inroads into rights to private property
unnecessarily. As government and the governing party, we agree to that. But
this Bill empowers us for the first time ever to ensure that communities
which are cut off from our coast would now not have to walk five, six,
seven, eight or ten kilometres around certain developments to gain access
to the coast. We will certainly use our power in government to ensure
better access to our coastline.

The Bill also gives our government the power to prevent development too
close to the sea by establishing set-back lines. These measures are
important, not only to preserve the beauty of coastal landscapes, but also
to respond to threats posed by, for example, rising sea levels associated
with climate change or dynamic coastal processes.

Excellent coastal water quality is not only essential to our burgeoning
tourism sector, but also to ensure the maintenance and expansion of the
aquaculture industry. There have been a number of recent reports in the
media about spills and substandard effluent from fish factories being
discharged into harbours and the coastal zone with devastating effects.
This Bill makes provision for coastal waters discharge permits and dumping
permits, and stipulates that all existing effluent discharges into the sea
and estuaries should be critically reviewed.

I would also like to draw the attention of hon members and the House to an
important amendment that was introduced following the consultative public
participation process. A subtext has been added to section 49 that now
places an obligation on municipalities with regard to their municipal
coastal management programmes. What this means in practice is that their
strategies and priorities will make provision for the equitable designation
of zones for the purpose of mixed-cost housing. This will not only take
into account the needs of previously disadvantaged individuals, but will
also ensure that people across all income groups are able to own property
along the coast in future. I think this is vitally important.

The new National Environmental Management: Integrated Coastal Management
Bill is both far-reaching and progressive. We are now on an accelerated
path to decisive action that will provide clear parameters for the planning
of future coastal developments and create economic and recreational
opportunities by increasing access to our coastal public property.

I am sure that I can provide hon members with numerous examples where
indiscriminate decisions have adversely affected not only our coast, but
also coastal communities. We can, as a country, no longer afford to take
decisions without taking all relevant factors and stakeholders into
account. This includes considering the inputs of all coastal shareholders.

This Bill requires the Premiers of coastal provinces to appoint lead agents
for coastal management in their provinces. It further provides for co-
ordinating structures in the form of a national and four provincial coastal
committees which will be mandatory. The Bill will also empower
municipalities to establish municipal coastal committees. While the latter
will not be mandatory, we hope that municipalities will see the benefits of
establishing these structures.

In conclusion, this Bill promotes a holistic way of thinking by promoting
co-ordinated and integrated coastal management which views the coast as a
system and emphasises the importance of managing it as such.

I cannot adequately express my appreciation and thanks to the chairperson,
the hon Zita, and also to the members of the portfolio committee from all
parties for their thorough deliberations, guidance and support for this
Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

                NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT: WASTE BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Chairperson, hon
members, there are currently well over 6 billion people on the planet. We
are likely to have 9 billion by mid-century. Yet, each person has the right
to clean water, food, shelter and energy. For us to be able to achieve
this, we will have to be careful with regard to the ecological impact we
cause. As consumption levels increase, we will face more waste management
challenges. We need to think ahead and be innovative to overcome our waste
management challenges.

To give effect to our constitutional rights, our department reviewed
environmental legislation in 1996. The review resulted in the development
and promulgation of the National Environmental Management Act in 1998 as
overarching framework legislation for environmental management. There are
various pieces of subsidiary legislation that have been promulgated under
the National Environmental Management Act, such as the National
Environmental Management: Protected Areas Act, the National Environmental
Management: Biodiversity Act and the National Environmental Management: Air
Quality Act.

In order to deal with waste management challenges, our department started
to develop the National Environmental Management: Waste Bill in 2005 as
subsidiary framework legislation which seeks to give legal effect to the
White Paper on Integrated Pollution and Waste Management that was developed
in the year 2000. The Bill has therefore been in the making for many years.
We are faced with a complex problem pertaining to waste management because
waste and its consequent pollution have never been dealt with in a more
focused way. There are still some people who do not consider what happens
to what they throw away.

The fragmentation of the waste management legislation has resulted in a
lack of effective waste management, which presents huge challenges in our
country. Improper waste management has a negative impact on health and the
environment, and unfortunately the most vulnerable are our poor communities
out there, especially women and children. The Bill provides a framework
that drives waste minimisation and will dramatically change the way we
manage waste in this country.

The Bill has gone through an extensive public participation process. It was
gazetted for comment from 12 January 2007 to 12 April 2007. During the
drafting process in 2006, there was extensive consultation with other
government departments and stakeholders before it was presented to Cabinet.
We also held a consultative waste conference in March 2007, in addition to
consultations with NGOs, business and industry sectors. The Chief State Law
Adviser certified the Bill in terms of its constitutionality and it was
tabled in Parliament in June 2007. The public hearings on the Bill yielded
very good and desirable comments on the Bill.

The Bill is largely framework legislation which provides the basis for the
regulation of waste management. The application of the Bill is limited only
to waste streams that are not dealt with by other pieces of legislation in
order to avoid duplication, as well as to complement existing legislation.
Our department was extremely careful to ensure that it did not infringe on
the mandate of local government and that it did not go beyond its
constitutional mandate with regard to setting norms and standards.

Since waste management has very real and major implications for the
economy, our department has considered what needed to be done nationally in
order to maintain a socioeconomic balance. Furthermore, whilst our
department had to ensure that it would deal even-handedly with waste as a
commodity and ensure that there was one set of rules, the legislation has
been drafted in such a way that it does not contravene South Africa’s
obligations in terms of international trade.

The legislation provides for a range of waste management measures,
including the declaration of priority wastes and the preparation of waste
management plans by industries or organs of state. Priority wastes would
not necessarily be large quantities but rather waste streams that have
become a serious problem or are toxic and therefore require specific and
focused attention in the way they are managed.

In order not to overregulate, only industries that are identified as large
waste generators will be required to develop and implement waste management
plans. Other industries will be encouraged to develop plans on a voluntary
basis.

There are a few new concepts in the Bill: firstly, the general duty for
waste holders stating that every person is responsible for how they deal
with their waste; secondly, for the first time, legislation has been used
to drive a waste minimisation approach which is based on the waste
hierarchy and will ensure that the “cradle-to-grave” approach is used in
managing waste - of course that is very important because we want to turn
waste into wealth; and thirdly, this legislation has a section dedicated to
contaminated land.

Historically, in South Africa, it has been relatively easy to contaminate
land without any serious consequences because there was no way of holding
polluters accountable. The “contaminated land” section of the Bill provides
for the remediation of contaminated land. Now our department can identify
land as contaminated and conduct investigations to determine the extent of
contamination as well as the form of remediation required. There will be a
database or register of all contaminated land. Our department is of the
view that the cost of reducing pollution must be shared between people who
are responsible for the waste.

While the Bill is largely framework legislation, the licensing of waste
management has been drafted at a much more detailed level. The licensing of
waste management activities is not new legislation, as the function was
provided for in the old days by the 1989 Act, and was performed by the
Department of Water Affairs and Forestry. The function has since been
transferred to our own department and we have made good progress on that.

Furthermore, the Bill caters for micro industries to be regulated if
necessary. Our department will be the competent authority to license
hazardous waste facilities because of associated environmental risks, and
provinces will license general waste facilities.

The Bill also provides for compliance and enforcement. What is different
about these provisions is that, unlike in the other pieces of legislation,
the Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry has been given powers to enforce
compliance in respect of waste-related issues that can impact on water
resources. The exercise of these powers should, however, be done after
consultation with the Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism or the
relevant MEC for environmental affairs.

The legislation provides for the drawing up of a national waste management
strategy within two years of promulgation. It is acknowledged that
implementation of the legislation will not happen overnight. The national
waste management strategy will be the master plan that will guide the
implementation of the legislation. Our department is of the view that the
National Environmental Management: Waste Bill begins to introduce a
revolutionary way of managing waste in South Africa.

I would like to conclude by quoting the 2005 Noble Peace Prize winner,
Wangari Maathai, when she said, and I quote:

   Activities that devastate the environment and societies continue
   unabated. Today we are faced with a challenge that calls for a shift in
   our thinking, so that humanity stops threatening its life-support
   systems. We are called to assist the earth to heal her wounds, and in the
   process heal our own – indeed, to embrace the whole creation in all its
   diversity, beauty and wonder. This will happen if we see the need to
   revive our sense of belonging to a larger family of life, with which we
   have shared our evolutionary process.

So, each and every one of us, in whatever we use, must ask ourselves: Where
will this container end up? And contribute to it ending up in the right
place. Let us change our mindset and know that we can turn waste into
wealth, and we will all be rich. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L P KHOARAI: Chairperson, Members of Parliament, the ANC in Polokwane
recognised the evidence of climate change as indisputable and resolved that
immediate action by all governments and the community as a whole was
needed. The ANC went on to say that a target must be set for the reduction
of greenhouse gases and emissions as part of our responsibility to protect
the environment and promote sustainable development, as well as to
participate in sharing the burden with the global community under a common
framework of action.

It is for this reason that the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa
Act, Act 108 of 1996, states that everyone has the right to an environment
that is not harmful to their health and wellbeing, and to have an
environment protected for the benefit of present and future generations
through reasonable legislative and other measures that prevent pollution
and economic degradation. In order to honour this constitutional mandate,
the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism has the obligation to
put in place measures that address environmental protection.

Incineration is commonly known as the process that deals with the
destruction of waste by converting organic material into carbon dioxide.
This process will be addressed by the National Environmental Management:
Waste Bill, which seeks to reform the legislation regulating waste
management in order to protect health and the environment by providing
reasonable measures for the prevention of pollution and ensuring compliance
and enforcement. Previously, South Africa did not have legislation that
addressed the issue of incineration. Now the National Environmental
Management: Waste Bill will have to address problems associated with
incineration.

Over the past 12 months, the Department of Environmental Affairs and
Tourism has been working on a policy on the incineration of hazardous waste
as a treatment solution for hazardous waste management. It has further
examined the usage of selected general and hazardous waste as a substitute
for fuel in cement kilns. It was also mentioned that cement-making is an
energy- and resource-intensive process which consumes 200 to 300 million
tons of coal per annum, which makes the cement industry a large contributor
to global warming.

It is crucial to recognise that the evidence of climate change is
irrefutable and that immediate action by all governments and the public as
a whole is needed. Our vision for the future includes a sustainable economy
where South Africa’s present and future generations realise their right to
an environment that is not harmful to their health and wellbeing.

Incineration has its own challenges. The cement manufacturing companies are
of the view that converting energy from waste can have a negative impact on
people’s lives. Water sources around those areas where incineration is
conducted might fall victim to pollution. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr G R MORGAN: Chairperson, hon members, Madam Deputy Minister, South
Africa is a wasteful country. Blessed with significant resources, we have
over several decades become accustomed to using far more than we need to.
On many production lines across South Africa, a finished product emerges
off one conveyor belt – we tend to focus on that and feel very proud of
ourselves – while off another conveyor belt tumble numerous other products,
which we all too readily classify as waste and send off to a landfill. It
is this behaviour that we as legislators seek to change here today.

The National Environmental Management: Waste Bill is framework legislation
that has been in development for more than five years. An extensive
consultancy process with relevant stakeholders was undertaken by the
department before bringing it to Parliament. It thus appears that the Bill
presented to the House today enjoys considerable support. Allow me to say,
though, that it is a pity that the executive introduced this Bill so late
in the parliamentary programme. While our deliberations certainly fulfil
minimum requirements, we could have done with more time.

It may be the case that many producers and the manufacturing industry look
at the implications of this Bill and see only more costs for their
businesses – an unnerving thought in this period of particularly high price
inflation. However, a more thorough analysis of the cradle-to-grave concept
in waste management can and should in fact add new efficiencies to
production. A little investment in waste reduction could see increased
profits in the future.

The Bill itself does not set targets for waste minimisation, although it
should be our goal ultimately to move South Africa to a zero-waste society.
It does allow the Minister or relevant MEC to engage with individual
sectors on the creation of industry waste management plans.

Such plans will create certainty and uniformity across sectors, thus
levelling the playing fields and should, in theory, be aligned to the
capacities and the potential of individual sectors. So, for example, the
glass sector may have specific requirements with regard to recycling, reuse
and recovery which are very different from the plastic sector.

As exciting as this piece of legislation may appear, it is not going to
change South Africa overnight. I suspect that the full implementation of
all parts of the Bill will only be achieved in more than five years’ time.
Engaging individual sectors will take a long time but getting
municipalities, who under this legislation also have obligations, may take
an eternity. It is true to say that the vast majority of municipalities,
many of which cannot even satisfy their minimum core functions, are not in
a position to implement their responsibilities in terms of this Bill.

The skills crisis and unfunded mandates are two defences that many
municipal managers may put in the way of this Bill. It is worth noting,
though, that the department has budgeted for significant funding in the
years of implementation, in order to help build capacity and
infrastructure. It simply has to be the case that there is eventually
uniformity of implementation across the provinces and municipalities. If
this is not the case, producers will flock to municipal districts where
more wasteful activities are tacitly condoned.

This Bill recognises the unique competencies that local government has in
the field of waste management. For some commentators, the National
Environmental Management: Waste Bill may even be controversial, as the
national department is intended to introduce a certain degree of
standardisation. However, this is a necessary evil and is perfectly
acceptable under section 44 of the Constitution, which provides national
government with somewhat of an override function.
The issue of incineration took much of the committee’s time during the
deliberations. I’d like to acknowledge the work of the NGOs that are
tireless campaigners in this field. It is true that there are many
undesirable aspects of incineration but then it must be said that many
other treatment options, including land filling, also have significant
negatives. The committee was of the view that a whole range of treatment
options needed to remain on the table and the banning of one option – in
this case incineration – could have numerous unforeseen consequences.

Incineration remains, for example, the dominant treatment option for
certain categories of medical waste, and it plays a role in the cement
production process. Nevertheless, there are health aspects which need to be
taken into consideration and, thus, an important amendment to the draft
Bill was that all regulations surrounding incineration need to be brought
back to the National Assembly.

The portfolio committee will need to ensure that the management of
incinerators is significantly improved and that more stringent air quality
permits are issued. It is unacceptable that some incinerators are still
operating illegally in South Africa. Furthermore, it is necessary to
improve the monitoring capacity of the implementing agencies.

The DA supports the National Environmental Management: Waste Bill here
today. Becoming a society that consumes less is the more sustainable
option, it is better for the health of the environment and it is better for
human health as well. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms C N Z ZIKALALA: Chairperson, we in South Africa have high growth targets
and ambitions for our economy. The increase in industrial and other
activities that will no doubt occur as we pursue and try to achieve these
targets will undoubtedly result in increased levels of pollution and waste,
and will therefore put extra strain on our environment.

If not managed in a responsible manner, this pollution and waste will have
a detrimental effect on our environment and health, as well as on our
economy, in the long term. It is therefore imperative that issues of waste
and pollution are dealt with in a focused, co-ordinated and responsible
manner.

We often hear of or are exposed to incidents of irresponsible disposal and
dumping of waste, which not only cause harm to the environment, but also
constitute a hazard to the health of people in the surrounding communities.
This type of irresponsible waste management must be stopped.

The Bill before us today is part of the department’s law reform process
which aims to consolidate and streamline legislation governing the
environment. The Bill aims to reform the laws regulating waste management
by providing measures for integrated pollution and waste management,
providing for compliance with those measures and giving effect to section
24 of the Constitution in order to achieve an environment that is not
harmful to the health and wellbeing of people.

With issues such as global warming and climate change coming to the fore,
it is imperative that we in South Africa also play our part and do our bit
to provide some form of protection and minimise the damage to our
environment. As South Africans, both business and individual households, we
must be more aware and consider the impact that our actions have on the
environment. We must learn to recycle and reuse so as to lessen the amount
of waste that is generated.

Hopefully this Bill will go a long way in dealing with our waste problems
and promote economic and social development that is not only sustainable,
but also ecologically friendly. The IFP supports the Bill.

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, the ACDP shares the view that the lack of proper
waste management, planning and bad habits in dealing with waste have become
a major challenge in South Africa. We have waste disposal on river banks,
the creation of open-dump disposal areas which threaten surrounding
residents, the general burning of waste causing air pollution and
unauthorised waste processing involving hazardous substances.

The National Environmental Management: Waste Bill aims to entrench waste
management best practices in the law, which the ACDP clearly supports. The
Bill will provide national norms, standards and measures for regulating the
management of waste by all spheres of government. The aim is to give effect
to section 24 of the Constitution, to achieve an environment that is not
harmful to the health and wellbeing of people.

For example, this Bill will replace the obsolete and weak end-of-pipe
approach with a new, more environmentally accountable and sustainable
approach. End-of-pipe management refers to the way in which rubbish is
typically collected by municipal waste companies, disposed of at landfills
and covered with soil. These landfills eventually exceed their capacity,
necessitating new landfill sites, and this, clearly, is not sustainable.

South Africa also, regrettably, has a sad legacy when it comes to the
incineration of waste. We need only to think of the Thor Chemicals saga. In
the mid-1980s Thor Chemicals, after being pressurised by the British
government for excessive mercury emissions at their plant in Margate, in
the UK, closed the plant and shifted it to Cato Ridge in KwaZulu-Natal,
where they imported mercurial hazardous waste and incinerated it at that
plant here in South Africa.

The result was three worker deaths and more than 40 worker injuries, all
due to exposure to mercury. The workers filed a lawsuit in London and the
case was successfully settled out of court. However, 20 years later, we
understand that the waste has not been removed from the premises, and the
soil and buildings remain contaminated with mercury, and clearly this is an
issue that needs to be addressed.

We trust that the Green Scorpions and other law enforcement agencies will
be able to make full use of the increased teeth provided by this Bill, such
as penalties of up to R10 million, to prosecute unscrupulous industries and
persons ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon member, your time has expired.

Mr S N SWART: ... and to ensure a safe and pollution-free environment for
all. The ACDP will support this Bill. I thank you.

Mr L ZITA: Chairperson, in Polokwane in December, the ANC took a very
critical and important resolution ... [Interjections.] You can pose a
question if you want to! In that resolution the ANC raised the issue of
zero-waste principles. We should seek to develop and to have a society in
which we manage waste in a very effective way, where we allow waste and
what we see as waste to be used in the production of something else.
Everything should be recycled. Everything has a purpose. There is no such
thing as complete waste. That is a very important principle. This
particular Bill lays the foundation for the realisation of this vision that
the ANC adopted in Polokwane.

I would like to be brief, and take this opportunity to thank the parties.
All members of the portfolio committee from the different parties agreed on
the National Environmental Management: Waste Bill; there was not even a
single dissenting voice.

I think this is a very important development because it begins to signal
that there is an embryo of what one calls a common national interest in
South Africa where all of us can come together and approach a problem as
South Africans, and not just reduce everything to petty politicking. That
was the major development in the discussion of the National Environmental
Management: Waste Bill.

I would also like to express a particular appreciation to all those who
were involved with this legislation. We had an open-ended process of public
participation. Even though we had public hearings on the Bill we continued
to consult, we continued to allow the participation of social actors such
as NGOs and businesspeople throughout the process of the legislation. It
was indeed a very participative process, and therefore a very difficult
process, particularly for those who are more bureaucratic, as some of the
officials sometimes can be. But they were all patient and allowed us to be
more participative in addressing this legislation.

I would like to express appreciation for the work of groundWork, one of the
NGOs that worked with us, and particularly its leader, Bobby Peak from
Durban, who was very influential in shaping and engaging with us around the
challenge of incineration. As a result, we had a very rigorous debate on
incineration, and the legislation seeks to address this challenge of
incineration.

We have therefore made it more difficult for the industry to solve the
problem of waste by just burning everything. That is a problem because it
reinforces pollution. As a result we have come to an agreement that
incineration should be an option of last resort; it should not be resorted
to willy-nilly.

I think the result is a piece of legislation which, though tough, does not
undermine the survival of the industry. It is tough legislation, it is
rigorous, but it does not undermine development.

The ANC supports the National Environmental Management: Waste Bill. Thank
you very much.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Chairperson, I
would very much like to thank all parties that have supported this Bill,
especially the chairperson, the hon Zita, who has been very instrumental in
steering this ship in the right direction. We really thank you for the
commitment you have shown today by supporting this Bill.

With this kind of commitment we will clean our country and also offer jobs,
especially to unemployed youth and women. That is why I said that everyone
will be rich, because we will be creating employment and making sure that
we are part of eradicating poverty while cleaning our country. We really
thank you for everything, but we should all take responsibility so that we
see our dream come true. It is no longer a dream, and we must now drive
this process as it unfolds. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Chairperson, your microphone is not on and we cannot hear
you, sir.

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

                       HOUSING DEVELOPMENT AGENCY BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Deputy Chairperson and hon members, after several
comprehensive reviews of our housing delivery value chain, it became very
clear to us that access to well-located land is one of the biggest and most
debilitating blockages in the housing delivery chain. The acquisition, the
holding and the release of land, as well as the slowness in processing land
development, pose a serious threat to our resolve to fast-track delivery of
sustainable human settlements.

Our initial response to this problem was to ask municipalities to refrain
from the wholesale sale of municipal-owned land. The idea was to target
state land in our quest to find well-located land. In October 2005, we
convened a national municipality indaba, together with ourselves, and we
urged municipalities who were then led by the SA Local Government
Association to adopt a moratorium on the sale of land. Because of the very
nature of the association, Salga, the moratorium remained of a voluntary
nature.

We welcome the gesture of co-operation underlying the voluntary moratorium,
and I take this opportunity now to express my appreciation to those
municipalities that adopted the freeze on the sale of land. Unfortunately,
the moratorium yielded few results in that, by the time it was introduced,
a lot of municipal-owned land had already been sold off. Sadly, there were
some municipalities that had ignored the call for a moratorium on the sale
of land in their myopic drive to gain revenue from the sale of land. This
points to some of the intergovernmental relation weaknesses that often
undermine our efforts in responding to national development challenges.

Our second response was, through Cabinet, a resolution to impose on all
state enterprises the requirement to prioritise housing as they dispose of
their non-core land assets. It became very clear to us at that point that
this initiative immediately demanded that there be a special-purpose
vehicle for harvesting these land assets for housing development, holding
them and preparing them for development.

In our search for solutions, we looked further afield than ourselves and
noted that other countries had done much better than we had, and we learned
from these countries, such as Namibia, India, Sri Lanka, Singapore, China,
Malaysia, and the list goes on. These countries have, within their stable,
housing development agencies which play the very specific role that we
would like our own Housing Development Agency to play.

The size of the housing backlog that we are faced with demands that we find
channels to ensure that we can deliver very speedily. Displacement of
construction capacity specifically away from the low-cost housing sector
and as a result of the mega infrastructure developments, as well as
increasing global mobility of skills, impose on us a responsibility to seek
to adopt alternative delivery models and instruments.

The constraints to the rapid provision of housing for the poor, and the
willingness of the NGO sector and private sector to join government in
providing sustainable human settlements ultimately led us to a number of
workshops in Cape Town 2005, to find partners to help us navigate through
this minefield. One of the conferences that we held, named the Social
Housing Contract, had, as one of its outcomes, a requirement from the state
to provide the nongovernmental organisations, the banking associations,
Slum Dwellers International and other stakeholders with the necessary
assistance in the form of land to ensure that our partnership can develop.

The Housing Development Agency is a product of what happens when government
and the private sector accept joint responsibility for the eradication of
slums and agree to work together to provide a better life for all.

Chairperson, very specifically, the Housing Development Agency Bill
establishes the Housing Development Agency as a statutory body, and its
main purpose is to address, one, the shortage of well-located land; two,
the facilitation of the rapid development of sustainable human settlements
by proactively improving intergovernmental relations across all three
spheres of government in respect of ensuring that needed inputs are
delivered; and, three, the supply of much-needed project management
capacity for government projects.

The rationale behind the agency is that it would assist in cutting red tape
that prohibits the acquisition of suitable land, something that would be
very difficult for municipal or provincial departments to do on their own.
The agency will also aid in minimising red tape in the approval of
development both by the government and by the private sector. This, in
turn, should make the housing segment attractive for increased private
sector investment. After all, the private sector is a very important key
player in the provision of safe, affordable housing for all South Africans.

The agency will facilitate the acquisition of land in a way that
supplements the capacities of government across all spheres. Municipalities
will be expected to use their housing sector plans to identify local
housing land needs. The provincial housing departments will be responsible
for assisting local authorities in developing their land needs, with
assessments and in co-ordinating individual municipal submissions into
provincial plans. The agency will also proactively facilitate collaboration
with other sectors in the development of such land in order to achieve the
outcome of sustainable human settlements.

The Bill provides for an agreement between the agency and a municipality,
where a council lacks the capacity to acquire, hold and develop land. The
agency’s facilitation of this will ensure that we can, so much more
speedily, achieve what we would like to do.

In summary, identifying the right parcel of land for acquisition, managing
costs once land has been acquired, assisting in the packaging of projects
and ensuring that the development necessary is fully integrated would
require something outside of what we have had all along.

I want to pay tribute to my team in the department, our partners in the
NGOs and the private sector for ensuring that this Bill is serving before
this House in record time. I commend the members of the portfolio committee
who worked tirelessly to ensure that the Housing Development Agency Bill is
serving before this House in the shortest possible time.

Deputy Chairperson, I present to you and the House the Housing Development
Agency Bill, 2007, for the House’s approval. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs Z A KOTA: Chairperson, Minister, Deputy Ministers, hon members,
honoured guests, I greet you this afternoon. It gives me great pleasure to
have this opportunity to debate the Housing Development Agency Bill. It is
a great achievement, indeed.

In September 2004, the national Department of Housing launched its Breaking
New Ground strategy, marking a turnaround in housing delivery. The strategy
re-evaluated housing delivery in South Africa and made recommendations for
bold changes to the traditional ways in which housing had been delivered.
It re-enforced the need to achieve a nonracial, integrated society through
the development of sustainable human settlements and quality housing.

The essence of sustainable human settlements is defined within the Breaking
New Ground strategy as follows: well-managed entities in which economic
growth and social development are in balance with the carrying capacity of
natural systems on which they depend for their existence and resulting in
sustainable development, that is, wealth creation, poverty alleviation and
equity.

This Bill before Parliament today is indeed an intervention whose objective
is to significantly accelerate affordable housing delivery in order to
impact positively on the development of integrated human settlements.

In line with the objectives of the comprehensive plan, the Housing
Development Agency Bill will assist provinces and municipalities with rapid
land release and landed property for housing, which will thus fast-track
housing delivery.

One of the many challenges facing housing delivery is the availability of
well-located land for the building of houses. The Housing Development
Agency Bill’s objective is to address that. It will identify, acquire,
hold, develop and release state and privately owned land for residential
and community purposes, for the creation of sustainable human settlements.
It will do so working hand in hand with all other relevant stakeholders. It
will work within the ethos of integrated governmental relations.

It is envisaged that this agency will have the ability to cut bureaucratic
red tape. It must have teeth in order for it to be able to do its business.
We have a mandate to do “Business Unusual”. This was said at this podium by
President Thabo Mbeki during the state of the nation address.

The ANC government has good policies and the challenge is with regard to
implementation. This Housing Development Agency Bill is there to assist
government in its objective to improve the quality of life for all our
people.

We are fortunate that the Minister of Housing, Dr Lindiwe Sisulu, has
worked very hard in ensuring that this piece of legislation is before
Parliament today. As the Portfolio Committee on Housing, we have satisfied
ourselves that consultation has been done and the concerns that were raised
during the consultation process have been taken into account in putting
together this legislation.

The ANC January 8 Statement speaks of the development of integrated human
settlements as a critical element in our fight against poverty and in
improving the quality of life of all our people. It went on to say that
this Housing Development Agency legislation is meant to address the
proliferation of informal settlements, and is an intervention to curb the
cost of construction material and the central planning approach for
directing resource allocation to human settlements.

As a committee we will continue with oversight and monitoring as far as the
implementation of this piece of legislation is concerned. It is very
important that this Bill should yield the required results. Government must
get value for money in this process of housing delivery.

We call upon all peace-loving South Africans to support the implementation
of this Housing Development Agency. We hope that in this process even
emerging contractors will benefit, because we don’t want a situation where
emerging contractors continue to emerge until doomsday. It is about time we
have an approach that says we will empower emerging contractors in housing
delivery. It is important, therefore, that we as this committee give an
opportunity to the department to do its job. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr A C STEYN: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members and guests, before I
start my speech I wish to draw the attention of this House to two
corrections in the Bill before us. In clause 12, subsection 8, the Bill
before us refers to section 10 when it should refer to section 11; and in
clause 13, subsection 2 refers to section 8 when it should in fact refer to
section 9. These corrections were pointed out to the committee secretary
this morning, and I was hoping that the chairperson would make mention of
them because we’ve got the correct Bill before us.

When the department first gave a presentation on the Bill, I questioned the
necessity of such an agency and asked why the same functions envisaged for
the agency could not be performed by a unit within the national Department
of Housing. At the time, strangely enough, many of my colleagues from the
governing party had the same reservations. We saw it as nothing more than a
re-creation of Thubelisha, which, as the department’s developer of choice,
doesn’t have a sterling record as far as housing delivery is concerned.

The question we all asked was this: Do we need a new structure, populated
by the same people who clearly cannot do the job, without first resolving
the bottlenecks that contribute to them not being able to do their jobs
efficiently? Why do we not tackle the underlying reasons for the lack of
delivery instead?

In one of the submissions it was even suggested that this intervention
would yield limited results unless at least the physical infrastructural
constraints were removed as a precursor to establishing such an agency. The
idea was put forward that the agency should act as a facilitator only,
focus on the macroplanning and be situated in the President’s Office.

However, the department portrayed the proposed agency as the “knight in
shining armour” that would miraculously speed up future housing delivery
and eliminate all the challenges, as they are referred to, that currently
inhibit decent housing delivery. Needless to say, my colleagues in the
committee have since changed their view and I, rather reluctantly, but in
the interests of enhanced delivery, have done the same, and will now
support the Bill before us today. In so doing, we have made many
amendments, including broadening the scope of the agency.

I must hasten to add that I am still not 100% convinced that the
establishment of the agency is the right way to go, but would dearly like
to be proved wrong in this instance. I say this for the following reasons.
The creation of another bureaucracy, besides the enormous financial and
human resources to be spent on offices and other infrastructure before a
single brick is planned or laid by this agency, is not necessarily going to
solve the challenges that exist. The agency will still be faced with skills
shortages, a certain level of red tape and dwindling supplies of building
material across the country. Perhaps the correct way to go is to address
the symptoms before prescribing the medication.

Having said that, it was proposed that the Bill would address one major
obstacle, and that is the availability of suitable land for development.
But, that is certainly not the only obstacle faced in the delivery of
housing, and I am now referring to the skills shortages being experienced,
not only in South Africa, but globally.

The objective is not just to deliver houses in the same manner that
government has done since 1994 until fairly recently, but to create
sustainable communities. This includes, therefore, the simultaneous
construction of other physical, economic, social and environmental
infrastructure, be it schools, clinics, transport infrastructure or the
creation of job opportunities.

In our oversight visits, more often than not, we come across housing
projects without any of the other amenities I referred to in order to
create a human settlement. Often, the actual housing project on its own is
even incomplete. The committee therefore decided that, if we are to accept
the necessity of this new agency, we needed to expand the objectives to try
to address some of the other challenges.

We have also added considerably to the functions of the agency. For
example, the agency will now have to ensure that there is collaboration and
intergovernmental alignment for housing development services, and when
contracted to provinces and municipalities for assistance, to enhance the
capacity of those organs of state through skills transference.

I am also very much the type of person who believes in the saying, “if it
ain’t broke, don’t fix it”. While the agency will exist to assist provinces
such as the Eastern Cape, where there clearly is a major problem with
service delivery, provinces and municipalities that are on track can
continue to manage and develop their own housing stock. The Bill recognises
their function under the Housing Act of 1997 and they can continue to do so
without recourse to the agency. The department has also given me the
assurance that the establishment of the agency will in no way retard or
prevent the accreditation of municipalities where they prove that they can,
independently, deliver on their mandate of housing delivery.

As I have indicated, the DA supports this Bill as amended, and I wish to
take this opportunity, even at this early stage, to wish the Ministry of
Housing and the still to-be-established agency good luck with its task. Hon
Minister, I pray that the agency will not follow in the footsteps of the SA
Housing Trust and become a financial drain on the country’s scarce monetary
resources. Perhaps, as has been suggested, a “trial run” should be pursued
from within the department prior to establishing and resourcing the agency.
I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms C N Z ZIKALALA: Chairperson, the success of the comprehensive plan for
the development of sustainable integrated human settlements depends on the
rapid release of well-located land, and dealing with the capacity
constraints in the provincial and municipal spheres of government in the
housing delivery backlog. Integration means integration of communities
regardless of colour, race or class. All South Africans must be able to
access housing in the well-located areas within our country.

The current developments in the housing sector, which entrench the old
apartheid regime’s thinking that black Africans are better off when placed
away from economic centres, and whites are better off when placed in the
economic centres of each town, are not in line with the spirit of Breaking
New Ground, as approved by the Cabinet in September 2004. The IFP supports
the establishment of the Housing Development Agency as an instrument to
accelerate housing delivery, and to provide provincial and municipal
spheres of government with the capacity to deal with the constraints of a
lack of capacity to deliver.

We hope the Bill will live up to our expectations of complementing the
capacity of all government spheres in identifying, acquiring, holding and
releasing state and privately-owned land for residential and community
purposes for the development of sustainable integrated human settlements.
In the spirit of “Business Unusual” the IFP hopes that the Minister, in
appointing the board, will deviate from “business as usual”, ANC-style, and
not appoint politically correct but incompetent individuals to the board
and compromise this noble objective of trying to unblock the blockages in
housing delivery.

The IFP is satisfied that there is nothing in the Bill that detracts from
the powers of municipalities or provinces to acquire and develop land in
terms of the Housing Act, Act 17 of 1997. Its function is to assist any
organs of state in dealing with already identified provincial and municipal
constraints as a barrier to housing delivery. The IFP supports the Bill.
[Applause.]

Ms S N SIGCAU: Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, the Bill before
us is necessitated by an acknowledgement from government that the housing
backlog is increasing. Despite the huge number of houses that have been
built since the advent of democracy, the backlog remains. The shortage of
skills and capacity at provincial and municipal levels have been a
problematic factor when it comes to delivery across the board, and
certainly when it comes to housing.

There are additional factors that affect the housing sector, such as the
prevalence of corruption in the allocation of tenders and beneficiaries.
Another factor that places pressure on government is the commitment that
was made to phase out informal settlements.

The functions of this agency are wide-ranging and aimed at addressing the
hurdle of acquiring suitable land, developing housing in a co-ordinated
manner and providing skills and capacity where the relevant organ of state
fails to meet the project deadlines. These are laudable goals that we
support.

It is our hope that the people selected to the board and appointed to staff
the agency will be of the highest calibre. It will require the efforts of a
talented and dedicated team to achieve the levels of co-ordination and
integration across multiple spheres of government that will be required for
the agency to successfully fulfil its mandate.

The UDM supports the Bill. [Applause.]

Nksz B N DAMBUZA: Sihlalo, malungu abekekileyo, kunye neendwendwe
ezibekekileyo, ndiza kuqala ngokulungisa nje into encinane nevele apha
kobekekileyo uSteyn. Andazi nokuba mhlawumbi, eli qonga lelokuba umntu
aveze izimvo zakhe ebenazo ngaphambi kokuba siwuhlalele phantsi siwuxovule
uMthetho na, kuba into endiyifumanisayo kukuba uveza izimvo zakhe, ekubeni
wonke umntu ebenazo ethe waziveza ekomitini, kodwa saxoxa, sevana, saphuma
noluvo oluhambisanayo sisonke. Mandiyilungise ke loo nto, ukuze ndingaphumi
apha kusekho izikrokrwana ezisecaleni.

Le yona yokushicilela okanye ukuprinta ingxaki siyibonile sonke, kwaye
ndiqinisekile ukuba iza kulungiswa ngoonobhala. (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[Ms B N DAMBUZA: Chairperson, hon members and distinguished guests, I will
begin by rectifying just one small issue that has been raised by the hon
Steyn. I do not know whether this platform was meant for people to air
views they have had prior to the discussion of the Act, because what I
notice is that he is raising his views, even though in the committee people
had raised their views, discussed them and came out with a common
understanding. Let me rectify that to ensure that I do not leave here with
people still disgruntled.

With regard to the issue of the problem with publishing or printing, we are
all aware of it, and I am certain that the secretaries will sort it out.]

Tabling this Housing Development Agency Bill before this august House is
the result of a concerted effort, willingness and commitment by the ANC-led
government to change the lives of citizens to ensure a better quality of
life. The key objective of the national Housing Department, under the
leadership of Comrade Lindiwe Sisulu, is the provision of integrated and
sustainable human settlements.

This Bill seeks to establish a special entity, known as the Housing
Development Agency, to assist in the acceleration of housing and human
settlement development with the focus on land acquisition and release,
bringing it to a state of readiness for development as well as project
management capability to complement the capacity of government across all
spheres.

It must also be registered that the agency will perform a special type of
task, and will bring value by doing things differently. The agency receives
its mandate from the Minister of Housing, concluded in a written form, in
which specific service delivery areas and targets are clearly spelt out,
and which also contains the operational and performance indicators to
measure its performance.

The Bill seeks to recognise the principle of job creation, which promotes
BEE principles and also the Expanded Public Works Programme. The agency is
governed by the governing body, which consists of nine members ...

... Kuqukwa amalungu amabini obuzekezeke. Kula malungu asixhenxe kuqukwa
namalungu anyulwe ngaba baPhathiswa balandelayo: oweMisebenzi yoLuntu,
owezeMihlaba nowooRhulumente bamaPhondo nooMasipala. Umsebenzi wesi sigqeba
kukuphatha uMlawuli-Jikelele kwakunye noMlawuli wezimali wombutho. Nangona
kunjalo, isigqeba sesona sinamandla okanye igunya lokulawula, siphinde
siqhagamshelane njalo noMphathiswa, sidlulisele kuye imiba enobuzaza
nephathelele kumsebenzi weziko okanye iagency.

Nangona isigqeba sivumelekile ukugunyazisa amandla ngokubhala phantsi,
kodwa amandla okuqesha aba babalwe ngasentla, ukuqulunqa isicwangciso
sokuphatha okanye i-strategic plan kwakunye negunya laso akuvumelekanga
ukuba kunikezelwe komnye umntu. Imiqathango yokuba ngubani ofanele ukuba
anyulwe kule bhodi ifana twatse neminye jikelele. (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[... including two ex officio members. Among the seven members who have
been appointed, there are also those who have been appointed by the
following Ministers: Public Works, Land Affairs and Provincial and Local
Government. The responsibility of this board is to supervise the director-
general and the agency’s treasurer. Be that as it may, the board has more
powers or authority to manage and also to liaise with the Minister and
inform her of any sensitive matters concerning the institution or the
agency’s services.

Even though the board has the authority to delegate powers in writing, the
authority to hire the above employees, the drafting of the management
strategic plan and its powers may not be delegated to anyone. The
conditions for appointment to this board are exactly the same as those for
appointment to other boards in general.]

With regard to the agency’s employees, the board determines the staff
establishment, which is meant to be very lean, attracting and sourcing high-
level skills to provide the expertise to work across all sectors, ie public
and private, and address the holistic challenges experienced in the housing
delivery sector, including infrastructure inefficiencies and central
planning at any given time.

When it comes to the funding of the agency, I should say that the funds to
manage this strategic task include money appropriated by Parliament. The
agency is expected to have the capacity to mobilise optimal resources from
government, public and private sources, including donor resources, on
approval by the Minister. The agency will be subject to the Public Finance
Management Act, and therefore the accounting standards and reporting,
including the powers exercised, will be conducted in accordance with this
Act.

The Minister will table the annual report of the agency to Parliament as
per parliamentary rules and regulations. The Minister may delegate to the
director-general any of his or her powers or assign any of his or her
duties as conferred or the imposed on him or her by the Bill, but making
regulations or appointment of a board member are functions that may not be
delegated. The Minister has the authority to intervene in every
circumstance whenever this is deemed necessary.

Siyikomiti eyongamele ezezindlu siwuthi thaca lo mthetho apha phambi kwenu,
sinethemba lokuba zonke iingxaki ezambethe okanye ezibambezela ukuqhutywa
kolwakhiwo lwezindlu ngokukhawuleza okukhulu ziya kusonjululwa. Kwaye nathi
sikwathembisa ukubeka iliso elibukhali. uKhongolose uyawuxhasa lo Mthetho
uYilwayo. Enkosi. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph
follows.)

[As the Housing Committee, we are tabling this Bill with the hope that all
the problems that pervade or rather inhibit the construction of houses will
be solved. We also promise to monitor this matter. The ANC supports the
Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr H B CUPIDO: Chairperson, Minister, the policy of the ACDP on the
provision of housing, the alleviation of squatting and the eradication of
backyard dwelling is being strongly addressed by the implementation of an
agency as provided for in this Housing Development Agency Bill.

In order to restore the dignity of our people, some of whom are living in
substandard shelters and in environments not conducive to human living, the
ACDP strongly supports the acceptance of this Bill.

Strong economic growth and rapid urbanisation require proactive initiatives
by all spheres of government to keep up with the provision of much-needed
and suitable land for housing. The agency will be instrumental in assisting
municipalities to acquire land and landed properties in order to develop
suitable human settlements.

By agreement, the agency will also assist municipalities to complete
projects which are incomplete and help with the upgrading of informal
settlements. The agency will assist with minimising bureaucracy in the
approval of developments by both government and the private sector.

The ACDP would urge the hon Minister of Housing to really ensure that the
members of the governing board will be people who are capable and have the
knowledge and experience to perform according to the requirements set out
in this Bill.

The ACDP supports the Bill.

Mr D C MABENA: Chairperson, Madam Minister, hon members, very few countries
have in place clearly defined policy strategies and implementation at
national level. Internationally, there is a strong move to increase the
supply of land for the poor and to get land markets working better in order
to create shelter and settlements for the poor.

As you all should know, South Africa’s housing policies are aligned to
these trends, if not leading in this regard. The ANC has, at successive
national conferences, adopted resolutions that inform these policies and
this legislative framework.

Our policies and programmes have passed the test of meticulous scrutiny.
The Housing Development Agency Bill before us today is no exception, but,
naturally and unsurprisingly, we in the House have become accustomed to
those in the opposition benches being centred upon one word: “why”. Allow
me to explain.

Since the advent of democracy, this ANC-led government has had unparalleled
success in housing delivery. However, we must be measured once we claim
these achievements and ask ourselves very hard questions.

As we all should know, the diabolical legacy of apartheid was never going
to manifest itself in the first decade of freedom. In fact, statistics,
projections and social indicators pertaining to housing were either in a
shambles or were contaminated, and did not reflect the true picture of the
immensity of the challenges we were facing.

Currently, any independent observer who travels this country will
unfortunately be able to point to the spatial dimensions – namely race,
class and economic – of this phenomenon and its most common denominator,
poverty.

According to the latest data available from the national Department of
Housing, more than 2,5 million of our people live in informal and
inadequate settlements. This reality is compounded by the fact that the
backlog is ever increasing, so much so that the national department has
given a frank and sober acknowledgement that we need to do something
radical to negate it.

Our government’s antipoverty policy is also based on housing and therefore
land becomes a critical element in this equation, hence the Housing
Development Agency Bill. In South Africa, the question of land for housing
needs a dedicated argency with commensurate capacity and ability which is
equal to that of the developed world. In the light of our government’s
constitutional imperatives and the Millennium Development Goals, it
requires a special-purpose vehicle to respond to this and other challenges.

In order to deal effectively with the challenges of human settlements and
in the spirit of building a caring society, the ANC has, after robust
debate at its 52nd conference in Polokwane in 2007, resolved that land
acquisition for human settlements should be accelerated through a housing
development agency.

This agency reaffirms the general strategic objectives of the
Reconstruction and Development Programme and the historic vision of the
Freedom Charter. Moreover, its mandate extends to giving direction to where
land and infrastructure are to be located for purposes of development, and
particularly socioeconomic development. Also, it establishes the linkages
between construction, development and growth, and ensures optimal
participation in the financial sector, which was hitherto negligible.

However, in order to make the agency fit for the purpose, we, as the
Portfolio Committee on Housing, need to ensure that it is endowed with the
best capacity, inter alia, human, technological, sectoral, etc capacity. In
addition, we pledge to the Minister that we will certainly ensure that the
financial resources allocated to the agency will be prudently disbursed and
that accountability will be given new meaning, obviously within the
prescripts of the Public Finance Management Act.

I have alluded to the importance of sectoral capacity. Currently land
constraints constitute one of the most critical constraints in relation to
the creation of human settlements. The agency will address this in a major
way. The Bill provides for the appointment of officials, amongst others
from the Department of Land Affairs, to the board. We believe that this is
a critical provision, since the Department of Land Affairs is a custodian
of land policy and concomitant expertise. Moreover, they will greatly
assist with the vexing issue of expropriation, particularly in cases or
scenarios where intransigence and antitransformation tendencies might
hamper our constitutional imperatives.

In relation to other functions, the Housing Development Agency will provide
for central co-ordination, planning, budgeting and monitoring in the
provision of infrastructure and the delivery of human settlements. At this
stage, I have to conscientise the House that, notwithstanding the powers
and duties given to the agency, the principle of consultation between all
parties mentioned in the Bill is indeed enshrined.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon member, your time has expired.

Mr D C MABENA: The ANC supports the Bill. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Chairperson, thank you very much for the
opportunity to close this debate. I want to thank the hon Zille. In all the
time I have worked in Parliament I have not had a situation where, in the
shortest possible time, we have managed to have consensus around a Bill of
this nature.

Thank you for managing to grab the hon Steyn by the scruff of his neck and
making sure that he does agree. All my threats to him fell on deaf ears, so
when I saw him agreeing to this, I knew you had done something beyond what
I could ever have done. I was laughing to myself when the hon Zille was
urging him and she said – I want to quote – “I call upon all peace-loving
South Africans to run around to support the Bill”. I quite imagined myself
running behind hon Joe Seremane. I don’t need to do much; just crawl
behind.

The hon Butch Steyn stood here and indicated that even though he might not
be 100% in support of the way that we are going, he would support us. He
raised a number of very important issues which were, fortunately for me,
responded to by members of the portfolio committee. He wondered why we
would put a new structure in place when, in fact, we have other problems.
We are putting a new structure in place precisely because we have studied
how it can be done differently. We have studied how other countries had
made a success of similar problems; we have studied too how this government
has made a success of similar intractable problems. We have seen how, in
the Department of Transport, the SA National Roads Agency Limited has done
much better than we could ever have done with Thubelisha. Thubelisha was
never intended to do what we want the agency to do.

That is why, therefore, we are going this way, hon Steyn, precisely to
ensure that we can attract the few skills that we have, because we are
mindful of the skills shortages that you are pointing out to us. It is not
“a knight in shining armour”, but we do think that it is a response to some
of the problems that we have. We have looked at it very hard; we have
studied it carefully and we think that this is the way to go.

I would like to thank the hon Zikalala who represented the IFP. I have
never seen her in the portfolio committee, but I welcome her to the
portfolio committee. She wants to say to me, from the podium, that I should
make sure that the members we chose for the board are not political
appointees. I want to say to both her and Butch Steyn that they can rest
assured that they will not be appointed to this board, precisely because we
want to make sure that it is not political. So, Butch Steyn, please don’t
apply. Even if you don’t make it back to Parliament, don’t apply for a
position on the board, because we will make sure that you don’t get there.

I would like to thank the UDM for their very swift support of the Bill. I
would like to thank Comrade Dambuza. Don’t worry about the public relations
that normally comes from the DA. The most important thing is that today we
are here and we are all agreed on the way to go. Thank you for explaining
to all the responsibility of this Bill. I think we have come to a point
where we all agree that this is the path we should follow; this is where we
should be; this is the right thing to do; and this is the right burden to
shoulders to ensure that we are able to take on the responsibilities that
lie ahead.

I would like to thank the UCDP. Please sit very close to Butch Steyn so
that, from time to time, you might whisper some sense into his ear. When he
has had sense whispered in his ear, he does tend to say the right thing.

I would like to thank the hon Mabena for explaining very explicitly why it
was necessary for us to go in the direction that we have gone.

I would like to thank the portfolio committee through the chair, Comrade
Zoe Kota, for the increased powers that they have given to the agency. I
myself could never have dreamt it would have the powers that it has now. I
would like to thank you also for the commitment that you have given that
the necessary funding will be channelled to the agency.

I would also like to thank you for understanding that monitoring and
overseeing the agency is a common responsibility between ourselves and you.
I think we have come to a point here where we can only move forward more
rapidly, as we have promised our people we would do, and I am very glad
that you are here to support me.

I would like to thank the members of the House who have sat through the
presentation of this Bill. Thank you for your support. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): That concludes the debate. Are
there any objections to the Bill being read a second time?

Mr M J ELLIS: Chairperson, there is certainly no objection to the Bill,
despite all the nasty things the Minister said about Butch Steyn. We
certainly don’t object to the content of the Bill, but there was an issue
that I did raise with the Table staff – and the hon Butch Steyn raised it
himself – with regard to the fact that there are two clause numbers that
are incorrect in the Bill.

Now I have been led to believe by the Table staff that, because the NA is
the first House and the Bill will now go to the NCOP, the select committee,
when the Bill gets to the NCOP, will be able to make those amendments or
the Bill will gave been corrected by the time it gets to them.

What I am asking you, sir, is whether this is the correct procedure and
whether those amendments will in fact be made. If they are not made, we
actually have a flawed Bill.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Just a minute. The indication is
that it is on record. Those are textual amendments that can be made in the
NCOP. If it doesn’t amend the Bill, we also have a record, as you have
stood up, and it has also been confirmed by myself here.

Mr M J ELLIS: Thank you, Chairperson.

Bill read a second time.

The House adjourned at 15:52.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Referral of Bill to National House of Traditional Leaders


    The Secretary to Parliament has, in accordance with  section  18(1)  of
    the Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework Act, 2003 (Act  No.
    41 of 2003), referred  the  Traditional  Courts  Bill  [B  15  –  2008]
    (National Assembly – sec 76)  to  the  National  House  of  Traditional
    Leaders, which must, within 30 days from the date of  the  referral  (8
    May 2008), make any comments it wishes to make.


National Assembly

The Speaker

 1. Reconsideration of Bill

    (1)    The Speaker received a letter  dated  25  April  2008  from  the
         President of the Republic informing her that  he  had  reservations
         about the constitutionality of the following Bill:

         Human Sciences Research Council Bill  [B  16B  of  2007]  (National
         Assembly - sec 75)


         and that, in terms of section 79(1) of  the  Constitution,  he  was
         referring  the   Bill   back   to   the   National   Assembly   for
         reconsideration. The President’s letter reads as follows:


         25 April 2008



         Dear Madam Speaker



       REFERRAL OF THE HUMAN SCIENCES RESEARCH COUNCIL BILL, 2007 (the
                       Bill) TO THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY


         I have received the above Bill from the Secretary of Parliament for
         me to assent to and sign into law.
         The Minister of Science and Technology  Mr  Mosibudi  Mangena  (the
         Minister), requested me not to sign the Bill  into  law  pending  a
         legal opinion on the constitutionality of the provision of  section
         5(3) of the Bill. I am now  in  possession  of  the  legal  opinion
         obtained by the Minister. The legal opinion is attached hereto  for
         your information and consideration.


         Section 5(3) of the Bill seeks to give power  to  the  Minister  of
         Science and Technology (the Minister) to  appoint  members  of  the
         Human Sciences Research Council board (the Board). Section 5(3)  of
         the Bill provides that, “The Minister may, in consultation with the
         National Assembly, appoint members of the Board after publishing  a
         notice in  the  Government  Gazette  and  two  national  newspapers
         circulating in the Republic calling upon members of the  public  to
         nominate persons contemplated in subsection (2)(a) and (b).”


         The main concern raised by the Minister with regard to section 5(3)
         is the use of the phrase “the Minister may,  in  consultation  with
         the National Assembly, appoint members of  the  Board  ...”.  I  am
         advised that the appointment of the Board “in consultation with the
         National Assembly” may undermine the  principle  of  separation  of
         powers as guaranteed by the Constitution of the Republic  of  South
         Africa, 1996. I am also advised that the appointment of  the  Board
         as contemplated in  section  5(3)  of  the  Bill  is  an  executive
         function, which has to be performed the Minister.


         The legal opinion obtained by the Minister concluded that,  section
         5(3) of the Bill as it stands, may be interpreted to suggest that:


         •  The National Assembly is involved in the executive functions  of
             appointing members  of  the  Board,  which  is  the  executive
             prerogative of the Minister.


         •   The  Minister’s  executive  powers  are  circumvented  and   or
             encroached into by the National assembly as the Minister would
             be required to be in agreement with the National  Assembly  in
             appointing members of the Board.


         The legal opinion  further  concluded  that  section  5(3)  in  its
         present context  creates  a  room  for  judicial  scrutiny  by  the
         Constitutional Court  as  it  may  contravene  section  85  of  the
         Constitution on the aspect of separation of powers.


         I am advised that the office of the Chief  State  Law  Adviser  was
         also of the view that section 5(3) as it stands may  undermine  the
         principle of separation of powers.


         I am concerned that the appointment of the Board by the Minister in
         consultation  with  the  National  Assembly  may   compromise   the
         principle of separation of powers guaranteed by the Constitution.


         In the light of the above, I would like to express my  reservations
         on the constitutionality of section 5(3) of the Bill.


         Section 79(1) of the Constitution requires the  President,  in  the
         event the President has reservations about constitutionality of the
         Bill referred to him by the National Assembly, to refer it back  to
         the National Assembly for reconsideration.


         In terms of section 79(1) of the Constitution, I hereby forward the
         Bill to the National Assembly for reconsideration.


       signed
       TM MBEKI


       Ms B Mbete, MP
       Speaker: National Assembly
       Parliament of the Republic of South Africa
       P.O.Box 15
       CAPE TOWN


       Cc Minister of Science and Technology, MP

2.    Membership of the Assembly


      a) The vacancy which occurred in the National Assembly  owing  to  the
         passing on of Ms Z N Nawa on 5 November 2007, has been filled  with
         effect from 6 May 2008 by the nomination of Mr K P Motlanthe.


      b) The vacancy which occurred owing to  the  resignation  of  Mr  A  M
         Maziya in the National Assembly with effect from 1  December  2007,
         has been filled with effect from 6 May 2008 by the nomination of Mr
         J M Mnisi.


      c) The vacancy which occurred owing to the resignation  of  Prof  A  K
         Asmal in the National Assembly with effect from 1 March  2008,  has
         been filled with effect from 6 May 2008 by the nomination of Ms N C
         Mfeketho.

TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)    Strategic Plan of National Treasury for 2008/11.

     b) Work Programme of Statistics South Africa for 2008/09-2010/11.

