---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 27 November 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2008-11-27
---

THURSDAY, 27 NOVEMBER 2008
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 10:06.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

   OBJECTION TO NOTICE OF MOTION BY MS B L NTEMBE, DATED 11 NOVEMBER 2008
        MISLEADING STATEMENT BY MR D A WORTH, DATED 19 NOVEMBER 2008

                                  (Ruling)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, before I continue with the Order
Paper for today, I want to make two rulings, which I promised that I would
do. Hon members, I would like to make a ruling on a point of order raised
by hon Tolo during the plenary on Tuesday, 11 November 2008. The hon member
objected to the notice of a motion that was moved by hon Ntembe; in
particular the hon member objected to a statement by hon Ntembe that reads
as follows:

  That the hon Minister for Provincial and Local Government on national
  television made known the decision to reincorporate Khutsong into Gauteng
  province.


After perusal of the transcript of the interview material sourced from the
SABC, I noted that the reference was made to the effect that Khutsong
should be reincorporated into Gauteng. However, the hon Tolo was correct to
say that the Minister went further to explain that he would be consulting
with the communities of Khutsong, Moetse and Matatiele to get their views
and to explain to them the processes that would be followed. I therefore
rule that the reference to the reincorporation was made and therefore the
notice of motion by hon Ntembe stands.

The second ruling relates to a point of order raised by Kgoshi Mokoena
during our plenary on Wednesday, 19 November 2008. The hon member objected
to a statement made by hon Worth on the grounds that the member was
misleading the House when he said: “Members who attended the public
hearings were bussed in.”

After perusal of the Hansard transcript, I can confirm that indeed the
member did say, “Members who attended the public hearings were bussed in”.
However, I would like to caution members that in terms of Rule 46(b) a
member may not deliberately make a statement in Council which the member
knows is false. That is what the Rule says. In this case, I am unable to
verify whether indeed members of the public were bussed in to attend the
public hearings or not.

However, let me conclude by saying that the Constitution also requires both
the provincial and the national legislatures to facilitate public
participation in the legislative process. Therefore, how this is done is a
matter for discussion. Thank you very much.

                        CONCERNS ABOUT WATER QUALITY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms D ROBINSON: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council -

      1) notes with concern the tragic circumstances of the outbreak of
         cholera in Zimbabwe and on our borders;


      2) expresses its concern to the water authorities in South Africa to
         ensure that the quality of our water is high enough to prevent the
         spread of cholera which can have such devastating consequences for
         our people;


      3) takes the recommendations of Dr Anthony Turton of the Council for
         “Scientific and Industrial Research, CSIR, seriously in his paper
         ‘Science Real and Relevant – A clean South Africa”; and

      4) is of the opinion that Dr Turton should be restored to his position
         so that he can continue to make the correct facts about our
         impending water crisis known, so that preventative action can be
         taken.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                GOOD MANAGEMENT OF FINANCES IN KWAZULU-NATAL

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnu D D GAMEDE: Sihlalo, ngiphakamisa ngaphandle kwesaziso:

   Ukuthi lo Mkhandlu –

      1) Uhalalisela futhi uncoma isifundazwe saKwaZulu-Natali ngombiko
         okhishwe uMcwaningimabhuku oveze ukuthi isimo nezinga lokuphathwa
         kwezimali esifundazweni sihle kakhulu futhi sihle kunazo zonke
         ezinye izifundazwe;

      2) ugcizelela ukuthi akukho soka lingenasici, kanye nanokuthi
         izinkinga ezibhekene noMnyango Wezolimo zilungiswe ngokushesha
         okukhulu futhi;

      3) ucela uhulumeni ophethe KwaZulu-Natali njengamanje ukuthi uqhubeke
         nokuziphatha kahle kakhulu izimali nakule minyaka eminye ezayo.
(Translation of isiZulu draft resolution follows.)

[Mr D D GAMEDE: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council -


      1) congratulates and praises the province of KwaZulu-Natal on the
         report issued by the Auditor-General which revealed that the
         finances of the province were properly handled and that the
         management of finances in the province was of a higher standard
         than in all the other provinces;


      2) emphasises that no one is perfect, and that the Department of
         Agriculture and Environmental Affairs should be put in order as
         soon as possible; and

      3) requests the ruling party in KwaZulu-Natal to continue to manage
         the finances properly, even in the near future.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

       INTERNATIONAL DAY FOR THE ELIMINATION OF VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms N F MAZIBUKO: Chairperson, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the Council, I
move without notice:

   That the Council -

      1) notes that 25 November marks the International Day for the
         Elimination of Violence Against Women as part of the 16 Days of No
         Violence Against Women campaign;


      2) acknowledges that many women and children in South Africa are still
         victims of violence at the hands of their partners and spouses; and




      3) calls on all South Africans and institutions of government to
         protect the rights of women and children in our country.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

   SUSPENSION OF RULE 239(1), JOINT RULE 154(2) AND JOINT RULE 220(2) FOR
     PURPOSES OF CONSIDERATION OF NATIONAL YOUTH DEVELOPMENT AGENCY BILL

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move the motion printed in my
name on the Order Paper, as follows:

   That the Council -


     1)  suspends  Rule  239(1),  which  provides,  inter  alia,  that  the
        consideration of a Bill may not  commence  before  at  least  three
        working days have elapsed since the committee’s report was  tabled,
        for the purposes of consideration of the National Youth Development
        Agency Bill [B82 — 2008] (National — Assembly sec 75) on  Thursday,
        27 November 2008;


     2) subject to the concurrence of the National Assembly, suspends Joint
        Rule 154(2), which provides that the Joint  Tagging  Mechanism  may
        not classify a Bill before the expiry of the period stated  in  the
        Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, in  respect  of  the
        Bill  (see  Announcements,  Tablings  and  Committee  Reports,   20
        November 2008, p 2321); and


     3) subject to the  concurrence  of  the  National  Assembly,  for  the
        purposes of conducting the  debate  today  on  the  National  Youth
        Development Agency Bill [B 82 — 2008] (National Assembly — sec 75),
        suspends Joint Rule 220(2), which requires that a translation of  a
        Bill’s official text must be received by Parliament at least  three
        days before the formal consideration of the Bill by  the  House  in
        which it was introduced.

Question put: That the motion be agreed to.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Motion  accordingly  agreed  to  in  accordance  with  section  65  of   the
Constitution.

 RATIFICATION OF EXTENSION OF DEADLINE FOR AD HOC JOINT COMMITTEE TO REPORT
      ON DRAFT AMENDMENT REGULATIONS MADE IN TERMS OF PUBLIC FUNDING OF
                      REPRESENTED POLITICAL PARTIES ACT

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move the motion printed in my
name on the Order Paper, as follows:

   That the Council —

     1) notes that the Ad Hoc Joint Committee to consider the draft
        amendment regulations made in terms of the Public Funding of
        Represented Political Parties Act was due to report on 5 November
        2008;

     2) further notes that the committee has on 18 November 2008 reported
        on its mandate;

     3) resolves, subject to the concurrence of the National Assembly and
        notwithstanding Joint Rule 138(5), to ratify the extension of the
        deadline by which the committee had to report to 18 November 2008.

Question put: That the motion be agreed to.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Motion accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

                         LEAVE OF ABSENCE TO MEMBERS

                             (Draft Resolution)
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move the motion printed in my
name on the Order Paper, as follows:

   That the Council, notwithstanding the provisions of Rule 17(1) of the
   Rules of the National Council of Provinces, grants hon F Nyanda and hon A
   N D Qikani leave of absence from proceedings of both the Council and
   committees of the Council in terms of Rule 17(2) until the honourable
   members are ready to resume their duties.

Question put: That the motion be agreed to.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Motion accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

                        NATIONAL LAND TRANSPORT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr R J TAU: Chairperson, hon members, I must confess that since the time I
was sworn in as a member of this House, I have never been lobbied the way I
have been lobbied today. Hon members asked me to make sure that our
statement is not more than five minutes long. Therefore, I want to oblige
the hon members. All members who lobbied me said that they have read the
report in the ATCs.

I just want to make one or two important points around the Bill itself, for
the benefit of those hon members who did not have an opportunity to read
the report.

For the purposes of management of land transportation in the country, the
Bill seeks to create an environment wherein municipalities will be allowed,
through national, provincial or whatever regulators, to have their own
local integrated road transport plans. This is something that has been
lacking when it comes to land transportation in our country. Municipalities
did not have the capacity to develop their own integrated road transport
plans.

That also raises the question of regulators and the issuing of permits. I
must point out that we had heated debates on this matter from our provinces
during the public hearings and even within the committee itself. It related
to the question whether a permit to operate is an asset that a South
African citizen can use as an economic instrument to advance or to grow
economically. However, we agreed, as the committee, that it cannot be
concluded that it is an asset precisely because of the challenges that come
with it. As a result, we agreed that the report will be presented to the
House for adoption. I now present it, Chairperson. Thank you very much.
Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Bill be agreed to.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: All nine provinces have voted in favour of the
Bill, but, unfortunately, I will not count the Mpumalanga vote because we
do not have their mandate in writing. As soon as we get your mandate, we
will incorporate it into our records. For now, eight provinces have voted
in favour of the Bill. I therefore declare this Bill agreed to in terms of
section 65 of the Constitution.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Bill accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.


                       JUDICIAL MATTERS AMENDMENT BILL


                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

                       JUDICIAL MATTERS AMENDMENT BILL

                      (Consideration of Second Report)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Just before Mr van der Merwe speaks, I
want to say that he will be speaking on the Second and the Third Orders.

Mr D J P VAN DER MERWE: Chairperson, hon colleagues, we look upon the
Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs as one of the most
important committees and we, as the DA, will support all efforts to improve
our justice system.

This Bill contains 40 clauses and it seeks to amend 14 unrelated different
Acts. The purpose of the Judicial Matters Amendment Bill is to amend
numerous provisions in various Acts by the Department of Justice and
Constitutional Development which do not require individual amendment Acts.
[Interjections.]

Mr B J MKHALIPHI: Chairperson, on a point of order. I think we need to
raise a point of order, because this is a committee report that does not
necessarily have to reflect a party-political position.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Correct. Continue, hon member.

Mr D J P VAN DER MERWE: Chairperson, section 113 of the General Laws
Amendment Act of 1935 criminalises the act where a newly born child is
disposed of with the intention of concealing the birth of the child.
Amendments in clause 1 address the evidentiary burden of proof that is
placed on the accused person.
Clause 59(A) of the Criminal Procedure Act of 1977 is aimed at amending
section 60 of the Criminal Procedural Act of 1977, which deals with bail
application of an accused person in court. This amendment intends to
address the problem of overcrowded prisons. This clause allows bail money
to be paid at any magistrate’s or High Court in the country and not only in
the court where the accused person is appearing.

Clause 34 section 7 of the Judges’ Remuneration and Conditions of
Employment Act. A judge who is discharged from active service and is under
the age of 75 years must, when required to do so, perform service for three
months in a year. Judges may voluntarily perform service for more than
three months yearly.

However, acceptance does not necessarily mean approval. The DA supports
this Bill. I thank you.

Debate concluded.

Judicial Matters Amendment Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of
the Constitution.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.
Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

      CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF JOINT COMMITTEE ON ETHICS AND MEMBERS’
  INTERESTSON REPORT OF AUDITOR-GENERAL ON ALLEGED NONDISCLOSURE BY MEMBERS
                                OF PARLIAMENT

     CONSIDERTATION OF REPORT OF JOINT COMMITTEE ON ETHICS AND MEMBERS’
            INTERESTS - COMPLAINT AGAINST MINISTER B M N BALFOUR

Mr R J TAU: Chairperson, I will just make the House’s life much easier by
going straight to the findings of the committee on Mr Woods. It is
recommended that Mr Woods be given the benefit of the doubt with regard to
Berg Street Properties, as there is no evidence to indicate that Mr Woods
consented to being appointed as a director for the Imbenge Group and
Imbenge Properties. That came about as a result of a complaint laid that Mr
Woods was a member of these companies and he did not declare it in his
form.

On the second issue regarding the hon Minister Balfour, it is as a result
of a complaint which refers to a payment allegedly made by Kgwerano
Financial Services for a Volkswagen Touareg. It was alleged that the
Minister had failed to declare a payment made by Kgwerano Financial
Services, as required by the code of conduct for Members of Parliament.

The findings read as follows:

In light of the above the committee found unanimously that the allegation
that the Minister received a gift in the form of a payment for his motor
vehicle was not substantiated. Consequently there is no breach of the code
...

... for having received the Touareg. That is how I present the report to
the House. Thank you.

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report of Auditor-General on alleged nondisclosure
by Members of Parliament be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report of Auditor-General on alleged nondisclosure by Members of Parliament
accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the constitution.

Question put: That the Report on Complaint Against Minister B M N Balfour
be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report on Complaint Against Minister B M N Balfour accordingly adopted in
accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND CONSTITUTIONAL
    AFFAIRS - PROVISIONAL SUSPENSION FROM OFFICE OF MAGISTRATE A BACHARAM

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND CONSTITUTIONAL
    AFFAIRS - SUSPENSION/REMOVAL FROM OFFICE OF MAGISTRATE X I R MASIMINI

Mr Z C NTULI: Chairperson, hon members, this is about the
suspension/removal of Magistrate Masimini and the suspension of Ms A
Bacharam. The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs
wishes to recommend that the House passes a resolution to uphold the
decision of the Magistrates’ Commission regarding the provisional
suspension of Magistrate A Bacharam and the removal from office of
Magistrate X I R Masimini, respectively, as it appears on the
Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, ATCs, of 17 November 2008,
on page 21. I request the House to pass that resolution. Thank you.

Debate concluded.
Question put: That the Report on the Provisional Suspension From Office of
Magistrate A Bacharam be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report on the Provisional Suspension From Office of Magistrate A Bacharam
accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

Question put: That the Report on Suspension/Removal from Office of
Magistrate X I R Masimini be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report on Suspension/Removal from office of Magistrate X I R Masimini
accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

  CONSDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND CONSTITUTIONAL
   AFFAIRS - AMENDING DRAFT NOTICE AND SCHEDULE DETERMINING RATE AT WHICH
   SALARIES ARE PAYABLE TO CONSTITUTIONAL COURT JUDGES AND JUDGES ANNUALLY

Mr Z C NTULI: Chairperson, hon members, I hereby note the report of the
Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs and the statement
submitted in terms of section 2(4) of the Judges’ Remuneration and
Conditions of Employment Act of 2001. This seeks to determine the rate at
which salaries are payable to Constitutional Court Judges and judges
annually. Judging by the report, the salary scale of the judges within this
respective jurisdiction is within the ambit and the jurisprudence of the
fair labour laws and the Constitution of the Republic.

I call upon the House to support this amendment. Thank you.

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

     CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND
 ADMINISTRATION – INTERVENTION IN DITSOBOTLA LOCAL MUNICIPALITY - NORTH WEST

Mr B J MKHALIPHI: Chairperson, hon members, good morning. The report that
appears in the ATCs is a report on our visit to the Ditsobotla Municipality
on 29 and 30 October. On our arrival at the municipality, we realised that
there were already some support mechanisms that had been implemented by the
office of the MEC in the province. However, despite these interventions, a
formal intervention was necessary in terms of section 139.

The issue that was urgently raised in our intervention and interaction with
councillors was the dysfunctional nature of the municipality owing to
political inability to manage the affairs of the municipality.

In a meeting that was part of our interaction, this committee had to
intervene and reprimand an official who had allegedly intimidated people
who were making inputs during the meeting. To highlight the state of
disarray that prevails in this municipality, we also found that the
community development workers who were supposed to be part of the workforce
wanted to make an input and thus organised themselves as outside
stakeholders.

Among the developments that are promising in this municipality, we realised
that there was already a deployee of the Development Bank of Southern
Africa who was operating in the financial section. This official said that,
if given the space and a correct environment, things can turn around for
the better in this municipality. We also observed that the municipal
manager deployed from the province was making good progress in the
municipality.

I will highlight just a few of the recommendations that we will table in
this House. First among these, as we were sent by this honourable House as
part of a fact–finding mission to that municipality, is the recommendation
that the National Council of Provinces approves the interventions issued by
the North West MEC for Developmental Local Government and Housing.

We also recommend that that department facilitates the appointment of a
forensic investigation that should go deeper into the alleged financial
irregularities and mismanagement in this municipality.

We also recommend that serious steps be taken by this municipal council to
ensure that appropriate measures are taken to normalise relationships
between the municipal councillors and officials.

Lastly, we also implore the municipal council to revisit the code of
conduct for councillors and officials in order to manage their respective
roles. We put this report to this House for consideration. Thank you,
Chair.

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.
IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.


     CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND
       ADMINISTRATION - OVERSIGHT VISIT TO MOHOKARE LOCAL MUNICIPALITY




Mr D A WORTH: Deputy Chairperson, the NCOP delegated the Select Committee
on Local Government and Administration to conduct a fact-finding mission to
the Mohokare Local Municipality in the Free State province during the
period 9 to 10 October 2008.


The main objective of the visit was to interact with the internal and
external stakeholders in the municipality in order to solicit their
opinions on the interventions invoked by the provincial executive councils
through the office of the MEC for Local Government and Housing in terms
section 139(1)(b) of the Constitution.


In the municipality, the delegation of the committee had interactive and
consultative meetings with the municipality’s stakeholders. The main
stakeholders were the administrator, the councillors and representatives
from the SA Local Government Association, Salga, the Free State Youth
Commission, organised labour and business forums.


The administrator indicated that the main reasons for the intervention in
Mohokare Local Municipality included infighting among councillors, which
resulted in the council not sitting; and allegations of fraud and misuse of
funds, leading to suspensions, as well as paralysis of the council’s
operations.


Some of the notable achievements reported by the administrator included the
creation of a now favourable climate for councillors to work together; the
development and passing of the integrated development plan, IDP, and the
budget; the provision of technical and systems support; the facilitation of
filling of four vacant section 57 manager posts; and the introduction of
systematic handling of problems and systems for effective delivery.

Some of the key challenges reported included: low morale among municipal
workers; the use of contract workers to complement the workforce;
ineffective management of the municipality’s income-generating facilities;
water supply shortages; and insufficient income generation due to depressed
economic conditions.

The union affiliates comprised of Cosatu, Sadtu, Nehawu, Samwu, Numsa,
Popcru and Saccawu indicated that they jointly support the intervention
issued by the provincial executive council.

Having visited the Mohokare Local Municipality, the Select Committee on
Local Government and Administration recommends the following: firstly, that
approval be granted for the interventions issued by the Free State MEC for
Local Government and Housing. Secondly, the provincial Department of Local
Government and Housing should facilitate the appointment of the forensic
investigation on alleged financial regularities and mismanagement in the
municipality.

Thirdly, the provincial Department of Local Government and Housing should
ensure fast-tracking of the appointment of section 57 managers. Fourthly,
the municipality must ensure the implementation of good labour practices.
Fifthly, the municipality should also facilitate the signing of performance
management contracts and assessments of section 57 managers and the
implementation of a code of good conduct and working relationships among
councillors and officials. Sixthly, the MEC’s offices are to monitor the
progress of the municipality, through the scrutinising of periodic reports,
which are to be copied and forwarded to the NCOP.

Lastly, the intervention is to be reviewed after a period of six months,
that is, by 30 April 2009. This report is to be considered by this House. I
thank you. [Applause.]
Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.



     CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND
      ADMINISTRATION - OVERSIGHT VISIT TO XHARIEP DISTRICT MUNICIPALITY


Mr D A WORTH: Deputy Chairperson, hon members, the NCOP delegated the
Select Committee on Local Government and Administration to conduct a fact-
finding visit to the Xhariep District Municipality in the Free State
province on 11 October 2008. Again the main objective of the visit was to
interact with internal and external stakeholders in the provincial
executive council through the office of the MEC for Local Government and
Housing in terms of section 139(1)(b) of the Constitution.

The committee had interactive meetings with stakeholders, including the
administrator, the executive mayor, the chief whip, the acting municipal
manager, organised labour, the Free State Youth Commission, the SA Council
of Churches and the SA Local Government Association, Salga.

In briefing the committee, the administrator indicated that on 28 May 2008
the Free State provincial executive council decided to intervene in the
Xhariep District Municipality. The rationale for the intervention was its
lack of capacity to perform powers and functions; inadequate budget to
perform as a district municipality; and possible unauthorised, irregular,
fruitless and wasteful expenditure, including fraud, corruption and
nepotism.

The administrator further informed the committee that since its
establishment the district encountered acute financial constraints due to
the limited levy base, and for the past three years the district has passed
budgets with deficits. The provincial department of local government has
provided the district with technical support to achieve the development of
the budget, budget-related policies, internal control, annual financial
statements and financial management since the suspension of the chief
financial manager.

In order to deal with the above-mentioned challenges the administrator
indicated that a turnaround strategy has been developed to provide system
support and strengthening of internal control; to support the establishment
of internal audit function; and to ensure development and implementation of
performance agreements that could hold section 57 managers accountable for
their performance.

The Free State Youth Commission welcomed and supported the intervention.
The representatives of the union Samwu indicated that organised labour
supported the intervention as issued by the MEC of Local Government and
Housing.

Having visited Xhariep District Municipality, the Select Committee on Local
Government and Administration recommends that: approval is granted for the
intervention issued by the Free State MEC for Local Government and Housing;
the provincial Department of Local Government and Housing facilitate the
appointment of a forensic investigation into the alleged financial
irregularities and mismanagement in the municipality; the provincial
Department of Local Government and Housing ensures the fast-tracking of the
appointment of section 57 managers; the municipality ensures the
implementation of good labour practices between the municipal management
and organised labour and the functioning of the labour forum in the
municipality; the municipality also facilitates the signing of performance
management contracts and assessments of section 57 managers and the
implementation of a code of good conduct to ensure a working relationship
amongst councillors and officials; the MEC’s office monitors the progress
of the municipality through scrutinising periodic reports and forwards a
copy to the NCOP and the intervention be reviewed after a period of six
months, which is until 30 April 2009.


This report is to be considered by this House. Thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): We just had a
presidential delegation from Russia in the gallery, but they have left.
Unfortunately we couldn’t welcome them.

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

                          PHOTOGRAPHING OF MEMBERS

                               (Announcement)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon members, before
I proceed I have an announcement to make about official photographs.
Parliament will be producing a special publication that pays tribute to MPs
who served during the third democratic Parliament. The publication will be
a gift to all MPs during the presidential address on 6 February 2009.

The group photo of all MPs - the National Assembly and the NCOP - was taken
last Tuesday. We have been busy taking individual portraits since last
week. We took most of the portraits during the Women’s Parliament. We still
need to take a few of the committee chairpersons’ portraits so we thought
that we might try to do them today for those remaining.

We have already taken some, including presiding officers and House
Chairpersons, as well as the Chief Whip. Those who have not taken
individual photos should remain after the plenary and the photographer will
be waiting for you. It will only take a few minutes of your time.

Business suspended at 11:15 and resumed at 14:05.

                              Afternoon Sitting

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF AD HOC JOINT COMMITTEE ON AMENDMENT REGULATIONS
   MADE IN TERMS OF SECTION 10 OF PUBLIC FUNDING OF REPRESENTED POLITICAL
                                 PARTIES ACT

Mr Z C NTULI: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, comrades and friends,
I hereby make a statement which proposes the acceptance of the Report of
the Ad Hoc Joint Committee on Amendment Regulations. The regulations were
made in accordance with section 10 of the Public Funding of Represented
Political Parties Act, Act 103 of 1997.

It is important to note that the ad hoc committee was constituted by
members of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
Development and the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
Affairs. It then made recommendations to the President of the Republic in
line with the said Act.

This amendment is crucial to promote good governance and the rule of law.
The House must support this amendment as it seeks to promote a vibrant
democracy and responsibility amongst individual parties to account for
resources they have used in the interests of the developmental state and
the poor. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.


                   NATIONAL YOUTH DEVELOPMENT AGENCY BILL


                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Before we debate, I would like to recognise
the chairperson of the National Youth Commission, Ms Nkondlo, who is seated
in the gallery. You are too short, we can’t see you! That’s the chairperson
of the National Youth Commission. Thank you, Ms Nkondlo.

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: Chairperson, good afternoon everybody, hon
members, compatriots, colleagues and comrades seated in the gallery,
especially the Chairperson of the National Youth Commission.

Ladies and gentlemen, I am indeed honoured to present to this House the
National Youth Development Agency Bill. When we talk about legislation that
is meant to impact positively on the lives of our young people, we know
that we are talking about our own future. Young people not only represent
the future, but are the guardians of the painful legacy of our past.

The pivotal role played by young people in the fight against an unjust
system is well recognised all over the world and by our government. As you
know, thousands of young people sacrificed their lives, their youth and
their education to take on a role that was well beyond their years. Their
bravery and courage did much to change the course of our history. We are
much indebted to these young men and women because their sacrifices made it
possible for all of us to live in a South Africa that is democratic,
nonracial and nonsexist.

However, the price these young people had to pay meant that they found
themselves at the margins of socioeconomic development in our country. This
unacceptable situation has not changed much in postdemocratic South Africa.


Our young citizens, as custodians of our future and guardians of our past,
have not benefited much from the fruits of our democratic dispensation. As
a result of the history of apartheid, they are confronted with serious
challenges. These include, amongst other things, the lack of access to
appropriate education; the lack of skills necessary to drive the economy;
engagement in risky lifestyles characterised by alcohol, substance abuse
and tobacco use; and communicable and noncommunicable diseases, as well as
accidents and trauma.

I’m sure I would not be alone in saying that these grave circumstances
cannot be condoned. Government firmly believes that our young people are
our national assets. They constitute a considerable portion of our
population, approximately 40% of the entire population, and are therefore
worth investing in in terms of material resources and through capacitating
them with relevant skills and training.

For us as government and along with our social partners, youth empowerment
is a national priority on our state’s developmental agenda. There needs to
be concerted attention and interventions directed at our young citizens by
all tiers of government, the business sector, labour and indeed civil
society in general.

As such, since the advent of our constitutional democracy, government has,
through national development strategies such as Gear and the Joint
Initiative for Priority Skills Acquisition, Jipsa, expressed its firm
commitment to mitigate the historic marginalisation of youth through
developing and enacting policies to advance youth development. These
interventions gave rise to the development of the National Youth Commission
Act and the National Youth Development Policy Framework of 2002-07.

Furthermore, the key institutions that were established to give practical
effect to these policies include the National Youth Commission, provincial
youth commissions and the Umsobomvu Youth Fund, as well as civil society
formations amalgamated under the SA Youth Council.

Recently, the National Youth Commission successfully advocated the
establishment of youth focal points within national and provincial
government departments. In addition, backed by the relevant legislative
policies, the respective but complementary mandates of these institutions
have sought to promote youth development that is holistic and
comprehensive. In all, the focus has been to promote the talents and
potential of young people; realise their role in fostering a cohesive
nonracial, nonsexist democratic society; foster access to quality
education, health, skills development and foster employment; and promote
their basic human right to sustainable livelihoods.

Through the current institutional arrangements, we can say a lot has been
achieved in the sphere of youth development in our country. However, many
challenges have been identified in relation to the discrepancies between
the mandates, strategic objectives and programmes of the National Youth
Commission and the Umsobomvu Youth Fund.

Other hurdles have been the limitations of the National Youth Commission as
a policymaking, lobbying and advocacy structure with insufficient financial
and human capacity to implement its mandate and the Umsobomvu Youth Fund as
an implementation organisation without a policy mandate. These dynamics
have now produced unnecessary tension between the two institutions, to the
detriment of the benefit to the very people they were set up to serve in
the first instance, and that is the youth.

For this reason, I am heartened that the National Youth Development Agency
Bill has been adopted by Parliament as of 21 November 2008. I am pleased
also that prior to this Bill being accepted, there was wide consultation
with relevant stakeholders.

I take this opportunity, therefore, to thank all our partners for
facilitating this process. I would like to commend and applaud the Minister
of Labour, the National Youth Commission, the Umsobomvu Youth Fund, the
National Economic Development and Labour Council and others. The final
outcome of this process will see to it that a single, focused agency is
formed from the merger of the National Youth Commission and the Umsobomvu
Youth Fund.

In actual fact, the National Youth Development Agency aims to consolidate
the gains and leverage capacities of these two institutions. We could
expect that this merger will sharpen the focus through customised,
responsive and relevant youth development interventions. In the process we
expect that it will reach out to young people in peri-urban and rural areas
as a priority, focusing on the youth who are not in the mainstream of youth
development.

I’m convinced that the Bill manages to bridge the gaps which exist,
particularly with respect to the activities of the Umsobomvu Youth Fund. It
clearly sets out the principles of youth development in South Africa,
taking into account the challenges of social and economic exclusion facing
thousands of our young citizens. It recognises that youth outside the
mainstream, in other words, those youths not at school and without gainful
employment, require focused interventions to enhance their chances of
participating in the labour market.

It is encouraging that the National Youth Development Agency will report to
one executive authority, with Parliament playing an important role. The
strategic programmes of the National Youth Development Agency Bill include,
amongst other things, contact information and counselling services to build
the social capital of youth, thus improving knowledge and access to human
capital development and employment opportunities; the National Youth
Service Programme to enhance employability through vocational training and
work experience gained whilst striving for and providing essential services
to our communities; entrepreneurial development support to increase access
and participation, including sustainability of self-employment efforts of
young people; and micro and small enterprise finance to improve access to
affordable finance to start and grow micro and small enterprises.

In this context, product development and access to markets become
absolutely critical. The other component is capacity-building to improve
the capacity of organisations rendering essential services to youth,
especially in the areas of vocational training, facilitation of community
service, and business and development support. I believe these programmes
will go a long way to ensure seamless, integrated sustainability and
responsiveness to the demands and aspirations of young people in our
country.

In closing, the youth of our country, including in particular the youth of
1976, were driven in their actions by hope for a brighter and more
equitable South Africa. As a democratic government, we too are driven by
the hope that this new institution, the National Youth Development Agency,
will realise the unlimited potential of our young citizens and by so doing
secure a brighter future for South Africa and indeed bring us a step closer
to the realisation of long-term, high-impact youth development in our
country. Thank you. [Applause.]

Nk N F MAZIBUKO: Ngiyabonga Sihlalo, ngibingelela amalungu kanye
noNgqongqoshe osivakashele namuhla. Besengizwile ukuthi nalaphaya egalari
akhona amalungu eKhomishani Yentsha.

UNgqongqoshe ubesekuthintile kancanyana ukuthi kuzoba yini umsebenzi wayo i-
National Youth Development Agency. Washo nanokuthi ngesiNgisi uma ngingathi
nje ukuhumusha wathi ... (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Ms N F MAZIBUKO: Thank you, Chairperson. Hon members and the Minister who
is visiting us today, greetings to you all. I have also been told that
there are members of the youth commission up there in the gallery.

The Minister has already highlighted what the functions of the National
Youth Development Agency would be. He also said, if I can translate that
into English ...]

... that the Bill will provide for the establishment of the National Youth
Development Agency, aimed at creating and promoting co-ordination in youth
development matters.

Uye wachaza uNgqongqoshe nanokuthi kuzoba yini umgomo wayo i-agency lena
ikakhulukazi ... [The Minister also explained what the objectives of the
agency would be, more especially ...]

... that they will also look at developing an integrated South African
youth development plan and strategy.

Izobuka umgomo kanye nayo imisebenzi ye-agency. Kucaca kakhulu ukuthi
sizobe sinanebhodi okuyilona elizobe liphethe umsebenzi wayo i-agency.
Angizukugxila kakhulu kulokho–ke kepha kancanyana njena ngizothi ukungena
enkulumeni yami. Kuyaye kuthiwe uzoyithola kanjani uhlezi ekhoneni! Lokhu
kushiwo yintsha yanamuhla. Ibuye isho nokuthi angeke uyithole. Khona lapho
futhi kukhona esinye esiphinde sisho sithi ixoxo nexoxo liyazigxumela,
alikho eligxumela elinye kodwa thina njengaMalungu ePhalamende siyazama
ukugxumela intsha ukuze nayo ikwazi ukuthi ifinyelele kumathuba angcono.

Kuyintokozo kimina namhlanje ukuthi ngethule phambi kweNdlu yoMkhandlu
Kazwelonke Wezifundazwe umbiko mayelana nalo Mthethosivinywa ohlongoziwe
weNational Youth Development Agency. Ngethemba ukuthi umbiko ogcwele ukhona
laphaya kuma-ATC. Amalungu azozifundela wona  kahle engajahe lutho ngoba lo
mbiko ubhalwe ngesiNgisi angazi noma ubhaliwe yini nangesiBhunu.

Njengosihlalo wekomidi lesikhashana elalibekelwe ukucubungula lo
Mthethosivivinywa we-agency, ngibonga amalungu aye abamba iqhaza kwaze
kwaba semaphethelweni siwenza lo Mthethosivinywa. Ngithi kubona ningadinwa
nangomuso nani seniyobatshela abazukulu benu ukuthi naphucula izimpilo
zabo. Ngokusungula le Youth Deveopment Agency senza intsha ukuthi ikwazi
ukuzigxumela.

Ukusungulwa kwale agency kusho ukuthi sizobe sivala uMnyango owawubhekene
neKhomishani Yentsha kanye nesiKhwama soMsobomvu, konke lonke kuzoba
uMnyango owodwa obhekene nezabasha.

Hhayi-ke malungu okuningi okumayelana nale agency njengoba besengishilo
ukuthi uNgqongqoshe uke wathi ukukuthinta, mina ngizokushiya kancane
ngingene kule ndaba ebalulukile okuvame ukuthi kaningi siyikhohlwe.
NgesiNgisi-ke ngizothi ... (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[It will look at the objects as well as the functions of the agency. It is,
therefore, obvious that we shall have a board that will be responsible for
the functioning of the agency. I am not going to dwell on that much, but I
shall simply focus on my speech. There is township slang that asks how one
is going to get it when one is lazily sitting on the street corner! This is
commonly said by today’s youth. And the youth usually answer themselves by
saying that one would not get it. Interestingly, there is another popular
saying which says “every man for himself, no man for another”, but we, as
Members of Parliament, are trying to reach out to the youth so that they
can also get better opportunities.

It is a great pleasure for me today to present before the National Council
of Provinces the report concerning this proposed Bill, the National Youth
Development Agency Bill. I hope that the full report is available in the
ATCs. Members will have time to read it at their leisure as this report is
written in English. I do not know if it is also available in Afrikaans.

As the chairperson of the ad hoc committee that was designated to consider
this Bill, I thank the members who participated throughout the drafting of
this Bill. I will forever be grateful to you and you will also have
something to tell your grandchildren, namely that you made their lives
better. By establishing this National Youth Development Agency, we are
encouraging the youth to do things for themselves.

The formation of this agency means that both the National Youth Commission
and the Umsobomvu Youth Fund will be merged into a single institution, the
National Youth Development Agency that is responsible for youth matters.

Anyway, hon members, most of the things about this agency, as I have
previously said, have been mentioned by the Minister, so I will leave them
out for now and go deeply into this issue that we frequently forget. In
English I would say ...]

... let’s take you down memory lane or on the journey that has been
travelled by the youth of this country.

Ngesintu siyayesithi geqa izindlebe zakho ulalele sikukhumbuze futhi
sikutshele ngomlando wentsha yakuleli lizwe, ukuze kucace ukuthi yingani
namuhla nani ningamalungu. Kubalulekile-ke ukuthi niphucule izimpilo zabo,
nani ngoba namhlanje nihlezi lapha kule Ndlu yoMkhandlu nje kungenxa yayo
intsha.
Namhlanje sibuthene kule Ndlu yoMkhandlu simele izifundazwe zethu ngenxa
yegazi lezinkulungwane ngezinkulungwane zabantu abasha bakuleli lizwe.
Intsha eyayilwela ukuthi mina nawe sikhululeke emakhambandeleni
engcindezelo. Namuhla sihlezi lapha eMkhandlwini ngenxa yentsha eyadela
izimpilo zayo. Abanye namuhla abaziwa ukuthi bakuphi, abanye babhadla
emajele. Phela i-CCB yayingabadlalisi kanye ne-SADF yayiwazonda kakhulu
amaqabane.

Kepha intsha yathi ngeke yehlulwe ngamaBhunu. Intsha yazimisela, yabumbana,
yawatshela amaBhunu ukuthi azoyikhotha imbenge yomile. Nangempela kwashunqa
uthuli. Ngonyaka ka 1976, sonke siyazi ukuthi kwenzekani. Intsha eningi
yagcwala imigwaqo, isuka laphaya eMorris Isaacson iholwa ngumufi uTsietsi
Mashinini. Yayilwela imfundo ngoba ezemfundo zangaleso sikhathi zazikhiqiza
kuphela ama-girl nama-boy awenzelwe abelungu. Sasifundiswa ukuthi sithi
“Ja, Baas” noma sithi “Yebo Mesisi”. Yingakho intsha yayifundiswa ulwimi
lwesiBhunu, i-Afrikaans.

ISoweto yavutha kakhulu yaba ngamalangabi. Kwakuyinto encane nje ukulotha
iBhunu, lalazi nalo ukuthi alingeni eSoweto. Konke lokhu kwakubangelwa
yintukuthelo intsha eyayinayo. Abanye bethu bagcina ngaleso sikhathi
ezikoleni kwase kufika nokuthi sithi: “pass one, pass all” kodwa futhi
sasiphumelela kanjalo sonke.

Akugcinanga lapho. Nangeminyaka yawo-1980, intsha yaqhubeka yabamba iqhaza
yanisela sona lesi sihlahla senkululeko. Beyithi uma kuthiwa azikhwela,
intsha beyiqiniseka ukuthi awekho amagundane anyonyobayo aya emsebenzini.
Uma kuthiwa yi-black Christmas, hawu labo abangenazo izindlebe bebewotha
ubomvu futhi bephuziswa ne-sta-soft.

Siyazi sonke ukuthi amaBhunu abeyisa kangangokuthi ebiza omama bethu
ngoJane laphaya emakhishini, bebiza obaba bethu ukuthi ngopikinini ngoba
nakhu besebenza ezingadini. Bengakhulumi nakahle nabo ngenxa yokuthi
abazali bethu bebengafundile bebekhulunyiswa isifanakalo. Kepha intsha
yashaya phansi ngonyawo yathi izolwela ukuthi ithole imfundo engcono ukuze
ikwazi ukuphucula izimpilo zayo.

Emva kwalokho intsha yazabalaza kakhulu. Yaphiwa amagama kwathiwa ngo-lost
generation. [Ubuwelewele.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[In Zulu we say: scrape your ears clean and listen carefully while I remind
you and tell you the history of the youth of this country. This will also
give you a clear picture as to how you became Members of Parliament. It is
therefore important for you to make the lives of the youth better because
you are sitting here in the NCOP today because of them.

Today we are gathered here in this Council representing our provinces
because of the blood that was shed by thousands and thousands of the youth
of this country; the youth who fought for me and you to be emancipated from
oppression. Today we are sitting here in the Council because of the youth
that sacrificed their lives. Some of them have never been accounted for
till today, some of them are languishing in prisons. Lest we forget, the
Civil Co-operation Bureau, CCB, and the then South African Defence Force,
SADF, showed no mercy to them and hated comrades a lot.

But the youth was defiant and said they would never be defeated by the
Afrikaners. The youth meant business; they came together and told the
Afrikaners straight away that they - the Afrikaners - would face the
consequences. And they stamped their authority indeed. We all know what
happened in 1976. Most of the youth bravely took to the streets, marching
from the Morris Isaacson High School led by the late Tsietsi Mashinini. The
youth were fighting for education because the education of the time was
aimed at producing garden boys and kitchen girls for the whites. We were
indoctrinated to say, “Ja, Baas” [Yes, Master] or “Yes, Madam”. That is why
the youth were taught Afrikaans.

Soweto was on fire. Setting an Afrikaner alight was not a big issue. The
Afrikaners themselves also knew very well that they were not welcome in
Soweto. And all this was caused by the anger and hatred of the youth.
Sadly, some of us went to school for the last time during those times and
the practice of “pass one, pass all” was introduced. And some of us made it
through the “pass one, pass all” practice.

It did not end there. During the 1980s youth continued to participate in
the struggle and nourished this tree of liberation. Each time there would
be a bus boycott, the youth would ensure that there were no sell-outs
sneaking out to work. When we had what we termed a black Christmas, those
who did not want to listen faced the wrath of the people and they were even
forced to drink Sta-soft.

We all know how contemptuous the Afrikaners were. They called our mothers –
who worked for them in the kitchens - names such as Jane and our fathers
“piccaninnies” because they worked for them as garden boys. They did not
even talk properly with our parents because our parents were illiterate and
they spoke improper Zulu, Fanakalo, with them. But the youth defied all the
odds and said, never! The youth said that they would fight for a better
education so that they could better their lives.

From that time the youth participated in the struggle more. They were then
called names such as the lost generation. [Interjections.]]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Hon Watson.

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, on a point of order: Is it parliamentary for the
member to speak in derogatory language and use the podium to attack the
Afrikaners of this country when addressing such a very important subject?
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: No, I don’t think she was attacking anybody.
She has been referring to the history of what happened to the young people
during those days. I don’t think that she’s out of order.

Mr A WATSON: Chair, she kept on referring to the Afrikaners. Now, can you
please check Hansard if you have time.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I don’t think that she’s out of order, Mr
Watson. The hon member may continue.

Nk N F MAZIBUKO: Hayi-ke Sihlalo ngiyabonga. Intsha yaqhubeka yaphiwa
amagama kwathiwa ngo-lost generation, kwasuka lapho kwathiwa ingo-Boom
Shaka beqanjwa emva kwaleliya qembu lomculo. Konke lokhu kungenxa
yezigigaba zonke intsha edlule kuzo lapha eNingizimu Afrika. Kwintsha
ekhule ngemuva kokhetho luka 1994, uhulumeni wentando yeningi wenza
imithetho ukuze kuhlonyiswe iKhomishani Yentsha, kanye noMsobomvu ukuze
amaqhinga amaningi eyayinawo iwasebenzise. Manje-ke sesiyihlomisa nge-
National Youth Development Agency.

Okubi-ke nje ukuthi ngikhuluma ngaphambi kokuba laba abanye bamaqenjane
bakhulume - ngoba phela siyabazi nathi laba a bayichamela uma ngabe imile,
beyikhonkothe uma ihamba. Kungenjalo ngabe siyakwazi ukubatshela okuningi.
Kodwa-ke uma sengiphetha, ubaba owayengumholi we-ANC, ubaba u O.R.Tambo
washo lawa mazwi wathi: ”A country that does not honour its youth does not
deserve its future.”

Masikhumbuze intsha ukuthi ikusasa ngelayo. Kubalulekile ukuthi ilivikele
futhi ibambe iqhaza ekuvikeleni inkululeko esayithola kanzima lapha
eNingizimu Afrika, ngemuva kweminyaka eminingi ogogo kanye nokhokho bethu
bephila baze bayophumula bengazange babe nethuba lokuvota. Babengazi ukuthi
kuvotwa kanjani nanokuthi kuyilungelo lokhu kwakuyilungelo labo.

Amahhovisi omasipala ahlala evuliwe mihla yonke le ukuze intsha ikwazi
ukuzibhalisela. Laba abanomazisi bayanxuswa ukuthi basondele emahhovisi
omasipala bayozibhalisa. Siyikhumbuze futhi intsha ukuthi ngomhla ziyi-8
kanye nomhla ziyi-9 kuFebhuwari 2009, izikhungo zokuvota zizobe zivuliwe
ngakho-ke ayiye ngobuningi bayo iyobhalisa ukuze ikwazi ukuvota ngosuku
lokhetho. Ngiyikhumbuze-ke intsha nanokuthi ukuvota yilungelo layo kanti
futhi ukuthi ivotela bani kuyimfihlo yayo.

Kepha alikho icala uma ngiyikhuthaza intsha ukuthi ivotele inhlangano
okuyiyona endala lapha eNingizimu Afrika, umbutho wobaba uLuthuli, oTambo,
oDube, omama uLilian Ngoyi, omama uCharlotte Maxeke kanye nomama u-Ida
Mntwana. Hhayi, phela kungashona ilanga uma ngingawabala onke amaqhawe
namaqhawekazi omzabalazo.

Namuhla-ke siyazi sonke ukuthi usuholwa ngubani lo mbutho. Phela usuholwa
nguyena uMsholozi! uNxamalala! Ngisho umbutho kaKhongolose hhayi nanoma
yimuphi kepha ngisho i-ANC uma ngabe abantu bedideka. Uma intsha ihlezi
mayikhuzele yazi ukuthi uKhongolose uyi-vision and the future of South
Africa. Ngiyabonga niwudle kahle uKhisimusi. (Translation of isiZulu
paragraphs follows.)

[Ms N F MAZIBUKO: Well, thank you, Chairperson. The youth continued to be
called names such as the lost generation, after which they were called Boom
Shaka, after that kwaito music group called Boom Shaka. And all this as a
result of incidents that the youth experienced here in South Africa. For
the youth growing up after 1994, the democratic government enacted laws to
develop the National Youth Commission and the Umsobomvu Youth Fund so that
the youth could use the many ideas that they had. And now, we are
developing this National Youth Development Agency.

I am unfortunately speaking before these smaller parties, and we all know
that they are notorious for urinating on a stationary vehicle and barking
at it when it’s moving. And if it was not for their notoriety, we would
tell them many things, but anyway let me conclude by quoting Comrade O R
Tambo who once said: “A country that does not honour its youth does not
deserve its future.”

Let us remind the youth that the future is theirs. It is therefore
important that they protect it and participate in securing the freedom that
we achieved through hard-earned struggle here in South Africa. It came
after many years of struggle by our grandparents and forefathers who were
laid to rest without achieving the right to vote. They did not know how to
vote, neither were they aware that voting was their right.

The municipal offices are always open for the youth to come and register.
Those who have identity documents are urged to go and register at the
municipal offices. We also want to remind the youth that the voting
stations will be open on 8 and 9 February 2009 for them to register. So
they must go out in numbers to register to be able to vote when election
day comes. I also want to remind them that it is their right to vote, but
as to who they vote for, that remains confidential.

But there is no offence in encouraging them to vote for the oldest
political party here in South Africa, the movement of Comrade Luthuli,
Tambo, Dube, Comrade Lilian Ngoyi, Charlotte Maxeke and Comrade Ida
Mntwana. Well, the list is endless and it could take me the whole day to
name all the heroes and heroines of the struggle.

And today we all know who is leading this movement. It is led by Msholozi!
Nxamalala himself! Here I am referring to the movement, the ANC, and not
just any other movement but the ANC, just in case some people get confused.
The youth must know and understand that the ANC is the vision and the
future of South Africa. Thank you, and have a Merry Christmas.]

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, colleagues, I don’t
normally take part in a debate if I have not been fully part of the
deliberations and the meetings that preceded the tabling of a Bill.

Unfortunately this Bill came in a bit of a rush when it was introduced to
us in the Eastern Cape on the evening of 4 November, barely three weeks
ago. I’ve been convinced by my party spokesperson, the youthful Mr Swathe,
that I should stand here and support this Bill, because of the very great
importance of the Bill to the youth of our country.

Therefore, I apologise that the meetings that were held, were held at the
same time that other important meetings of our select committees and other
bodies took place, and I couldn’t meet the obligations as I intended. But
I’ve gone through the Bill, I’ve had a look at all the documentation on it,
I know sufficient public hearings were held and I therefore stand here to
actually support the Bill.

When referring to the Bill as such, may I remind the previous speaker that
the National Youth Development Agency is an agency for all the youth, also
for the Afrikaners, whom she seems to hate so fervently. She must never
forget that we are one nation and we will be one nation, whether she likes
it or not. [Interjections.] There is a place for everyone in this country.
That is us: One future, one nation; one nation, one future.

I mentioned the speed with which the Bill was passed and I don’t think it
should go unnoticed that we are in such a hurry that we actually had to
suspend three Rules of Parliament this morning to get it passed. I will say
again that I am convinced that it’s so important that we must pass the Bill
before we go into recess. [Interjections.] I am not complaining, I am not
even talking to you, so please keep quiet. [Laughter.] Some members just
don’t know their place in this establishment, and they never will.
[Interjections.]

I have also found that this Bill was passed with so much speed that, while
it collapses the Umsobomvu Fund and the National Youth Commission, I still
found an advert for Umsobomvu on my table this morning. So maybe they
should also catch up with the fact that when we pass this Bill today the
fund actually will not exist anymore. I also see that we’re in such a hurry
that on the speakers’ list we’ve already appointed the hon Mazibuko as the
chairperson of the youth agency – congratulations on that appointment. I
don’t know who made it, but congratulations nonetheless. [Laughter.]

Thirdly, may I say to the hon Minister, who a couple of minutes ago said
she was so pleased when Parliament passed the Bill on 21 November, I have
news for you, Minister; the Bill will only be passed when this House passes
it and not when the NA passed it on 21 November. In that light, I pledge my
support and that of my party for the Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I think something is wrong on the speakers’
list. Hon Mazibuko is not the chairperson of the National Youth Development
Agency but, I think, of an ad hoc committee. Let that be corrected, please.


Ms A N T MCHUNU: Chairperson, the IFP fully supports the decision to repeal
the National Youth Commission Act and to disband the Umsobomvu Youth Fund.
Both institutions did not perform well in their mandates, so dissolving
them is a good political move. Most of the young people have not benefited
much from these two institutions.

Education is the basis for development and achievement, and presently the
type of education we have does not serve urban or rural youths who come
from poor homes where they have no access to IT. It’s through education
also that the youth can learn about the prevention of various diseases, for
example, HIV and TB, and about drug abuse and the promotion of health.

However, despite these serious shortcomings, a huge segment of the South
African youth is extremely passionate and ready to get involved in issues
of youth development and economic development in general. The agency must
ensure that young people have enough information about the institution
which is being proposed now. A good example of communicating with the youth
existed in the erstwhile KwaZulu-Natal government, as the youth was at the
forefront of development through the Bureau of Community Development and
the Emandleni Youth Camp that trained youth from poor backgrounds and
school dropouts in various skills. [Interjections.]

Experience has shown that consultation with young people is vital if they
are to be encouraged to participate in initiatives that can benefit them,
so policy formulation may not be a problem if the policy can be
implemented.

As a matter of principle, the IFP and its youth section, the IFP Youth
Brigade, have been advocating an institution that will go beyond just
merging the National Youth Commission and the Umsobomvu Youth Fund, but
which would give fresh impetus to youth development and, above all, its
implementation.

From as far back as 2003 the youth have been calling for a fully fledged
and well-resourced youth Ministry to implement youth development programmes
and take responsibility for all youth affairs. The youth need to be trusted
and given a separate Ministry that will take charge of youth development. A
bottom-up approach should have been used, outlining the agency’s activities
at local, provincial and national levels.

The IFP maintains that the success of this legislation will rest on how the
proposed agency relates to young people and how it interacts with parents
and their families - that is to say, the youth do not grow on trees. The
contribution of the youth to the economy will also depend on how the entire
government responds to the current economic crises, with an emphasis on
education and developmental training in the whole country. The Bill is
supported, but the comments made must be noted.

Mr R J TAU: Hon Chairperson, whatever the hon Watson said does not deserve
any engagement, precisely because I doubt if he read the submission of the
DA youth during public hearings, and so forth. What he said here, to me,
comes as a total departure from what the DA youth was arguing about, in
relation to that. [Interjections.]

Hon Chairperson, hon Minister and comrades, for some time now in this
august House, we as members have been grappling with the question of youth
unemployment, development and poverty. Year in and year out, during the
debates that normally mark the celebration of Youth Month and for a very
long time, during the policy and Budget Vote debates, we have been raising
the question of youth development.
Consistently, in line with the ANC policy positions on the youth, we have
been saying that, as a stratum and a pillar of our society, there is no way
that we could guarantee the future of our country if we do not align
government policies to respond to the needs of young people. Therefore, we
are noting that today marks a historic development in the lives of young
people in this country.

Previously, many programmes and institutions were created in order to
respond to the needs of young people in our country - of course, we have
intentions. We have come to realise that, without proper co-ordination and
determination to implement these programmes, sometimes very little gets
achieved.

For some time we have observed a very bad phenomenon crippling young
people, in that youth development was always associated with a blatant
display of wealth, elitism and a high level of consumerism. Young people
were made to believe that in order for them to be seen as successful, they
need to be posh with total and absolute disregard for society as opposed to
the overall development and contribution to society in general.

The Bill before us today provides, albeit not totally, a departure from the
disintegrated programmes of youth development. It presents hope for young
people in the rural areas who, not by choice, were unable to access
services aimed at improving their lives. It is through this piece of
legislation that we are going to see young people taking control of their
own destiny.

Of critical importance in the Bill is the fact that there is a shift from
the selfish outlook that young people of our country were exposed to. Not
only is the Bill going to put in place systems that will be seen as
advocacy institutions for young people, but at last the young people of
Groblershoop will have an opportunity to engage directly with institutions
that will relate to their needs at a contact level, because what the Bill
also seeks to do is to ensure that there is contact and that at provincial
level, there is a level of co-ordination and interaction.

It is a well-known fact that a strategic sector within our society, our
young people, have been at the receiving end of most of the ills in our
society. It is a fact that most of the people who are being abused by
ruthless farmers are young farmworkers. The majority of them are denied a
quality education or entry to universities. As a result, those who are
subjected to poverty and unemployment are working-class young people.

As much as the 15-year review document released by the President reported
that there was a significant reduction in the prevalence of HIV infection
amongst those younger than 20 years, we know that the majority who remain
infected are young people in the rural areas who find it difficult to
access health services. It is a fact that the majority of those who are
denied access to programmes geared at agrarian reform are young people who
live in the remote rural areas of our country.

At the moment we have noted turbulence in the world economy. Much as we are
told that the South African economy is capable of absorbing the pressure
that comes with this turbulence, equally, we are told that some key sectors
such as the automobile, banking and mining sectors are going to shed some
jobs. There is no doubt that the people or strata that are going to bear
the brunt of all these developments are young people once more. Thus it is
important that in all respects the youth development agency should position
itself to play the strategic role of ensuring that the young people of this
country are not neglected.

It is important that, as Parliament, we remind those who would be
responsible for the implementation of the Bill not to tell us that it is
only limited to policy advocacy. For a very long time in this august House
we have been calling for the establishment and support of co-operatives,
particularly for young people, whether it be by the Department of
Agriculture through its agrarian reform programmes, the Department of
Public Works through the Expanded Public Works Programme, EPWP, or the
youth service. One consistent response we keep getting is the fact that co-
ops were not catered for by law, and therefore there was no basis for them
to be implemented or budgeted for.
Now we are going to have the development agency, which, according to the
Bill that we are presenting today, identifies the development and the
support of youth co-ops as one of its core businesses. It is through such
legislation that we will be able to take forward the call by the president
of the ANC Youth League when he recently called upon young people to
respect the cultural and value systems we were brought up to believe in and
understand.

In fact, his call to young people is a reaffirmation of the belief of the
ANC in the Freedom Charter in its totality and not selectively. In fact,
some people need to be told that the overall thrust of the Freedom Charter
is respect for human dignity. Whether one refers to a clause that speaks on
education, governance, respect for the rule of law, accessibility to land
and wealth in our country, or peace and friendship and so forth, all make
reference to respect for human dignity.

Therefore, it would be naive to select only two to make a point, claiming
ownership of the Freedom Charter, hence the correctness of the president of
the ANC Youth League to call upon young people to observe setho le botho
[humaneness and kindness].

May I conclude by stating that, as the ANC, our aim is the creation of work
and to fight against poverty. We aim to move beyond the foundations as laid
down in the Freedom Charter and whatever documents we had before the Ready
to Govern programme and the Reconstruction and Development Programme. It is
during times like these that our target ... [Time expired.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon member, your speaking time has expired.
Just finish your sentence.

Mr R J TAU: It is during times like these that our target of reducing
poverty among young people requires us to set up our systems in such a way
that these agencies live up to expectations and ensure that young people,
and in particular young rural women, are catered for and are well protected
against abuse, unemployment and poverty. I thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: Sihlalo, namalungu ahloniphekile ...
[Greetings, Chairperson, as well as the hon members ...]

... as I stand to respond, I would like to thank all the hon members who
participated in this historic debate that was on the establishment of the
National Youth Development Agency. Thank you very much to all of you for
supporting the Bill.

I would also like to thank all those who assisted us in ensuring that we
are where we are - finalising this debate on the Bill. I am sure all of us
are now very ready for its implementation.

Sihlalo wekomidi, ngiyabonga kakhulu ukuthi usikhumbuze umlando wethu
womzabalazo ikakhulukazi ukusikhumbuza ngeqhaza elikade libanjwe abantu
abasha emzabalazweni. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Chairperson of the committee, thank you very much for reminding us about
the history of our political struggle, especially with regard to the role
that was played by the youth in the struggle.]

Hon Watson, I noted your response to the chairperson. But I would like to
say that this is our history - the reality of who we are, where we come
from and what our aspirations are as a nation towards nationhood. I would
also like to thank you for confirming our nationhood as South Africans. All
of us would like to see a united nation. Thank you very much.

Allow me to also thank you for reminding me about parliamentary processes.
Yes, the Bill is here before this House for concurrence. Thank you very
much for reminding me. It was very kind of you.

Chairperson, let me just say a few words before I sit down. Ms Mchunu, of
course it is true that for the National Youth Development Agency to succeed
all social partners are expected to play a role: families, communities and
all South Africans, especially those holding positions of power in
parastatals, training institutions, religious organisations, organised
labour and community development institutions, as well as those in the
private sector. So, all of us are expected to play a role to ensure that
this agency succeeds.

Just before I sit down, let me take this opportunity to thank the young
people for having come out in their numbers to register to vote and to also
remind them that there is still another opportunity that has been earmarked
for registration. But they can still continue to register even before
February.

I would like to make just two announcements. Firstly, from the 17th to the
19th of next month, we will hold a youth indaba, where we intend, yet
again, to speak on the National Youth Policy. We will also profile the work
that has been done by the National Youth Service. I am convinced that soon
thereafter we will release the National Youth Policy for public comment so
that we can work on a document that has been widely consulted upon as it is
the nature of this government to do so in its operations.

Before I sit down, may I wish all of you a merry Christmas and a happy New
Year. Don’t drink and drive. Live healthy lifestyles. I hope to see you
next year. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

                              FAREWELL SPEECHES

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE NCOP: Chairperson of the NCOP, hon M J Mahlangu;
Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP, hon Peggy Hollander; House Chairpersons,
Mrs Oliphant and Mr Setona; hon members and comrades from the ANC, this
year was a momentous one and one of the busiest for our hon members and
committees. The number of Bills passed by Parliament and the various
oversight activities of our committees truly attest to the hard work of our
hon members.

We have seen the conclusion of the first round of our programme of Taking
Parliament to the People as we visited the people of Lady Frere, Chris Hani
District in the Eastern Cape, possibly the last province in this term of
Parliament since the launch of the programme of Taking Parliament to the
People in 2002.

Therefore, I wish to pay tribute to all the people who contributed to the
efficient functioning of this august House. In the first instance, I
acknowledge the principled support and outstanding leadership of the
Chairperson of the NCOP, hon Mahlangu, and the presiding officers, the
deputy chairperson and the two House Chairpersons. I know that I can state
without fear of contradiction that your firm but fair leadership during
plenaries was the guiding light to all political parties and it deserves
our gratitude.

As the Chief Whip of the Council, I wish to thank all the provincial Whips
and the multiparty Whips for their leadership, co-operation and
contributions. In that respect I hasten to acknowledge the role played by
my predecessor, the hon Windvoël, in constructing a strong foundation for
the functioning of the Whippery in our Council.

I would like to take this opportunity to also acknowledge the parliamentary
staff and the service staff for their professional and administrative
skills in servicing the Table of the House. They make life easy and
convenient for us by providing interpreting services during debates;
compiling Hansard; processing legislation, questions and motions; and
serving the various committees.

Hon Chairperson, I have no doubt that many of us here share my sentiments
that we surely have a team to be proud of in the NCOP. Therefore, they
deserve a special word of appreciation for their individual and collective
contributions towards the success of our various programmes.

I firmly believe that through our collective efforts we have contributed to
the creation of a better world, and that we, as members of this august
institution, the Parliament of the Republic of South Africa, changed
thousands of lives for the better. Each one of us made a direct difference
in some or other way in the lives of the people of South Africa.

I am presumptuous enough to think that, with our efforts to create a better
life for all the people of South Africa, we are performing a crucial
function in an ever-changing and demanding world. Many of you have never
sought to be more important than our country and the lives of those we
serve. You have managed to accomplish your civil duties and constitutional
mandate with dedication, zeal and commitment.

Looking back, we all realise that this was a demanding year. Parliament
asks a lot of you and no matter how much you do, there is always more that
needs to be done. And I must tell you there are still more Bills coming.

So, at the close of this year, I want to thank each of the hon members for
giving of their talent and dedication and especially for making this House
a family of communities.

I know that when we started here in 2004, we used to fight a lot. I am
telling you, if you look back and note how we behaved during those days, we
are now completely different from those people who did not know each other
and were really at each other’s throats. We all are behaving like human
beings now!

As members of opposite parties, we would obviously try to negotiate the
most for our own constituencies. However, we are still compatriots and
fellow South Africans - a shared distinction which I value highly. It is
the support and understanding that we give each other that help us through
the long hours, the challenging tasks and the tough days. I sincerely thank
you for that.

From the office of the Chief Whip, I know that we have focused all the
powers from the team’s combined strengths and skills that we possess and
seized every opportunity to co-operate with hon members of this House who
put the national interests ahead of partisanship. I therefore thank my own
staff members for their unwavering support and dedication – and I truly
mean that.

As we now say goodbye at this our last sitting of the year - of course,
there are about two plenaries next year, hon members – and as we go out to
spend a well-deserved period of rest with our families, I wish all our
members and staff a very happy festive season. And for the ANC members who
are residing in the Western Cape, let us win all these by-elections in
order to win the province next year. May the Good Lord bless you until we
meet again. Thank you, Chair. [Applause.]

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, let me start by saying that I am honoured to be
able to stand here in good health and in high spirits, participating in the
debate on this topic for the fifth consecutive year. We are, indeed, all
very blessed to be here and I wish to pay tribute to the Almighty for this
and all the manifold blessings we receive daily, sometimes without noticing
or realising it.
The year behind us was filled with many highs and lows and I cannot think
of a single dull moment. So, I wish to extend my sincere thanks to all of
you for the part you played in making our plenaries and committee meetings
vibrant and interesting – unlike the times of the previous Parliaments,
which, I am told, were sometimes pretty dull and subdued.

I have prepared a festive message for many of you, as individuals and
groups, but I thought I had six minutes. Now I see the Chief Whip took ten,
so we only get two, but I will try to leave my nice message for all of you
in two minutes by cutting out some of the things - unfortunately.

To you, Chairperson, I hope you’ve found the farm that you’ve been dreaming
of. And, perhaps, as we are at the end of the year, it is a good time for
you to contemplate ways of sharing all those distinctive parliamentary
blazers, like the one you have been wearing lately in our plenaries, with
the rest of our delegates so that we can also look smart in parliamentary
blazers.

Our Deputy Chair, hon Peggy Hollander, I hope you have time to visit all
those nine provinces that you speak of so often.

I have messages for the Chair, Chief Whip and everybody else, especially
for the ANC, which is that I hope they will be able to cope next year!
[Interjections.]
The most important message must go to my colleagues for their wonderful
support. In all seriousness, I wish you and all our delegates and
colleagues the very best during the festive season and in the year ahead.
May that wonderful message of Christmas that we all believe in find its way
into your hearts and your homes, and into the hearts and homes of all your
loved ones. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms A N T MCHUNU: Chairperson, today, as members of the NCOP, we lift our
heads high in appreciation of the honour and privilege we have been given
by God Almighty to serve our fellow Africans in whatever way He deemed fit.
To Him we give praise and glory.

My personal thanks and that of my family go to the leader of my party, His
Excellency Dr M G Buthelezi, who has been the gateway to the platform which
I’m occupying now. He is a leader that can be trusted. I wouldn’t be here
had it not been for him.

On behalf of the IFP, great appreciation is extended to the hon Chairperson
of the House, the hon Mr M J Mahlangu, who has been a father to us all in
this House and unified us in diversity; the presiding officers who worked
with the hon Mr Mahlangu, the hon P M Hollander, Deputy Chairperson of the
NCOP; hon Mrs M N Oliphant, House Chairperson: Committees; hon T S Setona,
House Chairperson: Oversight; the former Chief Whip, hon V V Z Windvoël;
the Chief Whip of the House, hon Ms N D Ntwanambi, and all hon members in
this House and our staff.

The tasks performed by this House were not easy, but we tolerated each
other in the service of our countrymen, countrywomen and our children. A
lot more needs to be done to correct our failures – whether they were
planned or unplanned - or celebrate our successes - where such existed. But
these things are to be done with humility and honesty if we are to succeed
in what we do.

Our country and the whole world face the challenge of a downward spiralling
economy, worsening the abject poverty and hunger that we face. Achieving
the Millennium Development Goals is going to be an uphill battle that calls
for hard work, walking the extra mile in whatever we do and, still,
humility, honesty and co-operation in serving our people are needed.

May all the hon members and their families enjoy the festive season between
their busy schedules. To those who are Christians, may they enjoy a happy
Christmas and celebrate the birth of our Lord Jesus Christ. To all of us,
may we have a prosperous New Year and prepare for a vigorous campaign
towards elections. I thank you. May God bless you.

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Baie dankie, mnr die Voorsitter. Dit was ‘n jaar van
groot verwikkelinge op die politieke terrein, op die ekonomiese terrain,
en, soos dit in die politiek maar gebeur, was daar op sommige terreine
beter samewerking.

Daar was ook terreine waarop ons van mekaar verskil het as kollegas. Ek het
nêrens bitsigheid ervaar wanneer ons met ons kollegas van ander partye
verskil het nie. Daar was wel skerp verskille, maar geen bitsigheid nie.
Daar is ‘n groot mate van kollegialiteit in hierdie Huis en ‘n mens
waardeer dit werklik. Dit was ‘n aangename jaar gewees. Dit was lekker om
saam te werk, Voorsitter. Ons gaan ‘n baie veeleisende tydperk tegemoet.
Van ons gaan na die verkiesing terugkom en ander gaan nie.

Hier is ‘n groep wat wel gaan terugkom, en dit is die amptenare en die
personeel. Hulle gaan terugkom en vir hulle moet ons baie dankie sê vir wat
hulle doen. Hul lojaliteit lê grootliks by die instansie van die Parlement
en ons is dankbaar teenoor hulle. Hier is ‘n instansie hier anderkant wat
ek pas ook by was, naamlik die biblioteek. Ek maak baie gebruik van die
biblioteek en ek kry baie goeie samewerking en hulp van hulle. Van my kant
af wil ek hulle ook bedank vir dit wat hulle doen.

Daar lê ‘n baie aangename tyd vir ons voor en ek wens u en al u kollegas ‘n
baie aangename tyd toe. Laat ons ook in hierdie tyd van welbehae dink aan
die baie ander mense wat nie die voorregte het wat ons het nie. Baie dankie
vir ‘n aangename jaar en goeie wense vir u almal. Dankie. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)
[Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. It’s been a year of
significant complications in the political sphere, in the economic sphere
and, as is bound to happen in politics, in some spheres there was better co-
operation.

There were also areas in which we differed with one another as colleagues.
I never experienced any acrimony when we differed with our colleagues from
other parties. There were indeed acute differences, but no acrimony. There
is a great degree of collegiality in this House and one really appreciates
that. It has been a pleasant year. It was nice to work together,
Chairperson. We are heading for a very demanding period. After the
elections some of us will be returning, and others not.

There is a group which will be returning and they are the officials and the
staff. They will return and we must thank them very much for everything
they do. Their loyalty lies mainly with the institution of Parliament and
we are grateful to them. A service is rendered right here, and I was there
just now, namely the library. I use the library a lot and I receive very
good co-operation and assistance from them. From my side I also want to
thank them for what they are doing.

A pleasant time lies ahead of us and I wish you and your colleagues a very
good time. Let us, in this time of goodwill, also remember the many others
who do not enjoy our privileges. Thank you for a pleasant year and good
wishes to you all. Thank you. [Applause.]]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you, Dr Van Heerden. On behalf of the
presiding officers, may I join the parties to say we thank you all. You’ve
been a wonderful team to work with in this Third Parliament. As you go into
the festive season, as the Minister indicated earlier, enjoy your Christmas
and spend time with your families. You have been missing them, I know. We
have enjoyed working with you and you’ve been a lovely team.

Minister, particularly to you, I also want to thank you. Some people may
criticise me but it is fine, I can put my head on the block for that. You
are the one Minister who has never missed the activities of the NCOP.
[Applause.] And I must congratulate you on that.

I remember a time when I forgot to invite you to Taking Parliament to the
People. I received hot beans from you! [Laughter.] You just wrote a letter
to me asking me why I didn’t invite you. However, the keen interest you’ve
shown in this House motivates us all. Therefore, we wish to thank you very
much. You set a very good example and, as the members of the NCOP, we
really appreciate that.

yesterday I was giving gifts to all members at the dinner yesterday and
some of them couldn’t be there. I will still give you your gifts even if
you did not attend the dinner. Those who did not get their gifts should
remain in the House after adjournment; the staff will give them their
gifts, but we are not going to post it to you. Thank you very much, and
enjoy going home.

The Council adjourned at 15:15.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                         THURSDAY, 20 NOVEMBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent


    1) Bills passed by National Assembly on 20 November 2008:


          a) Provision of Land and Assistance Amendment Bill [B 40D – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).


          b) National Prosecuting Authority Amendment Bill [B 23D – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).


          c) South African Police Service Amendment Bill [B 30D – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).

2.    Introduction of Bill


     (1)    The Ad Hoc Committee on National Youth Development Agency Bill


          a) National Youth Development Agency Bill [B 82 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Draft Bill and memorandum setting
             out its objects published in Government Gazette No 31530 of
             24 October 2008.]


             Bill initiated by the Ad Hoc Committee on National Youth
             Development Agency Bill of the National Assembly, and referred
             to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in
             terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

TABLINGS
National Council of Provinces


1.    The Chairperson

         a) Explanatory Memorandum to the Draft Volunteer Regulations, in
            terms of the Disaster Management Act, 2002 (Act No 57 of 2002).

            Referred to the Select Committee on Local Government and
            Administration for consideration and report.


                          FRIDAY, 21 NOVEMBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent


    (1)    Bills passed by National Assembly on 21 November 2008:


          a) Criminal Procedure Amendment Bill [B 42D – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).


          b) Mine Health and Safety Amendment Bill [B 54D – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).


          c) National Radioactive Waste Disposal Institute Bill [B 41D –
             2008] (National Assembly – sec 75).


          d) Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Amendment Bill [B
             10F – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75).


          e) Regulation of Interception of Communications and Provision of
             Communication-related Information Amendment Bill [B 9D – 2006]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).

2.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a section 75 Bill:

         (a)      National Youth Development Agency Bill [B 82 – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 75)

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council
    (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly and transmitted for concurrence
         on 21 November 2008:


         (a)      National Youth Development Agency Bill [B 82 – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).


            The Bill has been referred to the Ad Hoc Committee on National
             Youth Development Agency Bill of the National Council of
             Provinces.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Report of the 2008 People’s Assembly.

CREDA INSERT - T081121e-insert1 – PAGE 2330

A.          BACKGROUND AND INTRODUCTION

1.    Background

The concept of the People’s Assembly may be found in the ideals contained
in the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa that positions our
democracy as both representative and participatory. Accordingly, our system
of government is based on the principles of the people's representatives
whose responsibility is to act in the people's interest and the
participation of the people in the process of decision making and
broadening the range of people who have access to opportunities for such
participation.

The People’s Assembly, in pursuance of the ideals of the Constitution,
provides a vehicle that brings the people and their representatives
together to debate challenges facing them. It provides a voice for the
people to express themselves and to participate in seeking solutions to
their challenges.

The People’s Assembly is also a fitting response to a commitment to build
an effective People’s Parliament that is responsive to the needs of the
people and that is driven by the ideal of realising a better quality of
life for all the people of South Africa.

To realise its commitment of being a Parliament that is responsive to the
needs of the People, Parliament has, since 2004, been coming together with
ordinary South Africans in the People’s Assemblies.

The People’s Assembly is a national event hosted by Parliament in one of
the provinces. Participants in the Peoples’ Assembly are drawn from
different provinces, the local municipality and members of Parliament and
converge at the national event in the hosting province to deliberate on
different topics.  The results of the deliberations are presented and
discussed in plenary where members of the Executive are invited to respond
to questions and comments.

The provincial legislatures, including the provincial legislature of the
province in which the People’s Assembly is hosted, hold parallel provincial
assemblies at the same time as the People’s Assembly. Participants at the
provincial assemblies join the People’s Assembly via satellite link and
participate in the discussions by making inputs and comments or by asking
questions.
2.    Introduction

This is the fifth People’s Assembly to be held by the Third Parliament. The
first People’s Assembly was held in Parliament in October 2004, and
celebrated the 10th anniversary of our democracy and the adoption of the
Constitution in 1996. The second People’s Assembly was held in Kliptown,
Soweto, in 2005 to mark the 50th anniversary of the Congress of the People
under the theme: “People’s Voices: Shaping the Future”. The third People’s
Assembly was held in 2006 in Oudtshoorn under the theme: “all shall have
equal rights” and provided an opportunity to review equality legislation
passed by Parliament.

The fourth People’s Assembly was held in 2007 at Mbizana, Eastern Cape
under the theme: “Masijule ngengxoxo Mzansi “.  The occasion was also used
to commemorate the life of O R Tambo by unveiling a plaque at his
birthplace, Nkantolo.

The 2008 People’s Assembly was held in Bushbuckridge, Mpumalanga Province.
Each province was represented by 15 participants. 136 participants were
drawn from the wards of the Bushbuckridge municipality. About 150 members
of Parliament also participated.

This year’s theme was “Parliament empowering communities for poverty
eradication” and was
discussed in three separate commissions under the following topics:


 1.   Sustainable development


 2.   Role of the public in poverty eradication


 3.   Education and health in poverty eradication

The discussions in the commissions also reflected on the reports of
previous People’s Assemblies relevant to the topics.

3.    Summary of activities

The People’s Assembly was preceded by a community meeting held at the
Margaret Nanana Mhlanga Memorial Hall in Oakly, Mpumalanga on 11 September
2008. The purpose of the community meeting was to inform the community
about the People’s Assembly and how they could participate in the oversight
work that would be undertaken by committees of parliament prior to the
commencement of the People’s Assembly.

The committees of the National Assembly and the National Council of
Provinces undertook oversight work on 15 and 16 September. The committees
visited various service delivery points in and around the Bushbuckridge
municipal area that were relevant to the portfolios that were represented
to gather firsthand information about issues affecting the community. The
portfolios that were represented by the committees included social
development, health, education, agriculture and land affairs, labour, water
affairs, and trade and industry.

The People’s Assembly commenced with a plenary on 17 September where
participants were welcomed and the objectives of the 2008 People’s Assembly
explained. Thereafter participants attended discussions in commissions. On
18 September the People’s Assembly was linked, via satellite, with
provincial assemblies. The Premier of the Province, Mr T S P Makwetla,
addressed the People’s Assembly. A consolidated report of oversight work by
parliamentary committees was presented. This was followed by presentation
of reports from the commissions. Questions and comments were then
entertained from the nine provincial sites and from the national site.
Ministers present, the Premier, members of the provincial executive
committee and members of Parliament responded to questions. Mr M J
Mahlangu, the Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, gave a vote
of thanks.

B.    PLENARY AND DISCUSSIONS IN COMMISSIONS (17 SEPTEMBER)

Chairperson:     Ms P M Hollander, MP, Deputy Chairperson of the National
Council of Provinces

Ms P M Hollander welcomed the Chairperson of the National Council of
Provinces, Mr M J Mahlangu, the Premier of Mpumalanga, T S P Makwetla, the
Speaker of the Mpumalanga Legislature, Mrs Y N Phosa, the Acting Mayor of
Bushbuckridge, Ms M S Mashego, all participating members of Parliament and
members of the Provincial Legislature, representatives of the House of
Traditional Leaders, Councillors and participants.

Ms Hollander thanked all participants for their support of parliamentary
programmes in the province, and their participation in the People’s
Assembly. She invited Mr M J Mahlangu, MP, to open the People’s Assembly
and welcome participants.

1.    Opening and welcome

Mr Mahlangu welcomed the participants. He indicated that this was the fifth
People’s Assembly and urged members of Parliament to pay attention to
people’s concerns. He said that poverty eradication was not only a South
African issue but a universal problem. The United Nations Development
Programme had identified a lack of water and sanitation as the main two
drivers of poverty worldwide.

Mr Mahlangu said that Parliament was keen to assist communities in their
fight against poverty. There should be a visible legacy left behind by the
occasion especially in light of the fact that this was the last People’s
Assembly of the Third Parliament. He suggested that the concept of a
People’s Assembly should be continued in the Fourth Parliament.

2.    Context and background to the People’s Assembly

Mr K O Bapela, House Chairperson in the National Assembly gave a brief
presentation about the People’s Assembly.

Mr Bapela said that the Constitution enjoined Parliament to ensure public
participation. This interaction and participation happened, among others,
through the opportunity to make submissions to Parliament and its
committees. People must have the opportunity to express their views on
legislation and policies. Parliament initiated the People’s Assembly as a
vehicle to fulfill people’s participation in parliamentary processes.  He
noted that the People’s Assembly was also a mechanism that was meant to
assist parliamentarians to address challenges facing communities. Policies
must be implemented with a view to improving people’s lives.
Parliamentarians are public representatives and must deliver on promises
made to the public. The idea was therefore that the People’s Assembly
should give feedback to the communities, inter alia, on issues of service
delivery.

3.    Input on how Parliament functions and the importance of public
     participation

Mr M B Skosana, House Chairperson in the National Assembly made a
presentation on how Parliament functions and the importance of public
participation.

Mr Skosana said that the National Assembly was elected to represent the
people, to elect the President, to provide a national forum for public
consideration of issues, to pass legislation, to scrutinise and to oversee
executive action. By comparison the National Council of Provinces was
elected to represent the provinces, to ensure that provincial interests are
taken into account in the national sphere of government by participating in
the national legislative process and by providing a national forum for
public consideration of issues affecting provinces.

In terms of sections 57 and 70 of the Constitution, the National Assembly
and the National Council of Provinces respectively, are separate and
independent. The two Houses are thus not accountable to any of the other
two arms of government, but are directly accountable to the electorate.

Mr Skosana went further to explain that Parliament functioned through its
committees and that each House had its own separate committees. However,
there were joint committees for joint business of both Houses.

Furthermore, section 59 of  the  Constitution  provided  that  the  National
Assembly must facilitate public involvement in its  processes  and  that  of
its committees, conduct  its  business  in  an  open  manner  and  hold  its
sittings and those of its committees in public. A number  of  measures  were
employed by Parliament to facilitate public participation, including  public
hearings,  submissions,  petitions,  the  People’s   Assembly,   the   Youth
Parliament and Taking Parliament to  the  People.  Parliament  had  recently
started the process  of  establishing  Parliamentary  Democracy  Offices  in
different provinces. These offices were  aimed  at  strengthening  the  link
between Parliament and the people, especially in the remote rural  areas  of
the various provinces. People can contact Parliament through these offices.

4.    Objectives and anticipated outcomes for 17 and 18 September
Mr G Q M Doidge, House Chairperson in the National Assembly took the
participants through the programme for 17 and 18 September.

Mr Doidge explained that the objective of the People’s Assembly is for
members of Parliament and communities to together identify challenges
facing the people.  Participants in the People’s Assembly are expected to
make inputs on the challenges that they identify in each thematic area. The
inputs would be reflected in a report that would be discussed in
Parliament. Recommendations in the report would be forwarded to the
Executive.  Parliament would use the report to monitor Executive responses
to some of the issues raised by participants.

5.    Commission breakaways

5.1   Commission one: Sustainable development

Chairperson:     Mr L Zita, MP.

Mr L Zita made a brief introductory comment. He said that sustainable
development is a pattern of resource usage that aims to meet human needs
while preserving the environment so that these needs could be met not only
in the present, but also in the indefinite future. Eradication of poverty
is one of the biggest challenges confronting sustainable development in
South Africa. Sustainable development can be conceptually deconstructed
into three important parts: environmental sustainability, economic
sustainability and socio-political sustainability.

5.1.1 Inputs and comments

Environmental legislation, policies and programmes
    • The National Framework for Sustainable Development (NFSD) identifies
      key areas for intervention based on an integrated analysis of trends.
    • There is a mismatch between environmental policies and legislation on
      the one hand and practice on the other hand.
    • Planning capacity at the municipal level is generally poor, resulting
      in reactive rather than proactive approaches to the challenges of
      sustainable development. Consequently, Integrated Development Plans
      (IDPs) do not reflect local priorities or realities, where they do,
      they remain largely unimplemented due to lack of prior experience in
      operationalising development plans.
    • Environmental sustainability is often neglected  in  decision  making.
      Decisions should result in good economic and environmental outcomes.
    • Environmental policies require  review  and  innovative  environmental
      programmes are required to reduce air pollution.
    • The  Sustainable  Development  Policy  has  not  yet  been  passed  by
      Parliament; this results in conflicting mandates between departments.


Public education
    • Civil society organisations need to be strengthened to enhance their
      ability to monitor government and to interact on a more equal footing
      with the private sector.
    • There is a need  to  further  develop  the  role  of  NGOs  in  public
      education.
    • Communities should be educated about sustainable development and the
      importance of integrating it into their lives. Projects will only
      succeed if communities are educated and consulted.
    • Education by the government on water and electricity use is urgently
      needed.
    • Communities are not educated, informed and developed. Information
      available at the national level is not disseminated to people at the
      local level.

The role of Parliament
    • Parliament and parliamentarians have an  important  role  to  play  in
      enacting legislation that can lead to the  attainment  of  sustainable
      development and reduction of poverty.
    • Parliament has a crucial role to play in the  sustainable  development
      agenda, not only on the national political  stage,  but  also  at  the
      grassroots level,  particularly  given  the  enormity  of  development
      challenges faced by South Africa.
    • There  is  a  need  for  collective  responsibility  between  Cabinet,
      different  government  departments  and  Parliament   as   there   are
      conflicting mandates in different departments.
    • There was  concern  regarding  Hoedspruit  having  been  removed  from
      Mpumalanga.

Environmental beneficiation
    • Sustainable Development projects championed within communities need to
      be monitored  and  benefit  the  communities.  Communities  should  be
      assisted to develop business plans in order for projects to succeed.
    • Communities should benefit in the commercial  profitability  of  their
      resources and not only  be  utilised  as  workers.  Skilled  community
      members need to be involved in projects.
    • People should be skilled to run projects on farms. Individuals  within
      the community should be targeted for specialised training required  to
      make the project a success.
    • Most resources were taken away and the community did not get anything
      in return. When game reserves were established people were evicted,
      but after the development, workers and the community did not benefit
      from this development.
    • Developed countries are taking ownership of South Africa’s natural
      resources. People living next to these resources are very poor.
    • Foreign people own the wealth of communities and local involvement in
      development is limited.
    • Game lodges are owned by foreigners and locals do not benefit, not
      even through job creation.
    • There is a demand for land to be mined but locals do not reap the
      benefits. Mining companies do not reinvest in communities in which
      they are situated.
    • There is insufficient job creation and  the lack of factories in
      Bushbuckridge impacts on the sustainability of the area.
    • Disabled people are skilled but have no work.
    • Unfair trading barriers must be removed.
    • People in Bushbuckridge own cattle but do not have profitable
      marketing opportunities.
    • People have been given land that is not productive and they do not
      know how to create a sustainable living from it.

Availability of infrastructure and land
    • An infrastructure development grant was given to  Bushbuckridge  as  a
      presidential nodal point to address water shortages.
    •  Land  claims  have  resulted  in  investors  withdrawing   from   the
      Bushbuckridge area.
    • Some of the land claims have not been considered or finalised.
    • There are no policy positions in municipalities regarding the need for
      land for development purposes.
    •  The  places  declared  as  heritage  sites  are  still  inhabited  or
      privatised.
    •  Although  funds  are  channelled  to  provision  of  infrastructures,
      defective structures are built.
    • The roads in Mapulaneng are bad, there is a lack of water (the town
      was without water for three months) and poor service delivery by the
      municipality.
    • Bushbuckridge is a dry area, even if it rains the boreholes are unable
      to retain water. Pipes were laid but water has not been supplied.
    • There is a need for roads, bridges and graveyards.
    • The demand for electricity is very high and sanitation projects are
      lagging behind.
    • The sale of developed land to foreigners results in minimal land being
      available to build houses for local people.
    • There is a lack of facilities for the community; there are no
      playgrounds for children and old age homes are only in towns and not
      in the rural areas where they are needed most.

Utilisation of resources
    • Trees are being cleared in residential areas and buildings are erected
      which results in global warming.
    • People are collecting sand for building;  this  has  resulted  in  big
      holes developing behind houses.

Waste management
    • There is a problem with waste management, this includes household,
      medical and industrial waste.
    • The dumping of toxic waste is a health risk and the municipalities are
      not able to manage waste dumps.
    • Dustbins are only serviced once a month and there are no empty sites
      for the dumping of waste, more trucks are required to pick up waste.
    • Municipalities do not have the capability to deal with cleaning and
      cleansing of public areas.

5.1.2 Achievements
 • The various government departments are trying to redress the problems of
   the past.
    • Social welfare is providing support by protecting people who cannot
      take care of themselves, for example, via the child support grant.
    • The commitment to decrease green house gasses is an initiative that
      was started some time ago.
    • The NFSD has systems based on integration specifically for sustainable
      development.
 • People with HIV and Aids are recycling leaves and producing plastics out
   of the leaves.
    • As part of a poverty eradication project, plastics are collected and
      shoes and socks produced.

5.1.3 Recommendations
    • There is a need for collective responsibility for environmental
      governance. The environment is not the responsibility of one
      department. Greater integration between departments needs to be
      championed at Cabinet level.
    • The Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism should embark on
      workshops to raise environmental awareness.
    • Parliament should consider a process to adjust provincial boundaries
      in order to bring Hoedspruit back into Mpumalanga.
    • The allocation of land subsequent to claims being processed should be
      monitored by government. Land is sold by claimants just months after
      receipt, because the new owners are not in a position to manage the
      land or to ensure sustainability. Attempts should be made to retain
      and attract investors when land claims are finalised.
    • The expertise to manage farms should be maintained after land claims
      have been finalised and people with managerial and other needed skills
      should be retained on a salary basis.
    • Basic infrastructure should be addressed as rural development is a key
      pillar in the fight against poverty.
    • When development is taking place and roads are built, the landscape
      should be taken into consideration as it might have an impact on the
      biodiversity of the area.
    • Corridors should be created to ensure the free flow of animals.
    • Proper consultation should take place between the owners of mines and
      the communities. Communities should share in the wealth created by
      mines.
    • Attention should be given to areas where trees are cleared and
      buildings erected to reduce the impact of global warming.
    • Climate change should be studied in order to minimise rural migration
      and the community should be informed and educated when climate change
      issues are being considered.
    • There should be monitoring of projects in general and the unsuccessful
      projects should be evaluated to establish the reason for the failure.
      The benefits of projects should be transferred to the community.
    • People at grass-roots level should be consulted on projects as they
      have a better knowledge of the needs of their communities. Communities
      must also have the opportunity to identify projects for themselves and
      seek funding.
    • When projects are started the community should be consulted and
      participants should be trained in order to assist them in the
      development of sustainable projects.
    • Investors should be encouraged to invest near the townships where
      people are residing.
    • Field officers should be appointed to monitor projects and give
      guidance to ensure that projects facilitate sustainable development
      within the community.
    • The youth and the elderly should be employed at legal dump sites.
    • People should be educated to recycle and recycling initiatives should
      be embarked upon.
    • The number of refuse trucks should be increased to ensure that waste
      is removed on a regular basis.
    • A dam would solve the water shortage problem in the area; the river
      Balula can be used to feed the dam. This should also assist with the
      creation of jobs.
    • The community should have shares in new developments and ventures,
      that is, game reserves and people should benefit from the influx of
      tourists.
    • People should be educated on the environment, namely the impact of
      development and how to conserve the environment.
    • Solar energy should be introduced as few people can afford
      electricity.
    • Available resources should be regulated and monitored to ensure its
      sustainable use.

5.2 Commission two: The role of the public in poverty eradication
Co-Chairpersons: Mr S L Tsenoli, MP.
                 Mr S Shiceka, MP.

At the commencement of the session, the co-chairpersons emphasised that the
discussion of the commission should primarily focus on the role of the
public in eradicating poverty, as much had been said in various forums
about the role of government in alleviating poverty amongst poor
communities. However, they said that participants were not censored from re-
articulating the role of government in this regard.

5.2.1 Inputs and comments

Natural resources
    • There was overwhelming consensus that Bushbuckridge has suitable land
      for farming and good potential for tourism.
    • Communities should be mobilised to identify and protect indigenous
      knowledge and traditional medicines with a long term view of
      protecting them from commercial piracy.
    • In the past many projects had failed but it is not clear what caused
      those failures.

Utilisation of available sport facilities
      Existing sport facilities in communities should be identified for
      utilisation by the youth. A campaign encouraging the youth to
      participate in sport should be started as some youth may succeed in
      sport and financially uplift themselves and their families. The
      campaign may also discourage youth from delinquency and thus
      discourage them from participating in illegal activities such as drug
      abuse. Institutions such as government departments and the Umsobomvu
      Youth Fund can be approached for assistance in this regard.

Lack of essential documents
    • The oversight visits by portfolio committees revealed that almost a
      quarter of the residents of Bushbuckridge do not have one or the other
      necessary documents such as an identity book, birth certificate, etc.
      It was emphasised that without these documents, community members will
      not be able to access government services such as old age pensions,
      grants, housing and other services.
    • It was felt that information on government services is centralized
      and ordinary people, especially in rural areas, are not able to
      access it.
    • In general there is a lack of civil education on government services
      and as a result communities do not understand the policies and
      programmes of government. Where available, officials manning these
      offices do not adhere to Batho Pele principles.
Delayed processing of land claims applications
      Progress on the finalisation of land claims is not being reported. For
      years now, despite the expectations created by the government,
      communities that had lodged land claims have no land to farm or work.

Disabled people
    • Disabled people are not adequately recognised and assisted by both the
      public and government.
    • Disabled people are often not able to access government buildings and
      consequently they cannot access services provided by government to the
      public. Government departments need to adhere to and implement
      policies on disabilities. Communities should acknowledge and support
      disabled people.
    • There was a call for funding to train disabled people. Communities
      need to be tolerant towards disabled people.

Foreign-owned businesses
    • Many foreign nationals own businesses within communities, but they are
      not committed to developing entrepreneurial skills or provide
      employment to any of the members of the communities who accommodate
      them.
    • In some instance foreigners’ operations also have a negative impact on
      the environment.


Adult basic education and training teachers
    • A concern was raised about fulltime teachers who are also employed by
      Abet Centers as Adult Basic Education and Training teachers after
      normal school hours. This affected the quality of work of these
      teachers at both levels.
    • Currently Abet teachers in other provinces such as Gauteng are paid
      slightly higher than those employed in Mpumalanga. This disparity in
      salaries resulted in a high turnover and brain drain by qualified
      teachers to other province.

Establishment of firefighting teams
      During Autumn, Mpumalanga is susceptible to raging veld fires which
      usually ravage natural resources such as forestry, vegetation,
      agricultural crops and live stock. This results in loss of revenue and
      jobs for the people of the province and thus add to the outflow of
      scarce skills.


Former farm workers
      There are a number of unemployed and skilled former farm workers in
      the community, who had been exploited on farms or badly treated as
      labour tenants in the previous dispensation. There was a need to
      develop special programmes to encourage them to rejoin farming.

Other comments and concerns
    • A new definition of poverty was necessary in order to identify the
      poorest of the poor in relation to urban and rural areas. This
      delineation would help allocate the necessary resources on the basis
      of established need.
    • Allegations were made that some councillors take and implement other
      people’s ideas for personal benefit.
    • Communities should be involved in the development and finalisation of
      IDPs. In order for communities to be involved, IPDs of municipalities
      should address challenges in relation to provision of resources for
      communities.
    • Bushbuckridge suffers from lack of resources such as water, roads,
      electricity etc. and this contributes hugely to poverty.
    • Communities must also focus on other opportunities such as mining and
      not only farming.
    • Communities must mobilise against corruption and nepotism to retain
      the gains brought about by government services.
    • NOGs should form clusters in order to avoid unnecessary competition in
      providing services especially to the youth.
    • Leaders do not disseminate information to the public and sometimes do
      not allow the public to participate in public participation
      programmes.
    • Establishment of mini-factories in residential areas should be
      encouraged. These factories can manufacture things like window and
      door frames etc.

5.2.2 Recommendations
    • Communities should be encouraged to form business co-operatives.  In
      addition, training in entrepreneurial and managerial skills should be
      provided in order to make entrepreneurs sustainable.
    • There should be continuous monitoring and evaluation of the co-
      operatives by both communities and government. Government projects
      must not only benefit the politically connected as is the case
      currently. They must be accessible to all qualifying business co-
      operatives in order to benefit broader society.
    • People whose ideas were stolen by councillors should report the matter
      to the relevant authorities, for example the Mayor, Members of the
      Executive Council or members of Parliament.
    • Funding should be sourced for managerial, financial and project
      management skills training.
    • Markets should be identified for selling community products.
    • The stringent government procurement policies must be reviewed.
    • Primary and secondary schools should introduce relevant agricultural
      and tourism programmes as soon as possible. To augment the basic
      agricultural knowledge acquired at school level, closed education
      institutions such as the former Bushbuckridge College of Education,
      the venue for the People’s Assembly event, must be revived as
      agricultural training institutions.
    • Where possible, multipurpose centers should be utilised to educate the
      youth about the importance of farming and agriculture.
    • Mobile and/or satellite offices must be established and manned by
      trained officials who will train and help the poor through workshops
      and other forums. Municipalities, Sector Education and Training
      Authorities and NGOs must also assist in the training of communities.
    • The government must expedite the processing of land claim
      applications. A commission of enquiry should be established to
      investigate the delay around the processing of these applications.
    • Businesses owned by foreign nationals should be adequately regulated
      regardless of the size and a special surcharge should be implemented
      for entrepreneurial skills training of local communities. Communities
      must also tap into the knowledge and skills of these foreign nationals
      so that when they leave the country, the skills remain.
    • Uniform standards for employment of Abet teachers should be
      established by the national Department of Education as a matter of
      urgency. In addition, Abet teachers should be trained further to meet
      the current skills demands.
    • Government must improve rural communication and contact networks.
    • Communities must establish fire fighting teams in order to manage veld
      fires in the area. The government and the private sector could be
      approached to assist where necessary.

5.3   Commission  three:  The  role  of  education  and  health  in  poverty
eradication

Co- Chairpersons:      Prof S M Mayathula, MP.
                       Ms J Masilo, MP.

The commission decided to divide the topic into two sub–topics  as  follows:
“the role of education in poverty eradication” and the “role  of  health  in
poverty eradication”. The role  of  education  in  poverty  eradication  was
considered first.

5.3.1 The role of education in poverty eradication

Prof Mayatula, in his introductory  remarks  noted  that  previous  People’s
Assemblies identified the strengthening of Abet programmes  which  were  not
adequately  rolled  out  in  rural  areas  as  one  of  the  key  areas  for
intervention. The issue of inclusive education was also mentioned.

5.3.1.1     Inputs and comments

School buildings and infrastructure
    • As a result of the drying-up of bore-holes and mismanagement of  water
      resources in the  Bushbuckridge  area  most  schools  do  not  have  a
      constant supply of water.
    • Despite being on a priority list for  renovations,  poorly  built  and
      dilapidated school buildings have not yet being renovated.
    • Mud schools built by the community are in a state of collapse and pose
      a danger to learners, as a result schooling takes  place  under  trees
      and/or in tents.
    • The Portfolio Committee  on  Education  had  observed  a  shortage  of
      schools  in  the  Bushbuckridge  area  and  overcrowding  in  existing
      schools.


Early childhood development and reception level
    • Government must establish more early childhood development centres.
    • Grade R teachers are paid their salaries after three months  of  work,
      which makes them unable to support their families.
    • Some Grade R teachers earn up to R1000 per month. Failure to pay  them
      good salaries demotivates them and affects their performance in class.
    •  Some Grade R teachers are paid by School Governing Bodies.

School nutrition
    • Nutrition at schools is not  being  adequately  provided.  Instead  of
      being served at least three different fresh vegetables per week as per
      the requirement, learners are only served butternut.
    • Caregivers in the school nutrition scheme, especially those  who  look
      after learners who have a learning disability, need to be remunerated.
    • The R400 per month stipend paid to school nutrition caregivers is  too
      little to be an effective poverty eradication tool.

Learners with disabilities
    • Volunteers  who  care  for  people  with  disabilities,  such  as  the
      volunteers of the Lulekani Project, should be paid a  stipend  because
      they provide a very important service to the community.
    • There is no access to educational facilities,  especially  for  people
      with disabilities.
    • There is also no transport for people with disabilities to  travel  to
      education institutions and even to government events that  are  hosted
      by the Department of Education.
    • In spite of  the  fact  that  Further  Education  and  Training  (FET)
      colleges are funded by Government, they do not accommodate people with
      disabilities.
    • People with disabilities, especially the visually  impaired,  are  not
      granted bursaries by the department or by private companies.
    • The visually impaired cannot study  mathematics  and  science  because
      educational institutions do  not  have  assistive  devices,  therefore
      people with disabilities will always be trapped in a vicious cycle  of
      poverty.
    •  There  are  no  higher  learning   institutions   for   people   with
      disabilities, especially the  deaf  and  the  visually  impaired.  The
      government  should  make  existing  institutions  of  higher  learning
      accessible to people with disabilities by providing assistive  devices
      such as sign language interpreting, Braille etc.
    • There is no specialised transport for learners to travel  to  tertiary
      institutions.
    •  There  is  no  proper  infrastructure  to  cater  for   people   with
      disabilities at the existing schools, especially for the deaf and  the
      visually impaired.
    • There are no wheelchair  ramps  in  educational  facilities  and  some
      buildings are not complete.
    • The  deaf  and  the  blind  are  excluded  from  the  few  learnership
      programmes available.
    • Sign language is not taught at lower levels of education.

Adult basic education and training
   Women and the elderly travel long distances to  access  Abet  facilities,
   this poses a safety risk.


Availability of teachers, quality  of  education  and  free  and  compulsory
education
    • There is a shortage of mathematics and science teachers which leads to
      learners obtaining poor results in those subjects.
    • The criteria for the appointment of senior teachers are not clear.
    • There is no career guidance to assist learners to select subjects that
      will afford them good job opportunities.
    • There is a lack of learner support material.
    • There are delays in the provision of free and compulsory education  by
      government.
    • There is no consistency between the  curriculum  at  secondary  school
      level and tertiary level.
    • There is only one Mpumalanga  Regional  Training  Trust  which  offers
      skills development in the province instead of four as planned;
    • There is no  trade  centre  in  Mpumalanga  to  accommodate  technical
      students in order to do trade  tests  to  prepare  for  employment  on
      completion of their studies.
    • There are no libraries and laboratories in the communities  to  assist
      learners with their studies.
    • Schools in the Bushbuckridge area are classified into quintiles one,
      two and three. Schools in the region suffer on account of cross
      provincial border anomalies, for example, schools which had been
      classified as quintile 2 schools while under Limpopo, are now
      categorised as quintile 3 schools under Mpumalanga, and as a result
      lose out on being classified as ‘No fee’ schools.  This results in
      young learners having to cross busy national or main roads running
      through the village in order to get to suitable schools.

Learners with learning difficulties
    • There are no trained professionals  who  can  identify  children  with
      learning disabilities  at  schools.  This  results  in  such  learners
      dropping out as they cannot cope as a result of their difficulties.
    • There is a need for the establishment of  centres  which  will  assist
      learners with  learning  disabilities  with  language  competency  and
      skills.
    • There is also a need for the establishment  of  a  centre  which  will
      train teachers to educate learners who have learning disabilities.


Institutions of higher learning
    • There are no universities in Mpumalanga.
    • Tertiary institutions such as Hoshane and Mapulaneng were closed  down
      and  they  have  become  white  elephants.  That  decision  should  be
      revisited with the aim of reviving them.
    • Tertiary education is expensive and unaffordable even to middle  class
      parents.

Learner pregnancy
    • There’s an alarming increase in teenage pregnancy  in  schools,  which
      also raises the  issue  of  increased  vulnerability  of  learners  to
      HIV/Aids.
    • Pregnant learners are not allowed to write  their  examinations,  this
      may exacerbate the levels of illiteracy  and  may  lead  to  increased
      poverty among the youths.

5.3.1.2     Responses

    • Section 29(1) of the Constitution of  the  Republic  provides  that  “
      everyone has the right to a basic  education,  including  adult  basic
      education”. To this end government is providing Abet free of charge
    • Grade Rs have to move away from  communities  and  become  part  of  a
      formal school curriculum. This will ensure free education from Grade R
      to Grade 9.
    • Prioritisation of schools for upgrading is done  at  the  regional  or
      school circuit level, not at provincial level. School  principals  and
      School Governing Bodies must ensure that  their  schools  are  on  the
      priority list, and they must insist on getting a copy of the list from
      officials.
    • Ramps  will  be  installed  for  people  with  disabilities  in  those
      facilities that have none.
    •  The  teacher  colleges  were  not  closed  but  attached   to   other
      institutions of higher learning.
    • The department will look at the issue of stipends for school nutrition
      caregivers and learnership programmes.  Specific  cases  such  as  the
      Lulekani project will be followed up.
    • The department will address the issue of overcrowding  in  schools,  a
      problem which MPs themselves observed during committee  visits  around
      the Bushbuckridge area. In one instance the ratio was 53 classes to 20
      teachers.
    • Learner have to be an all-rounder at secondary school  level  so  that
      they are able to adjust or  go  to  any  area.  The  Revised  National
      Curriculum Statement (RNCS) is designed to develop  learners  so  that
      they start thinking as if they were at tertiary level.
    • There is no specific criterion set out for the appointment of a senior
      teacher. Like everyone else, teachers compete for positions  based  on
      merit.
    • The age of children who receive a social grant is currently up  to  14
      years of age. From 2009 onwards it will go up by one year  every  year
      until it reaches 18 years.
    • The department will provide  teachers  with  the  skills  to  identify
      learners with a learning disabilities.
    • The department will look at the  issue  of  bringing  higher  learning
      institutions for the disabled closer to the communities, and  look  at
      providing transport in the meanwhile.
    • There are no-fee schools that communities have  to  utilise  to  avoid
      expensive school fees. This means that from Grade R up until  Grade  9
      government has introduced free  education  which  should  benefit  the
      poor. For tertiary education,  government  has  set  up  the  National
      Student Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS) in order to  assist  students  at
      public higher education institutions with loans and bursaries.
    • Compulsory education will be introduced in phases.
    • The 7% used  for  administration  by  the  department  in  the  school
      nutrition scheme is not a national norm.  This  means  that  provinces
      have the latitude to increase this figure in order to be able  to  pay
      stipends of more than R400  to  volunteer  caregivers  in  the  school
      nutrition scheme.

5.3.1.3     Recommendations
    • Provincial departments should urgently consider rebuilding  collapsing
      schools and replacing mud-built structures.
    • Schools without water supply should be  supplied  with  boreholes  and
      tanks.
    • The recruitment of qualified mathematics and science  teachers  should
      be prioritised.
    • The proper supply of fresh produce to the schools should be  regularly
      done and closely monitored.
    • Speed humps should be erected on the roads to avoid learners being hit
      by vehicles when crossing the roads on their way to school.
    • Transport should be provided for the disabled and the elderly in order
      to attend schools and other departmental activities.
    • The department should involve  the  communities  in  identifying  what
      could be done to stop teenage pregnancies.
    • Libraries and laboratories need to be built nearer to the communities.

5.3.2 The role of health in poverty eradication

Ms Masilo, in her introduction, detailed the  relationship  between  poverty
and health. She made particular reference to access to health,  people  with
disabilities, communicable diseases such as HIV and Aids,  tuberculosis  and
malaria.

5.3.2.1     Comments and inputs

Availability of health care workers
    • There is a  huge  shortage  of  nurses,  doctors  and  counsellors  at
      clinics, especially in the rural areas.
    • Community workers and volunteers are not funded although they work  24
      hours.
    • Nursing colleges are far from communities.
    • Doctors are imported from Cuba and other  countries  to  overcome  the
      existing shortage of medical personnel.


Availability of facilities, equipment and medicines
    • The Department of Health is always under funded.
    • Clinics often run out of medication  and  patients  are  offered  only
      Panado.
    • Some clinics have no water supply, they have broken toilet  seats  and
      they have poor maintenance standards.
    • The lack of resources at clinics often result in  patients  having  to
      bring their own stationery on which to write reports  and  records  of
      their illnesses.
    • There are no telephone lines at some clinics as a result of theft  and
      nurses are compelled to use their cellular phones to communicate  with
      the department.
    • Mobile clinics do not arrive on the dates and times as scheduled.
    • Government needs to build more clinics as traveling becomes a  problem
      for the elderly and the disabled, especially at Madjembeni village.
    • Medication is highly priced at the pharmacies.  Government  should  do
      something to curb the unscrupulous behaviour of medical aid schemes.
    • There is a shortage of shoes  for  the  people  with  disabilities  at
      clinics and hospitals.
    • Some clinics do not have wheel chairs to assist patients.
    • There is a shortage of ambulances at clinics and hospitals.
    • There are long waiting lists for  beds  at  hospitals  to  accommodate
      patients.
    • Some facilities at clinics are not conducive to the storing of certain
      medicines.

Disabled people
    • People with disabilities have no access to vital information regarding
      HIV/Aids.
    • Information is not available to the blind by means of Braille.
    • The blind cannot read  the  expiry  dates  on  their  medication,  and
      there’s no sign language interpreting for those who cannot speak.
    •  People  with  disabilities  were  previously  trained  on  issues  of
      HIV/Aids, but they are not appointed when positions become available.

Inadequate services
    • Operating times of clinics are a problem as some close at 3 or 5pm and
      do not open on weekends.
    • There  is  loss  of  confidence  in  clinics  because  of  their  poor
      performance in service delivery, resulting in people having to  travel
      long distances in order to reach hospitals.
    • Hospitals do not  accept  patients  without  a  referral  letter  from
      clinics.
    • People stay in long queues for the whole day  after  having  travelled
      long distances.
    • The department is not assisting in fighting teenage pregnancy.
    • There is an alarming increase in teenage  pregnancy  in  schools  and,
      unfortunately, pregnancy goes along with HIV/Aids.
    • Teenage pregnancy exacerbates poverty because pregnant girls  are  not
      permitted to write exams.
    • The child support grant is too little, and this results  in  teenagers
      getting pregnant repeatedly in order to collect more grants.
    • Emphasis is put only on HIV/Aids,  TB,  malaria,  etc,  more  emphasis
      should be put into addressing cancer because it also claims the  lives
      of many people.

5.3.2.2     Responses
    • Patients who are not on the critical list should be encouraged  to  go
      and convalesce at home in order to free up  beds  for  those  who  are
      critical.
    • Parents, religious leaders and cultural organisations should encourage
      and promote celibacy  among  the  youth  to  minimise  the  spread  of
      HIV/Aids and teenage pregnancy.
    • The relevant parliamentary committee  should  ask  the  Department  of
      Health to account better with  regard  to  the  monitoring  of  funds,
      because it is obvious that funds allocated for  certain  projects  are
      not spent on those projects.
    • The department fails to pay its suppliers, therefore the suppliers  do
      not deliver medicines at hospitals and clinics.
    • The department should provide assistive devices such as hearing  aids,
      wheelchairs, etc.
    • Infrastructure at health facilities is vandalised by  members  of  the
      communities in which  those  facilities  are  located.  The  Community
      Policing Forums must assist in curbing the vandalising of property  in
      health facilities. Members of the community must  desist  from  buying
      stolen window frames, doors etc, to discourage theft, and must act  to
      protect public facilities because they have been  provided  for  their
      benefit.
    • There is a  general  lack  of  hygiene  at  the  Lydenburg  and  Sabie
      Hospitals.
    • People in rural areas suffer because local nurses  prefer  to  go  and
      serve in other provinces.
    • The local management structures in all provinces should  know  how  to
      access specialist services such as laboratory and orthopedic services,
      if not, they should contact the Chief Director.

5.3.2.3     Recommendations
    • Government should introduce a voucher or card system  which  could  be
      used to purchase nappies, baby food, clothing and  groceries,  instead
      of giving out cash.
    • Clinics and hospitals can not afford  to  run  out  of  medicines  and
      stationery, especially  medicines,  therefore  they  need  to  conduct
      constant stock taking to avoid shortages.
    •  Communities  should  accompany  people  who  need  interpretation  to
      facilities.
    • Mobile clinics should inform the communities in time  when  they  will
      not be available for the next date.
    • Clinics and hospitals should be maintained regularly.
    • Hospitals should not turn people who do not  have  a  referral  letter
      from clinics away.
    • Government should provide a 24-hour service at clinics.
    • Security should be beefed up at clinics, and where there is  none,  it
      should be provided.
    • The department should provide enough beds at hospitals to  accommodate
      people.
    • Ambulances should be  made  available  and  even  sourced  from  other
      provinces.
    • Provincial departments should attend to all the concerns raised and  a
      task team should be formed to follow up on progress made.
    • Communities should  submit  their  complaints  to  their  constituency
      offices regarding these issues.
    • The department must train nurses who will serve their  own  provinces.
      Nurses should be proud of where they come from and should endeavour to
      uplift their own communities.
    • Government should establish nursing colleges in rural  areas  so  that
      local children can serve their own communities.
    • Enough funds should be sourced for the  department  and  be  carefully
      monitored.


C.    PLENARY AND REPORTS FROM COMMISSIONS (18 SEPTEMBER)

Chairperson: Mr M J Mahlangu, MP, Chairperson of  the  National  Council  of
Provinces

The Chairperson of the National Council of  Provinces  took  the  Chair  and
invited Mr T S P Makwetla, the Premier of Mpumalaga to address the  plenary.


1.    Address by Mr T S P Makwetla, MPL, Premier of Mpumalanga

The  Premier  of  Mpumalanga,  Mr  Makwetla,  indicated  that  the  People’s
Assembly provided ordinary people  with  an  opportunity  to  interact  with
Parliament and express their  views  about  poverty,  service  delivery  and
other  challenges  confronting  them.  For  Parliament,  the  event  was  an
opportunity to reach out and engage with communities from all walks of  life
in  order  to  develop  and  formulate  solutions  to  address  poverty  and
development challenges facing  the  country.  Furthermore,  by  holding  the
event  annually,  Parliament  was  strengthening  its  oversight  role   and
enhancing accountability by government on development and  service  delivery
commitments.


Mr Makwetla said that public participation in  matters  of  development  and
service delivery was a critical hallmark of a democratic state that  upholds
the values of transparency and accountability  to  the  electorate.  Through
the People’s Assembly law-makers were broadening  opportunities  for  public
participation.

He  emphasised  that  it  was  crucial  for  government  to  implement   the
recommendations of the participants in order to  tackle  the  challenges  of
underdevelopment, poverty and unemployment. The  provincial  government  had
already  implemented  an  array  of  programmes   such   as   infrastructure
development,   local   economic   development   and    created    employment
opportunities in order to tackle these challenges. It  also  has  programmes
to ensure access to quality education for all children and  the  sustainable
provision of health care services to all communities, especially those  that
are economically depressed.

He further urged government to empower communities in  an  effort  to  fight
poverty, unemployment and service delivery by increasing access  to  poverty
alleviation programmes, self-employment and economic  opportunities,  access
to finance and mentorship to support entrepreneurs and small businesses  for
the poor. Alongside these initiatives, there was still  a  need  to  enhance
direct support to poor households  through  social  grants  and  free  basic
services.

He reminded members of Parliament that the positive impact of  the  People’s
Assembly on the people would depend  on  how  government  responded  to  the
challenges that have been  raised  and  follow  up  on  issues  raised.  The
government Mpumalanga province  was  committed  to  ensuring  that  all  the
issues raised by the communities were properly tracked and responded  to  by
the relevant entities at various levels of government.

He  concluded  by  thanking  Parliament  for  choosing   the   Bushbuckridge
municipality as a venue for the 2008 People’s Assembly.



2.    Address by the Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, Mr  M
     J Mahlangu, MP

Mr Mahlangu welcomed all the participants  to  the  event  and  tendered  an
apology for the Speaker of the National Assembly who was  unable  to  attend
owing to ill-health.

He pointed out  that  this  year’s  People’s  Assembly  coincided  with  the
marking of the United  Nation’s  International  Day  of  Democracy  and  the
anniversary of the adoption of the Universal Declaration  on  Democracy  Day
by the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU).

The reports of the previous People’s Assemblies, including the 2008  report,
would be consolidated with a view to identifying  the  recurring  challenges
that needed to be addressed in order to  achieve  the  goal  of  eradicating
poverty and hunger.

The comprehensive report would be used to assist the  Fourth  Parliament  to
sharpen its response to the various challenges the  nation  faced.  However,
the  current  Parliament  would  still  be  seized  with  issues  that  were
immediately before it.

Mr Mahlangu proceeded to welcome all the provinces to the national event.

3.    Presentation of the Consolidated Oversight report by committees

Mr T S Setona, House Chairperson  in  the  National  Council  of  Provinces,
presented a consolidated committees’ report on the oversight  visit  to  the
Bushbuckridge municipality. He highlighted that an  impression  was  created
that the demarcation disputes which bedevilled the area for  some  time  had
immensely affected service delivery by government.

Some services had collapsed since the municipality had been taken back  from
Limpopo. As a result of unfinished projects there was a  huge  shortage  of,
for example, running  water  in  the  Bushbuckridge  area  and  consequently
health services centres such as hospitals  and  clinics  were  affected.  He
urged that this matter be attended to immediately.

He observed that some provincial  departments  had  not  been  part  of  the
oversight visits and senior officials from these departments  had  also  not
been part of the process.

The full report would be presented to Parliament for further  consideration.




4.    Report back by commissions

4.1   Commission one: Sustainable development

Chairperson: Mr K O Bapela, MP, House Chairperson National Assembly

Councillor A Khoza presented a report  on  behalf  of  the  commission.  The
following were some of the inputs made from the floor:

    • Although the environment is important, the education system  does  not
      provide education on the environment and sustainable development.

    • Often sustainable development is interpreted in a way  that  restricts
      development,  especially  of  people  in  rural  areas  who  are  more
      dependent on natural resources.

    • People who continue to plough in  wetlands  should  be  provided  with
      alternative land.

    • Sustainable development should not hamper  communities’  endeavour  to
      develop themselves.

    • Aquatic live stock must be looked after as  some  of  them  are  being
      wiped out by factors such as global warming.

The following responses were received:

    • The education curriculum does include education about the environment.
      However, the government still needs to do more to educate  communities
      about sustainable development, including ways of saving energy,  water
      and other resources.

    • The government realises that climate change presents both threats  and
      opportunities. Communities have to find new ways  of  using  resources
      and create new resources such as renewable sources of energy.

    • Some projects have not been continued because of  transborder  issues.
      There was a disjuncture when Bushbuckridge moved from Limpopo Province
      to Mpumalanga. However, the Mpumalanga government is  working  towards
      ensuring that important projects are continued.

4.2   Commission two: Role of the public in poverty eradication

Chairperson: Mr M B Skosana, MP, House Chairperson in the National  Assembly


Councillor  R  Khumalo  reported  back  on   behalf   of   the   commission.
Participants made the following inputs:

    • Public servants do not respect the Batho Pele principles.

    • The Umsobomvu Youth Fund is not responsive enough to the needs of  the
      youth.

    • There are no proper support structures in  rural  areas  for  disabled
      people to articulate their needs. Some are still not  benefiting  from
      government services due to services not being user-friendly.

    • The government should establish special programmes and enough  support
      structures for widows to earn a living. At present, widows  appear  to
      be sidelined by government.

    • The  authorities  should  process  applications  for  mining  licenses
      speedily.

    • Sustainability of  established  projects  and  provision  of  adequate
      resources to run them should be prioritised.

The following responses were received:

    • There seems to be an information gap, people do not know what services
      are offered and how to access them. Parliamentarians should take steps
      to fill the gap.

    • Early childhood development centers provide  an  opportunity  for  job
      creation for adults who run the centers.

    • The youth should be encouraged to take up agriculture and  farming  as
      career options.

4.3   Commission  three:  The  role  of  education  and  health  in  poverty
     eradication

Chairperson: Mr G Q M Doidge, MP, House Chairperson in the National
Assembly


4.3.1 The role of education in poverty eradication

Mr R P Z van den Heever, MP, reported back on behalf of  the  commission  on
its discussions of  the  education  sub-topic.  The  participants  made  the
following inputs:

    • Existing laws should be enforced  and  parents  held  accountable  for
      their children leaving school early.

    • Schools should implement vocational guidance or training.

    • The poor still lag behind in literacy and acquisition of skills.

    • Nkomzi should be declared a no-fee school zone.

    •  Government  schools  situated  in  rural  areas  must  include  sport
      activities  in  their  academic  curriculum.  Currently  learners  are
      excluded from participation in extramural activities.

    • There is a proliferation of taverns next to school premises  and  this
      leads to drug and alcohol abuse by school pupils.

    • Accessibility for disabled students  at  tertiary  institutions  is  a
      problem.

    • The Department of Education must  as  soon  as  possible  fulfill  its
      promise that each province will be given a director for agriculture in
      schools.

These were some of the responses:

    • The provinces are responsible for the implementation of the  education
      budget. The National Department has decided that some  schools  should
      be no-fee schools, the provincial departments  should  implement  that
      decision.

    • Disabled learners should have full access in schools.

    • Tertiary institutions should be accessible to disabled students.

    •  Statistics  do  not  support  the  claims  that  graduates  are   not
      employable.



4.3.2 The role of health in poverty eradication

Ms F Mazibuko, MP,  reported  back  on  behalf  of  the  commission  on  its
discussion of the health sub-topic. The following were some  of  the  inputs
made:

    • There was a general consensus that  the  lack  of  resources  such  as
      ambulances, furniture and stationery in rural clinics and shortage  of
      staff  such  as  nurses  and  doctors  resulted  in  overcrowding  and
      inadequate services. As a result some patients are turned back without
      help.

    • Vacant posts had been left unfilled for quite some time.

    • There was concern that senior citizens were being  abused  emotionally
      and financially with little being done by government to protect  them.
      Communities must be involved in the creation of safe  havens  for  the
      aged.

5.    Way forward

Chairperson: Mr G  Q  M  Doidge,  MP,  House  Chairperson  in  the  National
Assembly

There was consensus that in the future, public participation processes  such
as the People’s Assembly must be devoted to ordinary people  so  that  there
would be more time for  public  representatives  to  listen  to  the  issues
affecting  communities.  Members  of  Parliament   should   minimise   their
contributions and allow the public more time  to  raise  the  challenges  in
their communities.

Provincial  and  local  structures  of  government  must  also  be  actively
involved so that they are able to  accommodate  community  concerns  in  the
programmes at provincial level.

In its outreach  and  public  participation  programmes,  Parliament  should
endeavour to bridge the information gap by bringing all government  agencies
to engage with the people.



6.    Closing remarks

Mr M J Mahlangu, the Chairperson of the NCOP thanked  all  participants  for
taking  part  in  the  2008  People’s  Assembly.  He   emphasised   that   a
consolidated report of the People’s Assembly  would  be  prepared  and  once
considered by Parliament would be  sent  to  both  National  and  Provincial
governments  for  consideration  of  all  issues  raised.  All  members   of
Parliament and members of provincial legislatures must play a  crucial  role
in implementing and monitoring the implementation of progress  and  projects
on the ground. Parliament  should  consider  reviewing  the  future  of  the
People’s Assembly so as to increase time to fully process  the  issues  that
have been raised.


                          MONDAY, 24 NOVEMBER 2008


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) Technology Innovation Agency Bill [B 49B – 2007] – Act No 26 of
         2008 (assented to and signed by President on 17 November 2008).

      2) Mineral and Petroleum Resources Royalty Bill [B 59 – 2008] – Act No
         28 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 17 November
         2008).

      3) Renaming of High Courts Bill [B 5B – 2008] – Act No 30 of 2008
         (assented to and signed by President on 17 November 2008).

      4) Liquor Products Amendment Bill [B 22B – 2008] – Act No 32 of 2008
         (assented to and signed by President on 17 November 2008).

      5) National Energy Bill [B 52D – 2008] – Act No 34 of 2008 (assented
         to and signed by President on 17 November 2008).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces
1.    Report of the Select Committee on Local Government and  Administration
   on the oversight visit to Xhariep district municipality

1.    INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND


      The  National  Council  of  Provinces  (NCOP)  delegated  the   Select
      Committee on Local Government and Administration  to  conduct  a  fact
      finding visit to the  Xhariep  District  Municipality  in  Free  State
      Province during the 11 October 2008.

2.    OBJECTIVES


      The main objectives of the visit was to  interact  with  internal  and
      external  stakeholders  in  the  Provincial  Executive  Council  (PEC)
      through the Office of the MEC for  Local  Government  and  Housing  in
      terms of section 139 (1) (b) of the Constitution.


   3. DELEGATION


      The delegation of the NCOP consisted  of  the  following  members  and
      officials:


         • Hon S Shiceka                     (Gauteng Province)
         • Hon F Nyanda                      (Mpumalanga Province)
         • Hon D Worth                       (Free State Province)
         • Hon M Mzizi                       (Gauteng Province)
         • Hon Kgoshi M L Mokoena                  (Limpopo Province)
         • Hon A T Manyosi                   (Eastern Cape Province)
         • Hon N J Mack                      (Western Cape Province)
         • Hon A L J Moseki                        (North West Province)
         • Mr D Mokoena                      (Research Unit)
         • Mr M Manele                       (Committee Section)
         • Mr V Mfuniselwa                   (Committee Section)


   4. DISCUSSION


      On the 11 October 2008, the Delegation of the  Committee  conducted  a
      fact finding   visit to the  Xhariep  District  Municipality  and  had
      interactive meetings with stakeholders  including  the  Administrator,
      Executive Mayor,  Chief  Whip,  Acting  Municipal  Manager,  Organized
      Labour, Free State Youth Commission, South African Council of Churches
      and SALGA.


      4.1 Administrator


      In briefing the Committee, the Administrator indicated that on 28  May
      2008  the  Free  State  Provincial  Executive  Committee  decided   to
      intervene at Xhariep District Municipality in terms of Section 139 (1)
      (b) of the Constitution. The rationale for  the  intervention  in  the
      municipality was lack of  capacity  to  exercise  powers  and  perform
      functions; inadequate budget to perform as  a  district  municipality;
      possible unauthorized, irregular, fruitless and  wasteful  expenditure
      including possible fraud, corruption and nepotism.  The  Administrator
      further informed the  Committee  that  since  its  establishment,  the
      Xhariep District Municipality encountered acute  financial  constrains
      due to a limited levy base and for the past three years  the  District
      had passed budgets with deficits. The Provincial Department  of  Local
      Government provided the Xhariep District Municipality  with  technical
      support to achieve the development of budget, budget related policies,
      internal control manual, annual  financial  statements  and  financial
      management since the suspension of the Chief Financial Manager.


      Some  of  the  major  challenges  faced  by   the   Xhariep   District
      Municipality included:


         • Non adoption of IDP and Budget.
         • Restoration of the culture of work and accountability.
         • Strengthening of oversight capability.
         • Enhancing financial controls and management.


      In  order  to  deal   with   the   above-mentioned   challenges,   the
      Administrator indicated that a turn-around strategy had been developed
      to:
         • Provide system support and strengthening of internal controls;
         • Support in the establishment of internal audit function,
         • Ensure development and implementation of performance  agreements
           that could hold Section 57 Managers accountable for performance.



      4.2 Municipal Councillors


      In her submission, the Executive Mayor  indicated  that  she  did  not
      support the intervention as issued by the MEC of Local Government  and
      Housing. She indicated that the Municipal  Council  was  not  properly
      consulted on the processes and rationale for the issuing of the notice
      of intervention. The Chief Whip indicated that  the  majority  of  the
      Municipal Councillors were supporting  the  intervention  because  the
      Xhariep District Municipality through the leadership of the  Executive
      Mayor had failed to pass the IDP and Budget  at  the  right  time.  He
      further indicated that the appointment of the Administrator by the MEC
      of Local Government and  Housing  had  enabled  the  Xhariep  District
      Municipality to develop its IDP, pass the Budget and improved internal
      administrative systems.


      4.3 Municipal Manager


      The Municipal Manager indicated that he  did  not  fully  support  the
      intervention as issued by the MEC of Local Government and Housing.  He
      indicated that some of  the  problems  identified  in  the  notice  of
      intervention emerged as the result of lack  of  funding  and  suitable
      human resources. Some of the concerns raised by the Municipal  Manager
      related to understaffing of Local Economic Development  Unit,  Finance
      and Corporate Unit and other departments, non  existence  of  Internal
      Audit Committee,  lack  of  experience  by  some  of  the  Section  57
      Managers,  lack  of  proper  qualification  among  certain  employees,
      political interference in administrative operations,  lack  of  proper
      financial control due to lack of qualified personnel.


    . 4.4 Free State Youth Commission


      The  Free  State  Youth  Commission   welcomed   and   supported   the
      intervention.  It indicated that its interest in the whole process was
      informed by the implications  that  the  process  had  on  youth,  for
      example, skills development; poverty; unemployment; and  vulnerability
      to drug and substance abuse.  Noting  the  political,  administrative,
      strategic and operational problems identified  by  the  MEC  of  Local
      Government and Housing, the Free State Youth  Commission  was  of  the
      view that Section 139 (1) (b) was the best intervention.


    . 4.5 Organized Labour
      The representative from SAMWU Union indicated  that  organized  labour
      supported the intervention as issued by the MEC  of  Local  Government
      and Housing. In support of the intervention, the representative raised
      concerns relating to lack of consultation on processes leading to  the
      development of  IDP  and  Budget,  non  compliance  by  the  municipal
      administration on organizational service agreements,  non  setting  of
      labour forums within the Xhariep District  Municipality  and  lack  of
      funding mechanisms for local economic development projects.


5.    RECOMMENDATION

      Having visited Xhariep District Municipality, the Select Committee  on
      Local Government and Administration recommends that:


         • The National Council of Provinces approves the interventions
           issued by the Free-State MEC for Local Government and Housing.


         • The Provincial Department of Local Government and Housing
           facilitate the appointment of a forensic investigation on
           alleged financial irregularities and mismanagement in the
           Xhariep District Municipality.


         • Provincial Department of Local Government and Housing ensures
           the fast tracking of the appointment of Section 57 Managers.


         • The Xhariep District Municipality ensures the implementation of
           good labour practices between the municipal management and
           organised labour and the functioning of Labour Forum in the
           Municipality.


         • Furthermore, the Xhariep District Municipality should also
           facilitate the signing of performance management contract and
           assessment of Section 57 Managers and implementation of code of
           good conduct and working relationship among Councillors and
           officials.


         • The MEC’s office monitors the progress of the Xhariep District
           Municipality through the scrutinizing of periodic reports and a
           copy is forwarded to the NCOP.
         • The intervention be reviewed after a period of six months, which
           is by 30 April 2009.

      Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Local Government and  Administartion
   on the oversight visit to Mohokare Local Municipality

1.    INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND


      The  National  Council  of  Provinces  (NCOP)  delegated  the   Select
      Committee on Local Government and Administration  to  conduct  a  fact
      finding visit  to  the  Mohokare  Local  Municipality  in  Free  State
      Province during the period 09 until 10 October 2008.

2.    OBJECTIVES
      The main objectives of the visit was to  interact  with  internal  and
      external stakeholders in the Mohokare Local Municipality in  order  to
      solicit their opinions on the intervention invoked by  the  Provincial
      Executive Council through the Office of the MEC for  Local  Government
      and Housing in terms of section 139 (1) (b) of the Constitution.


3.    DELEGATION


      The delegation of the NCOP consisted  of  the  following  members  and
      officials:


         • Hon S Shiceka                     (Gauteng Province)
         • Hon F Nyanda                      (Mpumalanga Province)
         • Hon D Worth                       (Free State Province)
         • Hon M Mzizi                       (Gauteng Province)
         • Hon Kgoshi M. L.Mokoena                 (Limpopo Province)
         • Hon A T Manyosi                   (Eastern Cape Province)
         • Hon N J Mack                      (Western Cape Province)
         • Hon A L J Moseki                        (North West Province)
         • Mr D Mokoena                      (Research Unit)
         • Mr M Manele                       (Committee Section)
         • Mr V Mfuniselwa                   (Committee Section)


           4. DISCUSSION


      In Mohokare Local Municipality the delegation  of  the  Committee  had
      interactive and consultative meetings, from 09  to  10  October  2008,
      with  the  Municipality’s  stakeholders.  The  main  stakeholders  the
      delegation interacted with were the  Administrator,  the  Councillors,
      and  representatives  from  the   South   African   Local   Government
      Association (SALGA), Free State Youth Commission, the Organized Labour
      and the Business Forums.


      4.1 Administrator


      The Administrator indicated that the main reasons for intervention  in
      Mohokare  Local  Municipality  included  infighting  among   Municipal
      Councillors which resulted  in  the  Municipal  Council  not  sitting;
      allegations of fraud and  misuse  of  funds  leading  to  suspensions,
      charges as well as paralysis of the  Municipal  Council’s  operations.
      Some of the noticeable  achievements  reported  by  the  Administrator
      included creation of favorable climate for the  Municipal  Councillors
      to work together; development and passing  of  Integrated  Development
      Planning  (IDP) and the Budget; provision  of  technical  and  systems
      support; facilitation of filling of four Section  57  Managers  vacant
      posts; introduction of systematic handling of problems and systems for
      effective service delivery.


      Some of the key challenges reported included low morale  in  municipal
      workers; use of contract workers to complement workforce,  ineffective
      management of municipal’s income-generating facilities;  water  supply
      shortage; insufficient income-generating  due  to  depressed  economic
      conditions; obsolete equipment for the maintenance of roads;  streets;
      storm water drainage and poor  solid  waste  management  and  lack  of
      accountability of municipal investment grants funds.


      4.2 Municipal Councillors


      In their submission, the  Municipal  Councillors  indicated  that  the
      divisions within  Municipal  Council  started  before  2006  with  the
      nomination  of  the  candidate  for  the  Executive  Mayor   position;
      suspension of Municipal Manager and appointment  of  Acting  Municipal
      Manager and  Corporate  Service  Manager.  The  Municipal  Councillors
      stated that some of the political  problems  that  affected  effective
      functioning of the municipality related to appointment of  Section  57
      Managers,  non  implementation  of  Municipal  Council’s  resolutions,
      suspension  of  Municipal  Manager  by  the  Executive  Mayor  without
      Council’s approval and failure of the  Speaker  and  Acting  Municipal
      Manager to call Council meetings.


      The Municipal Councillors indicated that some  of  the  administrative
      problems that impacted on the smooth functioning of  the  municipality
      related to the purchasing of vehicles without  Council  approval,  non
      implementation of  council  resolutions,  lack  of  trained  staff  in
      finance department,  consultant’s  failure  to  design  and  implement
      municipal systems, poor quality  of  contractors  in  key  development
      projects and the failure of the administration to comply with existing
      legislations.  In  support  of   the   intervention,   the   Municipal
      Councillors indicated  that  significant  progress  in  terms  of  the
      development  of  an  IDP  and  Budgeting  had  been  made  since   the
      appointment of the Administrator and that a plan has  also  been  made
      for the appointment of Section 57 Managers.


      4.3 South African Local Government Association (SALGA)


      The Association indicated in the interest  of  service  delivery  that
      they support the intervention issued in terms of  section  139.  SALGA
      indicated that proper consultation process had been  followed  by  the
      provincial  government  and  the  MEC  in  issuing   the   notice   of
      intervention.


      4.4 Free State Youth Commission


      In their submission the Free State  Youth  Commission  indicated  that
      they welcomed and supported the intervention and  the  appointment  of
      the Administrator. Noting the political  and  administrative  problems
      identified by the MEC of Local Government and Housing, the  Commission
      expressed the view that the intervention and the  appointment  of  the
      Administrator would fast-track all the processes  that  have  hampered
      youth  development  in  the  Mohokare  Local  Municipality,  such   as
      community participation; development  of  IDP;  development  of  Local
      Economic Development;  formulation  and  submission  of  budgets;  re-
      establishment  of  the  Youth  Development  Unit;  implementation   of
      Municipal Council’s resolutions; provision of service delivery  within
      the local municipal area; development of Human Resource Policies, such
      as Skills Development Plan; Career Management and Succession  planning
      as well as Employment Equity Plan.


      The Commission stated that despite the efforts of advancing the  youth
      development agenda through lobbying for  the  establishment  of  youth
      development  units  within  municipalities,  participation  of   youth
      commissioners   in   district   Intergovernmental   Relation   Forums,
      deployment of commissioners in districts, participation of  the  Youth
      Commission in Premier’s Coordinating Forum  and establishment of Inter-
      Municipal Forum on Youth  Affairs,  the  municipality  had  failed  to
      accelerate development of youth  programmes  (e.g.  charcoal  project,
      youth farm project, bakery project). Having stated their  support  for
      the intervention, the Commission recommended that:


      • In the interest of ensuring acceleration of the  youth  development
        agenda, the Municipal Council should strive for political unity;
      • Regularize its meetings and perform its  political,  constitutional
        and legal mandates, both collectively and individually in order  to
        ensure implementation  of  Council  resolutions  aimed  at  service
        delivery.
      • The Administrator should fast-track the process of  re-establishing
        the youth unit within the municipality and put in place  the  turn-
        around strategy in consultation with the major stakeholders  within
        the  municipality  and  submits  to  the  Municipal   Council   for
        consideration and adoption.
      • Speed-up the process of appointing Section 57 Managers.
      • Assist the Mohokare Local Municipality in  developing  a  retention
        strategy and the development of recruitment and selection  strategy
        as well as  capacitating  officials  to  provide  services  to  the
        community.
      • The Department of Local Government and  Housing  should  fast-track
        the forensic investigation and make the report  accessible  to  the
        community  in   order   to   address   allegations   of   financial
        misappropriation and non-compliance with existing legislation.


      4.5 Organized Labour


      The Union affiliates composed of COSATU, SADTU, NEHAWU, SAMMU,  NUMSA,
      POPCRU  and  SACCAWU  indicated  that   they   jointly   support   the
      intervention issued by the Provincial Executive Council  in  terms  of
      Section  139.  Some  of  the  concerns  raised  in  support   of   the
      intervention related to the employees in acting capacity because posts
      are left vacant for longer  periods  of  time,  unequal  treatment  of
      employees, questionable appointment of  certain  candidates,  lack  of
      service  delivery  monitoring  and  evaluation  system,  loitering  of
      employees due to lack of job descriptions.


      In  order  to  ensure  effective  and  efficient  functioning  of  the
      municipality, the unions  recommended  that  the  municipality  should
      review the job description of employees as  general  workers,  provide
      continuous consultation with major internal and external stakeholders,
      prioritize  Batho  Pele  Principles  and   ensure   transparency   and
      participation  of  ward  meetings  on  matters  related  to  IDP   and
      Budgeting.


      4.6 Business Forum


      The representatives from the Business Forum expressed their support of
      the notice of intervention as issued by the MEC  of  Local  Government
      and Housing.  The  representatives  raised  concerns  with  regard  to
      awarding  of  tenders  to  contractors   not   residing   within   the
      municipality, lack of service delivery, lack of municipal feedback  on
      tender awards, lack  of  access  to  construction  tenders,  delay  of
      payments by the  municipality  construction  service  providers,  non-
      functionality of public toilets at taxi ranks, no recognition of local
      builders, lack of expansion programmes and  land  for  small  business
      developers.


5.    RECOMMENDATION AND WAY FORWARD

      Having visited Mohokare Local Municipality, the Select Committee on
      Local Government and Administration recommends that:


         • The National Council of Provinces approves the intervention
           issued by the Free-State MEC for Local Government and Housing.


         • The Provincial Department of Local Government and Housing
           facilitate the appointment of a forensic investigation on
           alleged financial irregularities and mismanagement in the
           municipality.


         • Provincial Department of Local Government and Housing ensures
           the fast tracking of the appointment of Section 57 Managers.


         • The Mohokare Local Municipality ensures the implementation of
           good labour practices between the municipal management and
           organised labour and the functioning of Labour Forum in the
           Municipality. Furthermore, there should be adherence to the
           municipality’s orgonogram.

         • There should be role clarification, capacity building and
           skilling of the municipal leadership.


         • Furthermore, the Mohokare Local Municipality should also
           facilitate the signing of performance management contract and
           assessment of Section 57 Managers and implementation of code of
           good conduct and working relationship among Municipal
           Councillors and officials.


         • The MEC’s office monitors the progress of the Municipality
           through the scrutinizing of periodic reports and a copy is
           forwarded to the NCOP.


         • The intervention be reviewed after a period of six months, which
           is by 30 April 2009.


      Report to be considered.


3.    Report of the Select Committee on Local Government and  Administration
      on the oversight visit to Ditsobotla Local Municipality

1.    INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND


      The fact finding visit by the Committee during the 28 and  29  October
      2008  emanated  from  enforcement  of  Section  139  (1)  (b)  of  the
      Constitution by the Provincial Executive Council (PEC). This was based
      on the alleged maladministration and financial  mismanagement  on  the
      side of the Municipality, which consequently had a direct  bearing  on
      service delivery at Ditsobotla.

2.    OBJECTIVES


      The objectives of the fact finding visit  was  for  the  Committee  to
      assess the alleged problems and issues causing disfunctionality in the
      municipal  administration;   engage   and   interact   with   relevant
      stakeholders in  order  to  solicit  their  opinions;  and  lastly  to
      recommend to the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) for approval  or
      disapproval of an intervention being applied to the  Ditsobotla  Local
      Municipality.


   3. DELEGATION


      The delegation of the Committee consisted of the following members and
      officials:


         •  Hon  B  J  Mkhaliphi  –  Chairperson                (Mpumalamga
           Province)
         • Hon M Mzizi                             (Gauteng Province)
         • Hon Kgoshi M L Mokoena                       (Limpopo Province)
         • Hon A Moseki                            (North West Province)
         • Mr D Mokoena                            (Research Unit)
         • Mr M Manele                             (Committee Section)


   4. DISCUSSION


      Below is a précis on the key issues raised and  discussed  by  various
      stakeholders.


      4.1 The Provincial Department of Developmental  Local  Government  and
      Housing


      The  MEC  of  the  Department  indicated  that  the  intervention  was
      primarily based only on  the  aspects  affecting  administration.  The
      Department briefed the delegation on the rationale  and  justification
      for invoking Section 139 of the Constitution.  The  presentation  made
      focused on the following five key performance areas:


         • Transformation and organisational development;
         • Basic service delivery;
         • Local economic development;
         • Financial viability and management; and
         • Good governance and public participation.


      Transformation and organisational development
      The transformation  and  organisational  development  challenges  that
      confronted the Ditsobotla Local  Municipality  included  high  vacancy
      rate of Section  57  Managers,  lack  of  adopted  policies  including
      delegation  of  authority  and  lack  of  staff  capacity  to  perform
      adequately in terms of municipal functions.


      Basic Service Delivery


      The service delivery challenges included shortage of  water  in  areas
      such as Itsoseng,  Coligny  and  Biesiesvlei.  There  were  delays  on
      housing due to lack of bulk services, limited  technical  capacity  in
      the technical department and lack of  operations  and  maintenance  of
      infrastructure.


      Local Economic Development


      Lack of capacity in the LED Unit, non-functionality of Local  Economic
      Development Forum and high unemployment levels especially among  youth
      were all challenges identified with local economic development in  the
      municipality.


      Good Governance and Public Participation


      Good governance and public participation challenges included  lack  of
      capacity  for  ward  committees,  resulting  in  poor   functionality,
      conflicting  roles  of  ward  committees  and  Community   Development
      Workers, Council meetings not regularly held and non-implementation of
      communication strategy.


      4.2 Business Forum
      The Business Forum of Ditsobotla supported  the  intervention  to  the
      municipality and raised serious concerns related to lack  of  control,
      management of income, discipline, problems of street repairs, lack  of
      shelters in taxi ranks, water services. The Forum emphasized the  need
      for  the  Ditsobotla  Local  Municipality  to  form   partnership   in
      developing business plans, promoting emerging small business  and  the
      need to  appoint  qualified  Municipal  Manager  and  Chief  Financial
      Officer in the Ditsobotla Local Municipality.


      Mayoral Committee


      The Mayoral Committee composed of the  Speaker,  Chief  Whip  and  the
      Mayor,  submitted  their  opinions  and  concerns  relating   to   the
      intervention in terms of Section 139. The  Speaker  acknowledged  that
      there had been political and administrative problems that  contributed
      to the intervention. He indicated that after consultation  with  their
      provincial department, the Municipal Council was finally convinced  of
      the importance of the  intervention.   The  concerns   raised  by  the
      Speaker included financial mismanagement in  the  Finance  Department,
      forging of Municipal Council’s resolution by the  officials,  external
      political interference in the administration  and  non  submission  of
      reports by some of the municipal wards.


      The Chief Whip acknowledged that the poor performance  and  management
      of the Ditsobotla Local Municipality had contributed to the issuing of
      the intervention. He indicated that  due  to  lack  of  technical  and
      funding support to the municipality, his  office, did not support  the
      intervention.


      The Mayor raised concerns relating  to  administration  and  political
      unity within the Ditsobotla Local Municipality. Some of  the  concerns
      raised included nullification of  the  appointment  of  the  Municipal
      Manager by Council, non-submission  of  financial  statements  by  the
      Chief Financial Officer, administrative failures to pay  third  party,
      officials using RDP housing  funds  without  the  Municipal  Council’s
      resolution   and   municipal   officials   insulting   the   Municipal
      Councillors.


      One of the Executive Committee Members  indicated  that  some  of  the
      Municipal Councillors were in support of the  intervention  issued  in
      terms of Section 139. He  acknowledged  that  the  deployment  of  the
      Acting  Municipal  Manager   had   assisted   the   Ditsobotla   Local
      Municipality to perform its functions. Some of the concerns raised  by
      the Executive Committee Member in support of the intervention included
      vacant position of the Chief Financial Officer,  lack  of  logistical,
      administrative and  secretarial  support  to  the  Municipal  Council,
      involvement of officials in politics and lack of professional  service
      generally from the officials.


      4.3 Organized Labour


      The organized labour composed of South African Municipal Workers Union
      (SAMWU) and Independent Municipal  and  Allied  Trade  Union  (IMATU),
      which submitted their concerns and opinions on the intervention issued
      in terms Section 139 of the Constitution. The SAMMU in support of  the
      intervention raised concerns relating to lack of political  leadership
      from  the  Mayor,  lapsing  of  workers  medical   funds,   managerial
      irregularities, municipal failure to pay third  party  funds,  calling
      off of interviews by the Mayor, appointment of officials found  guilty
      of corrupt practices and delays  in  the  appointment  of  Section  57
      Managers.


      Furthermore,  the  representatives  from  IMATU  in  support  of   the
      intervention raised concerns relating to the delays in the appointment
      of Section 57 Managers, and lack of access to audit reports.


      4.4 Municipal Councillors


      The Municipal Councillors indicated that they were all supporting  the
      intervention invoked by the MEC. In support of the intervention,  they
      raised political and administrative concerns relating to problems  and
      challenges within the  Ditsobotla  Local  Municipality.  Some  of  the
      political  concerns  raised  by  the  Municipal  Councillors  included
      failure of the Mayor to organize strategic  planning  workshops,  non-
      participation of the  Municipal  Councillors  in  the  appointment  of
      Section 57 Managers and the  conduct  of  the  Mayor  with  regard  to
      intimidation.  The  administrative  concerns  included  overdraft  and
      inability to manage funds, deterioration and  lack  of  administration
      leadership,  failure  of  the  administration  to   provide   adequate
      logistical,  secretarial  and  logistical  support,  signing   cheques
      without submission  of  supporting  documents,  non-implementation  of
      Municipal  Council’s  resolution  and  non-submission   of   financial
      statements on municipal expenditure. During the visit,  the  Committee
      reprimanded an official of Ditsobotla Local Municipality  due  to  his
      conduct.


      4.5 South African Local Government Association (SALGA)


      SALGA in support of the intervention raised apprehension  with  regard
      to the management of the municipality. The major  apprehension  raised
      by the Association included high  vacancy  rate  at  strategic  level,
      delays in the recruitment and appointment of Municipal  Manager,  non-
      deployment of experts within the  Ditsobotla  Local  Municipality  and
      inconsistency on matters relating to intergovernmental relations.  The
      Association  emphasized  the  need  to  fast  track  the  process   of
      appointing Municipal Manager and the implementation of the turn-around
      strategy and the harmonization of labour related matters.


      4.6 Ward Committees


      The Ward Committee Members from municipal wards 7, 9 and  15  were  in
      support of the intervention,  and  subsequently  raised  a  number  of
      concerns related to the management of  the  municipality.  Key  issues
      raised included garbage collection problem, lack  of  consultation  on
      matters related to intervention,  non-recognition  of  ward  committee
      members, lack of funding for the operations of Ward Committee  members
      and lack of policies governing the utilization of resources.


      4.7 Community Development Workers (CDWs)


      The CDW’s who were in support  of  the  intervention  raised  concerns
      related to communication and programmes. The concern raised  was  with
      regard to lack of  communication  between  Political  Office  and  the
      Community Development Workers. The programme concerns related  to  the
      lack  of  capacity  building  of  CDWs  within  the  Ditsobotla  Local
      Municipality.


      4.8 Senior Management


      The Senior Management of Ditsobotla Local Municipality in  support  of
      the intervention remarked on political management of the municipality.
      The major concerns being political interference in the administration,
      poor relationship between officials and  councillors,  utilization  of
      old financial systems, non materialization of the meeting  of  council
      sub committees, lack of performance management system,  lack  of  cash
      flow systems,  organisational  structure  not  aligned  to  integrated
      development planning, irregularities in supply chain  management  and,
      non filling of critical positions within the municipality.


      4.9 Select Committee Observations


      The delegation of the  Committee  had  observed  and  noted  the  good
      progress made by the Department and cooperation  demonstrated  by  the
      municipality. The intervention did not take executive obligation,  and
      it did not involve the appointment of an  Administrator.  A  Municipal
      Manager has been seconded and the intervention has only focused on key
      performance areas that are related  to  service  delivery.  Since  the
      secondment of the Municipal Manager, Ditsobotla Local Municipality has
      made progress in terms of resuscitating the labour forums  and  proper
      financial management.


      The general challenges within the Ditsobotla Local  Municipality  rest
      on the following salient areas which needs immediate address:


         • Municipal Finance Department;
         • Failure by the municipality to appoint the Municipal Manager and
           Chief Finance Officer;
         • Municipality’s absence of a personnel recruitment and  retention
           strategy;
         • The  council  delays  in  taking  resolutions  impacted  on  the
           appointment of Section 57 Managers; and
         • Absence of good working relations between  the  Offices  of  the
           Mayor and the Speaker.
5.    RECOMMENDATION AND WAY FORWARD

      Having visited Ditsobotla Local Municipality, the Select Committee on
      Local Government and Administration recommends that:


         • The National Council of Provinces approves the interventions
           issued by the North-West MEC for Developmental Local Government
           and Housing.


         • The Provincial Department of Developmental Local Government and
           Housing facilitate the appointment of a forensic investigation
           on alleged financial irregularities and mismanagement in
           Ditsobotla Local Municipality.


         • Provincial Department of Developmental Local Government and
           Housing ensures the fast tracking of the appointment of Section
           57 Managers and Municipal Manager.


         • Ditsobotla Local Municipality ensures the implementation of good
           labour practices between the municipal management and organised
           labour and the functioning of Labour Forum in the municipality.

         • Serious steps are taken by the Municipal Council to ensure that
           appropriate measures are undertaken in normalising the
           relationship between the Municipal Councillors and officials.

         • The Municipal Council ensures the functioning of the Municipal
           Committees.


         • Furthermore, the Ditsobotla Local Municipality should also
           facilitate the signing of performance management contract and
           assessment of Section 57 Managers and implementation of code of
           good conduct and working relationship among Councillors and
           officials.


         • The MEC’s office monitors the progress of Ditsobotla Local
           Municipality through the scrutinizing of periodic reports and a
           copy is forwarded to the NCOP.

         • The intervention be reviewed after a period of six months, which
           is by 30 April 2009.

      Report to be considered.

                         WEDNESDAY, 26 NOVEMBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Membership of Committees

    The following member has been appointed to serve on the Ad Hoc
     Committee on the National Youth Development Agency Bill:

       ANC


       Mkono, Mr D G

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

The first two reports below replace item 1 under “Committee Reports
–National Council of Provinces” published in the Announcements, Tablings
and Committee Reports of 19 November 2008, p 2304:

1.    First report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
      Affairs on the Judicial Matters Amendment Bill [B48B-2008 (Reprint)]
      (National Assembly), dated 18 November 2008:


          The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs,
          having considered the Judicial Matters Amendment Bill [B48B-2008
          (Reprint)] (National Assembly – sec 75) referred to it, reports
          that it agrees to the Bill.

2.    Second report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
      Affairs on the Judicial Matters Amendment Bill [B 48B-2008 (Reprint)]
      (National Assembly), dated 18 November 2008:

          The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs,
          having agreed to the Judicial Matters Amendment Bill [B48B-2008
          (Reprint)] (National Assembly – sec 75) referred to it, makes the
          following comments:


          The Committee recognises that the Bill is intended to address a
          whole range of practical issues in the administration of justice,
          which will, among others, enhance –


          (a)    access to justice;
          (b)    organisational efficiency; and
          (c)    the transformation of justice services.

      Although the Committee raised a number of questions and concerns, it
      was of the view that the Bill should be enacted and implemented as
      soon as possible because of the positive aspects contained in it.


      The Committee therefore requests the Department of Justice and
      Constitutional Development to report back to it within one year after
      the adoption of this report by the House on the following
      aspects/concerns which were raised during its deliberations on the
      Bill:

(a)   Clause 1: Concealment of birth: Although this provision, requiring,
      among others, that there must be a lawful burial order before a newly
      born child’s body can be disposed of, has been on the Statute Book
      since 1935, the Department is requested to investigate and report back
      on how this provision could impact on certain customary law practices
      in terms of which the bodies of newly born children are, in certain
      circumstances, disposed of, might seem to amount to the concealment of
      birth of a newly born child. The law must take these practices into
      account so as to ensure that criminal charges and prosecutions are
      only brought where there is an unlawful intention to conceal the birth
      of a child.

(b)   Clauses 5 to 8, 17 and 39: Admission of guilt fines: The Department
      must, during the implementation of these provisions, consult with
      other stakeholders, for instance the Department of Transport in
      respect of road traffic offences and the provincial and local spheres
      of government to ensure that there is no conflict in what these
      various stakeholders are striving to achieve in implementing their
      respective policies.

(c)   Clause 9: Amendment of section 60 of the Criminal Procedure Act,
      1977: Payment of bail money: The Committee requests the Department to
      explore other methods of payment of bail money so as to ensure that
      the latest technology is used to its full potential, for instance
      payment of bail money by means of credit cards. Every effort must be
      made to ensure that cash payments are used only where necessary.

(d)   Clause 18: Amendment of section 18 of the Matrimonial Property Act,
      1984: The Department is requested to investigate and report back on
      how the law in this regard could impact negatively on children who
      might be deprived of benefits accruing to them from their parents’
      estates as a result of their parents’ litigation. The impact of the
      law in this regard on spouses in terms of customary law must also be
      investigated and reported on.

(e)   Clauses 23 to 26: Amendments to the Debt Collectors Act, 1998: The
      Committee raised a general concern that persons who land themselves in
      debt often have to pay enormous amounts of interest when repaying
      their debts. The Department is requested to report back on how the
      Debt Collectors Act is intended to address this problem and whether
      its provisions are adequate in this regard, and if not, what further
      measures can be put in place to ensure that the Act achieves its
      goals.

(f)   Clause 36: Amendment of section 42 of the Criminal Law (Sexual
      Offences and Related Matters) Amendment Act, 2007: While the Criminal
      Law (Sexual Offences and Related Matters) Amendment Act, 2007,
      correctly singles out sexual offences committed against children and
      mentally disabled persons, providing for the particulars of
      perpetrators to be included in the National Register for Sex
      Offenders, it would seem as if sexual offences against elderly persons
      and infirm persons do not seem to receive the same attention. The
      Department is requested to revert to the Committee on this aspect.

3.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs
      on the Amending Draft Notice and Schedule submitted in terms of
      section 2(4) of the Judges Remuneration and Conditions of Employment
      Act, 2001 (Act No 47 of 2001), determining the rate at which salaries
      are payable to Constitutional Court judges and judges annually, dated
      18 November 2008: The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
      Affairs, having considered the Amending Draft Notice and Schedule
      submitted in terms of section 2(4) of the Judges Remuneration and
      Conditions of Employment Act, 2001 (Act No 47 of 2001), determining
      the rate at which salaries are payable to Constitutional Court judges
      and judges annually, referred to it, recommends that the Council
      approves the said Amending Draft Notice and Schedule.

Report to be considered.

4.    Report of the Ad Hoc Committee to consider legislation on the
      National Youth Development Agency on the National Youth Development
      Agency Bill [B82—2008] (National Assembly—sec 75), dated 26 November
      2008:


      The Ad Hoc Committee to consider legislation on the National Youth
      Development Agency, having considered the subject of the National
      Youth Development Agency Bill [Bill 82—2008] (National Assembly—sec
      75), referred to it, reports that it agrees to the Bill.

                         THURSDAY, 27 NOVEMBER 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent


    (1)    Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 27 November
    2008:


               a) Judicial Matters Amendment Bill [B 48B – 2008 (Reprint)]
                  (National Assembly – sec 75).


               b) National Youth Development Agency Bill [B 82 – 2008]
                  (National Assembly – sec 75).
National Council of Provinces

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

     1.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance for consideration and report:


        (a)      Annual Report of the Bank Supervision Department of the
             South African Reserve Bank for 2007.

        (b)      Annual Report of the Registrar of Friendly Societies for
             2006.

      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Education
        and Recreation for consideration and report:


     2.     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 18 – Department of Sport
        and Recreation South Africa for 2007-2008, including the Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information of Vote 18 for 2007-2008 [RP 250-2008].


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 13 – Department of
             Arts and Culture for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information of Vote 13 for 2007-2008.


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Quality
             Assurance in General and Further Education and Training –
             Umalusi for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.


        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Council for Natural Scientific Professions for 2007-2008,
             including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2007-2008.


        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             National Energy Research Institute (Pty) Ltd for 2007-2008,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008.


        (f)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Arts
             Council of South Africa for 2007-2008, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 188-2008].


    3.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Pebble Bed Modular
             Reactor (Pty) Limited for 2007-2008, including the Report of
             the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-
             2008.


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of Eskom Holdings Limited
             for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.


    4.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report. The
        report is also referred to the Select Committee on Land and
        Environmental Affairs in accordance with its mandate:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of Agriculture Sector Education
             and Training Authority for 2007-2008, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-2008 [RP 67-2008].


    5.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report. The
        reports are also referred to the Select Committee on Finance in
        accordance with its mandate:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Finance,
             Accounting, Management Consulting and other Financial Services
             Sector Education and Training Authority for 2007-2008,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 74-
             2008].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Banking Sector Education
             and Training Authority (Bank-Seta) for 2007-2008, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2007-2008 [RP 68-2008].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Insurance Sector
             Education and Training Authority (Inseta) for 2007-2008,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 79-
             2008].


    6.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance for consideration:


        (a)      Local Government Budgets and Expenditure Review (2008),
             2003/04 - 2009/10 [RP 113-2008].

        (b)      Municipal Budgets for the 2008 Medium-Term Revenue and
             Expenditure Framework (MTREF).

    7.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Productivity SA for
             2007-2008, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
             the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Media, Advertising,
             Publishing, Printing and Packaging Sector Education and
             Training Authority (MAPPP-Seta) for 2007-2008, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 81-2008].


    8.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report. The
        report is also referred to the Select Committee on Economic and
        Foreign Affairs in accordance with its mandate:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements Clothing, Textiles,
             Footwear and Leather Sector Education and Training Authority
             (CTFL-Seta) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008 [RP 70-2008].



    9.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Land and Environmental Affairs for consideration:


        (a)      2007-2008 Yearly Report to Parliament in terms of section
             26(1) of the National Environmental Management Act (NEMA), 1998
             (Act No 107 of 1998).

        (b)      2005-2006 Yearly Report to Parliament in terms of section
             26(1) of the National Environmental Management Act (NEMA), 1998
             (Act No 107 of 1998).

        (c)      General Notice No 1052 published in Government Gazette No
             31367 dated 27 August 2008: Nominations for appointment of
             suitable persons to serve as members of the Board of South
             African National Parks, in terms of the National Environmental
             Management: Protected Areas Act, 2003 (Act No 57 of 2003).

        (d)      Government Notice No 916 published in Government Gazette
             No 31360 dated 29 August 2008: Threatened or Protected Species:
             Second Amendments Regulation – 2008, in terms of the National
             Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of
             2004).

        (e)      Government Notice No 917 published in Government Gazette
             No 31360 dated 29 August 2008: Threatened or Protected Species:
             Second Amendments Regulation – 2008, in terms of the National
             Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of
             2004).

        (f)      Government Notice No 949 published in Government Gazette
             No 31380 dated 5 September 2008: Declaration of intention to
             propose extensions from, and a buffer zone for the fossil
             hominid sites of Sterkfontein, Swartkrans, Kromdraai and the
             environs (Cradle of Humankind), in terms of the National
             Environmental Management: Protected Areas Act, 2003 (Act No 57
             of 2003) and the World Heritage Convention Act, 1999 (Act No 49
             of 1999).


        (g)      General Notice No 1138 published in Government Gazette No
             31415 dated 15 September 2008: Second Edition Environmental
             Implementation and Management Plan (EIMP).


        (h)      Government Notice No 949 published in Government Gazette
             No 31380 dated 5 September 2008: Declaration of intention to
             propose extensions to and exclusions from, and a buffer zone
             for the fossil hominid sites of Sterkfontein, Swartkrans,
             Kromdraai and the environs (Cradle of Humankind), in term of
             the National Environmental Management: Protected Areas Act,
             2003 (Act No 57 of 2003).

        (i)      General Notice No 1138 published in Government Gazette No
             31415 dated 15 September 2008: Second Edition Environmental
             Implementation and Management Plan (EIMP) – March 2008.

        (j)      Government Notice No 1054 published in Government Gazette
             No 31461 dated 3 October 2008: Declaration of Land to be part
             of Augrabies Falls National Park, in terms of the National
             Environmental Management: Protected Areas Act, 2003 (Act No 57
             of 2003).

        (k)      Government Notice No 1055 published in Government Gazette
             No 31461 dated 3 October 2008: Declaration of Land to be part
             of Agulhas National Park, in terms of the National
             Environmental Management: Protected Areas Act, 2003 (Act No 57
             of 2003).

        (l)      Government Notice No 1056 published in Government Gazette
             No 31461 dated 3 October 2008: Declaration of Land to be part
             of Mapungubwe National Park, in terms of the National
             Environmental Management: Protected Areas Act, 2003 (Act No 57
             of 2003).

        (m)      Government Notice No 1057 published in Government Gazette
             No 31461 dated 3 October 2008: Declaration of Land to be part
             of Namaqua National Park, in terms of the National
             Environmental Management: Protected Areas Act, 2003 (Act No 57
             of 2003).

        (n)      Government Notice No 1058 published in Government Gazette
             No 31461 dated 3 October 2008: Declaration of Land to be part
             of Marakele National Park, in terms of the National
             Environmental Management: Protected Areas Act, 2003 (Act No 57
             of 2003).

        (o)      General Notice No 1264 published in Government Gazette No
             31495 dated 6 October 2008: Submission of names of persons fit
             to be appointed to serve as members of the South African
             Tourism Board, in terms of the Tourism Act, 1993 (Act No 72 of
             1993).

        (p)      Government Notice No 1108 published in Government Gazette
             No 31516 dated 17 October 2008: Regulations on the Stilbaai
             Marine Protected Area, in terms of the Marine Living Resources
             Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of 1998).

        (q)      Government Notice No 1109 published in Government Gazette
             No 31517 dated 17 October 2008: Notice declaring the Stilbaai
             Marine Protected Area under section 43 to be a marine
             protected area, in terms of the Marine Living Resources Act,
             1998 (Act No 18 of 1998).

        (r)      Government Notice No 1110 published in Government Gazette
             No 31517 dated 17 October 2008: Draft notice of fees payable
             in respect of applications for, and the issuing or granting of
             rights, permits and licences, in terms of section 25 of the
             Marine Living Resources Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of 1998) for
             recreational scuba diving in the Maputaland and St Lucia
             Marine Protected Areas; and in the Stilbaai and proposed
             Border Region Marine Protected Area upon declaration.
    10.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs and the Joint Standing
        Committee on Defence:


        (a)      The President of the Republic submitted a letter dated 31
             July 2008 to the Speaker of the National Assembly informing
             Members of the Assembly of the employment of the South African
             National Defence Force in Uganda, for service in fulfilment of
             the International Obligations of the Republic of South Africa
             towards the Republic of Uganda.

    11.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report. The
        report is also referred to the Select Committee on Security and
        Constitutional affairs in accordance with its mandate:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Safety and Security
             Sector Education and Training Authority (SAS-Seta) for 2007-
             2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008
             [RP 84-2008].


    12.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report. The
        reports are also referred to the Select Committee on Economic and
        Foreign Affairs in accordance with its mandate:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Manufacturing,
             Engineering and Related Services Sector Education and Training
             Authority (MER-Seta) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-2008 [RP 82-2008].


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of Services Sector
             Education and Training Authority for 2007-2008, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 88-2008].

        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the Food and Beverages
             Manufacturing Industry Sector Education and Training Authority
             for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
             2008 [RP 75-2008].

        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the Wholesale and
             Retail Sector Education and Training Authority for 2007-2008,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 88-
             2008].

    13. The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Labour
        and Public Enterprises for consideration and report. The report is
        also referred to the Select Committee on Land and Environmental
        Affairs in accordance with its mandate:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Forest Industries
             Education and Training Authority (FIETA) for 2007-2008,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 76-
             2008].

    14.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Department of Labour –
             Vote 16 for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2007-2008 and the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information of the
             Sheltered Employment Factories for 2007-2008 [RP 60-2008].

    15.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises and the Joint Monitoring Committee on
        Improvement of Quality of life and Status of Children, Youth and
        Disabled Persons for consideration and report:


          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Umsobomvu Youth Fund
             for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.

    16.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report. The
        report is also referred to the Select Committee on Public Services
        in accordance with its mandate:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Transport Education and
             Training Authority for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-2008 [RP 87-2008].

    17.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report. The
        report is also referred to the Select Committee on Economic and
        Foreign Affairs in accordance with its mandate:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of Mining Qualifications
             Authority for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2007-2008 [RP 86-2008].

    18.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Alexkor for 2007-2008,
             including the Report of the Independent Auditors for 2007-2008.

    19.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Land
        and Environmental Affairs for consideration:


        (a)      Government Notice No 808 published in the Government
             Gazette No 31281 dated 1 August 2008: Intention to declare
             certain land situated in the Harrismith and Bethlehem
             Registration Division, Free State Area as part of the Golden
             Gate Highlands National Park, made in terms of section 33(1)(a)
             of the National Environment: Protected Areas Act, 2003 (Act No
             57 of 2003).


    20.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Land
        and Environmental Affairs:
        (a)      Government Notice No 835 published in the Government
             Gazette No 31301 dated 8 August 2008: National Moratorium on
             the trade of individual Rhinoceros Horns within South Africa,
             made in terms of section 57(2) of the National Environment:
             Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of 2004).

    21.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Land and Environmental Affairs for consideration and report:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Isimangaliso
             Wetland Park Authority for 2007-2008, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-2008 and the Report of the Auditor-General
             on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of the
             People and Parks Development for 2007-2008.

        (b)      The Report and Financial Statements of Onderstepoort
             Biological Products Limited for 2007-2008, including the Report
             of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for
             2007-2008.

    22.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for
             Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) for 2007-2008,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 55-
             2008].

          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Compensation Fund for
             2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008
             [RP 64-2008].

          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Unemployment Insurance
             Fund (UIF) for 2006-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2007-2008 [RP 201-2008].

        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Economic
             Development and Labour Council (NEDLAC) for 2007-2008,
             including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2007-2008.

        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 30 – Department of
             Public Enterprises for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information of Vote 30 for 2007-2008 [RP 156-2008].


        (f)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Forestry Company Limited (SAFCOL) for 2007-2008, including the
             Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
             for 2007-2008.

        (g)      Report and Financial Statements of South African Airways
             (Proprietary) Limited (SAA) for 2007-2008, including the Report
             of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for
             2007-2008.


        (h)      Report and Financial Statements of Broadband Infraco (Pty)
             Limited for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.

        (i)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Broadcasting Corporation Limited (SABC) for 2007-2008,
             including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2007-2008.


    23.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report and to
        the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Chemical Industries
             Education and Training Authority (CHIETA) for 2007-2008,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 69-
             2008].


    24.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the International
             Marketing Council of South Africa (IMC) for 2007-2008,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 144-
             2007].


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of Sentech Limited for
             2007-2008,   including the Report of the Independent Auditors
             on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.
        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African Post
             Office Limited for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.


        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the Independent
             Communications Authority of South Africa for 2007-2008,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 239-
             2008].


     25.    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Land and Environmental Affairs for consideration and report:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 26 – Department of
             Environmental Affairs and Tourism for 2007-2008, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information of Vote 26 for 2007-2008 [RP 53-2008].


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of South African Tourism
             for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
             2008.

        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Weather Service (SAWS) for 2007-2008, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-2008 [RP 197-2008].

        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             National Biodiversity Institute (SANBI) for 2007-2008,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008.


        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of the Marine Living
             Resources Fund for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-2008 [RP 190-2008].


        (f)      Report and Financial Statements of the National
            Environmental Advisory Forum (NEAF) for 2007-2008 [RP 101-
            2008].


    26.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and report:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the
             Public Protector for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-2008 [RP 211-2008].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of Parliament of the South
             African Human Rights Commission for 2007-2008, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 89-2008].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Legal Aid Board for 2007-
             2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008
             [RP 97-2008].
          d) Report and Financial Statements of the Special Investigating
             Unit (SIU) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2007-2008 [RP 214-2008].


    27.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Social Services for consideration:


        (a)      Annual Performance Plan (Revised) of the Department of
             Home Affairs for 2007-2008.

    28.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration:


        (a)      Report of the Public Protector on an Investigation into
             the Causes of Delays in the Administration of Criminal Appeals
             lodged by Prisoners [Report No 10 of 2008-2009].

          b) Report of the Public Protector on Systematic Investigation
             into the Deficiencies with the Processing of Pension Benefits
             payable to Former Government Employees and their Dependants
             [Report No 11 of 2008-2009].

          c) Report of the Public Protector on an Investigation into an
             Allegation of the Misappropriation of Public Funds by the
             Kungwini Local Municipality in the Gauteng Province [Report No
             12 of 2008-2009].


        (d)      Draft amendment regulations made in terms of Public
             Funding of Represented Political Parties Act, 1997 (Act No. 103
             of 1997), and submitted to Parliament in terms of section 10 of
             the Act.


    29.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Social Services for consideration and report:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Electoral
             Commission for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2007-2008.

    30.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Education and Recreation for consideration and report:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Department of
             Education Vote 14 for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-2008 [RP 220-2008].


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Student
             Financial Aid Scheme for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-2008.

        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Qualifications Authority for 2007-2008, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-2008 [RP 149-2008].
        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the Education Labour
             Relations Council for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-2008 and the Report of the Auditor-General
             on the Transformation Fund of the Education Labour Relations
             Council for 2007-2008 [RP 136-2008].

        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of the Council on Higher
             Education for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2007-2008.

    31.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report. The
        report is also referred to the Select Committee on Local Government
        and Administration in accordance with its mandate:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Local Government
             Sector Education and Training Authority for 2007-2008,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 80-
             2008].

    32.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report. The
        report is also referred to the Select Committee on Economic and
        Foreign Affairs in accordance with its mandate:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Energy Sector
             Education and Training Authority for 2007-2008, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 73-2008].
    33.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report. The
        report is also referred to the Select Committee on Social Services
        in accordance with its mandate:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Health and Welfare
             Sector Education and Training Authority for 2007-2008,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 77-
             2008].

    34.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report. The
        report is also referred to the Select Committee on Education and
        Recreation in accordance with its mandate:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Education Training and
             Development Practices Sector Education and Training Authority
             for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-
             2008 [RP 72-2008].

    35.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report. The
        report is also referred to the Select Committee on Land and
        Environmental Affairs and the Select Committee Education and
        Recreation in accordance with its mandate:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Tourism,
             Hospitality and Sport Education and Training Authority (Theta)
             for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements and Performance information for 2007-
             2008 [RP 128-2008].

    36.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report. The
        report is also referred to the Select Committee on Education and
        Recreation in accordance with its mandate:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Information
             Systems, Electronics and Telecommunications Technologies Sector
             Education and Training Authority (ISETT-Seta) for 2007-2008,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 78-
             2008].

    37.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Education and Recreation for consideration and report:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African State
             Theatre for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2007-2008 [RP 224-2008].


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the
             Msunduzi/Voortrekker and Ncome Museums for 2007-2008, including
             the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
             and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [PR 160-2008].


        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the National English
             Literary Museum for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-2008.

        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the Market Theatre
             Foundation for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2007-2008 [RP 102-2008].

        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of Blind SA for 2007-2008,
             including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2007-2008.


        (f)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Museum –
             Bloemfontein for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2007-2008.


        (g)      Report and Financial Statements of the Iziko Museums of
             Cape Town   for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2007-2008 [RP 185-2008].


          h) Report and Financial Statements of the War Museum of the Boer
             Republics for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.


          i) Report and Financial Statements of the National Film and Video
             Foundation (NFVF) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-2008 [RP 176-2008].


          j) Report and Financial Statements of Artscape for 2007-2008,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 189-
             2008].

          k) Report and Financial Statements of The Freedom Park Trust for
             2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008.

          l) Report and Financial Statements of the William Humphreys Art
             Gallery for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2007-2008.

          m) Report and Financial Statements of Business and Arts South
             Africa (BASA) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008
             [RP 166-2008].

          n) Report and Financial Statements of the Natal Museum for 2007-
             2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements for 2007-2008 [RP 158-2008].

          o) Report and Financial Statements of the Pan South African
             Language Board (PANSALB) 2007-2008, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-2008 [RP 137-2008].

          p) Report and Financial Statements of the National Heritage
             Council for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2007-2008 [RP 203-2008].

          q) Report and Financial Statements of The Playhouse Company for
             2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008.



          r) Report and Financial Statements of the Nelson Mandela National
             Museum for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2007-2008 [RP 202-2008].

          s) Report and Financial Statements of the Afrikaans Language
             Museum en Language Monument for 2007-2008, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 161-2008].

          t) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Heritage
             Resources Agency (SAHRA) for 2007-2008, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-2008 [RP 192-2008].

          u) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Library
             for the Blind for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-2008.

          v) Report and Financial Statements of the Northern Flagship
             Institution for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2007-2008 [RP 164-2008].

          w) Report and Financial Statements of the Windybrow Centre for the
             Arts for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General
             on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
             2007-2008.

          x) Report and Financial Statements of the National Library of
             South Africa for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2007-2008 [RP 222-2008].


          y) Report and Financial Statements of the Luthuli Museum for 2007-
             2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008
             [RP 181-2008].

    38.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance for consideration and report:


        (a)      Annual Financial Statements of the Corporation for Public
             Deposits for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Accounting
             Standards Board for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 109-2008].

        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the
             Auditor-General for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 235-2008].

        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the Government
             Employees Pension Fund (GEPF) for 2007-2008, including the
             Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
             for 2007-2008 [RP 148-2008].


        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of the Reconstruction and
             Development Programme Fund for 2007-2008, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2007-
             2008 [RP 269-2008].

    39.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance:


        (a)      Government Notice No 871 published in Government Gazette
             No 31336 dated 15 August 2008: Appointment of Board members of
             the Co-operative Banks Development Agency, in terms of section
             58 of the Co-operative Banks Act, 2007 (Act No 40 of 2007).


        (b)      Government Notice No 887 published in Government Gazette
             No 31342 dated 22 August 2008: Designation of Institution of
             which the activities do not fall within the meaning of “The
             Business of a Bank” (“Financial Service Co-operative”), in
             terms of the Banks Act, 1990 (Act No 94 of 1990).


        (c)      Government Notice No 880 published in Government Gazette
             No 31342 dated 22 August 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
             1/1/1360), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
             91 of 1964).


        (d)      Government Notice No 881 published in Government Gazette
             No 31342 dated 22 August 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No
             2/305), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
             of 1964).


        (e)      Government Notice No 882 published in Government Gazette
             No 31342 dated 22 August 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
             3/634), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
             of 1964).


        (f)      Government Notice No 883 published in Government Gazette
             No 31342 dated 22 August 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
             3/635), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
             of 1964).


        (g)      Government Notice No 884 published in Government Gazette
             No 31342 dated 22 August 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No
             4/314), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
             of 1964).


        (h)      Government Notice No 885 published in Government Gazette
             No 31342 dated 22 August 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
             1/1/1359), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
             91 of 1964).


        (i)      Government Notice No 886 published in Government Gazette
             No 31342 dated 22 August 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No
             3/633), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
             of 1964).


        (j)      Government Notice No 895 published in Government Gazette
             No 31342 dated 22 August 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
             1/1/1361), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
             91 of 1964).


        (k)      Proclamation No 818 published in Government Gazette No
             31292 dated 1 August 2008: Commencement dates in terms of the
             Co-operatives Banks Act, 2007 (Act No 40 of 2007).


        (l)      Government Notice No 929 published in Government Gazette
             No 31381 dated 29 August 2008: Appointment and re-appointment
             of chairpersons of the Tax Board for the hearing of income tax
             appeals, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of
             1962).


        (m)      Government Notice No 930 published in Government Gazette
             No 31381 dated 29 August 2008: Determination of interest rate
             for purpose of paragraph (a) of the definition of “official
             rate”, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of
             1962).


        (n)      Government Notice No 931 published in Government Gazette
             No 31381 dated 29 August 2008: Determination of a date upon
             which section 22(1)(b) of the Taxation Laws Second Amendment
             Act,  2008 (Act No 4 of 2008).


        (o)      Government Notice No 929 published in Government Gazette
             No 31381 dated 29 August 2008: Determination of amounts for
             purposes of the Military Pensions Act, 1976 (Act No 84 of
             1976).


        (p)      Proclamation No 42 published in Government Gazette No
             31525 dated 20 October 2008: Commencement of the Diamond Export
             Levy Act, 2007 (Act No 15 of 2007) and section 21 of the
             Diamond Export Levy (Administration) Act, 2007 (Act No 14 of
             2007).


        (q)      Government Notice No R1140 published in Government Gazette
             No 31529 dated 23 October 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
             1/1/1365), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
             91 of 1964).


    40.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance for consideration:


        (a)      Government Notice No 878 published in Government Gazette
             No 31346 dated 22 August 2008: Municipal Asset Transfer
             Regulations, in terms of the Local Government: Municipal
             Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

        (b)      National Treasury – Consolidated Financial Information for
             the year ended 31 March 2008 [RP 268-2008].

        (c)      Draft Regulations issued under Section 75B of the Income
             Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962) prescribing administrative
             penalties in respect of non-compliance.

    41.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Economic and Foreign Affairs for consideration and report:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Competition
             Tribunal for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance information
             for 2007-2008 [RP 183-2008].

        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Consumer
             Tribunal for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2007-2008 [RP 217-2008].


        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the Export Credit
             Insurance Corporation of South Africa Limited for 2007-2008,
             including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2007-2008.

        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             National Accreditation System (SANAS) for 2007-2008, including
             the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
             Statements for 2007-2008 [RP 199-2008].


        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Credit
             Regulator (NCR) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-2008 [RP 140-2008].


        (f)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Bureau of Standards for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-2008 [RP 208-2008].


        (g)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African Micro-
             finance Apex Fund for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-2008 [RP 111-2008].


        (h)      Report and Financial Statements of the Companies and
             Intellectual Property Registration Office for 2007-2008,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 187-
             2008].

        (i)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Metrology
             Institute of South Africa for 2007-2008, including the Report
             of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 221-2008].


        (j)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Gambling
             Board for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2007-2008 [RP 125-2008].

        (k)      Report and Financial Statements of the Industrial
             Development Corporation of South Africa Limited (IDC) for 2007-
             2008, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2007-2008.


        (l)      Report and Financial Statements of Khula Enterprise
             Finance Limited for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008
             [RP 210-2008].


        (m)      Report and Financial Statements of the Competition
             Commission for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2007-2008 [RP 107-2008].

        (n)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Lotteries
             Board for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2007-2008.


        (o)      Report and Financial Statements of the Support Programme
             for Industrial Innovation (SPII) for 2007-2008, including the
             Reports of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
             for 2007-2008.

          p) Report and Financial Statements of the International Trade
             Administration Commission of South Africa for 2007-2008,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2007-2008 [RP 207-
             2008].

          q) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Quality
             Institute for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.



        (r)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Nuclear
             Regulator (NNR) for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-2008 [RP 36-2008].

        (s)      Report of the Mine Health and Safety Inspectorate for 2007-
             2008 [RP 261-2008].

    42.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Land and Environmental Affairs for consideration and report:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Air Traffic and
             Navigation Services Company Limited (ATNS) for 2007-2008,
             including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2007-2008.

        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of Inkomati Catchment
             Management Agency for 2007-2008, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2007-2008
             [RP 138-2008].
        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of Amatola Water for the
             year ended 30 June 2008, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year
             ended 30 June 2008.


         (d)     Report and Financial Statements of Umgeni Water for the
             year ended 30 June 2008, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year
             ended 30 June 2008.

    43.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Social Services for consideration and report:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Medical
             Schemes for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2007-2008 [RP 96-2008].


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Health
             Laboratory Service (NHLS) for 2007-2008, including the Report
             of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for
             2007-2008.


        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Medical Research Council (MRC) for 2007-2008, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2007-2008 [RP 173-2008].

        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Social Security Agency for 2007-2008, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-2008 [RP 108-2008].

    44.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and report:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 19 – Department of
             Correctional Services for 2007-2008, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information of Vote 19 for 2007-2008 [RP 217-2007].

    45.     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Economic and Foreign Affairs:


        (a)      Government Notice No 732 published in Government Gazette
             No 31226 dated 4 July 2008: Guidelines for the sub-programme
             Enterprise Investment Programme (Manufacturing Investment
             Programme).


        (b)      Government Notice No 733 published in Government Gazette
             No 31226 dated 4 July 2008: Guidelines for the sub-programme
             Enterprise Investment Programme (Tourism Support Programme).

        (c)      Government Notice No 758 published in Government Gazette
             No 31232 dated 18 July 2008: Accounting Officer – profession
             whose members qualify in terms of section 60: Chartered
             Institute of Business Management, in terms of the Close
             Corporation Act, 1984 (Act No 69 of 1984).

        (d)      Government Notice No 772 published in Government Gazette
             No 31247 dated 18 July 2008: Incorporation of an external
             company as a company in the Republic of South Africa: Rocsi
             Holdings (Pty) Ltd, in terms of the Companies Act, 1973 (Act
             No 61 of 1973).

        (e)      Government Notice No 836 published in Government Gazette
             No 31301 dated 8 August 2008: Standards matters, in terms of
             Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).

        (f)      Government Notice No 924 published in Government Gazette
             No 31371 dated 29 August 2008: Media, Advertising and
             Communication M (MAC) Sector Charter on Black Economic
             Empowerment, in terms of Broad-Based Black Economic
             Empowerment Act, 2003 (Act No 53 of 2003).

        (g)      Government Notice No 957 published in Government Gazette
             No 31402 dated 5 September 2008: Incorporation of an external
             company as a company in the Republic of South Africa: HIS
             (PTY) LTD, in terms of Companies Act, 1973 (Act No 61 of
             1973).

        (h)      Government Notice No 1021 published in Government Gazette
             No 31443 dated 26 September 2008: Standards matters, in terms
             of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).
    46.     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Education and Recreation for consideration:


        (a)      Revised Strategic Plan of the Department of Education for
             2008-2012 and the Operational Plans of the Department of
             Education for 2008/9.

TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Presidents’ Fund for 2007-
        2008, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements for 2007-2008 [RP 245-2008].

National Council of Provinces

1. The Chairperson

   (a)      The President of the Republic submitted the following letter
        dated 17 November 2008 to the Chairperson of the National Council
        of Provinces informing Members of the Council of the employment of
        the South African National Defence Force in co-operation with the
        South African Police Service:


        EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE FOR A
        SERVICE IN CO-OPERATION WITH THE SOUTH AFRICAN SERVICE


        This serves to inform the National Council of Provinces that I have
        authorised the employment of the South African National Defence
        Force (SANDF) personnel, for a service in co-operation with the
        South African Police Service in prevention and combating of crime
        and maintenance and preservation of law and order within the
        Republic of South Africa during the FIFA Confederation Cup draw,
        which is going to be held at Sandton Convention Centre from 19
        November to 24 November 2008.


        This employment is authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(a) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002).


        A total of thirty (30) SANDF members will be deployed at Sandton
        Convention Centre as from 19 November to 34 November 2008.


        I will communicate this report to members of the National Assembly,
        and wish to request that you bring the contents hereof to the
        attention of the National Council of Provinces.


        Regards


        signed
        K P MOTLANTHE


