---
title: 'National Assembly - 11 March 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2008-03-11
---

TUESDAY, 11 MARCH 2008

                                    ____





                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:01.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Dr S M VAN DYK: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that I intend moving
the following motion:

   That the House debates the performances, bonuses and bonus shares paid to
   Eskom management and their justification for these payouts.

Thank you.

                          DRAMATISTS AGAINST CRIME

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr H P MALULEKA (ANC): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Two weeks ago, the youth
of Mafikeng in the North West province embarked on a campaign aimed at
using drama as an outlet for young people to avoid crime and educate their
peers about the national efforts against crime. The event was known as
Dramatists Against Crime.

Thousands of youth attended the festival. The festival was established by a
group of young people in Gauteng province and was later on introduced in
other provinces with the same aim of raising awareness among their peers in
other provinces.

The Department of Sport, Arts and Culture, the National Arts Council, ABSA
and The Sowetan have since sponsored the initiative. Members of the SA
Police Service in the province have announced that they will be leading a
march against crime on 27 March 2008.

As the ANC, be it in the communities, political organisations, business or
civil society, we support this campaign by the youth to encourage them to
mobilise themselves against crime and to volunteer to assist the police. I
thank you, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

              THE CABINET AND ESKOM’S HANDLING OF POWER CRISIS

                            (Member’s Statement)
Adv H C SCHMIDT (DA): Madam Speaker, last week President Mbeki stood here,
clearly uninformed about Eskom’s handling of the power crisis and the
commitment his Cabinet had made on 25 January not to freeze construction
projects.

South Africa is capable of acting in unity to confront common national
challenges such as the electricity crisis. However, the people need a
government that is accountable to them to depend on rather than a self-
serving government that closes ranks, using the defence of so-called
“collective” responsibility.

The raft of contradictory statements from Eskom and the Mbeki Cabinet show
clearly that neither can be trusted to supply answers to several burning
questions. These range from Eskom’s management of its coal stockpiles to
why Eskom appears to be selling electricity at below cost to bulk consumers
while taxing private consumers and concealing resultant losses to safeguard
directors’ bonuses.

The DA therefore reaffirms its call for an independent commission of
inquiry into the conduct of Eskom’s management, including in its brief
whether negotiations should be held with relevant mining companies such as
BHP Billiton to mutually agree to terminate electricity supply to aluminium
smelters in order to save roughly 2 700 megawatts of electricity. This is
enough to safeguard the 400 000 jobs which are currently at risk in the
mining sector. I thank you.
            UPLIFTMENT OF PREVIOUSLY DISADVANTAGED SOUTH AFRICANS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M B SKOSANA (IFP): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is imperative that
members of this House remain ever vigilant about the substantive freedoms
enjoyed by poor, marginalised and underdeveloped South Africans. A truly
free and egalitarian African democratic society can only be realised
through the total emancipation of the historic, political, economic,
social, psychic and linguistic aspects of the existence of the formerly
oppressed.

For this reason the IFP agrees with the Minister of Arts and Culture, Dr
Pallo Jordan, that all the official languages must be integrated into all
domains of our life particularly in business transactions and economic
growth and development. We believe that failure to do so perpetuates the
linguistic, cultural and economic domination of English-and Afrikaans-
speaking South Africans and enhances the continued social and economic
deprivation of the majority.

We also agree with the Minister of Science and Technology, Mr Mosibudi
Mangena, that the ravages of superiority and inferiority complexes continue
to linger dangerously in the minds of both the former oppressor and the
former oppressed, thereby rolling back the frontiers of the freedom won
through the long and hard African struggle. I thank you, Madam Speaker.
[Applause.]

                 ESTABLISHMENT OF ISIVANDE DEVELOPMENT FUND

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N F MATHIBELA (ANC): Madam Speaker, the establishment of a Women’s
Project Fund and the strengthening of initiatives such as the Malibongwe
Project are intended to assist with creating an enabling environment for
women.

A dialogue on socio-economic issues affecting women was held on 8 March
2008. It was jointly hosted by the Departments of Arts and Culture and
Trade and Industry and the Presidency. It was held under the theme “A Fight
Against Poverty: A Partnership for Investing in Women and Girls to
Eradicate Poverty”. The dialogue brought women and stakeholders together to
debate socioeconomic issues affecting women, with specific reference to
poverty.

This occasion provided an opportunity to connect women across the globe and
united them in renewing their pledge for solidarity in the relentless
pursuit of emancipation, promotion of empowerment, demand for equality and
eradication of poverty. As part of the national effort to empower women,
the Department of Trade and Industry has announced the establishment of a
Hundred Million Fund known as ``Isivande’’ that is aimed at supporting
women-owned enterprises.

Through this and other measures, the ANC-led government continues to
intensify collaboration efforts with the people to ensure that every target
of the national war room against poverty is realised. I thank you.
[Applause.]

                      INVESTIGATION OF HIGH FOOD PRICES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S N SIGCAU (UDM): The UDM notes that economic developments over the past
year are placing increasing pressure on the household budgets of all South
Africans. Rising interest rates are making it more expensive to repay
debts. Inflation is driving the cost of transport and food up. It is
especially working class and poor households that are being pushed towards
destitution.

In this difficult environment, we have seen the Competition Commission
exposing price-fixing in the bread industry and questions are now being
asked about the prices of other basic food commodities. But the truth is
that prices have gone through the roof across the board and are out of all
proportion considering the rate of inflation.

We appreciate that the Competition Commission is looking into isolated
cases on a case-by-case basis but it seems necessary to institute a broad
investigation into food prices, such as the one that was conducted several
years ago.

Again, there are signs that certain producers and traders are engaged in
ridiculous price-fixing schemes and are fleecing people who have no choice
but to buy these basic commodities. If that is the case, we must expose
these cruel and greedy people. They must face the full force of this
society’s ridicule and must be prosecuted. I thank you.

                      INVESTIGATION OF CHANCELLOR HOUSE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr P W A MULDER (VF Plus): Mevrou die Speaker, die VF Plus wil die ANC
gelukwens met die aankondiging van hul tesourier-generaal, dr Matthews
Phosa, dat ’n forensiese ondersoek na alle bedrywighede van die
beleggingsmaatskappy Chancellor House gedoen gaan word. Die VF Plus
verwelkom ook die ondersoek van die Openbare Beskermer na Chancellor House
en veral die ondersoek na beweringe dat groot Eskom-tenders aan
ondernemings wat bande met Chancellor House het, toegeken is.

Die belangrikste rede vir die probleme rondom Chancellor House is die
huidige gebrek aan deursigtigheid ten opsigte van die finansiering van
politieke partye. Deursigtigheid en die demokrasie veronderstel dat
politieke partye op ’n gelyke vlak met mekaar moet meeding, om fondse en
kiesersteun te kry tydens verkiesings. As Chancellor House winste uit swart
bemagtigingstransaksies van die regering na die ANC teruggekanaliseer het,
veroorsaak dit, sonder twyfel, ’n konflik van belange. Dit bring die hele
wese van demokrasie in Suid-Afrika baie ernstig in die gedrang.

Om bogenoemde redes en in die belang van demokrasie in Suid-Afrika, wens
die VF Plus die nuwe ANC-leierskap geluk met hulle ondersoek na Chancellor
House, en eintlik indirek ook na die ou ANC-leierskap. Ons wil opreg die
hoop uitspreek dat die ondersoek daaroor gaan om billike verkiesings en
demokrasie in Suid-Afrika te verseker en so die beeld van politiek en
politici in die land te verbeter en dat dit nie net deel is van die ANC se
interne stryd nie. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement
follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER (FF Plus): Madam Speaker, the FF Plus wants to
congratulate the ANC on the announcement by their treasurer-general, Dr
Matthews Phosa, that a forensic inquiry will be launched into all
activities of the investment company, Chancellor House. The FF Plus also
welcomes the inquiry by the Public Protector into Chancellor House and
especially the inquiry into allegations that large Eskom tenders were given
to companies that have ties with Chancellor House.

The most important reason for the problems surrounding Chancellor House is
the current lack of transparency regarding the financing of political
parties. Transparency and democracy presuppose that political parties
should compete with one another on an equal fooling to secure funds and
muster voter support during elections. If Chancellor House had channelled
profits of black economic empowerment transactions of the government back
to the ANC, this results, without a doubt, in a conflict of interest. This
brings the whole essence of democracy into serious question.

For the above-mentioned reasons and in the interest of democracy in South
Africa, the FF Plus wishes to congratulate the new ANC leadership on its
inquiry into Chancellor House and, in fact, indirectly also into the old
ANC leadership. We genuinely hope that the inquiry will entail ensuring
fair elections and democracy in South Africa, thereby improving the image
of politics and of politicians in the country and that this is not merely
part of the internal struggle within the ANC. I thank you.]

                     MINING OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE YOUTH

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A J NYAMBI (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC believes that the participation
of the youth in the political, social and economic life of the country is
crucial in strengthening and enhancing cultural democracy.

The Limpopo Youth Commission, in partnership with the De Beers Venetia
Mine, will host a three-day mining indaba at Tshipise Aventura in the
Vhembe District. Amongst the objectives of the mining indaba is to explore
opportunities for young people in the mining sector.

We commend the persistent efforts by the youth, whose efforts are aimed at
creating work and fighting poverty. We ask the mining industry to emulate
this example and ensure that the future of the country, the youth, is well
represented in the mining industry. I thank you.

                Poverty eradication PROGRAMMES OF government

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr I S MFUNDISI (UCDP): Madam Speaker, poverty has come to be the number
one enemy of people in this country, though some are having it easy as they
are enriched by their disloyal ways and means.

While government is trying to alleviate poverty, the latter seems to be
getting more rooted by the day. Poverty reduction programmes of government
seem to be ineffective because there is insufficient capacity in government
to implement the programmes.

Land distribution projects that have been handed over to people are
collapsing because government does not give enough support and training to
the new owners, while in some instances such tracts of land are not
properly handed over to provincial agriculture departments.

Interest is mainly focused on the public relations exercise of handing over
the land with great fanfare in the glare of television cameras with no
follow-up visits or programmes thereafter. Government tends to function
like a traffic light — once it has given a green light, it does not bother
about what happens afterwards.

The UCDP feels strongly that the responsibility for handing over poverty
reduction projects, be it in agriculture, as part of the Extended Public
Works Programmes or any other initiative, should be supported by ongoing
training until these people have acquired the necessary skills to perform
their duties. People have to be provided with financial skills on how to
run the projects.

So many people who were awarded tenders for capital projects scarcely
complete them because they can’t manage their finances well and sooner or
later they are broke and out of business and end up once again in the cycle
of poverty and, in some cases, are bankrupt.

The UCDP maintains that allocating projects to people to earn a living
enhances their dignity as against doling out grants. The dictum of each
living by the sweat of their brow should be our guide in life. I thank you.


                 NUCLEAR TECHNOLOGY IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr S E M PHEKO (PAC): Madam Speaker, one day the oil wells of this planet
will dry up. The search for alternative forms of energy is imperative. The
electricity crisis in our country is a signal that finding new forms of
energy is an indispensable necessity. This is where nuclear technology
comes in.

Some countries in the world today have developed their nuclear technology
to a point where they have piles of weapons of mass destruction. But they
are resisting the sovereign right of developing countries to develop their
own nuclear technology for peaceful purposes.

It is a conundrum of conundrums, therefore, that in the UN Security
Council, our country voted against the right of Iran, another developing
country, to develop its nuclear power for peaceful purposes. This is
despite the fact that the Director-General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency reported that Iran was co-operating. Sooner on later, the
Iran case will be used as a precedent against our country when we exercise
our sovereign right to develop our nuclear technology.

Don’t we intend developing our own nuclear technology? If so, why do we
keep on exporting our uranium to countries hostile to our nuclear
technology capability?

Selling our uranium to these countries while they refuse us the right to
develop our nuclear technology is like providing help to an enemy army to
acquire weapons superior to ours – thus guaranteeing our own defeat.

Developing  countries  must  stand  together  in  defence  of  their  common
interests. They have a sovereign right to develop their  nuclear  technology
for peaceful objectives and scientific advancement. I thank you.

                abAlone harvesting and brutal police actions

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mnr S E OPPERMAN (DA): Speaker, voor die opskorting van die uithaal van
perlemoen op 1 Februarie 2008 kon polisietaakmaglede nie daarin slaag om
onwettige perlemoenstropers in hegtenis te neem nie.

Vir die laaste drie weke tree polisiebeamptes soos barbare op. Die
vissersgemeenskappe in die omgewing van Gansbaai en Hawston se huise word
deursoek sonder enige lasbriewe; huise se deure word oopgeskop; ’n hond is
drie weke gelede in die aangesig van sy eienaar doodgeskiet; pepersproei
word in mense se gesigte gespuit; vuurwapens word op weerlose mense gerig;
mense word geslaan.

Hierdie barbaarse, brutale optrede kan nie geduld word nie. Die DA sal vir
’n kommissie van ondersoek vra so spoedig as moontlik sodat hierdie
onaanvaarbare optrede ondersoek kan word en die skuldiges dienooreenkomstig
gestraf kan word. Onwettige stropers moet in hegtenis geneem word, maar
binne die raamwerk van die wet. Dankie. [Applous.] (Translation of
Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Mr S E OPPERMAN (DA): Speaker, prior to the suspension of the harvesting
of abalone on 1 February 2008, members of the police task force could not
succeed in arresting illegal abalone poachers.

In the past three weeks police officers have been behaving like savages.
The houses of the fishing communities in the Gansbaai and Hawston areas are
searched without any warrants; doors of houses are kicked open; three weeks
ago, a dog was shot and killed in front of its owner; pepper spray is
sprayed in people’s faces; fire-arms are pointed at defenceless people;
people are beaten up.

This barbaric, brutal behaviour cannot be tolerated. The DA will request a
commission of inquiry as soon as possible so that this unacceptable
behaviour can be investigated and the culprits can be punished accordingly.
Illegal poachers must be arrested but within the framework of the law.
Thank you. [Applause.]]

             SKILLS DEVELOPMENT OF THE YOUTH IN THE EASTERN CAPE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Nksz N M MDAKA (ANC): Somlomo, umbutho wesizwe i-ANC kunye norhulumente
bathe gqolo besakha izakhono zabantu beli, ngakumbi ulutsha. Kwiintsuku
ezimbalwa ezigqithileyo iNgqurha Industrial Development Project phaya
kweliya laseMpuma Koloni, ithe yatyikitya isivumelwano sotyalo-mali
esixabisa izigidi ngezigidi zeerandi. Le mali, iya kusetyenziselwa ukwakha
amathuba emisebenzi kunye nezakhono zolutsha lwephondo.

Inkoliso yolutsha lwethu alunawo umonde wokwakha izakhono. Lona lufuna
imisebenzi ngokungxama okukhulu. Thina singamalungu ale Ndlu, sibambisene
nabahlali ngokubanzi, masiphume iphulo sikhuthaze ulutsha lwethu ukuba lube
nomonde xa lufuna impumelelo. Umbutho wesizwe uya kuthi gqolo usebenzela
ubomi obungcono kubantu bonke.
(Translation of isiXhosa member’s statement follows.)

[Ms N M MDAKA (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC-led government is very
consistent in capacitating the people, particularly the youth. The Coega
Industrial Development project in the Eastern Cape has, in the past few
days, signed an agreement for an investment of millions of rands. This
money will be utilised specifically for job creation and skills development
for the youth of this province.

The majority of our youth do not have the patience required in the skills
development process.  They want to get employment as quickly as possible.
We, as members of this House, in co-operation with the community, should
embark on an operation to encourage our youth to be more patient if they
want to succeed. However, the people’s organisation will always strive for
a better life for all.]

                  PROPERTY RATES AND VALUATION OF PROPERTY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr P F SMITH (IFP): Madam Speaker, the IFP is concerned about the
uncertainty surrounding the implementation of the Local Government:
Municipal Property Rates Act. It is clear from daily reports in the media
that there are simply too many instances of poor valuations. We therefore
urge anyone who believes that their property has been wrongly valued to
take advantage of the objections process to have their properties revalued.

In the light of widespread public concerns, we also call on the Minister
for Provincial and Local Government to reassure this House that he is
satisfied that the valuations process has been properly implemented in all
the municipalities that have completed or are presently engaged in a
valuations process.

The reason people are concerned about valuations is the fear that their
rates will skyrocket. People do accept increases but they do not accept
unreasonable increases, and people may have sound reasons to fear the
latter since there are cases where rates revenue collected has increased by
more than 350% in the past year.

We therefore call for the urgent finalisation and implementation of an
existing draft regulation which seeks to cap the extent to which rates may
be increased year-on-year, and we call on the Minister to ensure that it
applies to rates raised during the current implementation phase of the
Local Government: Municipal Property Rates Act. Thank you.

                  PARTICIPATION IN HUMAN RIGHTS DAY FUN RUN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr T J BONHOMME (ANC): Madam Speaker, to be active in sport is an integral
part of the reconstruction and development of a healthier society. Sport
cuts across all development programmes and should be made accessible and
affordable to all South Africans.

Thousands of community members will take part in this year’s Human Rights
Day fun run, which forms part of the build-up to 21 March. The event is
organised in partnership with the Gauteng Department of Sport, Arts,
Culture and Recreation, the Sedibeng District Municipality and Vaal
Athletics.

The fun run is open to all communities. It is aimed at raising awareness
around the importance of the history of Human Rights Day and highlighting
key government achievements in addressing human rights issues. We urge
members of the public to take part in the event. I thank you.


                   OUTRAGEOUS STRIKE BY MUNICIPAL WORKERS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr E W TRENT (DA): Madam Speaker, whilst supporting the right of workers to
strike legally, the DA condemns, in the strongest terms, the outrageous
behaviour of a group of rogue Nelson Mandela Municipality workers who have
gone on the rampage in the city since last Wednesday, causing chaos. They
did so by, inter alia, flooding and trashing buildings; destroying property
and smashing doors, furniture and office equipment, including computers.
They threatened and intimidated their colleagues, who wished to work, with
steel pipes, sjamboks and knobkerries.

It is important to note that this illegal and violent strike action was
taken despite the fact that the Labour Court had granted them an order in
terms of which they had to undertake to ensure that their members complied
with the laws of this country and respected the rights of other citizens. I
am publicly challenging the members of the ANC here today to distance
themselves from and condemn those who are guilty of such behaviour.

I have noticed that the Minister of Safety and Security, the Minister of
Justice and the Minister of the Public Service and Administration are here.
Minister of Correctional Services, you can keep them where they belong once
they get there and I hope that you will note what I have said. You need to
make sure that the perpetrators face the full force of the law. You must do
this as a deterrent to those who may, in future, contemplate such action as
a means to settle their grievances.

             CAMPAIGN TO APPLY FOR IDENTITY DOCUMENTS AT SCHOOLS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N N SIBHIDLA (ANC): In an effort to bring ID application services to
high schools across the country, the Department of Home Affairs will unveil
the ID-of-the-self campaign. The campaign is aimed at motivating young
people to apply for ID books. The campaign will be undertaken in
partnership with the Department of Education, the National Youth
Commission, the South African Broadcasting Corporation or SABC and the
Independent Electoral Commission. It will be facilitated by the deployment
of mobile units to schools across the country to provide on-site
applications and registration assistance.

With an ID book, everyone among our people acquires the capacity to open
the door to a better future. Among other things, IDs are enabling tools for
people to further their education, apply for jobs, access social grants and
other government services and decide how the country is run. We urge all
Members of Parliament to use their constituency offices to support these
initiatives. I thank you.

                    ACCOUNTABILITY OF MANAGEMENT OF ESKOM
                              HIGH FOOD PRICES

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, let me respond to a few of the
statements, starting with that of the hon Schmidt.
Now, we need to be very careful; there are norms that are set out in the
Companies Act and its operation. The Companies Act asks of shareholders to
appoint a board to represent its interests and that board holds management
accountable. Any company listed in terms of the Companies Act including
Eskom in this instance, is structured like that and the norms are set out
in, amongst other places, the King I and King II reports.

If you then ask Parliament to be involved in holding management
accountable, you destroy the lines of accountability. We need to be careful
about how we exercise this power. Clearly, it’s very important for the
board of Eskom to be able to answer to Parliament for what management did
or did not do. If we don’t do that, I think the lines are completely
blurred and management doesn’t know who to account to. I’m saying that we
need to exercise a great deal of caution in regard to these issues.

I’d also like to respond to hon Sigcau and hon Mfundisi together. Now, I
think the points about food prices are well taken. One issue that we need
to be aware of is that food prices have increased across the world. Since
2005 the wheat price has increased by just over 200% at last count; over
the past 12 months the price of rice has increased by just over 100%; all
of the grain crops have increased in price, and, of course, maize prices
have increased to the extent that they have.

The food price monitoring committee - located primarily in the Department
of Agriculture – is preparing a fresh report and I think they should be
encouraged to place the report on the table.

The one issue that has arisen very sharply in the analysis is that
government interventions don’t always work. There’s been a very recent
story about bread price subsidies in Egypt, where the wheat price is
subsidised but where a lot of the bakers are selling the subsidised flour
and are then only baking a limited amount of bread for the poor. These
issues arise too frequently. We know that in this country, where there’s
VAT on white bread but no VAT on brown bread, you can’t see the 14% price
differential in the prices. These are issues that Parliament will have to
deal with.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon Minister. Your time has expired.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Oh, I’ve got a few more ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, you may take more time, as long as your
colleagues know that they will then have to forfeit their allocated time
for responses in the process.

                          DRAMATISTS AGAINST CRIME
                              ABALONE POACHING
                      STRIKE BY SAMWU IN PORT ELIZABETH

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Deputy Speaker, he’ll get more time
towards the end of Ministers’ responses. The youth of Mafikeng in North
West and of Gauteng and our country as a whole have really heeded the call
by the ANC and by the government that all hands must be on deck to fight
crime. Dramatists Against Crime must be commended for raising awareness and
assisting our communities in fighting crime. That’s the quick one.

Ons, die ANC, die regering en die polisie stem saam dat onwettige stropers
in hegtenis geneem moet word. [We, the ANC, the government and the police
agree that illegal poachers should be arrested.] We cannot have a situation
where these gangsters continue to do all these things and get away with
them.

Coming to the last one, Samwu in Port Elizabeth did undertake, as a union,
to ensure that its members comply with the laws of the country. Therefore,
the Minister of Safety and Security and the MEC from the Eastern Cape,
Thobile Mhlahlo, will definitely look into this whole situation. Surely, we
will be able to get a report at the end of it all. Thank you.

                 NUCLEAR TECHNOLOGY IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

                            (Minister’s Response)
The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I think it is important,
first of all, to reiterate the position of South Africa in support of
developing nations having the right to use nuclear energy for peaceful
developmental purposes where such needs arise. Therefore, our support for
this goal has not been unselfish because we have the need and will indeed
want to use nuclear energy for peaceful developmental purposes. We are
therefore in full support of developing countries in this regard.

Nevertheless, that support is based on the understanding that prescriptions
of the International Atomic Energy Agency, agreed to by nations of the
world, must be complied with. Where we are uncertain or where the
International Atomic Energy Agency is not satisfied that there is full
compliance, South Africa cannot be expected to blindly go ahead and support
these actions. I thank you.


                       ESTABLISHMENT OF ISIVANDE FUND


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Thank you very
much, Deputy Speaker. I would like to comment on the statement on socio-
economic dialogue and the establishment of a women’s development fund and
say that, in addition to supporting this statement and reflecting on the
commitments and strides made by government to ensure the empowerment of
women through the Isivande Women’s Fund, this also coincides with the 99th
anniversary of International Women’s Day on 8 March as well as the
Commission on the Status of Women’s focus this year.

In line with the Beijing Platform of Action resolutions, which deal with
the issue of financing for gender equality and women’s empowerment, South
Africa has shown, once again, that it is a leader in this field and we
should applaud ourselves. Thank you. [Applause.]


                           ID CAMPAIGN AT SCHOOLS


                         SKILLS DEVELOPMENT OF YOUTH


                            (Minister’s Response)


The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Deputy Speaker, the ANC, in its
January 8 Statement, directed the Department of Home Affairs to engage in a
national campaign that targets young people, especially those who are 16
years old, to obtain identity documents. As a result of this, last week
Friday The Minister of Home Affairs launched the campaign in Gugulethu and
issued 200 identity documents to learners.

We shall continue to focus on this group of our people and later this year,
leading up to 2009, we will try to reach out to all South Africans. We
therefore support the view that all hon members should utilise their
constituency offices and mobilise their constituencies to ensure that this
campaign succeeds.

The second issue that I would like to comment on briefly concerns young
people and skills. It is a known fact that in our country 70% of all those
who are unemployed are below the age of 35. Most of these young people are
unemployed because they lack the requisite skills.

University education is becoming more and more expensive and therefore
increasing numbers of young people are failing to access it. Even though
further education and training colleges are becoming more and more
accessible - and there is a lot of work that is being done to improve that
- there are still very serious gaps, which means that there are increasing
numbers of young people who are still unable to acquire skills.

I don’t think we should blame young people for not having skills. I also
don’t think that it is because young people are impatient and seek jobs but
don’t want to acquire skills. I think we need to do a lot of work to ensure
that the youth of our country are able to acquire skills so that they can
go ahead and get jobs. Thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE: Statements pertaining to any portfolio
having already been responded to, I will stand back for my bench mate. I
don’t know whether I heard you correctly, Deputy Speaker?




                      INVESTIGATION OF CHANCELLOR HOUSE

                        ARREST OF PERLEMOEN POACHERS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Deputy Speaker, I just want to
respond to the issue of Chancellor House which was raised by the FF Plus. I
would like to bring to the attention of the hon member that there is no
investigation being conducted by the ANC Treasurer-General on the issue of
Chancellor House. [Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: Not yet?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: It’s not about “not yet” but it
is what you need to know. Any new person who takes up a position in any
environment wants to know exactly what he is going to inherit. So, it’s not
an investigation; it’s an assessment and evaluation of the assets within
Chancellor House.

The second issue is that transparency is one of the fundamental principles
which the ANC believes in. This House did not know anything about
transparency until we came here. We have taught you how transparency works.
We are happy that you understand that transparency is a principle and that
the ANC will not compromise that principle.

The third issue to which I would like to respond ... [Interjections.]

Dr C P MULDER:  Madam Deputy Speaker, is the hon Deputy Minister prepared
to take a question? It’s a very easy question.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you prepared to take a question?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: If you allow me, Madam Speaker.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to take the question now?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Yes!

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, you’d better take your seat so that you can take a
question.

Dr C P MULDER: Madam Deputy Speaker, the hon Deputy Minister ...
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Deputy Speaker, if I give him
an opportunity to ask the question, I hope I will be able to have extra
time to respond to the second issue.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Unfortunately it will be taken from your time.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: No, I am therefore not going to
take his question, Madam Deputy Speaker.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Continue with your response then.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Madam Speaker, with regard to
the issue raised by the hon member of the DA, we and the police are not
going to tolerate any members of the police who behave in a manner which is
unacceptable. [Interjections.]

You shut up!  May I bring to your attention, hon member, that one of the
issues is that we expect communities where crimes are committed ...
[Interjections.]

Mr T D LEE: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of order: Is it parliamentary
to use the phrase ``shut up’’?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, the phrase ``shut up’’ has been
used several times. That does not mean that, because it has been used
several times, we should therefore continue in that direction. We need to
moderate our language as we address one another but the hon Deputy Minister
is not out of order. Please just conclude your response.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. I
want to say that communities that continue to harbour criminals will always
have problems with the police. We would like to urge the communities of
Coega, especially around issues of perlemoen, to continue co-operating with
the police. If the police are there for searches and all that, they must co-
operate, but if they continue behaving in a manner that obstructs the
police in doing their work, indeed they will have problems. Thank you.
[Time expired.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Dr R Davies): Madam Deputy
Speaker, I am also covered by the Minister of Finance. I wanted to respond
to the statement on food prices.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister Manuel, we have one and a half minutes left.

                        PROPERTY RATES AND VALUATIONS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: No, Madam Speaker, I wanted to respond to the
points raised by the hon Smith. He is looking so dapper in his Guayabera
today. He has gone to show it to the world.

Indeed, the issue of rates valuations is a very important matter. What we
need to ensure is that the legislation empowers local government. He is a
confederalist of note but now he is asking national government to intervene
in respect of local government.

There will be a measure of excesses in the early valuations. I think that
the objections processed will probably see some return to normality. There
clearly is an ongoing discussion in Johannesburg right now, where some of
the valuations are excessive. There will be a return to normality but I
think we must help it along rather than shout from the rooftops as though
there is a new calamity. Thank you.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I just want to go back to the Rules. Usually, we do
have members of the executive complaining. We allow a maximum of six
Ministerial responses at two minutes each. The reason why we allowed more
responses this afternoon is because you saved us a lot of time. We
therefore decided: Let us hear more from the executive. If you are brief in
your responses, we will hear more responses from the executive. That
concludes Ministerial responses. We now come to the statement by the
Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry.


    STATEMENT BY MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: NO WATER CRISIS


The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Deputy Speaker and hon members,
thank you for the opportunity to make a statement on the so-called water
crisis facing our country.

Water is a source of life and such a strategic resource that it is
important that Parliament and our society openly discuss and debate the
issues around it. To engage in this debate, we must be armed with
information and empower ourselves to better understand how this sector
works. Misinformation will only create unnecessary panic and discontent,
and I am sure that no one would desire that. So those who bandy about words
like ``crisis’’ must surely have facts and information at their disposal
before using such strong terms.

I am therefore hoping, through this statement, to set the record straight
so that we all take responsibility for what we say around this issue. As
the Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry, I have nothing to hide on the
state of our water sector and we have been open and transparent in our
presentations and inputs to Parliament’s Portfolio Committee on Water
Affairs and Forestry which, I must say, has been playing an excellent
oversight role over the sector.

At the outset, I would like to share with you what the water situation in
the country is. Now this is in terms of water storage and therefore we are
talking water security. The 2007-08 summer rainfall season started off in
October 2007 with well above-normal water storages due to the good rainfall
over the largest part of the country. The above-normal rainfall resulted in
good run-offs which is reflected in the good storage situation in our dams
and rivers across most parts of the country.

The result is that water storages in all provinces are well above the
average storage and most of the provincial storages equal or exceed last
year’s storage. On a national level, the current storage equals last year’s
storage of 86%. So, in terms of macro water availability, there is no
crisis.

But we do face challenges in some other areas and I am going to talk about
the challenges and what we are doing to try, collectively, to address them.
My department has in-depth knowledge about the situation, with particular
reference to hot spots. The department is well organised in terms of
proactive water resource planning, in terms of project planning and design
as well as national infrastructure implementation.

Although South Africa is a water-scarce country with highly skewed rainfall
distribution patterns and subject to droughts, we have planned for this by
having a number of dams and by having strict allocation processes,
extensive networks of infrastructure that transfer water from different
parts of the country and a consistent campaign to remind our citizens to be
water-wise by using water sparingly, although from time to time it becomes
necessary to impose restrictions during periods of drought.

South Africans, therefore, can rest assured that we do not have a water
crisis arising from poor planning. Our planning systems are strong and we
have looked at future needs. However, we cannot allow that comfort to lead
to inaction. Water should be a concern for all South Africans. Water in
South Africa is supplied on a regional basis and so drought conditions and
low dam levels in one part of the country can result in water restrictions
in that particular area. However, dams in another part of the country may
be full as a result of good rainfall.

I would like to say that we have enough water in our rivers, dams and
underground to supply water for socio-economic growth and development and
we have programmes in place to ensure timely development of infrastructure
to ensure the future supply of water to our growing economy whilst, at the
same time, trying to address the imbalances of the past with regard to
access to water for drinking purposes as well as productive use for the
majority who have been excluded.

To improve on our water availability, we shall also be clamping down on
illegal water users and we have plans in place for major new dams. Each of
the large metropolitan areas is required to do water reconciliation studies
to determine scenarios of future water use and whether new infrastructure
will be required to meet future needs. Climate change and its possible
impact on water resource availability has been considered in these studies.

I just want to share something with you. Much work has been done in this
area. Between 2004 and 2006, nine water resource capital projects were
completed at a cost of R1,3 billion. Here we are talking about the Nandoni
Dam in Limpopo and the Mooi-Mgemi Transfer Scheme in KwaZulu-Natal.

We are also currently implementing another six major water resource
infrastructure projects at a projected cost of R8,8 billion to be completed
between 2008 and 2012. Here we are talking of De Hoop in Limpopo, the Berg
River Dam in the Western Cape and the Vaal River East-Subsystem
Augmentation Scheme, which will supply sufficient water to Eskom power
stations and Sasol. In addition, a further nine major water resource
capital projects are in the planning stage and these will be built in the
next five to 10 years at an estimated cost of R12 billion.

Through our planning processes, we have determined that a new dam will be
required to service Gauteng by 2019. The feasibility studies to determine
the location of this new dam have already been completed and a decision on
the location will be made in the coming months.

In addressing the infrastructure challenges, we must distinguish between
national water infrastructure and municipal infrastructure. In terms of the
national water infrastructure, the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry
is well advanced in developing a comprehensive asset register.

Based on its commitment to ensure effective management, the department
initiated a study to investigate the condition of its works including dam
safety issues and, based on this study, the need was identified to improve
the situation which resulted in special funding being allocated to the
Department of Water Affairs and Forestry by the National Treasury to
address the national water infrastructure needs.

I request members to please not confuse dam infrastructure with other forms
of infrastructure such as waste water treatment plants, which I will be
addressing a little later on.

We have provided information to Parliament on several occasions on dams
that require maintenance - as you have just requested – so as to bring them
up to international standards. There have been some claims that our water
infrastructure is now crumbling. This is most definitely not the case.

A plan is in place to do the necessary rehabilitation and refurbishment of
our dams. In 2006 we set aside R1,3 billion over a five-year period to
ensure that our dams are maintained and that they are in line with
international standards.  The maintenance programme has already started,
with repair work being done on 42 of our dams.

South Africa has an excellent record with respect to the safety of dams,
and conducts compulsory safety inspections at regular intervals. The
identified shortcomings on DWAF-owned dams are being attended to. Our
important storage dams are structurally safe and the communities around
them need not be concerned.

I now turn to the state of our drinking water. At the outset, I would like
to say that drinking water quality management is the responsibility of
municipalities, and the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry has an
oversight and regulatory role on the quality of tap water.

Over the past few years my department has implemented a countrywide system
to assist with the overall management of the quality of drinking water. On
average over 3 000 samples have been taken nationwide from water supply
systems, and from the latest results available, we are pleased to report
that more than 94% of the analyses complied with the health aspects of the
national standard for drinking water quality.

The quality of drinking water from our taps is among the best in the world
and these findings serve as proof that we can still claim our rightful
place as one of the countries where one can drink water directly from the
tap. However, 6% of the analyses do not comply with this standard.

My department, as part of our oversight responsibility, is working with the
municipalities in the small towns to ensure that they meet the required
standards of delivering safe and clean drinking water to our people. Armed
with information from our monitoring system, we are able to be proactive in
addressing any noncompliance.

Of concern to me is the state of our rivers, which are prone to pollution.
I am very concerned about this pollution and I have directed my department
to strengthen its oversight role so that we address this problem more
comprehensively.

The pollution can come from the mining industry – what is referred to as
acid mine drainage; from poor municipal infrastructure which fails to treat
waste water to the required standards before releasing it back into the
rivers; as a result of industrial activity; informal settlements that are
established alongside rivers; and agricultural activities.

As part of our regulatory responsibilities, my department monitors the
health of our rivers. All is not well. We have identified 142 high-risk
sites where there is pollution. Despite what some will have you believe, we
are aware of the pollution in these areas and, together with relevant
stakeholders, we see it as our priority to bring them back to good health
through our river health programme.

More can be done, of course, and we will be doing more. We will also be
expanding the capacity of our regulatory and compliance unit. As you can
imagine, for you to be able to implement the policy of the polluter pays
principle, you need somebody to identify that there is pollution. So more
hands are needed to inspect, to identify, to report and to police our water
resources.

So we are going to be enforcing the polluter pays principle so as to make
sure that those that pollute our resources pay for the resolution of the
problem they have created.

I think that another important area to address is municipal wastewater
treatment plants. The responsibility for the running of the wastewater
treatment plants rests with municipalities. Here again we are expected to
play an oversight role.

We have done an audit and found that the situation in many municipalities
is dire and must be addressed as a matter of urgency. The pollution in some
of our rivers, as I have already said, can be attributed to failure on the
part of these municipal wastewater treatment plants.
There is no denying that some of this infrastructure is old and
dilapidated. Indeed, from our side, we have recognised the need to support
municipalities so that they are able to comply with our guidelines. We have
set guidelines for them in order for them to comply with our own standards.


The following actions are under way, over and above the continued hands-on
support that we provide to municipalities over the period: We have now
started an extensive database on all the wastewater treatment plants; the
monitoring system is being extended to also include functionality
management, governance and condition; the initial audit that we started is
to be extended to all wastewater treatment plants; a special bulk
infrastructure fund has been established; a dedicated programme on
infrastructure planning is under way, and we have developed special
guidelines to deal with infrastructure management.

An asset management programme has been initiated, and special attention is
being given to institutional capacity development with the focus on
sustainable management. Special attention is also being given to the
regulation of the sector, which includes accountability, performance
monitoring and legal intervention. Of course, there is continuous one-on-
one intervention with the stakeholders in the areas which we call
“hotspots”.

Finally, a concern that has been raised continually is the issue of skills.
To perform the work in the sector, you require a particular skill. So, like
all sectors in this country that require engineers and scientists, we face
challenges in recruiting and retaining suitably qualified staff.

Whilst we acknowledge that more can be done, we have put mitigation
measures in place to ensure that we do not run into a crisis. Those
measures include: The use of international experts and deploying engineers
to needy municipalities to train those municipalities; the deployment of
officials and experts to our regional offices to train the staff there; the
establishment of a training academy for young graduates, which is located
at head office and we are also looking forward to improved compensation
from the Department of the Public Service and Administration by means of
the implementation of a special dispensation allowance for scarce-skill
occupations such as engineers.

In summary, what I would like to communicate today is that our drinking
water is safe and is actually getting safer by the day. There are concerns,
however, as I have stated, with regard to our rivers. There are challenges,
particularly around wastewater treatment by municipalities, which require
urgent attention. I have stated how we are urgently intervening in those
areas.

What I am saying is that our planning is strong and that we are planning
way ahead of our needs. There are areas of concern, perhaps KwaZulu-Natal
and some others, but the planning that is in place is going to take care of
those concerns. I am saying our dams are safe.

So, hon members, this is a complex message that requires us to engage
meaningfully with water issues. We must remember at all times that we live
in a water-scarce region and that our water is not unlimited. We must
conserve and protect our water resources.

I think the time allocated for this debate will not do justice to the
amount of work, commitment and dedication by all involved in the sector, as
this is not a Water Affairs and Forestry issue only; this is a DPLG issue,
so we have to look at the augmentation and ring fencing of the Municipal
Infrastructure Grant to ensure that it does what it was meant to do.

We also need to augment the areas where municipalities find it necessary to
use the MIG finance because they do not have access to any other funding
resource. So we need to deal with those matters that always come up in our
interaction.

There is the matter of housing, and the sooner we have better houses and
eliminate informal settlements, which are actually in large part
responsible for the untreated effluent that not only does not go through
any of our water treatment plants but also pollutes the rivers,
particularly after heavy rains, the better. Housing will help us to deal
with this problem.

There is the matter of health and water institutions and academia, which
must continually help us with research for the future. Research
institutions and the private sector are also involved a great deal in many
of our intervention efforts, including NGOs and communities. I really want
to thank all of them for the hard work that they are doing and I would like
to say: Aluta Continua!

Before I sit down I would like to share with hon members that we have
information about most of the issues that they have raised because, having
been faced with these questions of the water crisis, we have to get a
status report from each of our regional offices in the provinces. We do
have such information and hon members are invited to continuously ask
questions about areas of concern in their areas of work.

That information will be forthcoming and I invite members to engage
honestly and openly and debate this in a constructive manner without
calling it a crisis. It is an issue of concern and a challenge facing a
whole lot of stakeholders, and I think we are dealing with it collectively
in a way that will ensure that the situation in the areas where there are
problems does not result in a crisis. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M M SWATHE: Chairperson, the hon Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry
would be well advised to remember that today South Africa is facing an
electricity supply crisis because the government ignored the warning it was
given more than 10 years ago.

We need open and honest leadership that will ensure that problems are
confronted head on and not ignored or simply wished away. The reality is
that at present South Africa is confronted with a looming crisis as a
combination of polluted water resources and poor management of dams, sewage
works and treatment plants has led to a situation where our water supply is
under serious threat.

A safe and reliable water supply is essential to the proper functioning of
any nation. There would be catastrophic implications for our nation’s
health and wellbeing if such systems were to break down. The reality is
that a threat does exist. As we speak, there are already localised areas of
crisis which, left unchecked, will bring about a worse crisis in South
Africa than what we are currently experiencing in relation to the
electricity supply.

There are three main areas of concern. The areas where our water originates
are being damaged by generalised official disregard for the environmental
consequences of industrial activity. The problems are exacerbated by
shortcomings in the management of our dams, which reduces the supply of
water we have available and also affects its quality.
The Minister herself admitted last year that only 60% of 294 dams were
owned and managed by her department and that only 54% of these dams comply
with modern safety standards. To compound this problem, the water treatment
plants themselves and the pipes that deliver clean water to our cities and
towns are old and dilapidated.

Most municipal sewerage systems in South Africa are 30 to 50 years old, but
few councils are doing anything more than band-aid maintenance. The dire
situation has been obvious for several years and has been made known to
DWAF, the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry. While it has estimated
that R180 billion would be needed for a complete overhaul of the system, it
has allocated only R1 billion, less than one per cent of what is needed
this year.

Last week the DA sent the Minister a copy of our report on the state of
South Africa’s water infrastructure. Included in that document was a
comprehensive list of solutions. Instead of hiding her head in the sand, in
a manner similar to that of her Cabinet colleague Alec Erwin, the Minister
would be well advised to face this problem head on in the interest of all
South Africans, failing which ... [Time expired.]

Mr M W SIBUYANA: Chairperson, hon members, hon Minister, let me kick off by
saying that it would be a very sad moment for me one day to hear the
Minister say, “I apologise to the people of South Africa for the water
crisis.”
Indeed, forewarned is forearmed and the failure to heed any warning results
in consequences too ghastly to contemplate. In statements read out in this
House, the IFP spoke of water pollution reported in different newspapers
and spoke of the vandalising of water supply infrastructure.

Municipalities hide behind the department’s failure to resuscitate defunct
boreholes and turn them into usable assets. Some municipalities, as
reported in newspapers, are failing to prevent sewage water from polluting
rivers in KwaZulu-Natal, the Eastern Cape and parts of the Western Cape.

Despite the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry telling us that the
media is blowing events out of proportion, there is a water crisis in South
Africa. The department’s failure is there for any person of ordinary
prudence to see. It cannot avoid sewage spills from old water
infrastructure.

In this regard, the people who elected us are indeed in need of a quality
water supply. We do not anticipate the fate of soccer coaches who fail to
deliver. [Time expired.]

Ms S N SIGCAU: Chairperson and hon Ministers, the hon Minister says that
there is no water crisis but it is so unfortunate that we have heard this
tune before. For years there were warnings about the electricity
infrastructure in this country not being maintained and expanded as it
should be.

Now, again, we see certain realities and warning signs. Water usage has
escalated. The number of end users has increased dramatically.
Infrastructure development and maintenance have not kept pace with demand.

We know that certain water and sanitation facilities depend on electricity
to operate. We also know that we live in a water-scarce country with a
rapidly growing population in the midst of a major urbanisation trend that
puts increased pressure on infrastructure. A full-scale risk assessment of
our water infrastructure in respect of projections of future demand needs
to be undertaken. I thank you, Chairperson.

Mr H B CUPIDO: Chairperson, the ACDP trusts that the serious debate on
water availability and the quality of water will kick local government, in
particular, into a higher gear because the results of poor water quality
are mostly felt by the poorest of the poor in informal settlements. Today’s
Cape Times carries a very serious article on the struggle of the Red Cross
hospital and the Tygerberg hospital in their fight against gastroenteritis.


If there’s no crisis in South Africa, why do we have so many outbreaks of
cholera in different provinces in our country? In 2007, it was reported
that there were 77 cases of cholera outbreaks in the township in Queenstown
in the Eastern Cape. In 2005, typhoid left five people dead and 3 346
others were also diagnosed with water-borne diseases in Delmas.

The quality of water that municipalities are delivering to our people, in
many cases, is not good. In 2004 ... [Time expired.] Thank you.

Dr C P MULDER: Chairperson, if we don’t have electricity, we can make a
fire or light a candle but if we don’t have clean drinking water, we don’t
have clean drinking water. It’s as simple as that. The Constitution
stipulates very clearly that everyone has the right to have access to
sufficient food and water.

If you’ve listened to what the hon Minister said this afternoon in terms of
planning the question is: Are we planning sufficiently in terms of the
needs that will exist in 2025 and 2030? Are we planning for that, because
we have to do that? Are we taking the necessary steps to clean our rivers,
because we hear on a daily basis of problems in the river system in South
Africa?

The hon Minister did also give us figures indicating that there was a
problem with 6% of drinking water samples, but in the end, if problems
really come to the fore in respect of drinking water, it’s not going to be
the Minister of Provincial and Local Government who’s going to be in the
dark but the Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry. What we are saying is:
Let us, in due course, have a discussion so that we do not have the same
situation that we ended up with in respect of the electricity supply in
South Arica. Let us address this – the sooner the better.

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Chairperson, I agree with the hon Minister that there
is no water crisis because our water resources are well-monitored for
pollution and other elements that could, otherwise, create a crisis. There
are many challenges that face us, including pollution, sewerage and
fertilisers containing nutrients such as nitrates and phosphates. These are
areas that are properly monitored even though they cause some pollution.

The excessive growth of these types of organisms consequently clogs our
waterways, uses up dissolved oxygen and decomposes and blocks light to
deeper waters. This, in turn, proves very harmful. These anomalies are well
monitored. However, I say they are challenges and we have to face ... [Time
expired.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Chairperson, it is reported that the World Health
Organisation, WHO, estimates that in 2003, approximately 1,1 billion people
had no access to safe water and 2,4 billion had no basic sanitation. It is
well known that this can potentially lead to a number of diseases, such as
cholera, typhoid, malaria, yellow fever, scabies and many more. Water-borne
disease kills one child every eight seconds.

However, it is encouraging to note that the Minister of Water Affairs and
Forestry has said South African tap water is among the safest potable water
globally. The MF, however, holds that the water supply and its condition
cannot always be controlled by man and that we always need interim measures
to secure us from water shortages or water-borne diseases. It is
interesting to note that affluent countries use up to 10 times more water
than poverty-stricken countries like South Africa.

We, then, hope that since the earth is covered mostly by water, the threat
of water shortages experienced in Cape Town in 2005 may see us taking
measures that, in the future, would perhaps see us pumping water from the
sea. We are reassured by the Minister’s statement that there is no water
crisis and that industrial waste contamination by mines has been contained
with an investment in securing the management of waste over the next five
years. I thank you.

Mr S SIMMONS: Chairperson, no water crisis? This is becoming a trademark
statement of this government’s denial. When ordinary South African citizens
taste their water and it’s different or notice a difference in the clarity
of the water, they do not need the Minister to come and tell them that
there is no crisis. However, having been a member of the portfolio
committee, I know of the excellent levels of expertise that the department
had at its disposal.

My question is whether the Minister can categorically state today that her
department, the provinces and the municipalities have retained this vital
expertise, because in short, our very disturbing Eskom situation tells us
that a loss of expertise inevitably leads to a crisis. So, if there is no
crisis, as the Minister claims, then one is looming. I thank you.

Ms C C SEPTEMBER: Chairperson, the ANC welcomes this debate this afternoon.
We welcome the debate because uppermost in the mind of the ANC continues to
be ensuring the quality of life of our people and building a caring society
that includes the provision of water, sanitation and making sure that we
achieve the Millennium Development Goals. Water, lest we forget, is one of
our enduring human symbols of life, regeneration, purity and hope. It is
one of our potent links with the sacred, nature and our cultural
inheritance.

This is our opportunity to bring water forward as a medium for a global
project that unifies humanity in a single course for peace, stability,
amity and ecological sustainability – not this funny attempt that we heard
here today to divide. The healing powers of water, the simple pleasure of
drinking pure water and the awesome power of waterfalls have the potential
to bring us together as one with each other and as one with nature.

Given the limited financial and labour resources, both on a global and a
local scale, decisions must be taken, hon Minister, on the basis of
feasibility, urgency and tolerable levels of economic and social costs
relative to socio-political, economic and ecological benefits. Yes, hon
Bhoola, desalination may be the most satisfactory solution in one situation
but rainwater harvesting may be the optimal one in another. What we
require, hon Minister, is the institution of a global managerial strategy.
This cannot be achieved without the adoption of enduring principles of
justice and hope.

The key principle and culprit in this is the fragmentation of water
management. Indeed, from a historical perspective, what is needed is an
integrative ethic of water management which deals with local problems of
water availability as a function of water resources, its transportation,
distribution and consumption in a trans-regional and global context. We
heard here this afternoon that some of them have started already. Choices
will have to be made about the rate of consumption, the wasteful practices,
recycling, and other solutions.

Different users, policy makers, financial agencies and professionals have
come together many times to exchange information and to achieve trust and
promote accountability and transparency, in this instance, in respect of
water. Of course, there are issues that are associated with disease, water
and sanitation. However, many of them were established even in the mid 19th
century. A great deal of the research conducted on bacteria developed
during this period. This is not a little South African problem only here
and now. Many times, even in 1937 and 1938, we’ve had cholera outbreaks.
We’ve had situations of industrial areas and smelly open sewers that
affected people and, therefore, solutions had to be found then, they still
need to be found and this will continue to be the case.

One of the influential reports on public health that was publicised was the
report of Chadwick. He demonstrated and argued that unsanitary housing
conditions caused disease and poverty, but he established the correlation
between poor sanitation, defective drainage, inadequate water supply and
overcrowded housing with disease, high mortality rates and low life
expectancy. This is why we have, today, in South Africa the National Water
Act and the National Water Resources Strategy that speak to all of these
issues. But then we heard some statements today that, of course, there is a
water crisis despite the fact that this morning, in the portfolio
committee, we had a detailed briefing of the reserve, infrastructure and
dams in the country.

Unfortunately, hon Mr Swathe, we understand that you couldn’t deviate from
your speech. You had to say all those things and we can see that hon
Swathe, hon Sibuyana and the hon member from the UDM have started a
campaign by themselves – a campaign that says there is a crisis and that is
aimed at breaking down the leadership responsible for government, the ANC
and systems of governance it has put in place, and completely ignores
everything that was said today.

They stand up in this House and deny the fact that we knew those things. In
fact, what we see is that they are now snatching at straws after having not
had their say about electricity. They are so dissatisfied that they even
asked the President to let the Cabinet go, after it was explained to them
that all of that is not going to happen - and here they come with the water
issue.

Hon Minister, we ask you, please, not to despair. You must continue with
the duty that the ANC-led government has entrusted to you and that is: We
must make sure that we achieve the Millennium Development Goals. The
portfolio committee had public hearings on water quality. We are surprised
now to hear that there is a crisis.

When we had the public hearing two years ago, of course, what came out of
that hearing was that there’s a disparity between cities and rural areas,
insufficient local education on the ground and there are pollution in
mining areas. The different departments told us how they are working
together. We had the situation of a query around the implementation of the
Drinking Water Quality Framework for SA and, of course, the responsibility
that goes together with receiving a licence.

Hon Minister, those things would be important to focus on. Of course, we
dealt with infrastructure, wastewater and treatment plants. On our
oversight visits, there was no cry of “there’s a crisis” after we came from
the Vaal River, the Hartebeespoort Dam and back to Cape Town. Indeed, what
we are saying is that we should maybe have a look at ring-fencing the
Municipal Infrastructure Grant so that we can make sure that the moneys
allocated are being ring-fenced. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Just a point of order, hon member!
Is that a point of order, sir?

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: I was just wondering whether the hon member can take a
brief and simple question.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon member, are you prepared to
take a question?

Ms C C SEPTEMBER: Well, of course, I must first make sure that I say what I
have to say - if I can continue.

Hon Minister, as we are looking at the National Water Resources Strategy,
whose five years are about to be completed, the ANC would be interested in
having a discussion on what the elements are that we should now put into
the National Water Resources Strategy in the next five years, because we
think that strategy has provided the country with some important things
that it has put together.

Secondly, what we would want to concentrate on is that much needs to be
done with regard to water conservation. [Time expired.] Thank you, very
much. There’s no crisis, hon members. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

                       PRECEDENCE TO ORDER OF THE DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Sawubona, Sihlalo. Wena kaMhlanga
kaMusi! [Greetings to you, Chairperson. You, the descendent of Mhlanga, the
son of Musi!]

I move:


  That after Order 1, precedence be given to Orders 3 and 4 under further
  business.

Agreed to.

    CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT OF INTERNATIONAL
   CONVENTION ON THE CONTROL OF HARMFUL ANTI-FOULING SYSTEMS ON SHIPS AND
  CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT OF 1991 AMENDMENTS TO
            THE CONVENTION ON INTERNATIONAL MARITIME ORGANISATION

Mr J P CRONIN: Chairperson, hon members, thank you for the applause.
However, this speech is going to be very boring and I don’t think there
will be any applause at the end of it.

Basically, these are two simple conventions which are both from the
International Maritime Organisation. The department has only recently
developed its capacity in the maritime sector and therefore there is quite
a backlog of international conventions that we have not dealt with. Some
members will remember that a few weeks ago we were also dealing with a
couple of maritime conventions.

The first one is the International Convention on the Control of Harmful
Anti-fouling Systems on Ships. I think you know about fouling. However,
it’s not the kind of fouling committed by Schalk Burger or Bakkies Botha.
It’s the fouling that happens to ships below the water line, where algae,
barnacles and shells accumulate underneath the ship. In order to prevent
that kind of fouling they paint on an anti-fouling substance, using
different kinds of paint. Some of the paint that they have been using is
therefore quite toxic and dangerous to ecosystems, habitats and species.
So, in terms of this international convention, those particular kinds of
paints are outlawed. That’s what this convention deals with and it empowers
local authorities – in our case, the SA Maritime Safety Agency – to inspect
ships and to stop them, if need be, to make sure that they are not carrying
this kind of paint.

We are only dealing with internationally flagged ships. Having been alerted
to this kind of issue, we have asked the department to give us a sense of
whether local ships that don’t fall under this convention are nonetheless
using these dangerous anti-fouling paints. We have not yet received a
response from the department but we are awaiting that.

The second convention is even more boring than the first one. It’s called
Amendments to the Convention on the International Maritime Organisation and
dates back to 1991. It recognises a committee called the Facilitation
Committee, which does what it is supposed to be doing – facilitate - and it
basically recognises it as a fully fledged committee of the International
Maritime Organisation, IMO.

The Portfolio Committee on Transport spent time with the department and
with responsible officials, who then explained to us what these conventions
were about. We had no problem in agreeing to what the conventions require
and we therefore recommend to this House that we should approve them.
[Applause.]

There was no debate.

International Convention on the Control of Harmful Anti-Fouling  Systems  on
Ships approved.

1991  Amendments  to  the   Convention   on   the   International   Maritime
Organisation (IMO) approved.

      Consideration of REQUEST FOR approval by Parliament of agreement
   establishing the collaborative africa budget reform initiative (CABRI)
                                     and
    consideration of REQUEST FOR approval by parliament of convention on
                  temporary admission (ISTANBUL CONVENTION)

Mr N M NENE: Chairperson and hon members, these conventions are just as
boring as the ones Comrade Jeremy was dealing with.

One of the resolutions of the 52nd National Conference of the ANC deals
with international relations, and it reminds us that the world has changed
radically in recent years, with more people living in democratic societies
- particularly in Africa. It is this situation that gives us confidence and
hope that we are on the right path towards a just world and a better Africa
for humankind.

It is in this spirit that the ANC continues to lead on initiatives, such as
the Collaborative Africa Budget Reform Initiative that we put before the
House today for ratification. This is a professional network aimed at
supporting African senior budget officials in their reform efforts to
accelerate service delivery, improve budget management and contribute
towards the achievement of development goals.

This initiative was initially conceptualised by the Ministers of Finance of
South Africa, Mozambique and Uganda and has since grown tremendously,
attracting more than 20 countries across Africa since 2004 - and membership
is still open and continues to grow.

We are also tabling the Convention on Temporary Admission, which was
adopted by the Council of the World Customs Organisation on 26 June 1990 in
Istanbul, Turkey, and came into force on 27 November 1993. This convention
is one of the main international agreements of the World Customs
Organisation that is aimed at harmonising and simplifying customs
procedures.

In a sense, this convention establishes a consolidated regime governing the
temporary admission of goods and means of transport and terminates and
replaces all existing instruments dealing exclusively or mainly with the
temporary admission of goods.

Due to the strong expansion of international trade, there has been a
proliferation of conventions, agreements and recommendations with the same
objective and hence this one consolidates them.

In terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution and on behalf of the
Portfolio Committee on Finance, I put these two conventions before the
House for ratification after the committee has considered them and found
them to be in order. I thank you. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

Agreement Establishing the Collaborative  Africa  Budget  Reform  Initiative
(CABRI) approved.

Convention on Temporary Admission (Istanbul Convention) approved.

The House adjourned at 15:36.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                            FRIDAY, 7 MARCH 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

      1) Prevention of Illegal Eviction from and Unlawful Occupation of Land
         Amendment  Bill,  2008,  submitted  by  the  Minister  of  Housing.
         Referred to the Portfolio  Committee  on  Housing  and  the  Select
         Committee on Public Services.


2.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Health


          a) Tobacco  Products  Amendment  Bill  [B  7  –  2008]  (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 76) [Explanatory summary of  Bill  and
             prior notice  of  its  introduction  published  in  Government
             Gazette No 30824 of 29 February 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Health
             of the National Assembly, as well as  referral  to  the  Joint
             Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms  of  Joint
             Rule 160.
             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of  the  Bill  may  be  submitted  to  the  JTM  within  three
             parliamentary working days.


     (2)    The Minister of Housing


          a) Prevention of Illegal Eviction From and Unlawful Occupation of
             Land Amendment Bill [B 8 – 2008] (National Assembly – proposed
             sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice  of  its
             introduction published in Government Gazette No  30458  of  16
             November 2007.]


             Introduction  and  referral  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
             Housing of the National Assembly, as well as referral  to  the
             Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in  terms  of
             Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of  the  Bill  may  be  submitted  to  the  JTM  within  three
             parliamentary working days.


     (3)    The Minister of Defence


          a) Castle Management Act Repeal  Bill  [B  9  –  2008]  (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of  Bill  and
             prior notice  of  its  introduction  published  in  Government
             Gazette No 30803 of 22 February 2008.]


             Introduction  and  referral  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
             Defence of the National Assembly, as well as referral  to  the
             Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in  terms  of
             Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of  the  Bill  may  be  submitted  to  the  JTM  within  three
             parliamentary working days.


     (4)    The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development


          a) Reform of  Customary  Law  of  Succession  and  Regulation  of
             Related Matters Bill  [B  10  –  2008]  (National  Assembly  –
             proposed sec 76) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
             of its introduction published in Government Gazette  No  30815
             of 25 February 2008.]


             Introduction  and  referral  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
             Justice  and  Constitutional  Development  of   the   National
             Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint  Tagging  Mechanism
             (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of  the  Bill  may  be  submitted  to  the  JTM  within  three
             parliamentary working days.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     a) Report of  the  Auditor-General  on  a  performance  audit  of  the
        provision of sanitation services at the Department of Water Affairs
        and Forestry [RP 11-2008].

     b) Report of the Auditor-General  on  a  performance  audit  of  grant
        management at the National Lotteries Board [RP 12-2008].
COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and  Constitutional
    Development on the Mandating Procedures of  Provinces  Bill  [B8B-2007]
    (National Council of Provinces – sec 76), dated 6 March 2008:

       The Portfolio Committee on Justice and  Constitutional  Development,
       having  considered  the  subject  of  the  Mandating  Procedures  of
       Provinces Bill [B8B-2007] (National Council of Provinces – sec  76),
       referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging  Mechanism  as  a
       sec 76 Bill, reports the Bill with amendments [B8C-2007].

                            MONDAY, 10 MARCH 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

 1. Withdrawal of referral

    Please note: The referral of the  Budget  and  Strategic  Plan  of  the
    Auditor-General for 2008-2011 [RP 231-2007] to the Portfolio  Committee
    on Finance, published on page 410 of the  Announcements,  Tablings  and
    Committee Reports of 5 March 2008, is withdrawn.


 2. Referral to committees of papers tabled

      a) The following paper is referred to the Committee  on  the  Auditor-
         General for consideration:


          i) The Budget and Strategic Plan of the Auditor-General for 2008-
             2011 [RP 231-2007]

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister of Foreign Affairs

    (a)    Strategic Plan of the Department of Foreign  Affairs  for  2008-
         2011.

                           TUESDAY, 11 MARCH 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Committees


      (1)   Public Service and Administration


         (a)      Mr M R Baloyi has  been  elected  as  Chairperson  of  the
             Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration  with
             effect from 5 March 2008.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

    a) Strategic Plan of the National Agricultural  Marketing  Council  for
       2008 to 2011.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

The following item replaces item 3, published in the ATC of 31 January  2008
on page 91:

Report  of  the  Portfolio  Committees   on   Justice   and   Constitutional
Development on a joint oversight visit to Pollsmoor Prison to  consider  the
position of awaiting-trial prisoners, dated 21 November 2007.
The Portfolio Committees on  Justice  and  Constitutional  Development,  and
Correctional Services, having undertaken the above oversight  visit  reports
as follows:

   1. Aim of the visit

      On  23  October  2007,  the  Portfolio  Committees  on   Justice   and
      Constitutional Development, and Correctional Services, and the  Select
      Committee on Security and Constitutional  Affairs  undertook  a  joint
      oversight visit to the Pollsmoor Correctional Facility. The aim was to
      consider overcrowding in our prisons,  particularly  the  position  of
      awaiting-trial prisoners. Representatives  from  the  Magistracy,  the
      National  Prosecuting  Authority  and  the  Judicial  Inspectorate  of
      Prisons were also present.

   2. Participants


      The following members of  the  Portfolio  Committees  on  Correctional
      Services, and Justice and Constitutional Development, and  the  Select
      Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs visited the Pollsmoor
      Correctional Centre:


      Portfolio   Committee   on   Correctional   Services:   Mr   D   Bloem
      (Chairperson),
      Ms LS Chikunga (ANC), Mr S Mahote (ANC), Mr E Xolo (ANC), Ms W Ngwenya
      (ANC), Mr J Selfe (DA) and Mr H Cupido (ACDP).


      Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional  Development:  Mr  B
      Magwanishe (Acting Chairperson), Mr JB Sibanyoni (ANC),  Ms  M  Meruti
      (ANC) and Ms C Johnson (ANC).


      Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs:  Kgoshi  L  M
      Mokoena (Chairperson) – Limpopo, Ms F Nyanda (ANC)  –  Mpumalanga  and
      Mr L H Fielding (DA) – Northern Cape.


      The Committees were accompanied by the following parliamentary support
      staff:


      Ms R Lawrence (Personal Assistant to the Chairperson of the  Portfolio
      Committee on Correctional  Services)  and  Ms  G  Dinizulu  (Committee
      Secretary to the  Select  Committee  on  Security  and  Constitutional
      Affairs), Ms C Balie (Committee Secretary to the  Portfolio  Committee
      on Correctional Services), Ms N Skaka (Committee Assistant) and  Ms  C
      Silkstone (Researcher  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and
      Constitutional Development)


      Pollsmoor Correctional Facility was represented by: Mr  Mkabela  (Area
      Commissioner),  Mr  Nthombeni  (  Regional   Commissioner:   Corporate
      Services), Mr Modisadife (Head: Admission Centre), Ms Dayimani  (Head:
      Medium B Centre), Mr  Molefe  (Head:  Medium  C  Centre),  Mr  Scholtz
      (Acting Head: Medium A Youth Centre) and  Ms  Claassen  (Head:  Female
      Section)


      The Department of Justice was represented by the following members  of
      the Judiciary: Ms M van Eeden (Acting Senior Magistrate, Wynberg) Mr M
      Dimbaza  (Chief  Magistrate,  Wynberg),  Mr  H  Swart  (Acting   Chief
      Magistrate, Cape Town)  and  Mr  Zantsi   (Senior  Public  Prosecutor,
      Athlone)


      The Judicial Inspectorate of Prisons was  represented  by:  s  Pritima
      Osman (Acting Director: Functional Services), Mr  T  Titus  (Visitor’s
      Committee Co-ordinator)

   3. Overview of proceedings
      The Department of Correctional Services gave a short briefing  to  the
      Committees on the Pollsmoor Management Area,  which  was  followed  by
      extensive discussion. MPs then spoke with a number  of  awaiting-trial
      prisoners, especially pregnant women, juveniles and children.

   4. Briefing on the Pollsmoor Management Area

        1. Pollsmoor is overcrowded. The present occupancy  rate  is  168%.
           While Pollsmoor is designed to accommodate 4  252  offenders  it
           currently has 7 296 offenders. 4 823 (66.8%) are  awaiting-trial
           prisoners. At the Female Centre, which MPs  visited,  there  are
           397 offenders, of which 47% are awaiting  trial.  The  occupancy
           rate is 162%.


           The Department provided the Committees with the breakdown in the
           table below of awaiting-trial prisoners, who had either not been
           granted bail or had been granted bail but could  not  afford  to
           pay. Sentenced juvenile  offenders  as  well  as  awaiting-trial
           juveniles (18-21) are housed in the Medium A section.

      4.2
|               |Admission Centre  |Medium A          |Female       |
|No bail        |2 531             |877               |152          |
|Less than R    |851               |242               |40           |
|1000           |                  |                  |             |
|Above R 1000   |124               |60                |10           |


      The Department also provided information, which  is  set  out  in  the
      table below, on the number of successful conversions  to  correctional
      supervision in terms of sections 62 (f), 71 and  72  of  the  Criminal
      Procedure Act 51 of 1977 from 1  March  2007  to  30  September  2007.
      Section 62(f) of the Criminal Procedure Act 51 of  1977  empowers  the
      court to release an  accused  on  bail  under  the  supervision  of  a
      probation officer or  a  correctional  official.  Section  71  of  the
      Criminal Procedure Act provides that awaiting-trial juveniles  may  be
      placed in a place of safety or under  supervision,  instead  of  being
      released on bail or being detained in custody, while section 72 refers
      to release of an accused on warning.

|Month    |Admission            |Medium A             |Female              |
|         |Submitted|Successful|Submitted|Successful|Submitted|Successfu|
|         |         |          |         |          |         |l        |
|March    |69       |48 (69.5%)|59       |47 (79.7%)|0        |0        |
|April    |75       |32 (42.7%)|29       |14 (48.3%)|0        |0        |
|May      |48       |32 (66.7%)|23       |19 (82.6%)|1        |0        |
|June     |48       |38 (79.2%)|15       |12 (80%)  |0        |0        |
|July     |43       |43 (100%) |44       |28 (63.6%)|8        |8 (100%) |
|August   |104      |21 (20.2%)|90       |48 (53.3%)|5        |2 (40%)  |
|September|96       |56 (58.3%)|225      |129(57.3%)|14       |10       |
|         |         |          |         |          |         |(71.4%)  |

     4.3    Interventions to address overcrowding at Pollsmoor include:
     • The appointment of four additional court officials (now a  total  of
       seven) to assist with the reduced bail applications and  alternative
       placements for awaiting-trial prisoners.
     • A list of section 62(f) and 63  applications  (to  reduce  bail)  is
       submitted weekly by the court officials to the various courts.
     • Heads of centres attend monthly case-flow meetings  to  address  the
       management of overcrowding.
     • A list of awaiting-trail children is provided to various courts  and
       at case flow meetings on a monthly basis.
     • The names of awaiting-trial children are given to the Department  of
       Social Development each Friday.
     • There is constant interaction between the  in-house  social  workers
       and the Department of Social Development for available bed space  at
       places of safety.


   5. Issues Arising

   1. Applications in terms of section 62(f) of the Criminal Procedure Act

           In response to queries about the  granting  of  applications  to
           place an accused under the  supervision  of  a  correctional  or
           probation officer in terms of section 62  (f)  of  the  Criminal
           Procedure Act  of  1977,  representatives  from  the  Magistracy
           expressed doubt that the Department of Correctional Services has
           sufficient capacity to monitor those released in terms  of  this
           section. It was said  that  magistrates  are  unable  to  simply
           release people awaiting-trial without the assurance  that  there
           are arrangements in place to ensure that  they  will  return  to
           court. MPs also heard that a common concern is that the majority
           of juveniles are being held  for  ‘aggressive’  offences.  Their
           parents do not always want them at home for reasons that include
           being unable to guarantee that they will be able to bring  their
           children to court on the appointed dates.  There  are  also  not
           enough places of safety and secure care facilities.

   2. Conditions of Bail

           Pollsmoor officials explained that  there  were  many  awaiting-
           trial prisoners who could not afford bail, even if it was  below
           R1000, as shown in the Table in paragraph 3.2.  above.  However,
           they could not provide the Committees with a  breakdown  of  the
           bail amounts under R1000, nor could they tell the Committees the
           precise details of the alleged crimes committed.


           It emerged that  the  factors  involved  in  granting  bail  are
           complex: bail is intended to ensure that an accused  returns  to
           court on the appointed date, and is meant to take  into  account
           the affordability of the  accused.  Where  the  bail  amount  is
           small, it does not necessarily mean  that  the  offence  is  not
           serious. Magistrates also take into account the  seriousness  of
           the offence, the strength of the case against  the  accused  and
           the  personal  circumstances  of  the  accused.  The  number  of
           previous convictions is also taken into account.


           Amendments to the Criminal Procedure Act were designed  to  make
           it more difficult to get bail: Schedules 5  and  6  to  the  Act
           state that bail may not be granted for the  offences  listed  in
           these Schedules, unless there are exceptional circumstances.

   3. Lack of information on the committal warrant


          Awaiting-trial prisoners are not assessed when first  brought  to
          Pollsmoor. The committal warrants that  accompany  awaiting-trial
          prisoners do not provide sufficient  details  of  the  crime  for
          which the accused is being  detained.  Typically,  the  committal
          warrant will simply state in broad terms the crime for which  the
          accused is being held.


          This makes it difficult for prison officials to establish whether
          a particular awaiting-trial prisoner’s case should be brought  to
          the attention of the authorities. The lack of  information  means
          that awaiting-trial  prisoners  can  spend  unnecessary  time  in
          prison. Prison officials need access to the court file  in  order
          to properly understand why an awaiting-trial  prisoner  is  being
          held.


   4. Legal facilities available to awaiting trial detainees

           Correctional Services officials said that there  are  facilities
           available to awaiting-trial prisoners to meet with  their  legal
           representatives. The Committees were informed that the Legal Aid
           Board visits the facility on Tuesdays,  Thursdays  and  Fridays.
           Officials from the Department of Justice have  also  visited  to
           explain plea bargaining.


           However, through further  engagement  with  the  officials,  MPs
           established that the Legal Aid Board does not always  visit  the
           facility and that  consultations  between  attorneys  and  their
           clients tend to take place at  the  courts.  The  representative
           from the Office of the Inspecting Judge was of the view that  if
           the Legal Aid Board visited the facility  more  regularly  there
           would be far more applications for reduction of bail. The  Legal
           Aid Board, however, has a shortage of  available  practitioners,
           which impacts on its ability to conduct prison visits.
           It was also  alleged  that  awaiting-trial  prisoners,  who  are
           children or juveniles, are often not given a chance  to  contact
           their parents when first arriving at Pollsmoor.

        5. Co-operation and liaison  between  Departments  of  Correctional
           Services and Justice and Constitutional Development.

           The Committees heard that there are inter-sectoral structures in
           place to streamline or facilitate the  processing  of  awaiting-
           trial prisoners. These structures meet monthly.  The  Committees
           heard that awaiting-trial  prisoners  are  considered  to  be  a
           priority for magistrates, and that magistrates are  well  versed
           on issues such as juveniles in custody and the granting of  bail
           of relatively small amounts.

   6. Visits from Magistrates

          While magistrates used to visit offenders in prisons, this is  no
          longer common practice. With the creation of the  Office  of  the
          Inspecting Judge, magistrates no longer feel that this is part of
          their function, and only visit when invited.

   7. Caseload Backlogs

          Although there are systems in  place,  the  enormous  in-flow  of
          cases creates backlogs. The Committees  were  informed  that  the
          Department of Justice has once again, from September,  instituted
          backlog courts to reduce this problem.


      8. Interventions to reduce the number of Children Awaiting  Trial  at
         Pollsmoor
          There are interventions to reduce the  number  of  awaiting-trial
          children in Pollsmoor. Every month a list of names is provided to
          courts and to the case flow  meetings.  Every  Friday,  Pollsmoor
          provides the Department of Social  Development  with  a  list  of
          sentenced and awaiting-trial children. Pollsmoor is also provided
          with information on the number of places available at  places  of
          safety  and  at  secure  care  facilities.  There   is   constant
          networking taking  place  between  the  in-house  Social  Workers
          regarding diversion, as well as available bed-space at places  of
          safety. This has seen a reduction in the number of male  children
          incarcerated from the end of August 2007, from 195 to 140 in late
          October 2007.

5. Committees’ Recommendations

       1.  In  different   forms,   several   of   the   observations   and
          recommendations in this section have been made before.  They  are
          not particularly novel or exceptional and can  even  be  seen  as
          predictable. The difference however is in the current approach of
          the  Committees.  We  are  determined  to  follow  up  on   these
          recommendations and actively monitor progress in regard to  them.
          We are acutely aware of the challenges the  relevant  departments
          and other roleplayers  face,  but  we  believe  that  incremental
          improvements are possible and certainly necessary  –  and  it  is
          these modest, incremental improvements that  our  Committees  are
          seeking to pursue. We are also aware of our own limitations, with
          our “over-loaded” programmes and inadequate  research,  technical
          and other support, and so we  should  not  be  too  ambitious  in
          setting our own oversight targets. We need to  be  strategic  and
          selective in our oversight targets. In this respect, our main aim
          is to see incremental improvements in the position  of  awaiting-
          trial  prisoners  in  Pollsmoor  and  put  appropriate  pressure,
          consistent with our oversight role, on the  relevant  departments
          and  other  roleplayers  for  incremental  improvements  in   the
          position  of  awaiting  trial  detainees  in  other  correctional
          facilities. The Correctional Services Portfolio  Committee  will,
          of course, focus more on the general conditions  at  correctional
          facilities and further advance its oversight role in this regard.
          However, our two Committees will work closer together  to  follow
          through on the recommendations set  out  below.  This  will  mean
          working both jointly and, in a  complementary  way,  in  our  own
          respective portfolios to  monitor  progress  in  respect  of  the
          recommendations. We might also work with other relevant portfolio
          and select committees to follow through  on  the  recommendations
          below.

       2. As part of the monitoring process, this report will  be  referred
          to the Departments of Justice and Constitutional Development  and
          Correctional Services for an initial written response within  two
          months of the date of its adoption. The aim of the response would
          be to provide information to the Committees, convey  the  initial
          views of the departments on the recommendations  below,  and  set
          the basis for the briefing referred to in 5.3 below.  The  report
          will also be referred  to  the  Pollsmoor  management  and  other
          relevant stakeholders.

       3. The Committees will also convene a joint meeting of the  relevant
          Departments, the  Pollsmoor  management  and  other  stakeholders
          within six months to monitor progress in  regard  to  the  issues
          raised in this report and take matters further.

       4. While the Committees appreciate the challenges, we feel that  for
          awaiting-trial offenders to constitute  66.8%  of  the  Pollsmoor
          offender population is altogether  unacceptable.  The  Committees
          require a more comprehensive explanation than we got  during  our
          visit on why this is the case and what is being done  to  improve
          the situation, even if gradually over time.  The  Committees  are
          keen to get a better sense of how  Pollsmoor  fares  compared  to
          other correctional facilities.

       5. The Pollsmoor officials explained their approach to dealing  with
          the high number of awaiting-trial prisoners, especially children.
          However, the Committees are not clear that this approach is being
          implemented effectively – and will engage further on this at  the
          briefing referred to in 5.3 above.  The  Committees  welcome  the
          reduction in the number of male children incarcerated,  from  195
          to 140, between the end of August and late October this year.

       6. The Committees are concerned about the number  of  awaiting-trial
          prisoners who are being detained in prison  simply  because  they
          are unable to meet bail, especially when the bail is below R1000.
          It is not cost-effective to accommodate awaiting-trial  prisoners
          where the bail amounts are small. The Committees  note  that  the
          Department of Justice and  Constitutional  Development’s  2006/07
          Annual Report refers to section 63(A) of the  Criminal  Procedure
          Act that allows for the release of awaiting trial prisoners,  who
          have been granted bail, but are  unable  to  pay  the  bail.  The
          Committees note that the Department of Correctional Services  was
          requested by  the  Criminal  Justice  System  Review  Project  to
          prioritise the release of such prisoners, and to submit a  report
          by end of May  2007,  indicating  progress.  The  Committees  are
          interested in what progress there has been in this regard.

       7. The Committees feel that the judiciary  should,  where  possible,
          make use of alternative sentencing so as to ensure that those who
          have committed  petty  offences  are  not  sent  to  the  already
          overcrowded prisons. Prison should be for serious offenders.

       8. The Committees are concerned that Legal Aid  Board  practitioners
          do not regularly visit Pollsmoor, except when they  are  informed
          that  an  accused  does  not  have  legal  representation.   More
          immediate access to a legal representative will  result  in  more
          applications for reduction of bail, and a decrease in the  number
          of awaiting-trial prisoners. However, the  Committees  are  aware
          that there was no representative from the Legal Aid Board present
          during the oversight visit. The Committees are also aware of  the
          capacity  constraints  that  face  the  Legal  Aid   Board.   The
          Committees will refer this report to  the  Legal  Aid  Board  and
          request a report, within two months, on  the  Board’s  visits  to
          Pollsmoor and other correctional facilities and the challenges it
          faces in this regard.

       9. The Committees feel  that  when  an  awaiting-trial  prisoner  is
          committed to a correctional facility, adequate information of the
          crime, in respect of which the accused has been charged,  has  to
          be contained in the accompanying documentation. This  information
          is usually contained in the case docket or  court  file.  If  the
          information is made available, stakeholders will be  better  able
          to ensure that awaiting-trial prisoners do not spend  unnecessary
          time in prison. The Committees request the Department of  Justice
          and Constitutional Development to report on  the  feasibility  of
          providing the  Department  of  Correctional  Services  with  such
          information.

      10. The Committees feels that, within their constraints,  magistrates
          should seek to visit  correctional  facilities,  particularly  in
          respect of awaiting-trial prisoners. The Committees are  keen  to
          understand what the difficulties are in regard to  this  and  how
          they might be addressed. The Committees will raise this with  the
          Magistrates  Commission  and  also  confer  with   the   Judicial
          Inspectorate of Prison.

      11. While it is clear that there are structures in place that provide
          for inter-sectoral engagement, it is not  clear  to  what  extent
          these structures are effective. The  Committees  will  engage  on
          this further at the briefing referred to in 6.3 above.

      12. The Committees feel that there should  be  greater  collaboration
          between all role players around ensuring  better  conditions  for
          and the speedy sentencing  of  awaiting  trial  detainees  –  co-
          operation between the Departments of Justice, Social Development,
          Safety and Security and Correctional Services should  be  ongoing
          in this regard.

      13. The Committees note that while sentenced children  and  juveniles
          take part in education, sport  and  developmental  programmes  in
          Pollsmoor, awaiting-trial children and juveniles are not  allowed
          to take part. This is  apparently  because  the  latter  category
          “fall under justice, not correctional services”.  The  Committees
          are clear  that  this  “silo”  approach  is  not  acceptable  and
          inconsistent with the notion of an integrated justice system, and
          feel that all children and juveniles, both  those  sentenced  and
          awaiting-trial, should be allowed to  take  part  in  the  above-
          mentioned programmes. Some of the awaiting-trial  juveniles  have
          been awaiting trial for long  periods,  some  as  long  as  three
          years.

      14. The Committees note the interventions to address overcrowding  in
          Pollsmoor. There is obviously a need for more places of safety as
          children and juveniles released from prison cannot always go back
          to their homes; sometimes there are not even contact  details  of
          the families of those released, especially if their families  are
          in rural areas or provinces other  than  the  Western  Cape.  The
          Committees note that the Department of  Social  Development  also
          serves on the intersectoral task team, referred to in 6.11 above,
          and  are  interested  to  receive   more   information   on   the
          availability of places of safety. The matter will also be  raised
          with  the  Social  Development  Portfolio   Committee   and,   if
          necessary, the Department of  Social  Development  will  also  be
          asked to attend the briefing referred to in 6.3 above.

      15. The Committees welcome  the  use  of  “backlog  courts”  and  are
          interested in progress in this regard.

      16. The Committees believe that more should be done  to  ensure  that
          pregnant women, who have committed petty crimes, are not detained
          in prison but are  diverted  to  community  correction  or  other
          appropriate intervention programmes.

      17. The Committees will follow through on the recommendations set out
          above and are keen to see progress in regard to them. We  do  not
          believe that we should simply  carry  out  oversight  visits  and
          write reports for the sake of doing so; there have to be material
          outcomes. The responsibility for this does not reside solely with
          the executive. Parliament also has a major responsibility -  and,
          consistent with  our  oversight  role,  we  commit  ourselves  to
          working with the relevant departments and other  stakeholders  to
          achieve progress in regard to the above recommendations.

   7. Acknowledgements


      The  Committees  express  their  appreciation  to  the  Department  of
      Correctional Services, the Pollsmoor management and other stakeholders
      for  their  co-operation  in  ensuring  that  the  study   visit   was
      productive. The Committees acknowledge the assistance of Ms  Christine
      Silkstone of the Parliamentary Research and Information  Unit  in  the
      preparation of this report.


      Report to be considered


