---
title: 'Joint Sitting - 28 February 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: Joint Sitting
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/joint-sitting/parliamentary-debates-JS-2008-02-28
---

THURSDAY, 28 FEBRUARY 2008
                                    ____

                        PROCEEDINGS AT JOINT SITTING
                                    ____

Members of the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces
assembled in the Chamber of the National Assembly at 14:27.

The Speaker of the National Assembly took the Chair and requested members
to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

            WELCOMING OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF FRANCE

The SPEAKER: Hon members, Mr President, we are honoured to have amongst us
today His Excellency Mr Nicolas Sarkozy, the President of the Republic of
France, who has been invited to address this Joint Sitting of Parliament on
the occasion of his visit to South Africa. His Excellency, may I take this
opportunity to welcome you to Parliament. [Applause.]

Ms N D NTWANAMBI: Madam Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the National
Assembly, Deputy Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces,
President of the Republic of South Africa Comrade Thabo Mbeki, members of
the executive, Members of Parliament and special delegates from our
provinces, honoured guests, on behalf of the people of South Africa I wish
to extend our warmest welcome to the President of the Republic of France,
President Nicolas Sarkozy.

Today marks yet another milestone in the thorough entrenchment of our
diplomatic relations and ties with the people of France. Our bilateral and
trilateral co-operation gathers considerable momentum and holds great
promise for addressing not only issues facing our country and region, but
also the global community. We are convinced that this occasion will indeed
take this process forward.

I must also say that I am reminded of a visit undertaken by former
President Nelson Mandela to France after our first democratic elections in
1994, when he urged the people of France to assist our country as we were
battling to overcome the long years of the legacy of apartheid and
underdevelopment.
The commitment made by the people of France saw a visit by former President
Chirac to our shores in June 1998, which was also followed by a visit by
Prime Minister Jospin in June 2001. It is for this reason that the millions
of people of South Africa are indeed humbled by the decision by President
Nicolas Sarkozy to also visit the southern shores of our beautiful
continent, bringing with him a message of hope and reaffirmation from the
people of France.

It is perhaps important that I indicate that relations between South Africa
and France are rooted in history and are marked by the common values of our
common beliefs, sharing the understanding of the importance of plural
democracy, respect for human rights and the promotion of social justice.

More importantly, ours is a relationship between peoples that are ready to
face the multiple challenges of a rapidly globalising world. Since the
demise of the apartheid regime in 1994 and the re-entry of our country into
the global community, South Africa and France have enjoyed cordial
relations characterised by regular high-level dialogue, diverse bilateral
co-operation programmes and growing bilateral economic ties, while co-
operating at a multilateral level, including the United Nations Security
Council and the G8.

We are indeed humbled that economic relations between our countries are
continually expanding and that France has grown to be South Africa’s eighth
largest trading partner and an important investor in the South African
economy.

Today, the South Africa-France Business Forum continues to provide an
opportunity for South African and French businesspeople to exchange views
on doing business in Africa and to explore possible joint partnerships on
the continent and entry into the European business community.

There are about 160 French companies operating in South Africa, including
several French multinationals such as Total, Alcatel, Renault, Lafarge,
Danone, Peugeot Citroën, which provide thousands of jobs for our people.

When we launched our flagship programme to address the shortage of skills
in our country, the people of France, particularly the business community
in France, were quick to respond with help. France has made clear its
commitment to supporting Asgisa, the Accelerated Shared Growth Initiative
for SA, and Jipsa, the Joint Initiative for Priority Skills Acquisition,
notably through envisaged participation in infrastructure development and
in human resource training.

We are proud that as our country engaged on a path to expand the pool of
scarce skills, such as engineers, companies such as the French nuclear
company Areva have committed themselves to training South African graduates
in project management at postgraduate level.

The École Nationale d’Administration, in association with the SA Management
Development Institute, will offer training programmes to senior South
African public servants. I am certain that your visit to our country, hon
President, will further expand our diplomatic ties, and that you will enjoy
your stay in our beautiful country. Once more, welcome to South Africa.
Thank you, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

               ADDRESS BY PRESIDENT NICOLAS SARKOZY OF FRANCE

Le PRÉSIDENT DE LA RÉPUBLIQUE FRANÇAISE (M.N Sarkozy): Madame la
Présidente, Monsieur le Président, mesdames et messieurs les
Parlementaires, je voudrais vous dire mon émotion de parler devant le
Parlement d’un pays qu’en France nous admirons, je veux dire votre pays,
l’Afrique du Sud.

Avec le recul, le vingtième siècle apparaît comme l'un des siècles les plus
brutaux de l'histoire de l’humanité. Le vingtième siècle pour l’humanité ce
fut: deux guerres mondiales, un génocide, la shoah, des dictatures,des
réfugiés,des déportés, des exilés.

Le vingtième siècle, ce fut pour le monde un siècle de fer. Et l’Afrique,
votre Afrique en a subi dans sa chair toute la violence et toute l’horreur.
L’Afrique a enduré la colonisation; les conséquences des grands conflits
mondiaux ne lui furent pas épargnées à l’Afrique puisque vos fils en
payèrent aussi le prix en combattant au service des puissances coloniales.
Puis vinrent les luttes pour la décolonisation et de nouvelles victimes,
puis vinrent des conflits entre pays africains qui accompagnèrent le
conflit entre l’Est et l’Ouest. Et puis comme si cela ne suffisait pas, il
a fallut que l’Afrique connaisse les génocides.
Plus que d'autres, l'Afrique fut victime du mépris et du racisme.

Et c'est pourtant de ce continent souvent humilié, parfois bafoué, et
précisément d'Afrique du Sud, qu'est venue à la toute fin du vingtième
siècle une magnifique leçon d'humanité. Alors qu’ici même régnaient
l'apartheid et ses violences, alors que la vengeance et de nouvelles
oppressions auraient pu naître de tant d'humiliations, le peuple d'Afrique
du Sud, guidé par des hommes hors du commun, a voulu rompre la longue
chaîne du malheur.

Cette extraordinaire réussite humaine, qui est la vôtre, doit beaucoup à
l’homme qui après 27 ans de prison a dit à ceux qui l’avaient si longtemps
privé de sa liberté: L’oppresseur doit être libéré tout comme l’oppressé.
L’opprimé et l’oppresseur sont tous deux dépossédés de leur humanité. Je
vous prie de croire que dans mon engagement politique, cette phrase a
beaucoup compté.

Et vous, les Sud-Africains, vous avez délibérément choisi la
réconciliation. En décidant d'emprunter ce chemin, je suis venu vous dire
en tant que Président de la France que vous avez en quelque sorte aussi
racheté le siècle. Vous avez permis qu'en dépit des atrocités du vingtième
siècle, ce siècle qui fut le siècle de l’horreur puisse se clore sur un
immense signal d'espoir pour l'humanité tout entière, et ce n’est pas rien
que ce signal d’espoir soit venu d'Afrique.

C'est donc empreint, Mesdames et Messieurs, de respect pour votre nation
que je me présente devant vous, les Représentants de ce grand people
d'Afrique du Sud, hérauts d'une société plus juste et plus humaine parce
que plus fraternelle. C'est pour saluer ce peuple et l'espoir qu'il nous
donne que j'ai souhaité venir ici, en Afrique du Sud.

Parce que l'Afrique a su faire naître cet espoir, la France veut travailler
avec l’Afrique du Sud. Notre monde doit s'appuyer désormais sur votre
exemple pour dire qu’il n’y a pas de fatalité. La France apporte à cette
lutte contre la fatalité ses valeurs, la liberté, l'égalité et la
fraternité. Mais la France et l’Afrique du Sud, j’en ai la conviction, en
agissant ensemble, peuvent mieux contribuer que d’autres à l'émergence d'un
monde apaisé.

Ce défi commun, nous l'avons en partage d'abord pour que l'Europe et
l'Afrique tissent enfin des liens nouveaux; des liens qui ne soient plus
ceux de l'inégalité, de l'exploitation et du ressentiment. A l’inégalité, à
l’exploitation, au ressentiment, je veux opposer l’égalité, l'équité et le
respect entre l’Europe et l’Afrique.

La relation entre la France et l’Afrique est ancienne. Je ne veux éviter
aucune question et escamoter aucun problème. La relation entre la France et
l’Afrique a pu être douloureuse, et en tant que Président de la France je
veux vous dire que j’ai déjà eu l’occasion d’évoquer les crimes et les
fautes commises. Et je n’ai pas l’intention de les oublier, parce que je
sais que sur ce continent, on a la mémoire, la mémoire des anciens, la
mémoire des malheurs et la mémoire des douleurs.

Il ne faut pas oublier non plus ce que la France doit à l’Afrique. Je pense
notamment à l’aide précieuse que l’Afrique nous a apportée dans les deux
guerres mondiales. Et je n’oublie pas que l’Afrique du Sud a combattu à nos
côtés.

La force de ces liens n’appartient pas qu’au passé, elle s’inscrit aussi
dans l’identité française. Savez-vous mes chers amis que 10% de la
population française aujourd’hui peut revendiquer son origine africaine?
Elle s’inscrit aussi dans l’identité africaine à travers la langue
française. Mais en dépit de la profondeur et de l’ancienneté de ces liens,
la relation de la France avec l’Afrique, particulièrement avec l’Afrique
sub-saharienne, se distend. Le nombre de Français vivant en Afrique, les
exportations et les investissements français vers l’Afrique ont baissé. Il
en résulte que nos partenaires traditionnels en Afrique ont parfois le
sentiment d’un abandon ou au minimum d'un désintérêt de la France à leur
endroit.

Alors cette relation entre vous et nous est compliquée parce que s’y mêlent
depuis toujours à la raison le sentiment et la passion, parce qu’elle est
depuis toujours chargée d’une grande affectivité, mais surtout parce que
cette relation est en décalage par rapport à ce que veulent les Africains
et à ce que perçoivent les Français.

Aujourd'hui, je le dis du fond de mon coeur, l'ancien modèle de relations
entre la France et l'Afrique n'est plus compris par les nouvelles
generations d'Africains, comme d'ailleurs par l'opinion publique française.
Il faut changer le modèle des relations entre la France et l’Afrique si
l’on veut regarder l’avenir ensemble.
Je sais même qu’au sein de votre Assemblée, certains entre vous, militants
de la lutte de libération, perçoivent eux-mêmes encore ces relations de la
France et de l'Afrique à travers le prisme de la colonisation. Votre
présence pour m’écouter n’en a d’ailleurs à mes yeux que advantage de prix.

Nous nous trouvons dans une situation où notre engagement politique,
militaire, économique aux côtés de l'Afrique est perçu par beaucoup non
comme une aide sincère, mais comme une ingérence néocoloniale; mais dans le
même temps, ayez l’honnêteté de reconnaître que certains nous reprochent
une indifférence, un retrait ou une absence d’engagement, un abandon ou une
ingratitude. Pour les uns on fait trop, ou mal pour les autres pas assez.

Et je sais parfaitement que les Africains en ont assez de recevoir des
leçons de morale ou de bonne gouvernance. Ils les perçoivent, ces leçons,
comme arrogantes ou condescendantes; mais dans le même temps, les sociétés
civiles, les opinions publiques d’Afrique nous interpellent, nous la
France, et elles souhaitent notre implication directe à leur côté pour
dénoncer la corruption ou la mauvaise gouvernance.
Il existe aujourd’hui une sorte d’exception africaine dans l’opinion
publique: ce qui est considéré comme normal avec d’autres régions du monde
fait naître le soupçon quant aux intentions du gouvernement français dès
qu'il s'agit d’Afrique. La jeunesse africaine entretient avec la France une
relation ambivalente d’attirance et de contestation.

Actuellement, plus de 100 000 Africains font des études supérieures en
France. Contrairement aux idées reçues, il n’y a jamais eu autant
d’étudiants africains dans les universités françaises. Et cependant, la
jeunesse d’Afrique éprouve le sentiment que la France se ferme à elle.

Mesdames et messieurs, c’est mon devoir de Président de la République de
lever ces malentendus, de dénoncer ces paradoxes qui trahissent une
situation qui n’est satisfaisante ni pour vous ni pour nous. Ma conviction
est que la relation franco-africaine est pleine d’avenir à condition que
nous lui donnions un nouvel élan.

De même que l’Afrique du Sud incarne une Afrique nouvelle, la relation
franco-sud-africaine doit inspirer une relation nouvelle entre la France et
l’Afrique. La France et l’Afrique du Sud peuvent avoir des relations
exemplaires, équilibrées, transparentes, et si vous me le permettez,
décomplexées.

Vous êtes devenu notre premier partenaire économique. Cent soixante
sociétés françaises développent des partenariats industriels et créent des
employs dans votre pays. Ce matin, avec le Président Thabo Mbeki nous avons
signé des accords dans les domaines de l’énergie, des transports, de la
science et du tourisme qui témoignent de la diversité de nos liens. Nous
devons aller plus loin. Le niveau de développement atteint par l’Afrique du
Sud n’explique pas à lui seul la nature de nos relations. Et je souhaite un
partenariat véritable entre nous.

Monsieur le Président, cher Thabo, vous avez coutume de dire que "l’Afrique
du Sud ne peut être un îlot de prospérité au milieu d’un océan de misère".
La France pense exactement la même chose. Je veux affirmer devant vous que
la sécurité et la prospérité de la France et de l’Europe sont
indissociables de la sécurité et de la prospérité de l’Afrique. Quatorze
kilomètres séparent l’Afrique et l’Europe par le détroit de Gibraltar. Ne
pas comprendre que nos destins sont liés, c’est procéder à un contresens
historique dont les conséquences seraient dramatiques. L’Europe et
l’Afrique auront le même destin en terme de sécurité et de développement.

La Renaissance de l’Afrique, la France la souhaite. La France souhaite la
renaissance de l’Afrique de toute son âme, la France la souhaite de tout
son coeur et la France la souhaite au nom de tout ce qui l’unit à
l’Afrique. Cette Renaissance, l’Afrique du Sud la veut. Elle en a donné le
signal. Elle a montré l’exemple. La Renaissance, ce n’est pas d’abord une
affaire de moyens. C’est d’abord, mesdames et messieurs, une affaire de
mentalités. Mais qu’est-ce que l’homme de la Renaissance? C’est l’homme qui
croit que tout est possible. L’homme de la Renaissance est un homme qui
croit en l’homme. Et parce qu’il croit en l’homme, il pense que l’homme
peut changer le monde. L’homme de la Renaissance c’est un homme dont les
rêves sont plus grands que ce qu’il peut accomplir!

Pour travailler à cette Renaissance, la France veut refonder ses relations
avec l’Afrique. La France ne veut pas être en Afrique pour perpétuer sous
d’autres formes des rapports inégaux qui appartiennent à un passé révolu.
Si la France veut refonder sa relation avec l’Afrique, la France doit
commencer par reconnaître et assumer ses intérêts en Afrique. La paix et la
sécurité du continent africain, la lutte contre la pauvreté, la croissance
économique du continent, votre insertion dans la mondialisation sont pour
nos deux pays des intérêts communs. La France, comme l’Afrique du Sud, a
intérêt a la sécurité de l’Afrique. Parce que les guerres, les pandémies,
les trafics ou le terrorisme en Afrique auront des conséquences directes en
Europe et en France. Si vous échouez aujourd’hui, ce sera le drame pour
nous demain.

La France, comme l’Afrique du Sud, ont un même intérêt à une meilleure
régulation de la mondialisation. La mondialisation est entrée dans notre
histoire. Il serait illusoire et dangereux de prétendre gérer les grandes
affaires du monde sans l’Afrique. La France n’acceptera pas qu’on puisse
traiter des grandes affaires du monde sans qu’un pays africain ne puisse
prendre sa part et parler au nom du continent africain. Mais est-ce que les
autres dirigeants du monde se rendent compte que l’Europe et l’Afrique
représentent ensemble près de la moitié des pays de la planète? Et c’est
ensemble seulement que les Européens et les Africains pourront peser sur la
mondialisation. L’Afrique du Sud est pour nous un partenaire dans la
mondialisation. Nous avons une approche commune. Et je le dis comme je le
pense, il est profondément anormal que le G8 ne fasse pas toute sa place au
G5. On ne peut pas prétendre traiter des grandes questions du monde sans
faire un place à égalité au G5, et donc à l’Afrique du Sud.

Je pense la même chose du Conseil de sécurité des Nations Unies. Il y a un
milliard d’Africains dans le monde. Qui peut concevoir que l’Afrique n’ait
pas au moins un siège de membre permanent du Conseil de sécurité des
Nations Unies? C’est une évidence. Je pense la même chose des grandes
organisations internationales comme le FMI. J’ai participé, cher Thabo, tu
le sais, à mon premier G8 de Président de la République à Heiligendamm. Et
j’ai constaté que pendant deux jours et demi, nous avons travaillé à huit
pays et que pour le déjeuner du dernier jour, nous avons invité – excusez
du peu – deux milliards et demi d’habitants. J’étais gêné pour les invités
de la dernière minute qui auraient dû être invités à la première minute de
ce sommet.

Pas un pays d’Amérique du Sud. Pas un pays d’Afrique. Pas l’Inde et pas la
Chine. Il faut pour le XXIème siècle, l’organisation du XXIème siècle et
pas l’organisation du XX ème siècle. Alors, il ne nous appartient pas de
décider qui représentera l'Afrique. Mais je constate que l'Afrique du Sud
marche à l'avant-garde de ce continent; qu’elle a tous les atouts pour
faire entendre sa voix dans ces enceintes. Le Président Mbeki a par le
passé gratifié la France du titre de "Citoyenne d’Afrique". C’est à mes
yeux un vrai compliment et je souhaite que la France le mérite.

Pendant la campagne présidentielle française, j'ai exprimé ma volonté de
rénover la relation entre la France et l’Afrique. Je mènerai à bien cette
rénovation, je vous demande de me comprendre. Il y a trois semaines au
Tchad, alors que des mouvements rebelles tentaient de renverser par les
armes les autorités légales du pays, la France, s’est interdit de
s’immiscer dans les combats. Je n’ai pas autorisé à ce qu’un seul soldat
français tire sur un africain, même si pour moi il convenait de soutenir le
gouvernement légal du Tchad. C’est un changement sans précédent. Mais je
veux aller plus loin aujourd’hui.

Ce changement il faut le poursuivre, parce que la présence militaire
française en Afrique repose toujours sur des accords conclus au lendemain
de la décolonisation, il y a 50 ans! Je ne dis pas que ces accords
n’étaient pas à l’époque justifiés. Mais j’affirme que ce qui a été fait en
1960 n’a plus le même sens aujourd’hui. La rédaction de ces accords est
obsolète et il n'est plus concevable, par exemple, que l’armée française
soit entraînée dans des conflits internes. L’Afrique de 2008 n’est pas
l’Afrique de 1960! La France en tirera toutes les conséquences avec ses
partenaires africains. Et je veux devant le Parlement d’Afrique du Sud
faire quatre propositions.

La première porte sur les accords de défense entre la France et les pays
africains. Ils doivent refléter l’Afrique d’aujourd’hui, et pas l’Afrique
d’hier. Ils doivent reposer sur les intérêts stratégiques de la France et
de ses partenaires africains. Je ne dis pas qu’il faille nécessairement
faire table rase et tout effacer d’un seul trait de plume. Mais je dis que
la France souhaite engager des discussions avec tous les Etats africains
concernés pour adapter les accords existants aux réalités du temps présent
et en tenant le plus grand compte de la propre volonté des pays africains.
La France sera ouverte au dialogue avec tous ceux qui souhaiteront nouer
avec elle un nouveau partenariat en matière de sécurité.

Deuxième proposition, je vais refonder nos relations sur un principe qui
n’existait pas et que j’imposerai, le principe de la transparence. La
transparence, c’est la meilleure garantie pour des relations solides et
durables, le meilleur antidote aux fantasmes et aux incompréhensions.
Contrairement à la pratique passée, j’annonce au Parlement d’Afrique du Sud
que tous les accords de défense entre la France et les pays africains
seront intégralement publiés. J’associerai également étroitement le
Parlement français aux grandes orientations de la politique de la France en
Afrique.

Troisièmement, je propose que la présence militaire française en Afrique
serve en priorité à aider l’Afrique à bâtir, comme elle en a l’ambition,
son propre dispositif de sécurité collective. L’Union africaine souhaite
disposer de forces en attente à l’horizon 2010–2012? Eh bien que cet
objectif soit aussi celui de la France! La France n’a pas vocation à
maintenir indéfiniment des forces armées en Afrique, l’Afrique doit prendre
en charge ses problèmes de sécurité.

Que l’on me comprenne bien: il ne s’agit nullement d’un désengagement de la
France en Afrique. C’est tout le contraire. Je souhaite que la France
s’engage davantage au côté de l’Union africaine, cher Thabo, pour
construire le système de sécurité collective dont l’Afrique a besoin car la
sécurité de l’Afrique c’est d’abord naturellement l’affaire des Africains.

Enfin, ma dernière proposition vise à faire de l’Europe un partenaire
majeur de l’Afrique en matière de paix et de sécurité. C’est le sens du
partenariat conclu entre nos deux continents à Lisbonne en décembre
dernier. C’est notre intérêt à tous, car une Europe forte a besoin d’une
Afrique forte.

Mais je sais bien que le meilleur garant de la paix et de la sécurité,
c’est la démocratie et la justice. Alors parlons-en de démocratie et de
justice. La France souhaite en en Côte d’Ivoire la tenue d’élections
libres, justes et reconnues. Aucun pays ne peut espérer le développement
sans organiser des élections démocratiques. Cela fait trop d’années que
nous les attendons. Et il en va de même au Zimbabwe. Et il en va de même au
Tchad où l’enracinement de la démocratie appelle dès maintenant de nouveaux
efforts de la part de tous. Et je veux le dire: la démocratie et les Droits
de l'Homme, cela vaut aussi en Afrique et ce n’est pas une conditionnalité
exposée de l'extérieur. La démocratie et les Droits de l'Homme n'ont rien
d'étranger à l'Afrique. Ce sont des aspirations des peuples africains que
la France partage.

En matière de développement, je souhaite que la France contribue plus
activement à la lutte que vous avez engagée contre la pauvreté. La France
maintiendra son engagement financier pour la réalisation des Objectifs de
Développement du Millénaire. Le Président Mbeki m’a interrogé, ma réponse
est claire. Mais j’ai souhaité que la France intervienne de manière plus
ciblée pour favoriser l’accélération de la croissance économique. Et que
nous contribuions directement à la création d’entreprises africaines
génératrices d’emplois. C’est pourquoi j’ai décidé aujourd’hui de lancer
une initiative de soutien à la croissance économique.

Cette initiative sera mise en oeuvre par l’Agence Française de
Développement. Elle comportera trois composantes: Nous allons créer un
fonds d’investissement de 250 millions d’euros pour prendre des
participations dans d’autres fonds mixtes ou thématiques, de façon à
développer les entreprises africaines. La deuxième composante, c’est la
création d’un fonds de garantie dote aussi de 250 millions d’euros, pour
permettre de faciliter l’accès des PME africaines au crédit bancaire et au
capital. La troisième composante sera le doublement, le doublement de
l’activité de l’Agence Française de Développement en faveur du secteur
privé, soit un engagement de 2 milliards d’euros, que je vous annonce, en
cinq ans. Au total, l’initiative de la France mobilisera donc deux
milliards et demi d’euros en cinq ans qui financeront directement ou
indirectement 2000 entreprises africaines, pour la création de 300 000
emplois.

En intégrant cette initiative, le total des engagements financiers français
bilatéraux pour l’Afrique subsaharienne s’élèvera donc à dix milliards
d’euros sur les cinq prochaines années. Qui osera après parler de
désengagement de la France?

Enfin, je voudrais terminer en évoquant un sujet difficile, mais il ne sert
à rien de faire des voyages si on ne parle pas des questions difficiles. Je
voudrais parler de l’avenir des relations entre la France et l’Afrique
s’agissant des migrations. Soixante-cinq pour cent des 200 000 étrangers
qui s’installent chaque année en France viennent du continent africain.
Cependant, il ne s’agit pas seulement d’un phénomène Nord-Sud. La grande
majorité de ces mouvements migratoires est interne au continent africain.
L’Afrique du Sud vous accueillez vous-même, à vous seule, près d’un quart
des populations migrantes de l’Afrique. Alors, la réalité de l’immigration
n’est pas satisfaisante aujourd’hui. Elle ne l'est pas pour nous, mais elle
ne l'est pas davantage pour vous. Nous sommes confrontés Européens et
Africains du Sud, au même défi. 500 000 personnes entrent illégalement en
Europe tous les ans, l'ampleur du phénomène vers l'Afrique du Sud l'oblige
également à un très grand nombre d'expulsions. Qui pourrait se satisfaire
d’une situation pareille?

Je n’ai jamais dis, parce que je ne le pense pas, que l’immigration est un
phénomène qu’il faudrait combattre. Et j’ai toujours dénoncé le concept
scandaleux d’immigration zéro, qui est une idée dangereuse et une idée
irréaliste. La France comme l’Afrique du Sud sont deux nations qui doivent
une part de leur essor à l’apport des migrants, nous ne pouvons pas
l’oublier.

Aucun pays au monde ne peut se permettre de recevoir, cependant, une
quantité de migrants qui excède sa capacité à les accueillir dignement,
dans le travail, le logement, l’éducation et les soins. La rupture de cet
équilibre entraîne des phénomènes de chômage massif, d’exclusion et de
ghettos. C’est donc la responsabilité de tout gouvernement de décider
combien de migrants il est prêt à accueillir sur son territoire et dans
quelles conditions.

La France prépare une réforme capitale de sa politique de l’immigration. Un
quota annuel de nouveaux migrants accueillis en France sera débattu et voté
chaque année par le Parlement. Ce plafond comportera des souscatégories par
motifs d’immigration – travail ou regroupement familial. Il sera négocié
avec les pays d’origine dans le cadre des accords de gestion concertés des
flux migratoires.

On ne gère pas l’immigration uniquement par la décision du pays d’accueil,
mais également par la décision du pays de départ. Le temps est venu de
construire un partenariat euro-africain sur les migrations, sur trois
sujets essentiels, capitaux à mes yeux: D’abord le pillage de vos cerveaux.
C’est un sujet d’une gravité extrême. Un rapport de l’OMS de 2006 souligne
cette situation invraisemblable: l’Afrique supporte 24% du fardeau des
maladies, et la même Afrique qui supporte 24% du fardeau des maladies ne
possède plus que 3% du personnel médical sur son territoire. Comment allez-
vous soigner les vôtres si tous les médecins que vous formez s’en vont chez
nous pour essayer de trouver un développement qu’ils ne trouvent pas chez
vous? Le pillage des cerveaux, il convient d’y mettre un terme.

Cette situation n’est pas tenable. Il faut éviter le départ définitif des
élites africaines.

Savez-vous qu’il y a en France plus de médecins béninois qui exercent dans
mon pays que de médecins béninois qui exercent au Bénin? Ne croyez-vous pas
que le Bénin, qui est l’un des pays les plus pauvres du monde, a besoin
d’avoir ses médecins plutôt que la France?

Ensuite, la répression des filières: il est temps que la communauté
internationale se mobilise contre cet odieux trafic qui exploite la misère
de malheureux qui n’ont d’autres espoirs que dans le départ. Nous devons
être plus sévères avec ces esclavagistes des temps modernes qui déshonorent
l’humanité.

Enfin le co-développement, la mobilisation des populations migrantes pour
le développement des pays d’origine. Ce nouveau chantier fait partie d’un
large paquet de mesures adopté lors du 2ème Sommet UE-Afrique à Lisbonne.
Et je développerai cette relation lorsque j’exercerai, à partir du 1er
juillet de cette année, les fonctions de Président de l’Union européenne.

Au-delà de la relation entre etats, nous devons multiplier les liens qui
existent entre nous. Alors j’entends bien que ces liens, ils ont suscité
beaucoup de déception dans le passé. Et je voudrais notamment dire combien
je souhaite la poursuite des Sommets Afrique-France. Mais je veux que ces
rencontres qui ont débuté en 1973 changent dans leur méthode et dans leur
nature. Il est nécessaire de les adapter quant à leur finalité et à leur
déroulement.

Il est nécessaire de changer les sommets Afrique-France, de changer les
méthodes, de changer les objectifs. Leur préparation mérite plus de
concertation, les débats gagneront à être structurés différemment, il y a
lieu d’ajuster leur périodicité à celle d'autres rencontres, dans le cadre
de l’Union européenne ou de la Francophonie. On peut songer enfin à leur
conférer un caractère plus concret, tirer des bilans ou formuler des
orientations.

Je propose que la prochaine réunion ministérielle de suivi qui précèdera le
prochain Sommet déjà prévu au Caire en 2009 soit l’occasion de se prononcer
en commun sur de nouvelles modalités. Comprenez-moi bien: parce que je
crois à la nécessité de l’amitié entre la France et l’Afrique, je ne veux
avoir aucun tabou dans la refondation de nos relations.

Alors que débute le XXIème siècle, j’ai parfaitement conscience que notre
génération porte la lourde responsabilité d’éviter les drames qu’a connus
le siècle précédent. Le message d’humanité et de réconciliation venu
d’Afrique du Sud doit donc nous guider. Dans mon bureau, mes chers amis, à
Paris, il y a une photo de Nelson Mandela qu’il m’a offerte lorsqu’il est
venu l’année dernière. Quand je regarde ce visage qui pour le monde entier
est devenu le visage du pardon, je pense toujours à deux choses qu’il a
dites. La première, c’était pendant la campagne de 1994. Il disait à ceux
pour la dignité desquels il s’était tant battu – il a eu le courage de leur
dire cela - Si vous voulez vivre mieux, vous devez travailler dur. Nous ne
pouvons le faire à votre place; vous devez le faire vous-mêmes.

Le deuxième message, c’est ce passage magnifique à la fin des mémoires de
Nelson Mandela, quand il dit, ce qui est bouleversant pour nous: Personne
ne naît en haïssant une autre personne à cause de la couleur de sa peau, à
cause de son passé, ou à cause de sa religion. Les gens doivent apprendre à
haïr, et si les gens peuvent apprendre à haïr, on peut leur enseigner aussi
à aimer. Quand Nelson Mandela parle ainsi, il n’appartient pas à l’Afrique
du Sud, il fait honneur au monde dans son ensemble.

Votre histoire nous enseigne que les hommes ne sont pleinement humains que
par et grâce à d’autres hommes. Votre pays en fait tous les jours la
démonstration en faisant coexister les descendants des esclaves et ceux des
maîtres; en faisant coexister les descendants des fermiers venus
d’Angleterre, des Pays-Bas ou de France et ceux des conquérants zoulous et
des guerriers khossas; en faisant coexister les descendants des métayers
venus du Gujarat et ceux des mineurs venus de toute l’Afrique Australe.

Votre histoire, mes chers amis d’Afrique du Sud, démontre que les valeurs
de votre révolution, comme celles de la Révolution Française, peuvent
toujours permettre de transformer le monde. Ensemble, Africains du Sud et
Français, nous croyons à l’égalité des droits, nous croyons à l’égalité des
dignités, nous refusons le racisme.
Votre histoire nous dit que le monde, pour réussir, a besoin de l’Afrique,
de la voix de l’Afrique, mais d’une Afrique debout, d’une Afrique vivante
et d’une Afrique libre. C’est cette Afrique que je suis venu rencontrer
aujourd`hui. Alors. Vive l'Afrique du Sud, Vive la France. (Translation of
French speech follows.)

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF FRANCE (Mr N Sarkozy): Madam Speaker, Mr
President, Members of Parliament, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to say
how moved I feel at speaking before the Parliament of a country that we in
France admire; I mean your country, South Africa.

In retrospect, the twentieth century appears to be one of the most brutal
centuries in the history of mankind. The twentieth century for mankind
entailed: two world wars, genocide, the Holocaust, dictatorships, refugees,
deportees, exiles.

The twentieth century for the world was a grim century. And Africa, your
Africa, was seared by all the violence and the horror of this. Africa
endured colonialism, and Africa was not spared the consequences of the
great world conflicts, since your sons also paid the price by fighting for
the colonial powers. Then came the struggles for decolonisation and new
victims, then came conflicts between African countries that accompanied the
Cold War. And then, as if that were not enough, Africa had to experience
genocide. Africa, more than other regions, was the victim of scorn and
racism.

Yet it was from this often humiliated and sometimes ridiculed continent,
and more particularly South Africa, that a magnificent lesson in humanity
came, just as the twentieth century was drawing to a close. At a time when
apartheid and its attendant violence prevailed here, at a time when so many
humiliations could have given rise to revenge and further oppression, the
people of South Africa, guided by outstanding men, wished to break with the
long chain of adversity.

This extraordinary human achievement, which is yours, owes much to the man
who, after 27 years in prison, said to those who had long deprived him of
his freedom: “The oppressor must be liberated just as surely as the
oppressed. The oppressed and the oppressor alike are robbed of their
humanity.” You must believe me when I say that this phrase has been very
important to me in my political commitment.

And you, South Africans, have deliberately chosen reconciliation. In
choosing to embark on this path, I am here to tell you as President of
France that you also redeemed the century, as it were. Despite the
atrocities of the twentieth century, you have allowed this century, which
was the century of horror, to end on a powerful note of hope for mankind as
a whole, and it is not insignificant that this note of hope has come from
Africa.

Ladies and gentlemen, it is therefore with deep respect for your nation
that I stand before you, the representatives of this great people of South
Africa, who herald a more just, a more fraternal and hence a more humane
society. It was to pay tribute to this people and the hope that this people
has given us that I wanted to come here, to South Africa.

Because Africa has managed to ignite this hope, France wishes to work with
South Africa. Our world must henceforth rely on your example to say that
nothing is inevitable. France brings to the struggle against inevitability
its values, liberty, equality and fraternity. But I am convinced that
France and South Africa, acting together, are in a better position than
others to contribute to the emergence of a peaceful world.

We take up this common challenge, firstly so that Europe and Africa can at
long last forge new ties, ties that are no longer based on inequality,
exploitation and resentment. To counter inequality, exploitation and
resentment, I want equality, fairness and respect between Europe and
Africa.

Relations between France and Africa go back a long way. I do not wish to
avoid any question or evade any problem. Relations between France and
Africa have at times been painful, and as President of France I want to
tell you that I have spoken elsewhere of the crimes that were committed and
the mistakes that were made. And I do not intend to forget them, because I
know that on this continent people remember, remember their forebears,
remember the misfortunes and remember the sorrows.

Nor should we forget what France owes to Africa. I am thinking particularly
of the invaluable help Africa gave us ​​during the two world wars. And I am
not forgetting that South Africa fought side by side with us.
The strength of these ties is not just a part of our past; it is also part
of the French identity. Do you know, my dear friends, that 10% of the
French population can today claim African ancestry? It is also part of the
African identity, through the French language. But although these ties are
deep and long-standing, relations between France and Africa, and more
particularly sub-Saharan Africa, are becoming less close-knit. The number
of French citizens living in Africa, as well as the volume of French
exports to Africa and French investments in Africa, have declined. This has
resulted in our traditional partners in Africa sometimes feeling that
France has abandoned, or at the very least lost interest in them.

So, the relationship between you and us is complicated because reason has
always been mingled with feeling and passion, because the relationship has
always been charged with emotion, but particularly because the relationship
is out of step with what the Africans want and what the French perceive.

Today I say from the bottom of my heart, the old pattern of relations
between France and Africa is no longer understood by new generations of
Africans, or for that matter by public opinion in France. We must change
the pattern of relations between France and Africa if we want to face the
future together.

I know that even within this Assembly some of you who were activists in the
struggle for freedom still perceive these French-African relations through
the prism of colonialism. For me, this makes the fact that you are here
listening to me even more precious.

We find ourselves in a situation in which our political, military and
economic engagement alongside Africa is seen by many not as a well-meant
helping hand but as neo-colonial interference; but at the same time, have
the honesty to recognise that some reproach us for indifference, withdrawal
or lack of engagement, abandonment or ingratitude. For some we do too much
or act wrongly, for others not enough.

And I am perfectly aware that Africans have had enough of being lectured to
about morals and good governance. They perceive such lectures as arrogant
and condescending; but at the same time, African civil society and public
opinion want us, us French, to become directly involved alongside them in
denouncing corruption and poor governance.

There is today a sort of African exception in public opinion: what is
considered normal in relations with other world regions generates suspicion
about the French government’s intentions in relations with Africa. African
youth has an ambivalent relationship with France, comprising both
attraction and protest.

Currently more than 100 000 Africans are studying at institutions of higher
learning in France. Contrary to what is often believed, there have never
been more African students in French universities. Nevertheless, African
young people have the feeling that France is closing its doors to them.

Ladies and gentlemen, it is my duty as President of the Republic to dispel
these misunderstandings, to expose these paradoxes which reveal a situation
that is satisfactory neither for you nor for us. I believe that French-
African relations hold out much promise for the future, provided we lend
them new impetus.
Just as South Africa epitomises a new Africa, the relationship between
France and South Africa should serve as inspiration for new relations
between France and Africa as a whole. France and South Africa can have
relations which are exemplary, balanced, transparent and, if you will
permit me the term, rid of all hang-ups.

You have become our leading economic partner. One hundred and sixty French
companies are developing industrial partnerships and creating jobs in your
country. This morning President Thabo Mbeki and I signed agreements on
energy, transport, science and tourism, which bear witness to the diversity
of these ties. We must go further. The level of development achieved by
South Africa does not by itself explain the nature of our relations. And I
wish to see a genuine partnership between us.

Mr President, dear Thabo, you are in the habit of saying that "South Africa
cannot be an island of prosperity in a sea of poverty". France thinks
exactly the same thing. I want to state before you that the security and
prosperity of France and Europe are indissolubly linked with the security
and prosperity of Africa. Only the 14 kilometres of the Straits of
Gibraltar separate Africa and Europe. Failing to understand that our
destinies are linked would be a historic misinterpretation with dramatic
consequences. Europe and Africa will share the same destiny in terms of
security and development.

France hopes for the Renaissance of Africa with all its heart and soul; it
hopes for this Renaissance for the sake of everything that unites it with
Africa. South Africa wants this Renaissance. It has given the signal. It
has set the example. The Renaissance is not first and foremost a matter of
resources. It is, ladies and gentlemen, above all a matter of mindsets. But
what is a Renaissance man? He is a man who believes that everything is
possible. A Renaissance man is a man who believes in man. And because he
believes in man, he thinks that man can change the world. A Renaissance man
is a man whose dreams are greater than what he himself can accomplish!

To help bring about this Renaissance, France wants to place its relations
with Africa on a new footing. France does not want to be in Africa to
perpetuate, in different forms, the unequal relations that belong to a past
that is over and done with. If France wants to place its relations with
Africa on a new footing, France must start by recognising and taking on
board its interests in Africa. Peace and security on the African continent,
the struggle against poverty, the economic growth of the continent and your
inclusion in the process of globalisation are interests that are shared by
both our countries. France, like South Africa, has an interest in the
security of Africa. Because wars, pandemics, trafficking and terrorism in
Africa will have direct consequences in Europe and France. If you fail
today, there will be tragedy for us tomorrow.

France and South Africa share a common interest in better-regulated
globalisation. Globalisation is now here to stay. It would be unrealistic
and dangerous to attempt to manage world affairs without Africa. France
will not accept world affairs being dealt with without an African country
making its contribution and speaking on behalf of the African continent. Do
the other world leaders realise that Europe and Africa together account for
nearly half the world’s countries? And together – but only together –
Europeans and Africans will be able to influence the course of
globalisation. South Africa is for us a partner in globalisation. We have a
common approach. And to put it bluntly, it is profoundly abnormal for the
G8 not to give an equal place to the G5. We cannot claim to be dealing with
major world affairs unless we give an equal place to the G5, and so to
South Africa.

I think the same applies to the United Nations Security Council. There are
a billion Africans in the world. Who can possibly imagine Africa not having
at least one permanent member seat at the United Nations Security Council?
Quite obviously it should. I think the same applies to the major
international organisations such as the IMF. I participated, dear Thabo, as
you know, in my first G8 as President of the Republic in Heiligendamm. And
I noted that for two-and-a-half days we were eight countries working there
and that for the lunch on the final day, we invited – would you believe it!
– two-and-a- half billion inhabitants. I was embarrassed for the last-
minute guests who should have been invited from the first minute of this
summit.

Not one country from South America. Not one country from Africa. Not India
and not China. For the twenty-first century, we have to have the
organisation of the twenty-first century and not that of the twentieth
century. It is not for us to decide who should represent Africa. But I see
that South Africa is forging ahead in the vanguard of the continent; that
South Africa is excellently placed to make her voice heard in these fora.
President Mbeki has in the past done France the honour of bestowing on it
"African Citizenship". This is to my mind a great compliment and I want
France to live up to it.



During the presidential election campaign I said I wanted to renew the
relationship between France and Africa. I shall see this through; I ask you
to understand me. Three weeks ago in Chad, when rebel forces were
attempting to overthrow the legitimate authorities of the country, France
refrained from becoming involved in the fighting. I did not authorise a
single French soldier to fire on an African, even though for me it was
right to support Chad’s legal government. That is an unprecedented change.
But I want to go further today.

This change has to be pursued, because the French military presence in
Africa is still grounded in agreements reached just after the end of
colonialism, 50 years ago! I am not saying that these agreements were not
justified at the time. But I am saying that what was done in 1960 no longer
has the same relevance today. Their wording is obsolete. It is now
unthinkable, for example, for the French army to be drawn into domestic
conflicts. The Africa of 2008 is no longer the Africa of 1960! France and
its African partners will take this fact fully on board. And I want to make
four proposals before the South African Parliament.

The first relates to the defence agreements between France and the African
countries. They must reflect Africa as it is today and not as it was
yesterday. They must rest on the strategic interests of France and its
African partners. I am not saying that the existing agreements should
necessarily be scrapped and that everything should be erased with the
stroke of a pen. But I am saying that France wants to undertake discussions
with all the African states concerned, with a view to adapting the existing
agreements to the realities of the present, taking full account of the
African countries’ wishes. France will be open to dialogue with all those
who wish to establish a new security partnership with it.

Second proposal: I am going to place our relations on a new footing, on a
principle which used not to exist and which I shall impose, the principle
of transparency. Transparency is the best guarantee of solid and lasting
relations, the best antidote to fantasies and misunderstandings. Contrary
to past practice, I announce to the South African Parliament that all the
defence agreements between France and the African countries will be
published in full. I also intend to closely involve the French Parliament
in setting out the major guidelines for France’s policy in Africa.

Thirdly, I propose that the French military presence in Africa serve first
and foremost to help Africa achieve its goal of building, as it wishes to
do, its own collective security arrangements. The African Union wishes to
have standby forces by 2010-2012? Then that objective should also be
France’s objective! France has no call to maintain armed forces in Africa
indefinitely; Africa has to take responsibility for its security problems.

Let me be clearly understood: This does not mean in any way that France is
disengaging from Africa. It is the exact opposite. I want France to engage
to an even greater extent alongside the African Union, dear Thabo, in
building the collective security system that Africa needs, because African
security is, of course, first and foremost a matter for the Africans.
Finally, my last proposal is to make Europe a major partner of Africa in
bringing about peace and security. This is the meaning of the partnership
established by our two continents in Lisbon last December. This is in the
interests of all of us, since a strong Europe needs a strong Africa.

But I am well aware that the best guarantors of peace and security are
democracy and justice. So let’s talk about democracy and justice. In Côte
d’Ivoire France is keen to see free, fair and recognised elections held. No
country can hope for development without organising democratic elections.
We have been waiting for them for too many years. And the same is true in
Zimbabwe. It also applies to Chad, where all of us are called upon to
immediately make further efforts to help democracy take root. And I want to
say: democracy and human rights also apply in Africa and are not a
conditionality imposed from outside. Democracy and human rights are in no
way foreign to Africa. They are aspirations of the African peoples that
France shares.

When it comes to development, I want France to contribute more actively to
the fight that you have waged against poverty. France will maintain its
financial commitment for the achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals. President Mbeki asked me about this, my answer is clear. But I also
called for France to work in a more targeted way to foster accelerated
economic growth and for us to contribute directly to the creation of
African companies that will generate jobs. This is why I have decided today
to launch an initiative to support economic growth.

This initiative will be implemented by the French Development Agency. It
will be in three parts: We are going to create a €250 million investment
fund to acquire holdings in other mixed or thematic funds in order to
develop African businesses. The second component is the creation of a
guarantee fund, which will likewise have a €250 million endowment to
facilitate access to bank credit and capital for African SMEs. The third
component will be the doubling of the activity of the French Development
Agency in support of the private sector, with a €2 billion commitment,
which I announce to you here, over five years. Overall, France’s initiative
will thus mobilise €2,5 billion over the five-year period, which will be
used to directly or indirectly finance 2 000 African companies and create
300 000 jobs.
When this initiative is included, the total French bilateral financial
commitment to sub-Saharan Africa will thus amount to €10 billion over the
coming five-year period. After this, who will dare talk about a
disengagement on the part of France?

Finally, I should like to end by bringing up a difficult issue, but there
is no point in travelling abroad if one does not talk about difficult
matters. I should like to talk about the future of relations between France
and Africa as regards migration. Sixty-five per cent of the 200 000 foreign
nationals who take up residence in France every year come from the African
continent. Yet this is not exclusively a North-South issue. The bulk of the
migratory movement takes place within the African continent itself. South
Africa – you yourselves – alone receives nearly a quarter of all migrant
populations in Africa. The reality of immigration is not satisfactory
today. It is not satisfactory for us, but it is no more satisfactory for
you. We, Europeans and South Africans, face the same challenge. Five
hundred thousand people enter Europe illegally every year; the scale of the
phenomenon in South Africa is also forcing that country to deport a very
large number of people. Who could be satisfied with such a situation?

I have never said, because I don’t think it, that immigration is a
phenomenon that must be fought. And I have always rejected the scandalous
idea of zero immigration, an idea that is dangerous and unrealistic. France
and South Africa are two nations that owe a part of their momentum to the
contribution of migrant workers; we cannot forget this.

However, no country in the world can afford to receive a number of migrants
exceeding its ability to extend to them a decent welcome, offering them
work, housing, education and health care. Upsetting this balance leads to
massive unemployment, to exclusion and to ghettos. So it is the
responsibility of every government to decide how many migrants it is
prepared to receive in its territory and under what conditions it is
prepared to receive them.

France is preparing a major reform of its immigration policy. An annual
quota of new migrants to be welcomed to France will be debated and voted on
each year by Parliament. The ceiling will be broken down into subcategories
defined by grounds for immigrating – work or family reunification. It will
be negotiated with the countries of origin as part of agreements on
concerted management of migration flows.

We can’t manage immigration solely by decision of the host country; it also
has to be by decision of the country of departure. The time has come to
build a European-African partnership on migration, covering three
essential, to my mind crucial, issues: Firstly, the brain drain you suffer.
This is an extremely serious matter. A 2006 WHO report highlights this
incredible situation: Africa bears 24% of the world’s burden of illness,
and this same Africa which bears 24% of the world’s burden of illness has
only 3% of its health-care personnel. How are you going to treat your sick
if all the doctors you train leave and come to our countries to try and
find a development they can’t find at home? We need to put an end to the
brain drain.

This situation is not tenable. We must avoid African elites emigrating for
good.

Did you know that there are more Benin doctors practising in my country
than there are Benin doctors practising in Benin? Don’t you think that
Benin, which is one of the world’s poorest countries, has greater need of
its doctors than France?

Secondly, organised crime: It is time the international community mobilised
against the odious trafficking which exploits the poverty of the hapless
human beings who feel their only hope is to leave their country. We must
take more severe action against those modern-day slave-drivers who
dishonour mankind.

Finally, co-development, which involves mobilising migrant populations to
support the development of their countries of origin. This new project is
part of a broad package of measures adopted at the 2nd EU-Africa Summit in
Lisbon. And I shall develop this relationship when I exercise, from 1 July
this year, the duties of President of the European Union.

Beyond state-to-state relations, we must increase the ties which exist
between us. Now I quite understand that these ties have given rise to a lot
of disappointment in the past. And I would particularly like to say how
keen I am to see the continuation of the Africa-France Summit meetings. But
I want the way in which these meetings, which began in 1973, are run and
their nature to change. Their purpose and organisation need to be adapted.

It is necessary to change the Africa-France summits, to change the methods
and change the objectives. Their preparation should be better co-ordinated;
the discussions should be structured differently; their timing should be
better matched to that of other meetings organised by the European Union
and the OIF [international Francophone organisation]. Finally, we could
consider giving them a more practical focus, tasking them with taking stock
or formulating guidelines.

I suggest that the next ministerial follow-up meeting that precedes the
forthcoming Summit scheduled in Cairo in 2009 take a common position on new
arrangements. Let me make myself clear: because I believe in the necessity
of the friendship between France and Africa, I want no taboos when it comes
to putting our relations on a new footing.

At the start of the twenty-first century, I am perfectly aware that our
generation bears the heavy responsibility of avoiding the disasters that
befell the previous century. So, South Africa’s message of humanity and
reconciliation must guide us. In my office in Paris, my dear friends, there
is a photograph of Nelson Mandela, which he gave me when he came last year.
When I look at this face, which for the entire world has become the face of
forgiveness, I always think of two things he said. The first was during the
1994 election campaign. He said to those for whose dignity he had fought so
hard – he had the courage to tell them this: "If you want better things,
you must work hard. We cannot do it all for you; you must do it
yourselves."

The second is the magnificent passage at the end of Nelson Mandela’s
memoirs in which he says – and this is very moving for us: "No one is born
hating another person because of the colour of their skin, religion or
background. Hatred and intolerance have to be learned and, if they can be
learned, so can love and tolerance." When Nelson Mandela talks in this way,
he doesn’t belong to South Africa, he honours the whole world.

Your history teaches us that men are only fully human through and thanks to
other men. Your country is a constant demonstration of this, in achieving
coexistence on the part of the descendants of slaves and of masters; in
achieving coexistence on the part of the descendants of farmers from
England, the Netherlands and France and of Zulu conquerors and Xhosa
warriors; in achieving coexistence on the part of the descendants of tenant
farmers from Gujarat and of miners from all over Southern Africa.

Your history, my dear South African friends, demonstrates that the values
of your revolution, like those of the French Revolution, will always make
it possible to transform the world. Together, South Africans and French, we
believe in equal rights, we believe in equal dignity and we reject racism.

Your history tells us that in order to succeed, the world needs Africa and
its voice – an upstanding, vibrant and free Africa. This is the Africa to
which I have come today. Long live South Africa! Long live France!]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker, I firstly want to say thank you very
much for giving me the honour of saying a few words, which I will in due
course do in French. [Applause.] I think you will all agree with me, he is
quite an orator, isn’t he? [Applause.] If I were to live in France
permanently, I would vote for him. [Laughter.] [Applause.]
Madame la Présidente du Parlement, Monsieur le Président  de  la  République
Sud-Africaine, Monsieur le Président de la République française, membres  du
Parlement, mesdames et messieurs.

Nous apprécions beaucoup votre visite au Cap - le plus beau  cap  du  monde.
Monsieur le Président Sarkozy, même si elle ne constitue pas, bien  sûr,  la
première arrivée d’un Français dans  notre  ville.  Le  premier  Français  a
débarqué ici il y a plus de trois cents ans déjà.

La présence française se manifeste encore  aujourd’hui  par  des  noms  dans
notre province - tels que Fleur du Cap, l’Avenir, La Provence,  le  Bonheur,
Patricia de Lille et beaucoup des autres.

Des centaines de milliers de Sud-Africains ont du  sang  français  dans  les
veines. Ma propre belle-mère était une demoiselle Jourdain,  donc  ma  femme
et tous mes enfants
et tous mes petits-enfants sont des descendants de  Français.  Moi-même,  je
suis membre du Parlement depuis trente ans déjà, et  d’origine  hollandaise,
mais j’ai étudié à la Sorbonne et j’admire beaucoup  Napoléon  Bonaparte  en
le general Charles de Gaulle.  Ma  petite-fille  étudie  le  français.  Nous
avons dix-sept Alliances Françaises en Afrique du Sud.

En fait,  bien  interessant,  monsieur  le  President,  notre  Ministre  des
Affaires Étrangères, qui n’est pas ici aujourd’hui , je  crois  qu’elle  est
en train d’apprendre le français. Je crois qu’elle va essayer de  vous  dire
elle-même “bonjour monsieur” et “merci” et “sil vous plait” et “au  revoir”.


Tout cela pour vous dire, Monsieur le Président, que ce pays et cette  ville
aimeraient que vous vous y sentiez chez vous aussi  à  l’aise  que  sur  les
Champs  Élysées,  grappillant  les  raisins  de  la  Butte  de   Montmartre,
dégustant un excellent Bordeaux, ou admirant  les  superbes  demoiselles  du
Lido.

Monsieur le Président,  nous  avons  essayé  de  vous  accueillir  le  mieux
possible. Si par malheur vous deviez mourir en Afrique du Sud –  ce  que  je
ne vous souhaite pas! - alors je suis certain qu’on ferait graver sur  votre
tombe:
   Ci-gît Nicolas Sarkozy.Victime de l’hospitalité sud-africaine.
On m’a fait l’honneur de me demander de vous remercier de vous être  adressé
à  nous  aujourd’hui.  Mais  comment  faire?  Vous  êtes  un  personnage  si
important dans tous le monde! Comment faire?

Dois-je tout simplement dire, ``Merci beaucoup’’ ou dois-je vous offrir  une
caisse de vin sud-africain?

Non. Je pense qu’il  serait  mieux  pour  ce  Parlement  de  voter  une  Loi
aujourd’hui. Une loi qui  stipulerait  que  les  Springboks  doivent  perdre
contre l’équipe de  France  lors  de  leur  prochaine  rencontre.  Une  loi,
monsieur le President!

Merci, Monsieur le Président, d’être parmi nous aujourd’hui. Vous  renforcez
les liens tricentenaires entre nos pays. Vous nous  avez  apporté  l’espoir!
Vous nous avez apporté de nouvelles perspectives pour  l’avenir.  Vous  avez
démontré que vous  êtes  un  ami  sincère  des  Sud-Africains!  Je  vais  le
répéter, Vous avez démontré que vous êtes un ami sincère des  Sud-Africains!
Merci monsieur.

Pour conclure, vous savez, quelle lutte énorme  nous,  Sud-Africains,  avons
menée. Mais nous  en  sommes  sortis  vainqueurs.  En  1994  notre  Nouvelle
Afrique du Sud est née. Aujourd’hui nous attendons avec impatience  le  jour
où, avec l’aide de la France, la vie sera meilleure  pour  tous  dans  notre
pays. La vie sera meilleure pour tous dans notre pays.

Pour  terminer,  laissez-moi  vous  emprunter,  à  vous  et  à  votre  pays,
l’espoir. Espoir que nous  aimerions  garder  précieusement  pour  toujours.
Nous voudrions conserver deux lignes de votre hymne  national,  deux  lignes
de votre hymne national, monsieur, que nous  allons  chanter  toujours  avec
vous et votre peuple, et maintenant je vais le chanter:

   Allons enfants de la patrie, le jour de gloire est arrivé!

Merci. (Translation of French paragraphs follows.)

[Madam Speaker of Parliament, Mr President of the Republic of South  Africa,
Mr President of the Republic of France, Members of  Parliament,  ladies  and
gentlemen.

We greatly appreciate your visit to the Cape - the most  beautiful  cape  in
the world - Mr President Sarkozy, even though  this  does  not,  of  course,
constitute the first arrival of a French  person  in  our  town.  The  first
French person disembarked here more than 300 years ago.

The French presence still manifests itself today in some  of  the  names  in
our province – such as Fleur du Cap,  l’Avenir,  La  Provence,  le  Bonheur,
Patricia de Lille and many others.

Hundreds of thousands of South Africans have French blood  in  their  veins.
My own mother-in-law was a young lady from the Jourdain family, so  my  wife
and all my children and all my grandchildren are French descendants. As  for
myself, I have been a Member of Parliament for some 30 years now, and am  of
Dutch origin, but I studied at the Sorbonne and I  greatly  admire  Napoleon
Bonaparte and General  Charles  de  Gaulle.  My  granddaughter  is  studying
French. We have 17 Alliance Française centres in South Africa.

In fact, very interestingly, Mr President, I think our Minister  of  Foreign
Affairs, who is not here today, is in the  process  of  learning  French.  I
think she herself will try to say to you, “bonjour, monsieur [good  morning,
sir]”, “merci [thank you]”,  “s’il  vous  plait  [please]”  and  “au  revoir
[goodbye]”.

All of this to say to you, Mr President, that this  country  and  this  town
would like you to feel as much at home and  as comfortable as on the Champs-
Élysées,  picking  the  grapes  of  the  Butte  de  Montmartre,  tasting  an
excellent Bordeaux or admiring the superb young ladies of the Lido.

Mr President, we have tried to welcome you in the best possible  manner.  If
by misfortune you were to die here in South Africa - which  I  do  not  wish
for! - well, then I am certain that one would have  the  following  engraved
on your tombstone:

   Here lies Nicolas Sarkozy. Victim of South African hospitality.

Mr President, I have been afforded the honour of being asked  to  thank  you
for addressing us today. But how am I to do it? You are  such  an  important
person in the world! What am I to do?

Should I simply say,“Thank you very much”, or should I offer you a case of
South African wine?

No.I think it would be better for this Parliament to pass an Act today. An
Act that would stipulate that the Springboks must lose against the French
team during their next match. An Act, Mr President!

Thank you, Mr President, for being among us today. You are strengthening
the three-hundred-year-old links between our countries. You have brought us
hope! You have brought us new perspectives for the future. You have shown
that you are a sincere friend of South Africans! I am going to repeat it.
You have shown that you are a sincere friend of South Africans! Thank you,
sir.

In conclusion, you know what a huge struggle we South Africans  have  waged.
But we have emerged from it as victors. In 1994 our  New  South  Africa  was
born. Today we are impatiently awaiting the  day  when,  with  the  help  of
France, life will be better for all in our country. Life will be better  for
all in our country.

To end with, allow me to borrow, from you and your country, hope. Hope  that
we would like to carefully guard forever. We would like to retain two  lines
of your national anthem, two lines of your national  anthem,  sir,  that  we
are always going to sing with you and your people, and now  I  am  going  to
sing them:


   Arise, children of the fatherland. The day of glory has arrived!

Thank you.]

The SPEAKER: That was the vote of thanks, but I think I would  be  amiss  in
my duty if I did not thank the hon van der Merwe. [Applause.]

The Speaker of the National Assembly adjourned the Joint Sitting at 15:19.


