---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 04 March 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2008-03-04
---

TUESDAY, 4 MARCH 2008
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:05.

The Acting Chairperson (Ms P M Hollander) took the Chair and requested
members to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                                 NEW MEMBERS

                               (Announcement)

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon members, I would
like to take this opportunity to welcome the hon Mqungquthu, who was sworn
in today, from the Free State. Hon member, you are welcome to the NCOP and
I wish you all the best in your work. Will the hon member please stand?
Where is the hon member? Hon member, will you please sit down; I know you
are not from the Free State. You must give us a chance to welcome you also.
Thank you.

We also have another member from the Northern Cape. Will the hon member
from the Northern Cape please stand so that we can welcome you to the NCOP.
[Applause.] The hon member is from the DA. Thank you. Where is our hon
member from the Free State? Has he gone back home? Has he returned?
[Interjections.] Okay, thank you.

                                 NO MOTIONS

Hon members, I have been informed that the Whippery have agreed that there
will be no notices of motion or motions without notice today except for the
motion printed on the Order Paper.

                   NOTICE OF MOTION ON 7 FEBRUARY IN ORDER

                                  (Ruling)

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Now, I want to come
to my ruling that I said I would give with regard to the hon Krumbock and
the hon Windvoël. Hon members, I would like to make a ruling on a point of
order raised by the hon Watson during our plenary on Thursday, 7 February
2008. The hon member asked if it was correct in terms of Council Rules for
a member to move a motion that had already been moved. He requested that I
should make a ruling on this matter, which I said I would.

After perusal of both the motions moved by the hon Krumbock and the hon
Windvoël, I note that they both referred to the 52nd ANC national
conference, which was held in Polokwane, even though the content of their
motions differed. However, I would like to bring to the attention of the
House that there is a difference between a notice of motion and a motion
without notice. The notice of motion is intended to inform the House that
at the next sitting of the House a member would move the motion. It does
not require any decision by the House. A motion without notice calls upon
the House to take a decision on a particular matter.

In terms of Rule 75(2) of the Council Rules, a draft resolution for
approval by the Council may not in substance be the same as a draft
resolution which has been approved or rejected by the Council during the
preceding six months. Both the hon Krumbock and the hon Windvoël’s notices
did not require the House to take any decision as, they gave notice that
they intended to move at the next sitting of the House. I therefore rule
that both notices were in order and procedurally in accordance with the
NCOP Rules. I thank you. Thank you, hon Watson.

              WELCOMING OF MINISTERS TO NCOP FOR QUESTION TIME

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): I would like to
welcome all the hon Ministers of the National Assembly with us today – the
executive. I hope that you will be with us for the afternoon. I have a
request from the hon Dr Sisulu, the Minister of Housing. She will answer a
few questions but after that she would like to be released and further
questions will be answered by the Deputy Minister of Education, the hon
Surty. Do you agree with that? Are you in agreement? [Interjections.] Thank
you.

                      RESIGNATION OF CHIEF WHIP OF NCOP

                               (Announcement)

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Before we start, I
have another notice to give to the Council. Hon members, I have received a
letter from the Chief Whip of the National Council of Provinces, the hon
Windvoël, informing the Council that he has resigned as the Chief Whip of
the Council. The election for the replacement of the Chief Whip will take
place tomorrow and it will be on the Order Paper. I thank you.

                          QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

                       SOCIAL SERVICES AND GOVERNANCE
                                  Cluster 2

MINISTERS:

               Notices of concern received from no-fee schools
1.    Mr V V Z Windvoël (ANC) asked the Minister of Education:

      Whether her department has received any notices of concern by schools
      designated as no-fee schools about the negative implications of paper
      budgets; if so, what measures is her department putting in place to
      address this situation?      CO735E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Thank you very much, Chairperson. Before
I proceed with the, may I thank the hon Windvoël for his contribution in
the past to this House. [Applause.]

The response is that, indeed, we have received some concerns that have been
raised by principals in relation to the paper budgets for no-fee schools.
We have discussed these concerns with the MECs at the Council of Education
Ministers meeting, and have indicated to them that it is important that the
transfers take place timeously. We’ve asked the department to look into
this matter and make proposals with regard to how we could deal with the
prompt payment or transfer of fees. This would probably be done by way of
norms and standards which we would have legislated or regulated.

We have also directed the Department of Education to look at ways of
increasing the number of section 21 schools, so that provinces are able to
transfer paper budget funds simply and quickly to as many schools as
possible without any administrative glitches.

The hon Chair is probably aware of the fact that the distinction between
section 21 and section 20 does create problems and inconvenience for some
schools, especially those that are section 20 schools. Thank you very much.

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you, hon
Deputy Minister. Are there any follow-up questions to the Deputy Minister?
There are none, so we then move to Question 2. The hon Ministers with
regard to Water Affairs and Forestry are both not available, but they will
respond. They asked that the response be tabled.

 Conducting of audits of water services authorities and strategies to ensure
         compliance and correct poor quality of water in Free State

2.    Mr C J van Rooyen (ANC) asked the Minister of Water Affairs and
      Forestry:

      (1)   Whether  appropriate  and  sufficient  (a)  periodic  regulatory
           audits of the water quality data and management systems of Water
           Services  Authorities,  WSAs,  are  being  conducted   and   (b)
           financial,  scientific  and  technological  resources  are  made
           available to WSAs to work on water quality issues; if  not,  why
           not, if so, what are the relevant details in each case;

      (2)   whether, in light of outbreaks of  health  problems  related  to
           water quality, her department  will  seek  alternatives  to  (a)
           actively engage or (b) force compliance  on  WSAs  that  do  not
           comply with legislation governing water quality; if not, what is
           the position in this  regard;  if  so,  what  are  the  relevant
           details;

      (3)   what plans and strategies are in place to correct the poor
           quality of water in some Free State towns?         CO741E

REPLY:

(1)(a)& (b)
           The question by the member deals with  drinking  water  quality.
           The quality of the tap water in South Africa, and especially  in
           our cities, is excellent  and  well  above  the  minimum  safety
           standards.  Our drinking water is  treated  to  ensure  that  it
           complies with the national standard (SANS  241:2006)  and  South
           Africa has an excellent reputation in provision of safe drinking
           water. Compliance with this standard would mean that  the  water
           is safe for human consumption. The Department of  Water  Affairs
           and Forestry regulates compliance levels with the standards  set
           and this intervention has seen a huge  improvement  in  the  way
           municipalities are performing their responsibility to manage the
           quality of drinking water.


           One of the Department  of  Water  Affairs  and  Forestry’s  most
           effective initiatives in the drinking water  quality  management
           domain was  the  development  of  an  electronic  water  quality
           management system that has been supplied to all  municipalities.
           The  system  provides  regular  and  up-to-date  drinking  water
           quality  information  to  DWAF  and  also  allows  managers   in
           municipalities to have access to regular reporting  on  drinking
           water quality.  This system is in use throughout the country; in
           January 2008 alone more than 3200 samples were taken from  water
           supply systems across the country and the analyses recorded more
           than 94% compliance with the  health  aspects  of  the  national
           standard.  We are in the process of extending this functionality
           to provide for waste water quality management as well.


           From this monitoring DWAF are able to make  rapid  interventions
           before  a  problem  with  our  drinking  water  arises  and  the
           department works closely with the municipalities in question  to
           resolve the situation. DWAF  relies  on  the  municipalities  to
           supply the data and the Department provides training on the  use
           of  the  system.   DWAF   also   conducts   random   audits   of
           municipalities on the use of the system, in particular when  the
           system identifies inconsistencies in the results.  During  these
           assessments the  condition  and  operability  of  the  treatment
           facility and process controllers would be assessed to inform any
           recommendations made to the municipality for implementation.


           Municipalities  would  use  their  own  financial  resources  to
           provide for operation and maintenance  including  water  quality
           issues, and the less  financially  secure  municipalities  would
           receive funding for these  areas  of  responsibility  under  the
           ‘equitable share’ allocation  under  Division  of  Revenue  Act,
           Dora.


(2)(a)      The outbreak of health problems will always  be  regarded  as  a
           priority for turn-around by the Department of Water Affairs  and
           Forestry, and  this  would  be  the  driving  force  behind  our
           endeavour to be more proactive in  our  regulatory  approach  to
           drinking water quality management.

 (2)(b)     Where outbreaks unfortunately do occur,  DWAF  plays  a  leading
           role in the team who search for the cause and  solution  of  the
           problem. If required, a turnaround plan is then drafted with due
           dates for rectifications which is strictly monitored throughout.
           It has been found that not  all  outbreaks  are  caused  due  to
           drinking water quality failures or due to human negligence.  But
           where this is evidenced then the Enforcement Protocol is used to
           ensure compliance is obtained soonest.

 (3)  As in all parts of the country, DWAF  works  closely  with  Provincial
           Government to ensure that crucial issues such as adverse quality
           of drinking water (if it occurs), is urgently addressed. In  the
           Free State a similar approach is being followed to  ensure  that
           practical planning will inform funding to be made available  for
           the purpose of quality enhancement.

 Possible actions concerning 600 faulty housing units in the Zanemvula Human
                             Settlement Project

3.    Ms B N Dlulane (ANC) asked the Minister of Housing:

      Whether her department has had any interaction with the Eastern Cape
      provincial department of local government, housing and traditional
      affairs or the Nelson Mandela Bay Metropolitan Municipality regarding
      possible actions concerning 600 of the 15 000 Zanemvula Human
      Settlement Project units that were certified by the Housing Board as
      faulty and which have to be demolished; if not, why not; if so, (a)
      what are the details of such actions or interventions, (b) how much
      will it cost to demolish the 600 houses, (c) who will bear the costs
      and (d) what measures are in place to recoup the money that will be
      lost from demolishing the 600 units?
      CO744E

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Thank you very much, Acting Chairperson. In
response to Question 3 from the hon Dlulane, I would like to point out that
the 600 housing units she refers to are houses that have been found to be
faulty, but that not all of them will be required to be demolished. Only
251 of them will be demolished; and, yes, we will ensure that the
contractor bears the cost of these houses. Fortunately for the contractor,
what has been done so far is the placement of a slab which would otherwise
be required for flooring. So we are hoping that not much will have been
lost, because most of the people who are assisting us in this are emerging
BEEs.

Yes, hon Dlulane, we have been in consultation with the Eastern Cape
provincial department and the Nelson Mandela Bay Municipality about this
matter. We had a contract signed as of 2006 with the two levels of
government ensuring that this was a national pilot project. But, in
February 2007, it became very clear that the project had problems, because
at that time the delivery agent was a city.

We have since taken over the project and placed it under the trusteeship
and the responsibility of Thubelisha. We are hoping that we will attend to
most of the matters that have caused this delay and ensure that there is a
speedy roll-out of the delivery of these houses in the Nelson Mandela Bay
Municipality. Thank you.
The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you, hon
Minister. I would like to remind members of the House that the time limit
for asking a supplementary question is two minutes and the time for
replying to a supplementary question will be four minutes. Only four
supplementary questions are allowed per question. Are there any follow-up
questions to the Minister? Hon Krumbock?

Mr G R KRUMBOCK: Thanks, Acting Chairperson. Thank you, Minister. You
mentioned in your answer, I think, that there was a problem with the slabs
with some of the houses in question. Usually when a slab cracks, that is a
problem of a faulty foundation. I was just wondering whether the National
Home Builders Registration Council, NHBRC, did their proper inspections of
the foundations, which is one of the standard tests that they have to do
during the completion of the house, and if they did, what actually went
wrong there, because it seems as if the inspection might have been at
fault? Thanks very much.

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Acting Chairperson, we came to this House last
year during the budget process and presented a problem that we are
experiencing in the concurrence in housing delivery, because whatever
policy we might put in place, ultimately the responsibility of delivery and
building rests on the province and subsequently also on the municipality.
In this particular case none of the constructors was registered with the
NHBRC. They have since been registered now that we have taken over the
project. And because they were not registered, they had gone ahead and laid
the foundation, the slab, as I indicated, and we have since discovered,
with the NHBRC doing the necessary inspections, that the floors are faulty
and we have requested that they redo them.

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you, hon
Minister. Are there any other follow-up questions to the Minister? Hon
Krumbock?

Mr G R KRUMBOCK: Thanks, Chairperson. I don’t want to make this a long
polemic, but the point is you are not supposed to be able to build a house
at all if you are not registered with the NHBRC, and this was a substantial
project. The figure of 600 houses or so has been mentioned. I am just
wondering how any contractor could have gotten a contract from the
government to build that many houses without being registered first. It
seems inconceivable.

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: My question exactly. This is exactly why we came
here to say that we do have a problem and we would like the National
Council of Provinces at some point to discuss this matter. But we have
since taken over the project and we are ensuring that registration is in
place and that all the people who are given contracts in government to
build houses are registered with the NHBRC. I am glad that the hon Krumbock
has pointed this out, because we do have a problem with crumbling floors,
and we have a problem with shoddy work, precisely because we do not have
any powers beyond what we are given by the legislation that we have. Thank
you.

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Are there any other
follow-up questions to the Minister? As there are none, we move to Question
4.

Both the Minister and the Deputy Minister of Social Development are abroad.
They have asked us if their questions could please stand over. We move to
Question 5 and it’s the same Ministers. They are both abroad, the Minister
of Social Development and the Deputy Minister of Social Development.

I then move to Question 6. Deputy Minister Surty, will you please answer
the question.

    Vacancies in Maths and Science filled by local and foreign educators

6.    Mr B J Tolo (ANC) asked the Minister of Education:

      (a) How many (i) vacancies does her department have in Maths and
      Science and (ii) of these vacancies are likely to be filled by local
      educators, (b) how many foreign educators for these subjects are in
      the employ of her department in each province, (c) which countries are
      they from and (d) how many more foreign educators are targeted for
      employment in the 2007-08 financial year?
                                              CO752E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Thank you very much, hon Chairperson. The
answers to (a)(i) & (a)(ii) of the question are as follows. According to a
report on a mathematics and science survey conducted in 2007 amongst the
provinces, 1 147 vacancies in mathematics and science were identified in
the various provinces.

The Ministry was not satisfied, given the fact that mathematics and
mathematical literacy are fundamental subjects, and directed the provinces
to look more closely at this particular element. Our estimation is that the
demands will certainly increase. The needs and demands are certainly more
than the 1 147 that have been identified.

In answer to (a)(ii) of the question in terms of the wider recruitment and
retention policy objectives, the recruitment of foreign educators is
regarded as a last resort. The primary objective is to ensure that all
possible strategies to recruit and retain South African educators in the
system are implemented. This implies that foreign educators will only be
considered if there is sufficient evidence that local educators could not
be recruited to fill the vacant spaces.

The issues of vacancies, appointments and staff provisioning are further
complicated by the fact that these are functions of the provincial
departments of education and not the national Department of Education.
Governing bodies themselves have the authority to appoint teachers, and
therefore a correct and accurate assessment becomes extremely difficult.

Currently, our department has embarked on a national bursary scheme called
Funza Lushaka, promoting teaching in public schools as a career of choice
for able and committed South Africans. Full-cost bursaries are available to
enable eligible students to complete a full teaching qualification in the
area of national priorities. Approximately 822 students qualified as
educators at the end of 2007, of which 167 were maths and science teachers.
These new qualified teachers are being matched and placed in vacant posts.

With regard to part (b) of the question, according to Persal, which is the
salary database and not an information or education management tool, 1 430
foreign educators are in the employ of the Department of Education.
However, we are not in a position to confirm how many posts are for
mathematics and science. The breakdown of the provinces is available, and I
can say that the leading country in terms of foreign provision is Zimbabwe.

This is quite a long question. In terms of part (c), the countries that
provide us with most foreign teachers are Zimbabwe, the Democratic Republic
of Congo, Ghana, Zambia, Nigeria, Ethiopia, Malawi, Botswana, Lesotho,
Kenya, Uganda, Great Britain and Sudan.

With regard to part (d), the Council of Education Ministers approved in
principle the recruitment of foreign educators into the system of
education. We have done so on the basis that we would give preference to
local educators, and, in fact, advertisements have been carried out in all
the provinces inviting even retired teachers to fill these posts.

The Department of Home Affairs has assisted the Department of Education and
other departments in identifying scarce skills. Provision has been made for
1 000 foreign educators to be employed, particularly in the scarce-skills
subjects such as mathematics and science. The Council of Education
Ministers has approved the number of foreign educators that has been
recruited and has requested that the Department of Home Affairs increase
the amount from 1 000 to 2 000, given the desperate need for mathematics
and science-qualified teachers.

The department is in the process of securing a recruitment agency to fast-
track the filling of vacant mathematics and science posts, particularly
those that would be filled by foreign educators. Thank you, Chairperson.

Mr B J TOLO: Thank you, Chair. Thank you, hon Deputy Minister, for the
answer given. My follow-up question is: Is there any intention on the part
of the Department of Education, or maybe even provincially, to recruit
retired teachers to be able to address this big shortage that we have in
the country? By when do we think, as a country, we will be self-sufficient
in terms of maths and science teachers? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: What I can say, and have indicated in my
original response, is that the provinces have embarked on an advertisement
campaign inviting and recruiting teachers locally who have the appropriate
skills to come back to the profession. Not more than two months ago, I
addressed a campaign that was launched in the Western Cape with the MEC for
education. Beyond that, there is a need to recognise that whilst we have
foreign educators on contract, we should develop and expand the
opportunities to our local educators. So, we could then, at the same time,
train our teachers to ensure that they have the appropriate skills, that
they are competent and confident to be able to do the job and therefore not
displace them from the system of education.

I think we all have a responsibility of drawing attention to people whom we
can identify as skilled people, especially in the scarce- skills areas of
mathematics, science and the languages - and I say languages broadly, not
only English – to come back to the profession, because I think it is a
vacuum that we must fill very, very quickly in order to ensure that quality
education takes place in our schools. Thank you very much.

 Details of exercise of profiling community arts centres in seven provinces,
                         and of actions to be taken

7.    Ms N M Madlala-Magubane (ANC) asked the Minister of Arts and Culture:

      (a) What are the details of the exercise his department conducted of
      profiling community arts centres in seven provinces and (b) what
      action will his department take following the findings?
                                   CO754E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Acting Chairperson, the exercise
that the member is referring to took the form of personal visits by
officials from the Department of Arts and Culture to community centres in
seven provinces, and they were Limpopo, Mpumalanga, Gauteng, the North
West, the Free State, the Western Cape and KwaZulu-Natal.

They developed a questionnaire which was structured in such a way that they
could get the key information they needed from each of the centres. For
instance, the questions that were posed dealt with the ownership and legal
status of the community arts centres, governance and management,
intergovernmental resources, human resources, funding sources,
infrastructure deficiencies and requirements, programmes and services,
training requirements and the challenges.

Through that exercise the department was able to establish the common
challenges that the community arts centres face. Some of the findings
included a lack of funding for their operations and programmes, the absence
of or insufficient human resources, inappropriately designed structures for
the intended purposes of the centres, inadequate facilities for the uses of
those centres, lack of sustainable support from different levels of
government, and lack of skills and capability for the management of the
centres.

There were also disputes around the ownership of the centres and, I guess,
also a very high turnover because the people either volunteer or don’t get
paid. The centre managers furnished this information to the officials,
together with, in some instances, some visuals. The findings - and this is
a response to the (b) part of the question - were documented and we are in
the process of preparing a consolidated report.

The challenges were isolated and form the basis of a motivation for a
business plan for the community arts centres in order to look at ways of
how we can support or how we can strengthen community arts centres in the
work that they do.

A national task team was also established by the director-general. They
were given terms of reference, which were, broadly, to ensure that the time
and resources are committed to the work of community arts centres. I won’t
go into the task team, unless people really want to know the terms of
reference. Basically and overall, this is just about looking at what it is
we can do, at what time we can commit to community arts centres and also at
what resources can be committed. Thank you.

Nk N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: Ngiyabonga Mphathi wohlelo, ngiyabonga Sekela
likaNgqongqoshe. Sekela likaNgqongqoshe kungani ngibuza lombuzo kungoba
kubonakele ukuthi ezifundazweni ikhono likhona phakathi kwezingane zethu
kodwa nje kunezinto ezithize ezishodayo ekudinga ukuba uMnyango
uzibhekelele.

Ngakho-ke ngethemba ukuthi lokho okuphawulile phakathi kwale Ndlu ukuthi
nitholile okuthize nakuphawula, nisayohlala phansi nikuhlaziye. Ngethemba
ukuthi uMnyango wakho uzokwenza lokho ngokushesha ukuze izingane zethu nazo
zihlomule. Ngiyabonga Sekela Ngqongqoshe. (Translation of isiZulu
paragraphs follows.)

[Ms N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: Thank you, Acting Chairperson; thank you, Deputy
Minister. Deputy Minister, the reason I am asking this question is because
it has been noticed that, in the provinces, there are many skills our
children have but there are things that the department needs to address.
Therefore, I hope that with what you have mentioned in this House, you have
found something and you are still going to sit down and analyse it. I hope
that your department will do that speedily so that our children can also
benefit. Thank you, Deputy Minister.]

USEKELA-MPHATHISWA WEZOBUGCISA NENKCUBEKO: Lo msebenzi ubusenziwa awunqandi
into yokuba umsebenzi ungaqhubeki kwiiCommunity Arts Centres. Bakhona
abantu abavolontiyayo ukuze banike uqeqesho ngokolwazi lwabo kwimisebenzi
ethile eyenziwayo kuloo maziko. Umzekelo: basaqhuba abantu abenza izinto
zethwathwa ukuncedisa ukuqeqesha ulutsha. Zikhona ke nezinye iiprojekthi
eziqhutywayo. Kambe ke iziko eli lelokuqeqesha abantu. Enye into mhlawumbi
endingagxininisa kuyo yinto yokuba ewe, ulutsha lwethu luyaya kakhulu phaya
kwiiCommunity Arts Centres. Ngamanye amaxesha bayela ukuya kucula, bayele
imidlalo yeqonga, bayele ukuqeqeshwa kwimisebenzi yezandla.

Kambe ke eyona nto ibalulekileyo yeyokuba ngoku siqalisa ukugaya ulutsha
ukuba luyazi into yokuba kukho le nto kuthiwa yiYouth in t he Arts. Ukuze
babe sisigqeba esikhoyo esiphantsi kweeCommunity Arts Centres kufuneka
bangaphelelwa lithemba, bayazi into yokuba ikhona into ekhoyo, kwaye ikhona
nemali esiza kuyibekela ulutsha bucala, lona lodwa, khona ukuze lufumane
uqeqesho. Kule Youth in the Arts sizama ukuyiseka, kukho amaqela ngamaqela
olutsha a zama ukwenza iiprojekthi zawo - mhlawumbi abanye bayacula, abanye
benza imidlalo yeqonga. Nezo mali ziphuma ecaleni phantsi kweInvesting in
Culture Fund  zezokuba babe besebenza ezo zinto. Sisoloko sibakokosile kuba
siyazi ukuba abantu abancinane baphelelwa msinya lithemba. Ngoko ke sizama
ukuba bangaphelelwa lilo. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[The DEPUTY MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: The work that is being done does
not stifle the progress in the community arts centres. There are people who
volunteer to train in their areas of knowledge in certain art forms done at
those centres. For example: training youth on leather works is in progress.
There are also other projects that are in operation. The centre is for
skills training. One other thing that I would like to focus on is that our
youth do go to these community arts centres. They sometimes go there for
singing, drama and training in crafts.

However, the most important thing is that we are now busy with sensitising
the youth about the initiative that is called Youth in the Arts. For the
youth to be a movement within the community arts centres, they should not
lose hope, but know that there is a provision for them. Funds will be
provided specifically for the training of the youth. In this proposed Youth
in the Arts initiative, there are various groups of youth busy with their
own projects; some are singing and others are involved in drama. Funds
provided by private funders through the Investing in the Culture Fund
assist in ensuring that they continue with such projects in the meantime.
We are always taking good care of them, because we know that the youth are
quick to lose hope. Therefore, we are trying to ensure that they do not
lose hope.]

Mna B J TOLO: Ke a leboga Modulasetulo. Ke a kwa gore Motlatša Tona ba
lebeletše diprof entshe tše di šupago, bjalo mo South Afrika re na le
diprofentshe tše senyane. Go diprofentshe tše tše dingwe tše pedi ba tlo ya
neng naa? Ke a leboga. (Translation of Sepedi paragraph follows.)

[Mr B J TOLO: Thank you, Chairperson. I understand that the Deputy Minister
is focusing on seven provinces while South Africa has nine provinces. When
will the other two provinces be visited? Thank you.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Regarding the other two provinces,
this is not because no work is being done. This focuses on the seven
provinces in the meanwhile. For example, if we talk of the Eastern Cape
that is missing from this list; it is a very vibrant province in so far as
arts and culture is concerned. So we are looking at the provinces
mentioned, but it doesn’t mean that we are not going to look at the other
two provinces as well. Thank you.

   Progress made in developing a training programme for school managers on
                 management of National Curriculum Statement

   8. Ms N F Mazibuko (ANC) asked the Minister of Education:

      Whether any progress has been made with regard to the development of a
      training programme for school managers on the management of the
      National Curriculum Statement, the original target for this having
      been January 2007; if not, why not; if so, what progress?
                                              CO757E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, I thank the hon N F Mazibuko
for raising this matter, because indeed leadership in schools has a direct
impact on the functionality of schools.

The department had already planned and provided opportunities for an
advanced certificate in school leadership, which has been offered at
several of our institutions. We have already provided opportunities for 400
teacher professionals, that is, principals, to attend these courses and the
response that we have from them is that they have indeed gained from them.

One of the core elements of this particular programme is the ability to
implement the curriculum. One of the areas we had identified in terms of
developing and designing this programme, amongst other areas, was to ensure
that principals, leaders or school managers are able to understand what
collective leadership is all about, that they have sound knowledge about
financial practices and management in terms of school funds and are able to
understand the need to interact dynamically in a vibrant way with the
society. Indeed, we do believe that this opportunity will be an excellent
one for those who are already principals and those who aspire to being
principals, because it will enhance their confidence and ability in those
particular roles.

As regards the specific programme for curriculum development, we have also
discovered that there are challenges in relation to the content of the
curriculum, and it is one area that we have to emphasise. The department,
we can report, has provided a programme and training materials for this
particular area. These will be provided to all principals together with a
pack of key materials, which includes policy and legislation, to ensure
sustainable development.

A training programme based on curriculum implementation, with these
documents as a source of reference, will be run from April this year. Thank
you, Chairperson.

Ms N F MAZIBUKO: Thank you, Deputy Minister, for your response. My follow-
up question is: With regard to these 400 teachers and principals that you
have indicated, is there any way of monitoring if they are actually
implementing what they have learnt from that training? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Thank you very much. I think it is very
important to do an assessment and evaluation of all principals who have
attended the course. The first step would be, really, to get a sense from
the principals whether they have gained from that particular experience,
and indeed there was a resoundingly affirmative response to that.

What we are going to do is monitor the progress of these principals and
leaders in schools to satisfy ourselves that this pilot project has had the
necessary impact in terms of the functionality of our schools. Thank you
very much.

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you, hon
Deputy Minister. Are there any other supplementary questions to the
Minister? If there are none, we then move to Question 9, and this will be
the last question that the hon Dr Sisulu will answer. She has asked to be
released.

      Details of co-ordination between government departments regarding
    allocation of houses, and of action taken to address complaints from
                   applicants about housing waiting lists

9.    Mr M A Mzizi (IFP) asked the Minister of Housing:


      (1)   Whether there is co-ordination between the various government
           departments and entities with regard to the allocation of
           houses; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details;

      (2)   whether she has been informed of complaints (a) that certain
           provincial and local authorities have different lists of
           applicants awaiting houses and (b) from individuals who claim
           that after having received a stand number on application for a
           housing subsidy, the houses had been given to other people upon
           completion of construction; if so, (i) what is being done to
           correct this situation in each case and (ii) what are the
           further relevant details; if not,

        3) whether her department will investigate these claims; if not,
           why not; if so, what are the relevant details?

            CO769E

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Acting Chairperson, I must thank you for allowing
me to make an early exit, and I would like to thank the hon Deputy Minister
of Education for agreeing to stand in for me.

The question I’m answering is from the hon Mzizi, and he wants to know if
there’s any co-ordination between the various government departments with
regard to the allocation of houses. Hon Mzizi, the issue of the waiting
list has become such a thorny issue that we in the national government have
decided that we are going to develop national housing guidelines, which are
principles to which most of the provinces would be required to adhere. I
want to emphasise the words “most of the provinces” as opposed to “all of
the provinces” for reasons that I will outline much later on.

The second part of the question is whether I’ve been informed of complaints
about certain provinces, at which local authorities have different lists
from applicants waiting, etc. Yes, hon Mzizi, this has been brought to our
attention which is why we have decided that we will have an integrated
waiting list.

We inherited a situation in terms of which we had various lists divided
along racial lines and it has taken us a long time, especially in the
Western Cape, to come up with a consolidated waiting list. We now have a
consolidated waiting list in the Western Cape, particularly in Cape Town,
which has been worked on by an audit company which we contracted about two
years ago to deal precisely with some of the problems that have arisen.

However, in relation to the specific question that you ask on whether the
department will investigate any claims arising from other provinces, where
in fact the situation verges on what the hon member might call corruption,
yes, we have a special unit in our department which is called the Special
Investigating Unit.

The department is collaborating with the national Special Investigating
Unit. Under a presidential proclamation, we have now formed a relationship
in which we are being assisted to deal with cases of corruption and
maladministration in respect of the allocation of houses.

This is an ongoing problem, and we are therefore hoping that out of this
collaboration we will be able to solve some of these problems, hon Mzizi.
The third part of the question has been responded to in my previous
answers. Thank you.

Mnu M A MZIZI: Angibonge Bambela likaSihlalo noma ngingazi ukuthi
seliqhamukaphi leli gama ngoba kwakuyiSekela likaSihlalo. Angibonge
kuNgqongqoshe uma ephawula ngalolu daba. Ngqongqoshe impela lolu daba
selwaba yinsakavukela umchilo wesidwaba lezi zinto ziyatholakala, umbuzo
wokuqala esigabeni sokuqala ePhiritona yikho lokho, okwesibili
kuyatholakala lapha eWinnie Mandela squatter camp ngaseGauteng kwesami
isigodi naseMagagula Heights.

Kodwa-ke ngiyayibonga impendulo yakho Nqgogqoshe uma uthi niphezu kwawo lo
mkhankaso. Sengathi kungashesha ngoba abantu bafika kithi sebethole
izincwadi ezibesabisayo ngokuthi njengoba uhleli lapho endlini ubokwazi
ukuthi isambane asiwumbi umgodi siwulale. Yingakho-ke phela sesibona ukuthi
ingathi kungashesha isifociya sihlale okhalweni impela ukuze sikhwexele
sibone ukuthi kwenzekani. Ngiyabonga. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs
follows.)

[Mr M A MZIZI: Thank you Acting Chairperson, even though I don’t really
know where this title comes from because we knew you as the Deputy
Chairperson. Thank you Minister for your response on this matter. Minister,
indeed this matter has since become the order of the day. These things are
found almost everywhere. My first question relates to Phiritona where the
same thing is happening and it is also happening in Winnie Mandela squatter
camp next to Gauteng in my area and in Magagula Heights.

Be that as it may, I thank you, Minister, for your response when you say
you are dealing with these cases. We wish that these can be addressed
speedily because people come to us with letters intimidating them with
eviction. That is why we are saying we wish everything could be done
speedily and more effort should be put into this so that we can see what is
happening. [Thank you.]]

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you, hon
Mzizi. Are there any other follow-up questions to the Minister? Hon
Minister, would you like to answer?

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Hon Acting Chair, yes, I did call you “hon Acting
Chair” because I was under the impression that is your title as we stand
now. But, if it is not, I stand to be corrected by the hon Mzizi.

Mhlonishwa Mzizi, ngicela ungangibhaxabuli ngesiZulu ngoba noma lesi esami
siya nokho ngakhona, sisazobuye sifinyelele kulesi sakho. Ngizocela-ke
ukuphendula ngesiNgisi. [Hon Mzizi, please don’t bombard me with isiZulu
because mine is very limited, but it will soon match yours. I therefore
request to respond in English.]

Yes, these are serious problems, hon Mzizi. I think that these are matters
that we are seized with in order to address the issues that you are
raising. We have deliberately taken on this relationship with the national
Special Investigating Unit and we have deliberately requested the President
to allow us to do this because of the enormity of the problem as it is
perceived, or as we experience it at local level.

However, hon Mzizi, I do not know how this matter would affect a squatter
camp, because the hon member says this is a recurring problem in the Nelson
Mandela squatter camp. I don’t know if there are any allocations of houses
in squatter camps, but I do know that when we allocate houses, these
allocations occur in established locations and established human
settlements. I would like to take on the urgency with which he is dealing
with this matter and hope that we can look forward to some assistance from
them as well. Thank you.

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you, hon Dr
Sisulu. I would just like to correct the hon Mzizi: I am Acting Chair at
the moment. Our Chairperson has had a major operation. He’s in the
Christiaan Barnard Memorial Hospital, so I am acting in his place. Thank
you very much. Are there any other follow-up questions to the Minister?
Yes, hon member.
Mr Z C NTULI: Thank you, Chairperson. I would like to find out from the
Minister of Housing whether she is aware that there are people,
particularly in KwaZulu-Natal, who are going around charging people in
order to tell them whether they qualify for the subsidy, because it seems
as if that is illegal. Are there any possibilities of charging those
people, who are going around charging people just to say that they will
check whether a person qualifies for a subsidy, for fraud? They charge
people for that. You will find a queue of people going there. People should
rather just to go to the municipality for someone to say, “Yes, you
qualify.” They are making money; this is a scam.

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Hon Acting Chairperson, I thought the hon Mzizi
would stand up to thank me for the information that I have provided this
House with.

To get back to the question of what we are doing about this scam, I am
actually hearing of this for the first time. I was not aware that this is
what is happening, but I’m trying to work out if perhaps this is a scam. If
they are providing a service for people who cannot go to the municipality,
I don’t know if it is a scam.

We would not encourage it, because the municipality has the responsibility
of checking through their records, and therefore advising citizens about
whether or not they qualify for a subsidy. I need to look into this. I
would need to look into the legislation before I declare these activities
fraudulent and illegal.

The members here could please send out the message that municipalities have
a responsibility. They have the waiting list. That is where you apply for a
subsidy and that is where you would get the necessary information. Any
intermediary is making money out of poor people and we should try to avoid
that. Thank you.

Nk N F MAZIBUKO: Ngiyabonga Sihlalo. Ngqongqoshe ngithanda ukwazi ukuthi
ngabe lukhona na uhlelo osewulucabangile ukuze ithi yonke le mibandela
yohlu lwabantu abalindile ibendawonye ukuze ivimbele abantu abahamba
begcogcoma beshinthsa izifundazwe besuka eNtshonalanga Kapa beqele
eMpumalanga Kapa beyofuna indlu basuke lapho beqele naseGauteng, njal?
Ngabe lukhona na uhlelo osulwenzile oluzokwenza ukuthi lonke lolu hlu
lwabantu abalindile luhlanganiswe lube ndawonye? Ngiyabonga. (Translation
of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Ms N F MAZIBUKO: Thank you Acting Chairperson. Minister, I would like to
know whether there is any plan that you have contemplated so that all the
particulars of people who are on waiting lists can be compiled on one
database to prevent people who are moving from one province to the other,
like people from the Western Cape crossing to the Eastern Cape, from
getting a house here and in Gauteng, etc. Is there any plan that you have
come up with so that all people who are on the waiting lists can be put in
one database? Thank you.]

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Thank you very much, Acting Chairperson. Again,
allow me to answer in English not because my Zulu is deficient, especially
the level at which the hon member was asking the question, but because
these are such important matters that it is important that we make sure
they are understood.

We came here about a year ago to deal with the issue of housing waiting
lists that arose out of a problem that we were experiencing on the N2. We
explained to the House here that we had decided to have a national database
of all the provinces and of all the municipalities - compiled into one
national database - that will be held by the national department. All the
municipalities and provinces will be given access to log into it,
understand and be able to deal with the database as it is. We are busy with
that.

We are hoping very soon that we will be able to publish it on the Internet
or wherever most people would be able to access it. It is absolutely
important that we do this, for the reason that the hon member has pointed
out to us: people are mobile. We have a very mobile society, and it is
important for us to be able to track whether somebody has been given a
subsidy, because double dipping is a serious problem for us when we are
faced with such huge problems.
We are dealing with this matter, hon member. Very soon we will have one
database, which will be related to the database that is held by the
Independent Electoral Commission, IEC, which deals with the voter
registration list. It will also be related to the Social Development list
which deals with the people that receive benefits from the state. This
database will also be linked and cross-checked against the resources and
the database that we have at Home Affairs. Thank you, Acting Chairperson.

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you, hon
Minister Dr Sisulu. Is there a last follow–up question to the Minister?
There is none. We then move to Question 10. I call upon the Deputy Minister
of Provincial and Local Government to answer Question 10. Thank you.

   Reasons for published draft regulations on reduction of rates on state
    property, and impact thereof on municipalities and residential rates

10.   Mrs D Robinson (DA) asked the Minister for Provincial and Local
      Government:

      (1)   What are the reasons for the recently published draft
           regulations on the reduction of rates payable on state property;


      (2)   whether any research has been done into the fiscal impact this
           will have on (a) municipalities and (b) residential rates; if
           not, why not; if so, what were the findings;

      (3)   whether households will be able to avoid the impact of these
           rates; if not, what is the position in this regard; if so, what
           are the relevant details?                    CO761E

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Acting Chair, the
answer to the hon Robinson’s question is as follows. The regulations
published on 19 December 2007 were published in terms of section 19 of the
Local Government: Municipal Property Rates Act of 2004.

The regulations deal solely with the ratios between residential and
nonresidential property categories. They do not deal with rates payable on
state property, as the actual rates payable are determined through
decisions adopted in municipal council meetings. Parliament empowered the
Minister to make such regulations. They are now being published for comment
by any interested person, including Members of Parliament.

The answer to part (2) of the question is that the impact which any future
regulations may have on municipalities and ratepayers will be the product
of a combination of factors. This would include a consideration as to
whether the municipality overall achieves an expanded rates base, and would
also depend on the rebates, exemptions, reductions or incentives each
municipality offers. The fiscal impact on municipalities is thus but one of
the factors that were taken into account when compiling the draft
regulations. Other factors that were taken into account include
affordability, economic impact and social impact.

The regulations relate solely to the ratio between residential and
nonresidential property categories, and do not deal with actual rates. The
impact, therefore, of rates is dependent upon the decision each
municipality takes in future regarding the rate to be imposed on each
property category, the economic situation of households, and the value of
property.

Finally, these are draft regulations published for comment. Members of
Parliament can comment on them. We cannot argue about the draft regulations
in this House as there is no final policy decision that has been taken. The
whole idea is to enable all interested parties to influence the final
decision by the Minister.

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you, Deputy
Minister for Provincial and Local Government. Are there any follow-up
questions to the Deputy Minister? There are none.

We move to Question 11. Hon Lamoela, both the Ministers are abroad, and
they’ve asked that their questions stand over.
 Details of agreement reached with Department of Social Development on take-
  over of special youth centres, and of responsibilities assumed before and
                               after transfer

12.   Ms J M Masilo (ANC) asked the Minister of Education:

      (a) What are the details of the agreement reached between her
      department and the Department of Social Development on its takeover of
      the responsibilities for the infrastructure of special youth centres
      (reform schools) within the next two years, (b) what (i) were her
      department’s responsibilities prior to transfer and (ii) will they be
      after transfer and (c) what progress has been made so far?
                             CO749E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Thank you very much, hon Acting
Chairperson. The reply is as follows: Under (a), according to the
Children’s Amendment Act passed in December 2007, all reform schools and
schools of industry must be registered with the Department of Social
Development within two years. Discussions over transfer details have begun,
but have not yet been finalised given the fact that the Act was only passed
in December 2007.

The answer to part (b)(i), with regard to the secure-care centres for
children awaiting trial, is that the Department of Education was
responsible for the provision of education in such centres. The Department
of Social Development had full responsibility for the residential
facilities, and for care and support provisioning.

With regard to schools of industry, the Department of Education had full
responsibility for the provision of education as well as the residential
facilities at the school. The employment of all staff was the
responsibility of the Department of Education. However, in some provinces,
some of these functions have been outsourced to the Department of Social
Development or to nongovernmental organisations undertaking this task. With
regard to reform schools, the Department of Education has full
responsibility for educational programmes, the entire physical plant, and
all attendant or incidental responsibilities.

The answer to part (b)(ii) is: With the coming into effect of the new law,
the Department of Education will remain responsible for the provision of
education programmes, but the provision of social support and residential
care will become the responsibility of the Department of Social
Development.

The answer to part (c) of the question is that the Children’s Amendment Act
was passed in December 2007. A Children’s Act Committee has been
established, and its responsibility is to work out the finer details of the
transfer process. I thank you, Acting Chairperson.

      Details of strategic objective of promoting linguistic diversity

13.   Ms J M Masilo (ANC) asked the Minister of Arts and Culture:

      What are the details of his department’s strategic objective of
      promoting linguistic diversity in South Africa, particularly with
      regard to the Public Service?                                 CO750E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Thank you, Acting Chair. I would
like to start by assuring this House that the Ministry and the Department
of Arts and Culture are committed to promoting linguistic diversity in
South Africa.

Hon members would recall that the Minister of Arts and Culture, Dr Pallo
Jordan, identified this need and made a call on government departments to
establish their own language units, as we considered them critical in
ensuring that we have the necessary infrastructure for language
facilitation. The Minister also suggested that we begin with 10 key
government departments, and that those departments be chosen on the basis
of their service delivery functions. As the Ministry and the Department of
Arts and Culture, we would like to acknowledge and commend some of the
departments that have made strides in promoting linguistic diversity.

These are the departments that have either set up the language units or
that have expanded their language units to accommodate the use of African
languages within the Public Service. Examples of these departments are the
SA Police Service, the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development
and the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry.

We’ve also noted that GCIS, the Government Communication and Information
System, is also in the process of establishing a language unit. The reason
I’m mentioning these departments is just to demonstrate that the promotion
of linguistic diversity does not rest solely with the Department of Arts
and Culture.

The role of the department is primarily to facilitate and ensure that the
policy imperatives and guidelines are set, understood and implemented. And
it should be noted that the department’s National Language Service is
providing a translation and editing service in all the 11 languages as well
as in some of the foreign languages. There are also terminology projects
aimed at assisting with the development of the necessary vocabulary. The
Department of Arts and Culture also facilitates the human language
technologies to fast-track the development of the African languages.

By way of an example, the department is currently developing machine-aided
translation tools to improve the speed, consistency and quality of official
documents in all the official languages at all government offices. There is
also another project in the pipeline, which is a multilingual telephone-
based system that will enable callers to access government services in the
official languages of their choice - and I must emphasise “the official
languages of their choice” - through a simple, speech-orientated interface
that is suitable for users with limited or no literacy. Thank you, Acting
Chair.

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you, hon
Deputy Minister Botha. Are there any follow-up questions to the Minister?
Hon Masilo?

Ms J M MASILO: Ke a leboga Modulasetulo wa Namaotshwere wa rona wa nama-o-
tshwere. [Thank you, Acting Chairperson.]

I would like to thank the Deputy Minister for the response and also the
Deputy Minister of Education for the responses. I don’t have any follow-
ups. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Thank you, hon member. I’m not sure
whether it is procedural to make an announcement that you don’t have follow-
up questions, but I am aware that the Acting Chairperson set you up.

Mr B J TOLO: Chairperson, I want to find out from the Department of Arts
and Culture whether they do recognise sign language as one of the languages
of South Africa, and what they are doing to develop that language.
The DEPUTY MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Thank you, Presiding Chair. Yes,
we do recognise sign language. We have already approached Cabinet to look
at how we can proceed in also incorporating sign language as an official
language. That is in process already. Thank you.

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, the Minister indicated that they have
identified 10 departments to start with their own language units. I would
like to know how far those 10 departments are, and if they are making any
progress in that regard? Thank you very much.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: I wish we had more than 10
departments. The reason I mentioned them is because they are making
excellent progress. I just wanted to demonstrate that there are departments
that are already doing these things. But, also, we would like to invite
other departments to begin to establish their own language units. That is
why I was mentioning GCIS as well, as one of the departments that are
already looking at establishing their own language unit. This is an ongoing
process. It is slow as we all know, but we will get there. Thanks.

 Satisfactoriness of implementation of policy in respect of no-fee schools,
  school feeding scheme, provision of classrooms and school infrastructure

15.   Mr V V Z Windvoël (ANC) asked the Minister of Education:
      Whether the implementation of education legislation and policies by
      provinces is satisfactory, with particular reference to the policy in
      respect of (a) no-fee schools, (b) the school feeding scheme and (c)
      the provision of (i) class rooms and (ii) school infrastructure; if
      not, (a) what is the position in this regard and (b) what are the
      areas of concern in respect of each province?
                       CO736E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Thank you very much, hon Chairperson. Hon
Chairperson, I have a very comprehensive reply which is three full pages
long. I have tried to reduce the answer, for purposes of assisting the
House, to one page. I will, however, table with your permission,
Chairperson, the full response to the question.

In answer to part (a) with regard to no-fee schools, I refer the hon
Windvoël to the answer I gave earlier to Question 1.

With regard to nutrition, the nutrition programme provides meals to
learners in targeted public primary schools, promotes sustainable food
production in school gardens – there are more than 4 500 school gardens
currently – and aims to strengthen nutrition education for school
communities. In most provinces, the school nutrition programme is
implemented successfully. However, there has been concern about
underexpenditure and overexpenditure by particular provinces. The
Department of Education has been proactive in tackling these concerns. For
instance, in consultation with the Eastern Cape provincial department, we
have reviewed the model that they used to provide meals. We have
established a task team, payments are being monitored, and the provision of
meals is being monitored in districts and schools.

May I add, with your permission, hon Chair, that amongst the provinces, the
province that is really underperforming in relation to nutrition programmes
is indeed the Eastern Cape. Therefore, we have established a dedicated task
team to assist this province so that our children do not suffer as a result
of the poor functioning of the nutrition scheme.

With regard to c(i) that deals with classrooms and c(ii) that deals with
infrastructure, the first report of the National Education Infrastructure
Management System revealed that we have made substantial progress in the
provision of classrooms and school infrastructure. For the benefit of hon
members of this House, the National Education Information Management System
enables us to identify schools throughout the country. We can have aerial
photographs of them; we know who the principals are; how many classrooms
there are; whether there is sanitation in those schools; whether there is
water – if it is borehole water or provided by municipalities, etc. So we
have a comprehensive database of all schools in the country, and that
certainly is an important tool in terms of planning.
The number of overcrowded schools has fallen strongly from 51% in 1996 to
42% in 2000, and to 24% in 2006. The number of schools with electricity has
increased from 11 174 in 1996 to 20 713 in 2006. The number of schools
without water has decreased from 8 823 in 1996 to 3 152 in 2006. The number
of schools without toilets has decreased from 3 265 in 1996 to 1 532 in
2006.

I may add with your permission, Chairperson, that these numbers have also
been significantly reduced over the past year. Nonetheless, we have a great
deal of work to do. While three in four schools were rated as being in good
or excellent condition in terms of the National Education Information
Management System, Neims, one in four was rated as being in a poor
condition. In the Eastern Cape for example and in particular, nearly one of
every two schools was in a poor condition.

These backlogs remain despite provinces increasing their school
infrastructure expenditure from R1,6 billion in 2003-04 to R3 billion in
2007-08. We believe that much faster progress is necessary to provide
access to adequate and properly resourced school facilities.

In response to the Neims report, Cabinet has mandated the Department of
Education – and this is perhaps very good news – to use innovative
mechanisms such as greater community involvement, public-private
partnerships and dedicated delivery vehicles to accelerate delivery. The
National Treasury’s Infrastructure Delivery Improvement Programme has long
supported us in this regard. We will use this programme to ensure effective
use of increased allocations.

And, I may add, for the benefit of the House that on Friday this week there
is a joint meeting between the Department of Education and the Department
of Public Works to look particularly at urgent matters of infrastructure. I
thank you, hon Chair.

REPLY:

(a)   In regard to no-fee schools, I refer the hon member to the answer I
      gave earlier in answer to Q 1.

(b)   The nutrition programme provides meals to learners in quintile 1 to 3
       public primary schools, promotes sustainable food production in
       school gardens, and aims to strengthen nutrition education for school
       communities.

       In most provinces, the school nutrition programme is implemented
       successfully. However, there has been concern at under- and over-
       expenditure by particular provinces. The DoE has been proactive in
       tackling these concerns. For instance, in consultation with the
       Eastern Cape Provincial Department, we have reviewed the model used
       to provide meals. We have established a task team, payments are being
       monitored, and the provision of meals is being monitored in districts
       and schools.

(c)   (i) classrooms and (ii) school infrastructure

       The first report of the National Education Infrastructure  Management
       System, Neims, provinces  revealed  that  we  have  made  substantial
       progress in the provision of classrooms and school infrastructure:

       The number of overcrowded schools has fallen strongly,  from  51%  in
       1996 to 42% in 2000 to 24% in 2006.
       The number of schools with electricity has increased, from 11,174  in
       1996 to 20,713 in 2006.
       The number of schools without water has decreased, from 8,823 in 1996
       to 3,152 in 2006.
       The number of schools without toilets has decreased,  from  3,265  in
       1996 to 1,532 in 2006.
       Nonetheless, we believe that much faster progress is necessary to
       provide access to adequate school facilities. While 3 in 4 schools
       were rated as in good or excellent condition, 1 in 4 was rated as in
       poor condition. In the Eastern Cape, in particular, nearly 1 in 2
       schools was in a poor condition.


       These backlogs remain in spite of provinces increasing their school
       infrastructure spend from R1.6 billion in 2003/04 to more than R3
       billion in 2007/08.


       In response to the Neims report, cabinet has mandated the DoE to use
       innovative mechanisms (such as greater community involvement, public-
       private partnerships and dedicated delivery vehicles) to accelerate
       delivery. The National Treasury’s Infrastructure Delivery Improvement
       Programme has long supported us in this regard. We will use this
       programme to ensure effective use of the increased allocations.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon members, my apologies in
particular to the Deputy Minister. I made an omission because of the
markings here - I was supposed to go to the Deputy Minister of Education.
My apologies.

Is there any follow-up question? Hon Windvoël? Could you use the microphone
next to Mr Watson?

Mr V V Z WINDVOËL: Thank you, hon House Chairperson. Maybe they need to be
told, when I’m about to speak, that I have shifted to this side of the
House.

I want to thank the Deputy Minister for the earlier compliment and also
thank others for their compliments that I have received even beyond this
House. I also want to thank the Deputy Minister for his lengthy response
and we will gladly receive his written response as such.

Regarding my follow-up question, which I think will also benefit the member
from the Free State seated on my right, there are variations, in
particular, for the no-fee schools in the per capita budgeting. There are
some provinces that budget less than others, and the trend is for there to
be less budgeting per capita in the rural and poorer provinces than in what
we may define as the economically strong provinces.

Could the Minister make a statement as to what causes these variations,
because the concern we have is that if the poorer provinces budget only a
little, that also affects the quality of education which is dispensed in
those particular schools. I thank you, Chairperson.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Thank you very much, hon member. I think
it is a very pertinent and necessary question to put. There are indeed
variations. If you compare the Western Cape to Limpopo, for example, there
is a significant difference in terms of the allocation per learner.
Ideally, we are looking at between R720 and R1 000 per learner.

Indeed, provinces have been requested to really review the allocations,
particularly in the provinces of Mpumalanga and Limpopo in terms of the
allocations. That would enable the schools to be better resourced so that
the no-fee schools really remove the burden or the yoke of repression in
those schools. So, we have asked for uniformity. One of the possibilities
that we could look at is to create a norm.

But, again, because of the disproportionate development in provinces, a
norm has to allow for a degree of flexibility. We do believe that you
cannot have an allocation of less than R500 per learner. So, indeed, it’s a
matter that has been raised in the Council of Education Ministers’ meeting,
and an undertaking has been received that they would look at that closely.

Perhaps to add to that, provinces such as Limpopo and Mpumalanga,
particularly Limpopo, the Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal, have more schools
located in the first and second quintiles as compared to the Western Cape
or Gauteng. Because of the infrastructure and development, it would mean
that the burden of allocation is far greater.

So, whilst we have an average of 40% across the board in the country as a
whole, you would find disparities in terms of schools identified. For
example, in the Western Cape you would have less than 40% of the learners
who are recipients of the benefits of attending no-fee schools, whereas if
you go to Limpopo or Mpumalanga you would find that the number of schools
that benefit from it exceeds 60% because of the poverty index that applies
there.

So, this is rather a complex matter. But the concern that has been raised –
and certainly forcefully raised by the Minister – has been that the minimum
threshold with regard to the allocations should be appropriate to enable
the school to function effectively. I thank you for your question.

Mr B J TOLO: Chair, I have three follow-up questions for the Deputy
Minister, but I will interlink them so that they become one question.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Make it one. I don’t want to be
rigid. I can apply the Rules. Make it one question and as conveniently as
possible.

Mr B J TOLO: Chair, the Deputy Minister has correctly indicated that the
Eastern Cape’s department is seriously challenged when it comes to the
implementation of the feeding scheme. We all know that the policy says that
all children in primary schools must be fed, but in the Eastern Cape
children are only being fed up to Grade 4.

So I am just asking whether, in the endeavours of the department to try to
help the Eastern Cape feed the kids there, if you are also going to help
them to feed all the primary schoolchildren, as the policy actually
indicates? Then, the other aspect of the question is: Are we intending to
extend this scheme to include feeding children in secondary schools?

Water and sanitation for schools is a function that has been given to the
Department of Water Affairs and Forestry by Cabinet, I think. Are you
getting the sense that this department is doing well in terms of addressing
the problem of water and sanitation in schools? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, with regard to the norm for
feeding schemes, the framework we have provided is that our learners must
be fed on 156 days and that this would cover all primary schoolchildren. We
have included Grade R in the spectrum of primary schools, in terms of our
direction, given the fact that we have received a more favourable budget
for the nutrition programme. So that would be the one factor.

Indeed, one of the problems that we have identified in the Eastern Cape is
that they do not feed across the entire spectrum, in other words all the
learners in primary school. That is why we said that the model that is in
place is not appropriate and that it does not respond adequately to the
needs within the province.

With regard to water and sanitation, we regard that as an important area.
Certainly, schools cannot be regarded as functional or adequately resourced
without water being provided and suitable sanitation. However, the
government had set aside R800 million specifically for the provision of
water and sanitation to schools and clinics.

The Department of Education, the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry
and the Department of Health are working very, very closely. There is a
list of priority schools that has been provided, and indeed we are quite
heartened by the response of the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry
in this regard. It also forms one of the strategic objectives of government
to ensure that all our clinics and all our schools have water and
electricity because it is so necessary and critical. Thank you.

Mr B J TOLO: Chairperson, there is one question that has not been responded
to: whether the scheme will actually be extended to include secondary
schools.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Some of the provinces – in fact, there
are one or two – have included it, because they can’t have the situation of
one child in primary school with a sibling in high school, when they are
both from families in need, being fed while the other is not.

Given the scope of the application - this scheme reaches more than 6
million children; in fact, close to 10 million children - it becomes
extremely difficult at one go to do so. We have engaged with Treasury to
ask them whether, in fact, we couldn’t in the first two quintiles - the
lowest quintiles - extend the programme to include high schools. As soon as
we receive some kind of response from Treasury, we will be able to report
back to this House. Thank you.

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, as we all know, education is a concurrent
function. My question relates to infrastructure, feeding schemes, no–fee
schools and so forth. I know the Ministry normally meets from time to time
with MECs and so on, but my question is: Does the national Ministry have
the constitutional and legal authority to impose on provinces where to
improve and what to do? I know we are sitting with quite a difficult
situation here in terms of which we all know that certain functions are
within the provinces – they do their own budgets and so forth. Minister, I
would like to hear your views. What is it that we can do to improve these
relationships? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Thank you very much, hon Sulliman. We are
all aware of the challenges that we face in terms of concurrent powers
whether in respect of education, health or housing. The Division of Revenue
Act does provide for opportunities in which a Minister can, on the basis of
nonperformance of executive responsibilities of a province, divert those
funds to another province.

However, the difficulty that we face if we take, for example, the nutrition
scheme, is that we cannot say that the Eastern Cape is not providing
adequately for those learners, therefore we are taking those resources and
transferring them to Limpopo. What we should be doing in terms of co-
operative governance is to ensure that we provide the support, which we are
obliged to do constitutionally, to the province to ensure that they are
better able to perform their executive responsibility.

However, we have made it very, very clear that with regard to these
priorities, which affect directly the performance of our learners – I mean,
we are speaking not only to their minds but also to their stomachs – that
we would certainly be very firm in terms of the expenditure.

With regard to infrastructure, Mr Sulliman, if you were paying any
attention ... Mr Sulliman? Thank you very much for your attention.
[Interjections.] With regard to infrastructure, we have a monthly report
from each of the provinces with regard to water, electricity, sanitation,
the building of additional classrooms, and the building of schools.

That enables us as a Ministry to track the performance of provinces in
relation to infrastructure needs. If we do not monitor this, then we may
find that we fall far short of our targets even though resources have been
allocated. Thank you.

       Initiatives to showcase South African arts and culture through
               opportunities offered by Fifa Soccer World Cup

14.   Mr B J Tolo (ANC) asked the Minister of Arts and Culture:

      Whether his department has long- and short-term initiatives in place
      to showcase South African arts and culture through the opportunities
      offered by the Fifa Soccer World Cup event; if not, why not; if so,
      what are the relevant details?          CO751E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Thank you, House Chair. Maybe we
should remind the hon Deputy Minister Surty that he should refer to the
member as “the hon” Sulliman! [Laughter.]

In response to the question that was asked by the hon member Tolo, yes, the
department does have a 2010 arts and culture plan, which we intend to
launch very soon, because we have fewer than 1 000 days to go. Actually, I
think we have just under 900 days; eight hundred and something. The plan is
aligned to the framework of the Vision 2010 programme and social cohesion.

The arts and culture programme stands on what I would call five legs, if
there is anything like five legs, or five pillars. It’s the performing arts
pillar, it’s the literary arts pillar, it’s the heritage resources, legacy
and promotion pillar, and the visual arts pillar.

Each of these pillars has long-term and short-term arts and culture
activities. For example, amongst the short-term activities of the
performing arts we are looking at a national conference to establish a
national choir and a national song, which is something that would bring
together the whole nation. As we all know, there is no corner of this
country that does not have a choir; whether it’s rural or urban, there is a
choir. Also, we’re looking at establishing a national dance troupe.

Then the department will also use the national holidays’ celebrations, such
as Reconciliation Day, Youth Day, Women’s Day and Freedom Day to popularise
the 2010 cultural programmes. The department also hopes to enter into
partnerships with stakeholders in other events such as the Macufe Festival
in the Free State, the Cape Town International Jazz Festival and the
Mapungubwe Arts Festival, and we probably will look at others as well.

In the long term, the department has partnered with other government
departments, one being the Department of Sport and Recreation, in planning
and implementing the mobilisation and mass participation of projects such
as the game they call 1Pal, which is street soccer. We’ve entered into a
partnership with the Department of Sport and Recreation.

The department has also established a partnership with the Local Organising
Committee for the opening and closing ceremonies of the Fifa World Cup.
There are other long-term projects. We’ve also earmarked for 2010 to
include a national museum of contemporary African art, which forms part of
our legacy programme. Thank you, House Chair.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Thanks, House Chair, and I thank the Deputy Minister
for the calculated response. My follow-up question is to find out whether
they, as a department, are going to move up a gear and move out of event-
driven showcasing, and just promote culture as culture in our country.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): The Kgoshi has spoken, hon Deputy
Minister.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Yes, the Kgoshi has spoken. If I
understand the question, you’ll notice that when we have events, we don’t
have events for the sake of having an event. We have often said – and the
Minister has often said this – that we are not a department of dance and
song.

We have a very focused objective, and we’ve been given the mandate of
looking at more important issues such as nation-building and social
cohesion and looking at national identity. So the whole purpose is actually
to do the things that we do in order to achieve social cohesion. We would
have to use some of these activities to achieve that.

As I said earlier, there is no place, no area in our country that does not
have a choir. It doesn’t matter where you go. That, for us, is one of the
means that we can use to bring people together so that they are one. There
is the recent incident that is now topical about racism, but if you had
been at the banquet that was arranged to welcome the French President, you
would have seen that we had a multicoloured, multiracial choir singing.
There were all sorts of people there; it was a rainbow choir. So that’s the
means that we use to that end of social cohesion. We’ve moved away, since
2004, your excellency hon Mokoena. Thanks.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Thank you, hon Deputy Minister. Are
there any further follow-up questions? In the absence of any, we proceed to
Question 17. I mean, by that, that the Minister of Sport and Recreation has
deferred all the questions to the next Question Time. So we proceed to
Question 17 to the Minister of Housing. The question will be taken by the
hon Deputy Minister of Education, the hon Surty.

   Plans to correct recurrence of underspending and to assist provinces to
                          ensure delivery of houses

17.   Mr C J van Rooyen (ANC) asked the Minister of Housing:

      (1)   Whether her department has any plans in place to correct the
           recurrence of the Free State Department of Housing’s projected
           underspending of R82,2 million in the 2007-08 financial year; if
           not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details;


      (2)   whether other provincial departments of housing have similar
           projected amounts of underspending in the 2007-08 financial
           year; if not, what is the position in this regard; if so, what
           plans are in place to assist these provinces in ensuring the
           delivery of houses;

        3) how many houses have been completed and delivered in
           Stellenbosch since the local government elections in 2006?

            CO742E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION (on behalf of the Minister of Housing):
Chairperson, the answer is as follows. One, yes, the department has, with
reference to a special housing Minmec meeting held on 30 October 2007,
resolved that the trends in provinces be determined early in the coming
years for provinces that are likely to underspend, and that the funds of
underperforming provinces, which received an allocation from the Integrated
Housing and Human Settlement Development Grant, be stopped in terms of the
Division of Revenue Act, 2007, and be re-allocated to performing provinces
in terms of the provision of the Division of Revenue Act, 2007 – quite
interestingly, I alluded to this in my earlier response.

The Department of Housing has also put a number of processes in place to
have closer interaction with provinces, which includes project
implementation support and monitoring activities. The national Department
of Housing created a branch specialising in rendering assistance to
provinces experiencing difficulties.

In addition, the department has provided support to assist provinces to
compile their five multiyear development plans, and it is expected that
with the improvement in the planning services being rendered, provinces
will be assisted to plan and budget appropriately and that underexpenditure
will be reduced and eventually eliminated when the new planning
dispensation is fully operational. Furthermore, it must be indicated that
the national Department of Housing sent teams to all the nine provinces to
determine the readiness of the provinces to execute projects and carry out
some in loco inspections of current projects.

The answer to part 3 of the question is, yes, the Eastern Cape is
experiencing underspending problems. In view of the problems experienced,
an amount of R500 million allocated to the Eastern Cape was also stopped
and reallocated to performing provinces. The remedial actions reflected in
paragraph one are also applicable in respect of the Eastern Cape as the
actions are being applied countrywide. Thank you, Chairperson.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): There is no follow-up question.
Thanks very much, hon members. I am also informed that questions for the
Minister of Social Development will also be deferred. There is also a
question by the hon Mazibuko to the Minister of Sport and Recreation, which
will be deferred. We then go to Question 20 addressed to the hon Minister
of Housing. Over to you, hon Deputy Minister of Education.

   Records of housing units demolished or rebuilt in provinces due to poor
 building materials and shoddy contractors, and preventative measures taken
                          to address the situation

20.   Mr V V Z Windvoël (ANC) asked the Minister of Housing:

      (1)   Whether her department keeps a record of the total number of
           reported housing units that are demolished or rebuilt in each
           province as a result of the use of poor building materials and
           shoddy contractors; if not, why not; if so, what was the total
           amount in losses in the nine provinces between 1 January 2004
           and 31 December 2007;
      (2)   whether her department is putting any preventative measures in
           place to address the situation; if not, why not; if so, what
           measures?                                    CO737E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION (on behalf of the Minister of Housing):
Thank you, hon Chairperson. The reply is as follows. One: No, the
department does not keep separate records on the rebuilding of houses that
were permitted to be demolished or houses that required repair work owing
to shoddy workmanship or weak materials used. The records, in respect of
such cases, are collected and maintained by the relevant provincial housing
departments or municipalities.

Two: Yes, with effect from 1 April 2002, all houses constructed and
financed through any of the national housing programmes must be enrolled
with the National Home Builders Registration Council, the NHBRC. In
addition, all home builders that construct houses that are financed through
the NHBRC must be registered with the organisation.

The NHBRC assesses all home builders’ capacity and ability to deliver
houses that will meet the minimum technical requirements. All houses are
subject to the minimum technical requirements introduced by the council,
and the council also conducts regular compliance inspections to ensure
compliance with the said technical requirements. This process provides for
the structured regulation of the home building industry and ensures that
the highest quality products are delivered.

It is assumed that the relevant houses referred to in the question are part
of the projects approved prior to 1 April 2002 and were, therefore, not
subject to the council’s enrolment and quality control scheme. Thank you,
Chairperson.

Mr V V Z WINDVOËL: Chairperson, I take it that it would be unfair to pose
my follow-up question to the Deputy Minister of Education. I’ll make a
compromise and put it in writing to the relevant Minister, because I think
there are serious matters to be followed up on this issue. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Thanks very much, hon Windvoël. Hon
members, I just want to bring to your attention my observation – I might be
erring seriously, so I’m speaking subject to contestation – that there are
a number of questions here that really need extensive details. For
instance, one could have a question to the Minister of Housing on the
number of houses per province. That would be a detailed question.

So I want to advise that Rules must apply. Members must know that such
detailed questions require written replies, because Ministers may not be in
a position to provide the answers. The dilemma that this creates is that
members may not be satisfied with the details that are given in this short
space of time. Okay. This is a Rule here. [Interjections.] Sorry, I’m still
presiding, Chief. Could you please sit down?

The tendency is that hon members raise a question again, because they think
that it has not been responded to. I’m just making these general
observations and bringing members’ attention to this. I’m not referring to
any specific question, but I can refer to the Rules on this matter. Hon
Kgoshi, do you want to say something?

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: No, Chair. I think I’ll take your last observation to
say, maybe check the Rules, Sir. Let’s talk about it, because some of us
differ with what you are saying, Chair.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Certainly. We’ll go that way, but I
think you can discuss my observation outside. I really wanted to bring that
to the attention of the members. On that note, hon members, we will go to
the next question which is printed in the name of the hon Windvoël to the
Minister of Home Affairs.

 Progress made in filling critical departmental vacancies and in addressing
  cases of senior managers serving in an acting capacity for longer than a
                                    year

21.   Mr V V Z Windvoël (ANC) asked the Minister of Home Affairs:

      Whether her department has made any progress to (a) fill critical
      vacancies in all of its offices and (b) address cases of senior
      managers that have been in an acting capacity in certain positions for
      longer than a year; if not, why not; if so, what progress?
                                              CO738E

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Thank you very much, Chairperson, and thank
you to the hon V V Z Windvoël. The answer to the question is yes, hon
member, the department is making progress with the filling of the
identified critical vacancies.

To date, the department has filled 186 of these critical vacancies which
were available. An additional 318 vacancies are now at the interview stage,
and they will be finalised soon. These posts include seven out of 15 SMS,
senior management service, positions that are occupied by officials in
acting capacities. It must, however, be noted that the department is
currently involved in a turnaround process that includes the finalisation
of a new organisational structure. The new structure is now going through a
process of approval by the Department of the Public Service and
Administration and Cabinet. It would not be wise, therefore, at this stage
to fill all positions in terms of the current structure as most of these
have been reviewed.

In line with the directive of the President during the state of the nation
address, the department will, however, continue with the process of filling
the rest of the identified critical vacancies. These, of course, are
limited to those vacancies that need to be filled to support service
delivery imperatives, including the stabilisation of the senior management
service. We are confident that in relation to these critical vacancies, we
will meet the six-month deadline given to us by the President during the
state of the nation address. I thank you, hon Chair.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): In the absence of a follow-up
question, we proceed straight to Question 23. We will skip Question 22
which is to the Minister of Social Development. You know that, hon
Sulliman, as it is printed in your name. We will proceed straight to
Question 23 addressed to the Minister of Housing. I now call the hon Deputy
Minister of Education.

 Performance audits by Auditor-General on RDP housing projects in Free State
23.   Mr D A Worth (DA) asked the Minister of Housing:

      Whether the Auditor-General has started to conduct performance audits
      on Reconstruction and Development Programme, RDP, housing projects in
      the Free State; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                        CO762E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION (on behalf of the Minister of Housing):
Thank you very much, hon Chairperson. In fact, you just alluded to this
problem here. If, at all, the question was clearer, we would have been able
to respond. For example, does the question refer to value for money,
quality of work, etc? The department does not ordinarily request the
Auditor-General to do audits, but because of the lack of clarity in the
question, a proper response could not be provided.

However, if the hon member could provide us with greater detail and
clarity, then certainly the hon Minister of Housing would be in a better
position to respond. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon Deputy Minister, I do understand
your position. Clearly, it is an acting one here, and I’ll take up what the
hon Windvoël has said, in that even asking you a follow-up question would
be unfair. I really want to put it on record, particularly for ministerial
staff, that it cannot be taken that a Member of Parliament writes a
question and the department does not respond because the question is not
clear. Write to that hon member who posed the question, because the
question has gone through the relevant processes, and say what your
understanding is, what the issues are and clarify it at that level.

I am just making this general ruling without a specific context, because
this sets the wrong precedent. I know at one point there was this kind of
response and there was an uproar in this House, which caused some acrimony
between ourselves and the Ministers. I hope officials from the department
are taking note of this.

 Prosecution of contractors in Free State with regard to badly built houses
                       and non-completion of contracts

24.   Mr D A Worth (DA) asked the Minister of Housing:
      Whether any contractors in the Free State have been prosecuted with
      regard to badly built houses and for non-completion of contracts; if
      not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                                         CO763E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION (on behalf of the Minister of Housing):
Thank you, hon Chairperson. Given the fact that this question is very
clear, we are able to respond to it very comprehensively. [Laughter.] We
certainly will convey your sentiments to the hon Minister and take note of
it for our own purposes.

The response is as follows. Currently, no contractors have been prosecuted
in respect of either badly built or incomplete houses in the Free State.
However, there are various cases where civil legal proceedings are pending
in courts against trusts that were established as part of the People’s
Housing Project and which received money to carry out projects but failed
to do so. Further, there are cases that were reported to the SAPS and the
Directorate of Special Operations by individual beneficiaries who were
aggrieved by contractors for reasons unknown to the department. The outcome
of these cases is not known to the department.

In terms of Proclamation R7 of 2007, as published in the Government Gazette
29831 dated 25 April 2007, the Special Investigating Unit has been mandated
to conduct investigations into any fraud, corruption and maladministration
regarding development and delivery of low-cost housing in South Africa
through the national Department of Housing and provincial departments of
housing and the former housing development boards and corporations and
local authorities and their appointed agents.

Contractual nondelivery by developers, contractors and service providers is
one of the key focus areas of the Special Investigating Unit in terms of
that particular proclamation. A list of all prioritised contracts is being
compiled by the Special Investigating Unit to identify urgent contracts in
the various provinces, including the Free State. Cases against trusts were
also identified as priority projects to be dealt with by the Special
Investigating Unit. Thank you, Chairperson.

Mr A WATSON: Chair, my question is actually more of a general nature,
because the hon Minister said that this question could be answered because
it was more clearly written. Yet, in his response to the question about
badly built houses and for the noncompletion of contracts, he replied in
terms of badly built houses and uncompleted houses. So he didn’t answer the
right question.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon Deputy Minister, I take that as
a comment by the hon Watson. [Laughter.] I am not sure if you really want
to respond.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: I think with your permission, hon Chair,
I would like to respond. The question is as follows, for the benefit of the
House: whether any contractors in the Free State have been prosecuted with
regard to badly built houses. The answer could have been no. But what we
have done is that we have said no, and we have given an explanation. So, I
think, we have given more than was required, and I think the hon member
should say, “Thank you very much for your very comprehensive answer.”
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Order! Order! I don’t want to engage
with that, but for now I think we must take it that the question has been
answered sufficiently. It’s unfortunate that the Deputy Minister is acting
for the Minister. I think the Minister has the authority to engage in terms
of the details. We will proceed to the next question. [Interjections.] I
think it is Question ... Oh, there is a follow-up question. Yes, hon Worth.

Mr D A WORTH: Deputy Chair, all I would like to do is ask the Deputy
Minister if I could have that in writing, please. Thanks.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Could the hon member have that
response in writing?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: We have no difficulty in tabling it, hon
Chair. Thank you.

REPLY:

Currently, no contractors have been prosecuted in respect  of  either  badly
built or incomplete houses in the Free State.  However,  there  are  various
cases where civil legal proceedings are pending  in  courts  against  trusts
that were established as part of the Peoples Housing Projects (PHP) and  who
received money to carry out projects but failed to  do  so.  Further,  there
are  cases  that  were  reported  to  the  SAPS  and   DSO   by   individual
beneficiaries who were aggrieved by contractors for reasons unknown  to  the
department. The outcome of these cases is not known to the department.

In terms of Proclamation R7 of  2007  as  published  in  Government  Gazette
29831 dated 25 April 2007, the Special Investigating Unit has been  mandated
to conduct investigations into any fraud, corruption  and  maladministration
regarding development and delivery  of  low-cost  housing  in  South  Africa
through the National Department of Housing, the  provincial  departments  of
housing, the former Housing Development Boards and  corporations  and  local
authorities and their appointed agents.
Contractual non-delivery by developers, contractors and service providers
is one of the key focus areas of the Special Investigating Unit in terms of
Proclamation R7 of 2007. A list of all prioritised contracts is being
compiled by the Special Investigating Unit to identify urgent contracts in
the various provinces including Free State. Cases against trusts were also
identified as priority projects to be dealt with by the Special
Investigating Unit.

  Minister’s stance on protest marches against corruption in Dewetsdorp in
                  Free State and Britstown in Northern Cape

25.   Ms B L Ntembe (ID) asked the Minister for Provincial and Local
      Government:

      Whether, in light of the protest marches against corruption in
      Dewetsdorp in the Free State and Britstown in the Northern Cape, he
      will take any action against the alleged corrupters; if not, why not;
      if so, (a) what action and (b) what are the further relevant details?
                                                         CO766E

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chair, the answer
to the hon Ntembe is as follows: Available information seems to indicate
that the protest marches may not be the result of corruption, but may
instead be linked to general service delivery problems in these towns.
The Free State and the Northern Cape provincial departments responsible for
local government will look into the matters raised by the protesters, in
consultation with the relevant stakeholders, particularly community
leaders, to determine the exact causes of the protests. They will also
focus on the identification of solutions to these problems. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon members, in the absence of any
follow-up questions, it might be my ignorance but there is a new member
here or a member who has changed her surname. This question is written in
the name of the hon Ntembe. [Interjections.] Oh yes, thanks very much.
[Laughter.] [Applause.]

I think it is fair for me, because I was trying to look for new members.
One of the new members whose name was announced is not here, while the
other one is there. I thought maybe that the hon Kgarebe had changed her
surname to Ntembe. So I was wondering whether they had broken the Rules of
Parliament by allowing a person from outside Parliament to ask a question.
This is sincere; it’s not a joke. Thanks very much.

                    Aim and origin of Operation Umbrella

26.   Ms B L Ntembe (ID) asked the Minister of Home Affairs:

      Whether she has been informed of Operation Umbrella; if not, what is
      the position in this regard; if so, (a) who ordered the operation, (b)
      what is the aim of the operation and (c) what brought it about?
                                                   CO767E

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Thank you very much, hon Chair, and thanks
also to the hon Ntembe. The answer to this question is yes, I am informed
of Operation Umbrella and I have received a report about it. The operation
is a joint effort between us, the Department of Home Affairs, the SA Police
Service and other law-enforcement agencies.

It is in the main an operation by the police, of course, with the
participation of the Department of Home Affairs. The activities of the
operation, in specific relation to the Department of Home Affairs, are
overseen by the inspectorate chief director. Approval for the involvement
of the department in this operation was given by the Acting Deputy Director-
General of the National Immigration Branch, and it commenced on 1 November
2007, and it will come to an end on 31 March 2008.

The operation is planned as part of the normal functions of the immigration
inspectorate as contemplated in the Immigration Act of 2002. Amongst other
things, it aims to deal with problems experienced by the department in
enforcing the Act, including the investigation of fraudulent marriages,
undocumented foreign nationals, abuse of our late registration of births,
abuse of our asylum seekers/refugee systems and other related cases.

At the conclusion of these investigations, the relevant competent
authorities are then informed to proceed with prosecutions and finalise
these cases. The operation was brought about as a result of the assessment
by the law-enforcement agencies regarding the extent of the criminality,
including that of illegal migration.

The department has also received concerns from communities regarding the
extent of criminality in our communities by some of these elements. I thank
you.

 Plans to investigate alleged brutal treatment of refugees by police at home
                         affairs office in Cape Town

27.   Ms B L Ntembe (ID) asked the Minister of Home Affairs:

      Whether her department has any plans to investigate the alleged brutal
      treatment of refugees at its Cape Town office on the Foreshore by
      police members; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                                   CO768E

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Hon Chair and hon Ntembe, with regard to this
question, to my knowledge the department has not received a complaint
regarding police brutality at any of our offices. Of course, should such a
complaint be received, the department will accordingly deal with it
together with the SA Police Service and the Independent Complaints
Directorate.

The information at my disposal, at this stage, in relation to the specific
case of 10 February 2008 the hon member referred to, is that the officials
from the Department of Public Works called in the police to assist in
handling and calming a situation that had degenerated into chaos and
disorder involving members of the public at the Cape Town refugee office.
As a result, one member of the public was arrested on charges of inciting
unruly behaviour and the disturbance of public order.

If any further information regarding the conduct of the police or of any of
our officials, during the handling of this incident, is reported, we will
then most certainly be willing to investigate. But, so far, hon member,
nothing has come our way.

On receiving this question, we then went on to conduct an investigation and
to make enquiries as to whether we had received any complaint about this
particular matter, and nothing has come our way so far. I thank you.

  Measures taken by the department to strengthen collaboration in provision
                  of Early Childhood Development programmes

28.   Ms J M Masilo (ANC) asked the Minister of Education:

      What measures is her department putting in place to strengthen
      collaboration with the Department of Social Development as well as
      other related departments in the provision of early childhood
      development programmes?                                  CO748E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Hon Chairperson, I have a comprehensive
two-and-a-half-page answer but for the benefit of this House I am going to
just summarise the answer and provide the hon member with a comprehensive
answer so that she will have the benefit of it.

The Department of Education has had a collaborative relationship with other
departments in relation to Early Childhood Development, ECD, for the past
12 years. Initially, this collaboration was through the post-1994 ECD
policy development processes. The relationship, particularly with the
Departments of Social Development and of Health, was formalised with the
development of the National Integrated Plan, NIP, for early childhood
development in 2004 under the leadership of the Department of Education.

At the same time, the Department of Education also played a key role in the
establishment of the first ever National Interdepartmental Committee on
Early Childhood Development, Nicecd.

Currently, the NIP is being led by the Department of     Social
Development. Thus, the measures taken to strengthen collaboration have
primarily been functionally informed, although I should also add that ECD
was one of the Department of Education’s priority areas for the 2008
budget. Our bid was not fully funded this year, but that does not mean that
we will not be fully funded in the future.

We recognise the critical importance of early childhood development for our
children, and this has certainly made an impact in terms of subsequent
repetition rates, which have decreased. Language development is higher, and
primary school completion rates are higher, directly as a result of our
programmes in early childhood development. Therefore, we will persist in
rallying for greater allocations for early childhood development and we
regard this as an important priority area particularly for foundation
learning. I thank the hon member for her question.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Thanks, hon Deputy Minister. Are
there any follow-up questions? No.

The question directed to the hon Minister of Health, Question 29, will be
deferred to the next Question Time, because of the nonavailability of the
hon Minister and the Deputy Minister.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

                   OVERSIGHT VISIT TO NORTH WEST PROVINCE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, on behalf of the Chairperson of the National
Council of Provinces, I move the draft resolution printed in his name on
the Order Paper, as follows:

   That, in terms of Rule 21(2) and, in the  interest  of  enhancing  public
   participation,  conducting  oversight  and  providing  a   platform   for
   consideration of issues affecting provinces as provided  for  in  section
   42(4) and 72(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996
   –


      1) the Council resolves to, from 10 to 14 March 2008,  conduct  public
         hearings, hold  meetings,  conduct  oversight  visits  and  sit  in
         plenary in the province of North West on 14 March  2008,  at  10:00
         until the conclusion of  business on that day; and


      2) the Council notes that the estimated cost of effecting  the  change
         in venue and maintaining it for the specified period will be R2 920
         000.00.

Question put: That the motion be agreed to.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon members, the hon Sulliman has
moved that the motion on the Order Paper be adopted. In accordance with
Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to make their
declarations of vote if they so wish. Is there any province that wants to
make a declaration of vote? As there is none, we shall now proceed to the
voting on the question. I shall do this in alphabetical order per province.

Delegation heads must please indicate to the Chair whether they vote in
favour, of or against, or abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: In favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Ondersteun. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Siyaxhasa. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: In favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Limpopo?
Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo ondersteun. [Limpopo supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Mpumalanga supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Northern Cape?

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Northern Cape “ondersteun”. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West in favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Western Cape supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon members, all nine provinces
voted in favour. I therefore declare the motion agreed to in terms of
section 65 of the Constitution.

Motion accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 15:58.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           FRIDAY, 8 FEBRUARY 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) Traditional Health Practioners Bill [B 20 – 2007] – Act  No  22  of
         2007 (assented to and signed by President on 7 January 2008).


      2) Securities Transfer Tax Bill [B 44 – 2007] –  Act  No  25  of  2007
         (assented to and signed by President on 21 December 2007).


      3) Securities Transfer Tax Administration Bill [B 45 – 2007] – Act  No
         26 of 2007 (assented to and signed  by  President  on  21  December
         2007).


      4) Health Professions Amendment Bill [B 10D – 2006] –  Act  No  29  of
         2007 (assented to and signed by President on 11 January 2008).
      5) Public Service Amendment Bill [B 31B – 2006] – Act No  30  of  2007
         (assented to and signed by President on 11 January 2008).


      6) Education Laws Amendment Bill [B 33D – 2007] – Act No  31  of  2007
         (assented to and signed by President on 21 December 2007).


      7) Broadband Infraco Bill [B 26B – 2007] – Act No 33 of 2007 (assented
         to and signed by President on 21 December 2007).


      8) South African Express Bill [B 14D – 2007]  –  Act  No  34  of  2007
         (assented to and signed by President on 21 December 2007).


      9) Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 42 – 2007]  –  Act  No  35  of  2007
         (assented to and signed by President on 21 December 2007).


     10) Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 43 – 2007] –  Act  No  36  of
         2007 (assented to and signed by President on 21 December 2007).


     11) Electronic Communications Amendment Bill [B 38B – 2007] – Act No 37
         of 2007 (assented to and signed by President on 21 December 2007).


     12) Criminal Law (Sentencing) Amendment Bill [15B – 2007] – Act  No  38
         of 2007 (assented to and signed by President on 21 December 2007).

2.    Introduction of Bills
     (1)    The Minister of Housing


          a) Housing Development  Agency   Bill  [B  1  –  2008]  (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 76) [Explanatory summary of  Bill  and
             prior notice  of  its  introduction  published  in  Government
             Gazette No 30346 of 26 October 2007.]


             Introduction  and  referral  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
             Housing of the National Assembly, as well as referral  to  the
             Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in  terms  of
             Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of  the  Bill  may  be  submitted  to  the  JTM  within  three
             parliamentary working days.


     (2)    The Minister of Safety and Security


          a) Second-Hand Goods  Bill [B 2  –  2008]  (National  Assembly  –
             proposed sec 76) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
             of its introduction published in Government Gazette  No  30559
             of 14 December 2007.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Safety
             and Security of the National Assembly, as well as referral  to
             the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in  terms
             of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of  the  Bill  may  be  submitted  to  the  JTM  within  three
             parliamentary working days.
    3.      Bills passed by Houses –  to  be  submitted  to  President  for
        assent

        (1)      Bill passed by National Council of Provinces on 7 February
             2008.


               a) Choice on Termination of Pregnancy Amendment Bill [B  21B
                  – 2007 (National Council of Provinces – sec 76).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Defence

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Castle of Good Hope  for
        2006-2007, including the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
        Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 130-2007].


    (b)     Memorandum of  Understanding  between  the  Government  of  the
        Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Central  African
        Republic concerning Defence Cooperation, tabled in terms of section
        231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


    (c)     Explanatory  Memorandum  to  the  Memorandum  of  Understanding
        between the Government of the Republic  of  South  Africa  and  the
        Government of  the  Central  African  Republic  concerning  Defence
        Cooperation.


    (d)     Memorandum of  Understanding  between  the  Government  of  the
        Republic of South Africa and the  Government  of  the  Republic  of
        Gabon on Defence Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3)  of
        the Constitution, 1996.


    (e)     Explanatory  Memorandum  to  the  Memorandum  of  Understanding
        between the Government of the Republic  of  South  Africa  and  the
        Government of the Republic of Gabon on Defence Cooperation.


    (f)     Agreement between the  Government  of  the  Republic  of  South
        Africa and the Government  of  the  Republic  of  Guinea-Bissau  on
        Defence Cooperation, tabled in  terms  of  section  231(3)  of  the
        Constitution, 1996.


    (g)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the  Government
        of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the  Republic
        of Guinea-Bissau on Defence Cooperation.


    (h)     Agreement for the Establishment of a Joint Permanent Commission
        on Defence and Security between the Government of the  Republic  of
        South Africa and the Government  of  the  Republic  of  Mozambique,
        tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


    (i)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement for  the  Establishment
        of a Joint Permanent Commission on Defence and Security between the
        Government of the Republic of South Africa and  the  Government  of
        the Republic of Mozambique.


    (j)     Exchange of Letters between the Government of the  Republic  of
        South Africa and the  North  Atlantic  Treaty  Organisation  (NATO)
        regarding Naval Exercises in the Republic of South Africa  from  28
        August to 10 September 2007, tabled in terms of section  231(3)  of
        the Constitution, 1996.


    (k)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Exchange of Letters  between  the
        Republic of South Africa and the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation
        (NATO) regarding the Modalities relating to the Status  of  members
        of Nato’s Naval Group 1 Participating in Exercise Amazolo.


    (l)     Agreement between the  Government  of  the  Republic  of  South
        Africa and  the  Government  of  the  Kingdom  of  the  Netherlands
        concerning the Status of Military and Civilian Personnel  of  their
        Department/Ministry of Defence present in  each  other’s  territory
        for activities related to Military Cooperation, tabled in terms  of
        section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


    (m)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the  Government
        of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of  the  Kingdom
        of the Netherlands concerning the Status of Military  and  Civilian
        Personnel of their Department/Ministry of Defence present  in  each
        other’s territory for activities related to Military Cooperation.


    (n)     Agreement between the  Government  of  the  Republic  of  South
        Africa and the  Government  of  the  Kingdom  of  Spain  concerning
        Defence Cooperation, tabled in  terms  of  section  231(3)  of  the
        Constitution, 1996.


    (o)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the  Government
        of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of  the  Kingdom
        of Spain concerning Defence Cooperation.


    (p)     Memorandum of  Understanding  between  the  Government  of  the
        Republic of South Africa and the  Government  of  the  Republic  of
        Sudan on Defence Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3)  of
        the Constitution, 1996.


    (q)     Explanatory  Memorandum  to  the  Memorandum  of  Understanding
        between the Government of the Republic  of  South  Africa  and  the
        Government of the Republic of Sudan on Defence Cooperation.


    (r)     Memorandum of  Understanding  between  the  Government  of  the
        Republic of South Africa and the  Government  of  the  Republic  of
        Uganda regarding  the  Renovation  of  the  O  R  Tambo  School  of
        Leadership, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the  Constitution,
        1996.


    (s)     Explanatory  Memorandum  to  the  Memorandum  of  Understanding
        between the Government of the Republic  of  South  Africa  and  the
        Government of the Republic of Uganda regarding  the  Renovation  of
        the O R Tambo School of Leadership.


    (t)     Memorandum of  Understanding  between  the  Government  of  the
        Republic of South Africa and the Government of the  United  Kingdom
        of  Great  Britain  and   Northern   Ireland   concerning   Defence
        Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
        1996.

    (u)     Explanatory  Memorandum  to  the  Memorandum  of  Understanding
        between the Government of the Republic  of  South  Africa  and  the
        Government of the Republic of Uganda regarding  the  Renovation  of
        the O R Tambo School of Leadership.


2.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

    (a)     Government Notice No R.69 published in  Government  Gazette  No
        30703 dated 28  January  2008:  Threatened  or  Protected  Species:
        Amendment regulations,  in  terms  of  the  National  Environmental
        Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of 2004).




    (b)     Government Notice No R.70 published in  Government  Gazette  No
        30703 dated 28  January  2008:  Notice  to  repeal:  Threatened  or
        Protected Species: Amendment Regulations, in terms of the  National
        Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act,  2004  (Act  No  10  of
        2004).




    (c)     General Notice No R.62 published in Government Gazette No 30716
        dated 1 February  2008:  Regulation  for  the  Protection  of  Wild
        Abalone (Haliotis), in terms of the Marine  Living  Resources  Act,
        1998 (Act No 18 of 1998).


3.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Umgeni Water  for  the  year
        ended 30  June  2007,  including  the  Report  of  the  Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for the  year  ended  30  June
        2007.


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of Bushbuckridge Water for  the
        year ended 30 June 2007, including the Report  of  the  Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for the  year  ended  30  June
        2007.

    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of  Rand  Water  for  the  year
        ended 30  June  2007,  including  the  Report  of  the  Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for the  year  ended  30  June
        2007.


    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Lepelle  Northern  Water
        for the year ended 30  June  2007,  including  the  Report  of  the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended
        30 June 2007.

4.    Minister of Finance

    (a)     Convention on Temporary Admission (Istanbul Convention), tabled
        in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.



    (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to  the  Temporary  Admission  (Istanbul
        Convention).


    (c)     Response of the South African Revenue Services to the resolution
        of Parliament on the report of the Portfolio Committee  on  Finance
        on the  South African Revenue Services Strategic Plan for 2007/2008
        – 2009/2010.



                          TUESDAY, 12 FEBRUARY 2008

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Transport

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South  African  Maritime
        Safety Authority  (including  the  Maritime  Fund)  for  2006-2007,
        including the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the  Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2006-2007 [RP 213-2007].




    (b)     Report  and  Financial  Statements  of  the  Cross-Border  Road
        Transport Agency (C-BRTA) for 2006-2007, including  the  Report  of
        the Auditor-General on the  Financial  Statements  and  Performance
        Information for 2006-2007 [RP 151-2007].


2     The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Magalies Water for the  year
        ended 30  June  2007,  including  the  Report  of  the  Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for the  year  ended  30  June
        2007.


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of Sedibeng Water for the  year
        ended 30  June  2007,  including  the  Report  of  the  Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for the  year  ended  30  June
        2007.

                         WEDNESDAY, 13 FEBRUARY 2008
ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

    (1)    Choice on Termination of Pregnancy Amendment Bill [B 21B – 2007]
         – Act No 1 of 2008 (assented to and  signed  by  President  on  12
         February 2008).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Government Notice No 99  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
        30715 dated 31 January 2008: Determination of limit or remuneration
        for purpose of determination of contribution in terms of section  6
        of the Unemployment Insurance Contributions Act, 2002 (Act No 4  of
        2002).


2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

    (a)     Proclamation No R.37 published in Government Gazette  No  30521
        dated 27 November 2007: Referral of  matters  of  existing  special
        investigating  unit  and  special  tribunal  in  terms  of  Special
        Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No  74  of
        1996).




    (b)     Proclamation No R.38 published in Government Gazette  No  30521
        dated 27 November 2007: Referral of  matters  of  existing  special
        investigating  unit  and  special  tribunal  in  terms  of  Special
        Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No  74  of
        1996).

    (c)     Proclamation No R.39 published in Government Gazette  No  30521
        dated 27 November 2007: Referral of  matters  of  existing  special
        investigating  unit  and  special  tribunal  in  terms  of  Special
        Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No  74  of
        1996).




    (d)     Proclamation No R.40 published in Government Gazette  No  30521
        dated 27 November 2007: Referral of  matters  of  existing  special
        investigating  unit  and  special  tribunal  in  terms  of  Special
        Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No  74  of
        1996).




    (e)     Proclamation No R.41 published in Government Gazette  No  30521
        dated 27 November 2007: Referral of  matters  of  existing  special
        investigating  unit  and  special  tribunal  in  terms  of  Special
        Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No  74  of
        1996).




    (f)     Proclamation No R.44 published in Government Gazette  No  30527
        dated 28 November 2007: Referral of  matters  of  existing  special
        investigating  unit  and  special  tribunal  in  terms  of  Special
        Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No  74  of
        1996).




    (g)     Proclamation No R.45 published in Government Gazette  No  30552
        dated 7 December 2007: Referral  of  matters  of  existing  special
        investigating  unit  and  special  tribunal  in  terms  of  Special
        Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No  74  of
        1996).


    (h)     Proclamation No R.17 published in Government Gazette  No  30664
        dated 11 January  2008:  Amendment  of  Proclamation  in  terms  of
        Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No
        74 of 1996).



                          TUESDAY, 14 FEBRUARY 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    (1)     The following paper is referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
        Social Services for  consideration and report:

        (a)       Report  and  Financial  Statements  of   the   Film   and
             Publication Board for 2006-2007, including the  Report  of  the
             Auditor-General on the  Financial  Statements  and  Performance
             Information for 2006-2007.

    (2)     The following paper is referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration  and  to  the
        Joint Standing Committee on Defence:

        (a)      Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the  management  and
             provision of official accommodation to staff at the  Department
             of Defence – November 2007 [RP 252-2007].

    (3)     The following paper is referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
        Security  and  Constitutional  Affairs  and  the   Joint   Standing
        Committee on Defence:

        (a)      The President of the Republic submitted a letter dated  30
             November  2007  to  the  Chairperson  of  the  Joint   Standing
             Committee on Defence informing Members of  the  Joint  Standing
             Committee on Defence of the employment  of  the  South  African
             National Defence Force for a service in co-operation  with  the
             South African Police Service during the  2010  FIFA  World  Cup
             preliminary draw.

    (4)     The following paper is referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and report:

        (a)      Report in terms of section 13(4A)(b)  of  the  Magistrates
             Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993): Withholding of  remuneration  of
             Magistrate M K Chauke, an additional Magistrate at Pretoria.

    (5)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Land
        and Environmental Affairs for consideration and report:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Marine Living Resources
             Fund for 2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General
             on the Financial Statements  and  Performance  Information  for
             2006-2007.

    (6)     The following papers are referred to the  Select  Committee  on
        Land and Environmental Affairs for consideration:


        (a)      Government Notice No 1147 published in Government  Gazette
             No 30537 dated 7 December 2007: Assignment of the Management of
             Mokala  National  park  to   south   African   National   Parks
             (SANParks), in terms of the National Environmental  Management:
             Protected Areas Act, 2003 (Act No 57 of 2003).


        (b)      General Notice No 1717 published in Government Gazette  No
             30534 dated 7 December  2007:  Publication  of  Policy  on  the
             Management of Seals, Seabirds and Shorebirds, in terms  of  the
             Marine Living Resources Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of 1998).


        (c)      General Notice No 1718 published in Government Gazette  No
             30535 dated 7 December 2007: Invitation to comment on the draft
             policy and application  forms  concerning  the  allocation  and
             management of long term fishing rights  in  the  Large  Pelagic
             (Tuna and Swordfish) Sector - 2007,  in  terms  of  the  Marine
             Living Resources Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of 1998).


        (d)       Government  Notice  No  R.1187  published  in  Government
             Gazette  No  30568  dated  14  December  2007:   Amendment   of
             critically endangered,  endangered,  vulnerable  and  protected
             species  list,  in  terms   of   the   National   Environmental
             Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of 2004).


        (e)       Government  Notice  No  R.1188  published  in  Government
             Gazette  No  30568  dated  14  December  2007:  Threatened   or
             Protected  Species  Amendment  Regulations,  in  terms  of  the
             National Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004  (Act
             No 10 of 2004).


        (f)      General Notice No 1767 published in Government Gazette  No
             30574 dated 21 December 2007:  Invitation  to  comment  on  the
             Draft Policy for the Transfer of Commercial  Fishing  Rights  -
             2007, in terms of the Marine Living Resources Act, 1998 (Act No
             18 of 1998).


        (g)      General Notice No 1197 published in Government Gazette  No
             30590 dated  18  December  2007:  Proclamation  of  the  Fossil
             Hominid Sites of South Africa  (Consisting  of  Fossil  Hominid
             Site of Sterkfontein, Swartkrans, Kromdraai and  the  Environs,
             Taung Skull Fossil Site and Makapan Valley)  in  terms  of  the
             World Heritage Convention Act, 1999 (Act No 49 of 1999).


        (h)      General Notice No 1198 published in Government Gazette  No
             30590 dated 18 December 2007: Proclamation of Robben Island  as
             a World Heritage Site in terms of the World Heritage Convention
             Act, 1999 (Act No 49 of 1999).


        (i)      General Notice No 1199 published in Government Gazette  No
             30590 dated 18 December 2007: Notice  in  connection  with  the
             Proclamation of uKhahlamba Drakensberg Park as a World Heritage
             Site in terms of the World Heritage Convention Act,  1999  (Act
             No 49 of 1999).


        (j)      General Notice No 1200 published in Government Gazette  No
             30590  dated  18  December  2007:  Proclamation  of  Mapungubwe
             Cultural Landscape as a World Heritage Site  in  terms  of  the
             World Heritage Convention Act, 1999 (Act No 49 of 1999).


        (k)      General Notice No 1201 published in Government Gazette  No
             30590 dated 18 December 2007: Proclamation of Vredefort Dome as
             a World Heritage Site in terms of the World Heritage Convention
             Act, 1999 (Act No 49 of 1999).


        (l)      General Notice No 1202 published in Government Gazette  No
             30590 dated 18 December 2007: Declaration of the Member of  the
             Executive Council for  Economic  Development,  Environment  and
             Tourism, Limpopo Province as the Authority for  Makapan  Valley
             Serial World Heritage Site  in  terms  of  the  World  Heritage
             Convention Act, 1999 (Act No 49 of 1999).


        (m)      General Notice No 1203 published in Government Gazette  No
             30590 dated 18 December 2007: Declaration  of  the  North  West
             Member of the Executive Council for  Agriculture,  Conservation
             and Environment as the Authority for  the  Taung  Skull  Fossil
             Site in terms of the World Heritage Convention Act,  1999  (Act
             No 49 of 1999).


        (n)      General Notice No 1204 published in Government Gazette  No
             30590 dated 18 December 2007: Declaration of the Member of  the
             Executive Council for Sport, Arts and  Culture,  Northern  Cape
             Province as the Authority for  the  Richtersveld  Cultural  and
             Botanical Landscape World Heritage Site in terms of  the  World
             Heritage Convention Act, 1999 (Act No 49 of 1999).


        (o)      General Notice No 1205 published in Government Gazette  No
             30590 dated 18 December 2007: Declaration of the  Kwazulu-Natal
             Nature Conservation Board as the Authority for  the  uKhahlamba
             Drakensberg Park World Heritage Site  in  terms  of  the  World
             Heritage Convention Act, 1999 (Act No 49 of 1999).
        (p)      General Notice No 1768 published in Government Gazette  No
             30575 dated 21 December 2007:  Publication  of  Policy  on  the
             Management of Seals, Seabirds and Shorebirds, in terms  of  the
             Sea Birds and Seals Protection Act, 1973 (Act No 46 of 1973).


        (q)      Government Notice No 1141 published in Government  Gazette
             No 30542 dated 3  December  2007:  Draft  Regulations  for  the
             protection of Abalone (Haliotis) (wild), in terms of the Marine
             Living Resources Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of 1998).


        (r)      Government Notice No 1123 published in Government  Gazette
             No 30518 dated 23 November 2007: Declaration of the Highveld as
             priority area  in  terms  of  section  18(1)  of  the  National
             Environmental Management: Air Quality Act, 2004 (Act No  39  of
             2004).

    (7)     The following papers are referred to the  Select  Committee  on
        Finance:

        (a)       Government  Notice  No  R.1090  published  in  Government
             Gazette No 30491 dated 16 November 2007: Amendment of  Schedule
             No 1 (No 1/1/1348) in terms of Customs  and  Excise  Act,  1964
             (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (b)      Proclamation No 36  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
             30508 dated 30 November 2007: Commencement of sections 7(1)(m),
             9(1) and 34(1) of the Revenue Laws Second Amendment  Act,  2006
             (Act No 21 of 2006).


        (c)       Government  Notice  No  R.1139  published  in  Government
             Gazette No 30532 dated 30 November 2007: Amendment of  Schedule
             No 1 (No 1/1/149) in terms of Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act
             No 91 of 1964).


        (d)       Government  Notice  No  R.1196  published  in  Government
             Gazette No 30581 dated 14 December 2007: Amendment of  Schedule
             No 2 (No 2/294) in terms of Customs and Excise Act,  1964  (Act
             No 91 of 1964).


        (e)      Government Notice No 1207 published in Government  Gazette
             No 30592 dated 20 December 2007: Approval  of  allocations,  in
             terms of the Division of Revenue Act, 2007 (Act No 1 of 2007).


        (f)       Government  Notice  No  R.1211  published  in  Government
             Gazette No 30586 dated 21 December 2007: Amendment of  Schedule
             No 2 (No 2/295) in terms of Customs and Excise Act,  1964  (Act
             No 91 of 1964).


        (g)       Government  Notice  No  R.1212  published  in  Government
             Gazette No 30586 dated 21 December 2007: Amendment of  Schedule
             No 2 (No 2/296) in terms of Customs and Excise Act,  1964  (Act
             No 91 of 1964).



        (h)       Government  Notice  No  R.1213  published  in  Government
             Gazette No 30586 dated 21 December 2007: Amendment of  Schedule
             No 3 (No 3/624) in terms of Customs and Excise Act,  1964  (Act
             No 91 of 1964).



        (i)       Government  Notice  No  R.1214  published  in  Government
             Gazette No 30586 dated 21 December 2007: Amendment of  Schedule
             No 3 (No 3/625) in terms of Customs and Excise Act,  1964  (Act
             No 91 of 1964).


        (j)       Government  Notice  No  R.1215  published  in  Government
             Gazette No 30586 dated 21 December 2007: Amendment of  Schedule
             No 3 (No 3/626) in terms of Customs and Excise Act,  1964  (Act
             No 91 of 1964).


        (k)       Government  Notice  No  R.1216  published  in  Government
             Gazette No 30586 dated 21 December 2007: Amendment of  Schedule
             No 3 (No 3/627) in terms of Customs and Excise Act,  1964  (Act
             No 91 of 1964).


        (l)       Government  Notice  No  R.1217  published  in  Government
             Gazette No 30586 dated 21 December 2007: Amendment of  Schedule
             No 4 (No 4/310) in terms of Customs and Excise Act,  1964  (Act
             No 91 of 1964).


        (m)       Government  Notice  No  R.1218  published  in  Government
             Gazette No 30586 dated 21 December 2007: Amendment of  Schedule
             No 5 (No 5/87) in terms of Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No
             91 of 1964).


        (n)       Government  Notice  No  R.1228  published  in  Government
             Gazette No 30601 dated 21 December 2007: Amendment of  Schedule
             No 1 (No 1/1/1350) in terms of Customs  and  Excise  Act,  1964
             (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (o)       Government  Notice  No  R.1229  published  in  Government
             Gazette No 30601 dated 21 December 2007: Amendment of  Schedule
             No 1 (No 1/1/1351) in terms of Customs  and  Excise  Act,  1964
             (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (p)       Government  Notice  No  R.1230  published  in  Government
             Gazette No 30601 dated 21 December 2007: Amendment of  Schedule
             No 1 (No 1/1/1352) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1664
             (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (q)       Government  Notice  No  R.1231  published  in  Government
             Gazette No 30601 dated 21 December 2007: Amendment of  Schedule
             No 10 (No 10/11) in terms of Customs and Excise Act, 1964  (Act
             No 91 of 1964).


        (r)       Government  Notice  No  R.1232  published  in  Government
             Gazette No 30601 dated 21 December 2007: Amendment of  Schedule
             No 3 (No 3/628) in terms of Customs and Excise Act,  1964  (Act
             No 91 of 1964).


        (s)       Government  Notice  No  R.1253  published  in  Government
             Gazette No 30601 dated 21 December 2007: Amendment of  Schedule
             No 1 (No 1/1/1354) in terms of Customs  and  Excise  Act,  1964
             (Act No 91 of 1964).


        (t)      Government Notice No R.1 published in  Government  Gazette
             No 30627 dated 1 January 2008:  Amendment  of  regulations,  in
             terms of the Banks Act, 1994 (Act No 94 of 1990).


        (u)      Government Notice No R.3 published in  Government  Gazette
             No 30629 dated 1 January 2008: Regulations relating  to  banks,
             in terms of the Banks Act, 1994 (Act No 94 of 1990).


        (v)      Government Notice No R.4 published in  Government  Gazette
             No 30631 dated 1 January 2008: Amendment of Schedule No  1  (No
             1/1/1353) in terms of Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act  No  91
             of 1964).


        (w)      Government Notice No R.5 published in  Government  Gazette
             No 30631 dated 1 January 2008: Amendment of Schedule No  3  (No
             3/629) in terms of Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No  91  of
             1964).


        (x)      Government Notice No R.6 published in  Government  Gazette
             No 30631 dated 1 January 2008: Amendment of Schedule No  4  (No
             4/311) in terms of Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No  91  of
             1964).


        (y)      Government Notice No 7 published in Government Gazette  No
             30637 dated 4 January 2008: Listing  and  delisting  of  public
             entities in terms of the Public Finance  Management  Act,  1999
             (Act No 1 of 1999).


    (8)     The following papers are referred to the  Select  Committee  on
        Finance for consideration and report:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Financial  Services
             Board on the Registrar of Collective Investment Schemes for the
             year ended 31 December 2006 [RP 250-2007].
        (b)      Report of the South African Statistics Council  for  2006-
             2007 [RP 238-2007].


    (9)     The following paper is referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
        Education and Recreation for consideration and report:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the  National  Advisory
             Council on Innovation for 2006-2007.


    (10)    The following paper is referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
        Finance:


        (a)       General  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the  Audit
             Outcomes  of  National  and  Provincial   Departments,   Public
             Entities and Constitutional Institutions for 2006-2007 [RP 226-
             2007].

    (11)    The following paper is referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
        Local  Government      and  Administration  for  consideration  and
        report:
        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African Local
             Government Association (SALGA)  for  2006-2007,  including  the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial  Statements  and
             Performance Information for 2006-2007 [RP 9-2008].

    (12)    The following papers are referred to the  Select  Committee  on
        Land and Environmental Affairs for consideration and report:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Ikangala Water for  the
             year  ended  30  June  2007,  including  the  Report   of   the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for  the  year
             ended 30 June 2007.


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of Pelladrift Water  Board
             for the year ended 30 June 2007, including the  Report  of  the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for  the  year
             ended 30 June 2007.


        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of  Bloem  Water  for  the
             year  ended  30  June  2007,  including  the  Report   of   the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for  the  year
             ended 30 June 2007.


        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of Amatola Water  for  the
             year  ended  30  June  2007,  including  the  Report   of   the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for  the  year
             ended 30 June 2007.


        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of the Overberg Water  for
             the year ended 30  June  2007,  including  the  Report  of  the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for  the  year
             ended 30 June 2007.


        (f)      Report and Financial Statements of Umgeni  Water  for  the
             year  ended  30  June  2007,  including  the  Report   of   the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for  the  year
             ended 30 June 2007.

        (g)      Report and Financial Statements of Bushbuckridge Water for
             the year ended 30  June  2007,  including  the  Report  of  the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for  the  year
             ended 30 June 2007.


        (h)      Report and Financial Statements of Rand Water for the year
             ended 30 June 2007, including the  Report  of  the  Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
             2007.


        (i)      Report and Financial Statements of  the  Lepelle  Northern
             Water for the year ended 30 June 2007, including the Report  of
             the Independent Auditors on the Financial  Statements  for  the
             year ended 30 June 2007.


        (j)      Report and Financial Statements of Magalies Water for  the
             year  ended  30  June  2007,  including  the  Report   of   the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for  the  year
             ended 30 June 2007.

        (k)      Report and Financial Statements of Sedibeng Water for  the
             year  ended  30  June  2007,  including  the  Report   of   the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for  the  year
             ended 30 June 2007.


    (13)    The following paper is referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and report:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Castle of Good Hope
             for 2006-2007, including the Report of the  Auditor-General  on
             the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 130-2007].


    (14)    The following papers are referred to the  Select  Committee  on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs:

        (a)      Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of  the
             Republic of South Africa and  the  Government  of  the  Central
             African Republic  concerning  Defence  Cooperation,  tabled  in
             terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

        (b)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of  Understanding
             between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and  the
             Government of the Central African Republic  concerning  Defence
             Cooperation.

        (c)      Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of  the
             Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic  of
             Gabon on Defence Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3)
             of the Constitution, 1996.
        (d)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of  Understanding
             between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and  the
             Government of the Republic of Gabon on Defence Cooperation.

        (e)      Agreement between the Government of the Republic of  South
             Africa and the Government of the Republic of  Guinea-Bissau  on
             Defence Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3)  of  the
             Constitution, 1996.

        (f)       Explanatory  Memorandum  to  the  Agreement  between  the
             Government of the Republic of South Africa and  the  Government
             of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau on Defence Cooperation.

        (g)      Agreement for  the  Establishment  of  a  Joint  Permanent
             Commission on Defence and Security between  the  Government  of
             the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic
             of Mozambique,  tabled  in  terms  of  section  231(3)  of  the
             Constitution, 1996.

        (h)       Explanatory  Memorandum  to   the   Agreement   for   the
             Establishment of a Joint Permanent Commission  on  Defence  and
             Security between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
             and the Government of the Republic of Mozambique.

        (i)      Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic
             of South Africa and  the  North  Atlantic  Treaty  Organisation
             (NATO) regarding Naval  Exercises  in  the  Republic  of  South
             Africa from 28 August to 10 September 2007, tabled in terms  of
             section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.
        (j)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Exchange of Letters  between
             the Republic of South Africa  and  the  North  Atlantic  Treaty
             Organisation (NATO) regarding the Modalities  relating  to  the
             Status of members of Nato’s  Naval  Group  1  Participating  in
             Exercise Amazolo.

        (k)      Agreement between the Government of the Republic of  South
             Africa and the Government of the  Kingdom  of  the  Netherlands
             concerning the Status of Military  and  Civilian  Personnel  of
             their Department/Ministry of Defence present  in  each  other’s
             territory  for  activities  related  to  Military  Cooperation,
             tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

        (l)       Explanatory  Memorandum  to  the  Agreement  between  the
             Government of the Republic of South Africa and  the  Government
             of the Kingdom of the  Netherlands  concerning  the  Status  of
             Military and Civilian Personnel of their Department/Ministry of
             Defence  present  in  each  other’s  territory  for  activities
             related to Military Cooperation.

        (m)      Agreement between the Government of the Republic of  South
             Africa and the Government of the Kingdom  of  Spain  concerning
             Defence Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3)  of  the
             Constitution, 1996.

        (n)       Explanatory  Memorandum  to  the  Agreement  between  the
             Government of the Republic of South Africa and  the  Government
             of the Kingdom of Spain concerning Defence Cooperation.

        (o)      Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of  the
             Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic  of
             Sudan on Defence Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3)
             of the Constitution, 1996.

        (p)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of  Understanding
             between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and  the
             Government of the Republic of Sudan on Defence Cooperation.

        (q)      Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of  the
             Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic  of
             Uganda regarding the Renovation of the  O  R  Tambo  School  of
             Leadership,  tabled  in  terms  of  section   231(3)   of   the
             Constitution, 1996.

        (r)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of  Understanding
             between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and  the
             Government of the Republic of Uganda regarding  the  Renovation
             of the O R Tambo School of Leadership.

        (s)      Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of  the
             Republic of South Africa  and  the  Government  of  the  United
             Kingdom  of  Great  Britain  and  Northern  Ireland  concerning
             Defence Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3)  of  the
             Constitution, 1996.

        (t)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Memorandum of  Understanding
             between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and  the
             Government of the Republic of Uganda regarding  the  Renovation
             of the O R Tambo School of Leadership.
    (15)    The following papers are referred to the  Select  Committee  on
        Finance for consideration and report:

        (a)      Convention on Temporary Admission  (Istanbul  Convention),
             tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


        (b)       Explanatory  Memorandum  to   the   Temporary   Admission
             (Istanbul Convention).


    (16)    The following papers are referred to the  Select  Committee  on
        Public Services for consideration and report:

        (a)      Report and  Financial  Statements  of  the  South  African
             Maritime Safety Authority (including  the  Maritime  Fund)  for
             2006-2007, including the Report of the Auditor-General  on  the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for  2006-2007
             [RP 213-2007].

        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the  Cross-Border  Road
             Transport Agency (C-BRTA) for 2006-2007, including  the  Report
             of  the  Auditor-General  on  the  Financial   Statements   and
             Performance Information for 2006-2007 [RP 151-2007].

TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance
    (a)     Government Notice No 128 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
        30730 dated 5 February 2008: The  dimension  of,  design  for,  and
        compilation of, the year 2008 Natura pure gold coin series in terms
        of the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).


    (b)     Government Notice No 129 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
        30730 dated 5 February 2008: The  dimension  of,  design  for,  and
        compilation of, the year 2008 Protea coin series in  terms  of  the
        South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).


    (c)     Government Notice No 130 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
        30730 dated 5 February 2008: The  dimension  of,  design  for,  and
        compilation of, the year 2008 Fifa 2010 coin series in terms of the
        South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).


    (d)     Government Notice No 131 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
        30730 dated 5 February 2008: The  dimension  of,  design  for,  and
        compilation of, the year 2008 R2 pure gold coin series in terms  of
        the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).


    (e)     Government Notice No 132 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
        30730 dated 5 February 2008: The  dimension  of,  design  for,  and
        compilation of, the year 2008 sterling silver coin series in  terms
        of the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).

    (f)     Government Notice No 133 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
        30730 dated 5 February 2008: The  dimension  of,  design  for,  and
        compilation of, the year 2008 Crown size and  2½c  sterling  silver
        coin series in terms of the South African Reserve  Bank  Act,  1989
        (Act No 90 of 1989).

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

    (a)     Report on the suspension of a magistrate: Mr S P Zwelibanzi, an
        additional magistrate at NgQamakwe in terms of section  13(4)(a)(i)
        of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).

                          MONDAY, 18 FEBRUARY 2008

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

      a) Report of the Registrar of Short-term Insurance for 2006.


      b) Report of the Registrar of Long-term Insurance for 2006.

2.    The Minister for Public Enterprises

      a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Public Enterprises for 2008  to
         2011.

3.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

      a) Report and Financial Statements of the Performing  Arts  Centre  of
         Free State (PACOFS) for 2006-2007,  including  the  Report  of  the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.

                          TUESDAY, 19 FEBRUARY 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM on 19 February  2008  in  terms  of  Joint  Rule  160(4)
         classified the following Bills as section 76 Bills:

          a) Housing  Development  Agency  Bill  [B  1  –  2008]  (National
             Assembly – sec 76)


          b) Second-Hand Goods Bill [B 2 – 2008] (National Assembly  –  sec
             76).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Arts and Culture


a) Report and  Financial  Statements  of  the  National  Archivist  and  the
   National Archives Advisory Council for 2004-2005.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

CREDA INSERT - Insert: T080219-InsertE – PAGES 236-269

                         WEDNESDAY, 20 FEBRUARY 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM on 18 February  2008  in  terms  of  Joint  Rule  160(6)
         classified the following Bill as a section 75 Bill:

         (a)      Cross-Border Road Transport Amendment Bill [B 51  –  2007]
             (National Assembly – sec 75)
2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

      1) Appropriation Bill, 2008, submitted by  the  Minister  of  Finance.
         Referred to the Portfolio  Committee  on  Finance  and  the  Select
         Committee on Finance.

      2) Division of Revenue  Bill,  2008,  submitted  by  the  Minister  of
         Finance. Referred to the Portfolio Committee  on  Finance  and  the
         Select Committee on Finance.

3.    Introduction of Bills


     1.     The Minister of Finance


         (a)     Appropriation Bill  [B  3  –  2008]  (National  Assembly  –
              proposed sec 77)

        b) Division of Revenue Bill [B  4  –  2008]  (National  Assembly  –
           proposed sec 76)


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Finance  of
         the National Assembly for  consideration  and  report  and  to  the
         Joint Budget Committee to consider in  terms  of  its  mandate,  as
         well  as  referral  to  the  Joint  Tagging  Mechanism  (JTM)   for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the  classification  of
         the Bills may be submitted to the JTM  within  three  parliamentary
         working days.

TABLINGS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


      a) The Budget Speech of the Minister of Finance – 20 February 2008 [RP
         03-2008].


      b) Estimate of National Revenue for 2008 [RP 04-2008].


      c) Taxation Proposals: Rates of Normal Tax and Rebates.

      d) Budget Review 2008 [RP 02-2008], including:

             • Taxation proposals in respect of customs and excise duties.

      e) Appropriation Bill [B 3 - 2008].


       f) Division of Revenue Bill [B 4 - 2008], tabled in terms of section
          10(1) of the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act, 1997 (Act No
          97 of 1997).

      g)  Estimates  of  National  Expenditure  2008  [RP  01-2008],   which
         includes:


          1. Memorandum on Vote No 1 - "The  Presidency",  Main  Estimates,
             2008-2009;

          2. Memorandum on Vote No 2 - "Parliament", Main Estimates,  2008-
             2009;

          3. Memorandum on Vote No 3 - "Foreign Affairs",  Main  Estimates,
             2008-2009;

          4. Memorandum on Vote No 4 - "Home Affairs", Main Estimates, 2008-
             2009;

          5. Memorandum on Vote No 5 - "Public Works", Main Estimates, 2008-
             2009;

          6. Memorandum on Vote  No  6  -  "Government  Communications  and
             Information System", Main Estimates, 2008-2009;

          7. Memorandum on Vote No 7 - "National Treasury", Main Estimates,
             2008-2009;

         8. Memorandum on Vote No 8 - "Public Service  and  Administration",
             Main Estimates, 2008-2009;

         9. Memorandum on Vote No 9  -  "Public  Service  Commission",  Main
             Estimates, 2008-2009;

         10.      Memorandum on Vote  No  10  -  "South  African  Management
             Development Institute", Main Estimates, 2008-2009;

         11.      Memorandum on Vote No 11 - "Statistics South Africa", Main
             Estimates, 2008-2009;

         12.      Memorandum on Vote  No  12  -  "Arts  and  Culture",  Main
             Estimates, 2008-2009;

         13.      Memorandum on Vote No 13 -  "Education",  Main  Estimates,
             2008-2009;

         14.      Memorandum on Vote No 14 - "Health", Main Estimates, 2008-
             2009;

         15.      Memorandum on Vote No 15 - "Labour", Main Estimates, 2008-
             2009;

         16.      Memorandum on Vote No  16  -  "Social  Development",  Main
             Estimates, 2008-2009;


         17.      Memorandum on Vote No 17 -  "Sport  and  Recreation  South
             Africa", Main Estimates, 2008-2009;


         18.      Memorandum on Vote No 18 - "Correctional  Services",  Main
             Estimates, 2008-2009;


         19.      Memorandum on Vote No 19 - "Defence", Main Estimates, 2008-
             2009;

         20.       Memorandum  on  Vote  No  20  -  "Independent  Complaints
             Directorate", Main Estimates, 2008-2009;


         21.      Memorandum on Vote No 21  -  "Justice  and  Constitutional
             Development", Main Estimates, 2008-2009;


         22.      Memorandum on Vote No 22 -  "Safety  and  Security”,  Main
             Estimates, 2008-2009;


         23.      Memorandum on Vote No 23 - "Agriculture", Main  Estimates,
             2008-2009;


         24.       Memorandum  on  Vote  No  24  -  "Communications",   Main
             Estimates, 2008-2009;

         25.      Memorandum on Vote No  25  -  "Environmental  Affairs  and
             Tourism", Main Estimates, 2008-2009;


         26.      Memorandum on Vote No 26 - "Housing", Main Estimates, 2008-
             2009;


         27.      Memorandum on Vote No 27 - "Land Affairs", Main Estimates,
             2008-2009;


         28.      Memorandum on Vote No 28 -  "Minerals  and  Energy",  Main
             Estimates, 2008-2009;


         29.       Memorandum  on  Vote  No  29  -  "Provincial  and   Local
             Government", Main Estimates, 2008-2009;


         30.      Memorandum on Vote No  30  -  "Public  Enterprises",  Main
             Estimates, 2008-2009;

         31.      Memorandum on Vote No 31 - "Science and Technology",  Main
             Estimates, 2008-2009;


         32.      Memorandum on Vote No 32  -  "Trade  and  Industry",  Main
             Estimates, 2008-2009;


         33.      Memorandum on Vote No 33 -  "Transport",  Main  Estimates,
             2008-2009;


         34.      Memorandum on Vote No 34 - "Water Affairs  and  Forestry",
             Main Estimates, 2008-2009.
    Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance  for  consideration  and
    report.


                         THURSDAY, 21 FEBRUARY 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


      1. The Minister of Finance


         Please note: The following item  amends  item  3  under  the  entry
         “Announcements – The Speaker and  the  Chairperson”,  published  on
         page 272 of the Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of 20
         February 2008:


          a) Appropriation Bill [B 3 – 2008] (National Assembly –  proposed
             sec 77)


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Finance  of
         the National Assembly for  consideration  and  report  and  to  the
         Joint Budget Committee to consider in  terms  of  its  mandate,  as
         well  as  referral  to  the  Joint  Tagging  Mechanism  (JTM)   for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the  classification  of
         the Bills may be submitted to the JTM  within  three  parliamentary
         working days.


         (b)      Division of Revenue Bill [B 4 – 2008] (National Assembly –
         proposed sec 76)


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Finance  of
         the National Assembly for consideration  and  report,  as  well  as
         referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism  (JTM)  for  classification
         in terms of Joint Rule 160.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the  classification  of
         the Bills may be submitted to the JTM  within  three  parliamentary
         working days.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

     a) Draft Rules of Procedure for Applications to Court in terms of  the
        Promotion of Access to Information Act, 2000 (Act No 2 of 2000).

                          FRIDAY, 22 FEBRUARY 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

    (1)    Co-operative Banks Bill [B 13B – 2007]  –  Act  No  40  of  2007
        (assented to and signed by President on 18 February 2008).

                          MONDAY, 25 FEBRUARY 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM on terms of Joint Rule 160(4) classified  the  following
         Bill as a section 76 Bill:

         (a)      Division of Revenue Bill [B 4 – 2008] (National Assembly –
             sec 76)

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

     a) Draft Amendments to the High Courts and Magistrates’  Courts  Rules
        in accordance with section  7(2)  (c)  of  the  Criminal  Procedure
        Amendment Act, 2003 (Act No 42 of 2003).


2.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs


      a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Land Affairs for 2008 to 2011.

                          TUESDAY, 26 FEBRUARY 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National  Council  of  Provinces  in
     respect of Bill passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


    (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly and transmitted for concurrence
         on 26 February 2008:


         (a)      Division of Revenue Bill [B 4 - 2008] (National Assembly –
             sec 76)


            The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Finance of
             the National Council of Provinces.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

      a) Government Notice No R.137 published in Government Gazette No 30739
         dated 8 February 2008: Commencement of Bio-Prospecting, Access  and
         Benefit-Sharing  Regulations,  2008  in  terms  of   the   National
         Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act,  2004  (Act  No  10  of
         2004).

      b) Government Notice No R.138 published in Government Gazette No 30739
         dated 8 February 2008: Regulation on  Bio-Prospecting,  Access  and
         Benefit-Sharing in terms of the National Environmental  Management:
         Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of 2004).

      c) Government Notice No R.149 published in Government Gazette No 30739
         dated 8 February 2008: Notice of exemption in terms of section  86,
         in terms of the  National  Environmental  Management:  Biodiversity
         Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of 2004).

      d) General Notice No 246 published  in  Government  Gazette  No  30767
         dated 11 February 2008: Regulations:  Fees  for  the  provision  of
         aviation meteorological services in  terms  of  the  South  African
         Weather Service Act, 2001 (Act No 8 of 2001).
      e) General Notice No 253 published  in  Government  Gazette  No  30773
         dated 13 February 2008:  Regulating  Committee  for  Meteorological
         Services: Nominations for the appointment of  suitable  persons  as
         members, in terms of the South African Weather  Service  Act,  2001
         (Act No 8 of 2001).

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

      a) Government Notice No R.845  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
         30276 dated 14  September  2007:  National  Building  Regulations:
         Amendment in  terms  of  the  National  Building  Regulations  and
         Building Standards Act, 1977 (Act No 103 of 1977).


      b) Government Notice No 1054 published in Government Gazette No 30442
         dated 9  November  2007:  Proposed  amendment  of  the  compulsory
         specification for motor vehicles of Category M1, in terms  of  the
         Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 23 of 1993).


      c) Government Notice No 1055 published in Government Gazette No 30442
         dated 9  November  2007:  Proposed  amendment  of  the  compulsory
         specification for motor vehicles of Category N1, in terms  of  the
         Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 23 of 1993).


      d) Government Notice No 1079 published in Government Gazette No 30471
         dated 16 November 2007: Incorporation of an external company as  a
         company in the Republic of South Africa in terms of the  Companies
         Act, 1973 (Act No 61 of 1973).


      e) Government Notice No 1167 published in Government Gazette No 30549
         dated 7 December 2007: Incorporation of an external company  as  a
         company in the Republic of South Africa in terms of the  Companies
         Act, 1973 (Act No 61 of 1973).


      f) Government Notice No R.1168 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
         30551 dated 7 December 2007:  International  Trade  Administration
         Commission of South Africa:  Amendment  of  Government  Notice  No
         R269, in terms of the International Trade Administration Act, 2002
         (Act No 71 of 2002).


     (g)    Government Notice No R.1225 published in Government  Gazette  No
         30593  dated  14  December  2007:  Patents  Regulations  Amendment
         pursuant to the Patents Amendment Act, 2005 (Act No 20 of 2005).


      h) Government Notice No R.1226  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
         30593 dated 14 December 2007: Patents Regulations  Amendment,  2007
         in terms of the Patents Amendment Act, 2005 (Act No 20 of 2005).


      i) Proclamation No R.46 published in Government Gazette No 30593 dated
         14 December 2007: Determination that Act and Regulations will  come
         into operation in terms of the Patents Amendment Act, 2005 (Act  No
         20 of 2005).

      j) Government Notice No 54 published in Government  Gazette  No  30687
         dated  25  January  2008:  Companies  and   Intellectual   Property
         Registration Office (CIPRO): Practice Note No 1 of 2008: Directives
         of the Registrar of Companies and of Close Corporations in terms of
         the Companies Act, 1973 (Act No 61 of 1973) and Close  Corporations
         Act, 2006 (Act No 69 of 1984).


      k) Government Notice No R63 published in Government Gazette  No  30696
         dated 1 February 2008: Strategic Industrial Project (SIP) in  terms
         of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


      l) Government Notice No R64 published in Government Gazette  No  30696
         dated 1 February 2008: Strategic Industrial Project (SIP) in  terms
         of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


      m) Government Notice No R.82 published in Government Gazette No  30718
         dated  1  February  2008:  Amendments  to   the   National   Liquor
         Regulations, 2004 in terms of the Liquor Act, 2003 (Act  No  59  of
         2003).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

CREDA INSERT - Insert: T080226 – Insert1E - PAGES 331-350

                         WEDNESDAY, 27 FEBRUARY 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

                   CALLING OF JOINT SITTING OF PARLIAMENT

The Speaker of the National Assembly, Ms B Mbete,  and  the  Chairperson  of
the National Council of Provinces, Mr M J Mahlangu, in terms of  Joint  Rule
7(2), have called a joint sitting of the Houses of Parliament for  Thursday,
28 February 2008 at 14:15 in order for  Mr  Nicolas  Sarkozy,  President  of
France, to address the Joint Sitting.



B MBETE, MP                                        M J MAHLANGU, MP
SPEAKER OF THE                                           CHAIRPERSON OF THE
NATIONAL ASSEMBLY                            NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

      (a)   Strategic Plan of the Department of Agriculture for  2008-09  to
2010-11.

                         THURSDAY, 28 FEBRUARY 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bill passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


    (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly and transmitted for concurrence
         on 28 February 2008:


         (a)      National Environment Laws Amendment Bill [B 35 - 2007]
             (National Assembly – sec 76)


            The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Land and
             Environmental Affairs of the National Council of Provinces.

2.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs:

        a) Special Report of the JSCI on the Special “Browse” Mole
           consolidated report in terms of section 6(2) of the Intelligence
           Services Control Act, 1994 (Act No 40 of 1994).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

      a) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Czech Republic on Economic Cooperation,
         tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

      b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government of
         the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Czech
         Republic on Economic Cooperation.

                          FRIDAY, 29 FEBRUARY 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills
    (1)    Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and Disinfectants Amendment Bill [B 35F  –
        2005] – Act No 39 of 2007 (assented to and signed by  President  on
        23 February 2008).


    (2)    Tobacco Products Control Amendment Bill [B 24B – 2006] – Act  No
        23 of 2007 (assented to and signed  by  President  on  23  February
        2008).

2.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM on 22 February  2008  in  terms  of  Joint  Rule  160(6)
         classified the following Bill as a section 77 Bill:

         (a)      Appropriation Bill [B 3 – 2008] (National Assembly  –  sec
              77).

                            MONDAY, 3 MARCH 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)    Castle Management  Act  Repeal  Bill,  2008,  submitted  by  the
        Minister of Defence. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Defence
        and the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs.


    (2)    Defence Amendment Bill,  2008,  submitted  by  the  Minister  of
         Defence. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on  Defence  and  the
         Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs.

      3) Tobacco Products Control Amendment Bill,  2008,  submitted  by  the
         Minister of Health. Referred to the Portfolio Committee  on  Health
         and the Select Committee on Social Services.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Labour

      a)  International  Labour  Organisation  (ILO)  Convention  187   and
         Recommendation  197  concerning  the  Promotional  Framework   for
         Occupational Safety and Health, 2006, tabled in terms  of  section
         231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

      b) Explanatory Memorandum to the  International  Labour  Organisation
         (ILO)  Convention  187  and  Recommendation  197  concerning   the
         Promotional Framework for Occupational Safety and Health.
      c) International Labour Organisation (ILO) Convention 188,  concerning
         work in the Fishing Sector and Recommendation 199, concerning  work
         in the Fishing Sector, tabled in terms of  section  231(3)  of  the
         Constitution, 1996.


      d) Explanatory Memorandum to  the  International  Labour  Organisation
         (ILO) Convention 188, concerning work in  the  Fishing  Sector  and
         Recommendation 199, concerning work in the Fishing Sector.

      e)  International  Labour  Organisation   (ILO)   Recommendation   198
         concerning the Employment Relationship, 2006, tabled  in  terms  of
         section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

      f) Explanatory Memorandum to  the  International  Labour  Organisation
         (ILO) Recommendation 198 concerning  the  Employment  Relationship,
         2006.

      g) International Labour Organisation (ILO) Maritime Labour Convention,
         2006, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

      h) Explanatory Memorandum to  the  International  Labour  Organisation
         (ILO) Maritime Labour Convention, 2006.

                            TUESDAY, 4 MARCH 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


         (a)      Renaming of High  Courts  Bill  [B  5  –  2008]  (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of  Bill  and
             prior notice  of  its  introduction  published  in  Government
             Gazette No 30799 of 21 February 2008.]


             Introduction  and  referral  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
             Justice  and  Constitutional  Development  of   the   National
             Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint  Tagging  Mechanism
             (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of  the  Bill  may  be  submitted  to  the  JTM  within  three
             parliamentary working days.


National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following paper is referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
        Safety and Security:


         (a)      Report of the Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD) for
             January 2007 to June 2007, in terms of section 18(5)(c) of the
             Domestic Violence Act, 1998 (Act No 116 of 1998).

    2.      The following paper is referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
        Social Services for consideration and  report  and  to  the  Select
        Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises:


         (a)       Report  and  Financial  Statements  of  the  Compensation
             Commissioner for Occupational Diseases  (CCOD)  for  2005-2006
             and 2006-2007, including the Reports of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 and 2006-2007.


    3.      The following paper is referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
        Finance for consideration:

         (a)      The Budget and Strategic Plan of the  Auditor-General  for
             2008-2011 [RP 231-2007].


    4.      The following paper is referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
        Economic and Foreign Affairs and the Select Committee  on  Security
        and  Constitutional  Affairs  for  consideration  and  report,  the
        committees to confer and  the  Select  Committee  on  Economic  and
        Foreign Affairs to report:

          a) Report of the South African Council for the  Non-Proliferation
             of Weapons of Mass Destruction for July 2006 to June 2007.


    5.      The following paper is referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
        Social Services for consideration and report:



        (a)       Report  and  Financial  Statements  of  the   Independent
             Electoral Commission (IEC) for 2006-2007, including the Report
             of  the  Auditor-General  on  the  Financial  Statements   and
             Performance Information for 2006-2007 [RP 103-2007].



    6.      The following papers are referred to the  Select  Committee  on
        Finance:



        (a)      General Notice No 1634 published in Government Gazette  No
             30464 dated 13 November 2007: Draft Municipal  Asset  Transfer
             Regulations:  Call  for  comments,  in  term  of   the   Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act  No  1
             of 1999).




        (b)       Government  Notice  No  R.1026  published  in  Government
             Gazette No 30420 dated 26  October  2007:  Correction  notice:
             Amendment of Schedule No 1  (No  1/1/1346)  in  terms  of  the
             Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).




        (c)       Government  Notice  No  R.1071  published  in  Government
             Gazette No 30460 dated 16 November 2007: Amendment of Schedule
             No 4 (No 4/302) in terms of the Customs and Excise  Act,  1964
             (Act No 91 of 1964).


    7.      The following paper is referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
        Finance for consideration:


        (a)      Government Notice No 99 published in Government Gazette No
             30715  dated  31  January  2008:  Determination  of  limit  or
             remuneration for purpose of determination of  contribution  in
             terms of section 6 of the Unemployment Insurance Contributions
             Act, 2002 (Act No 4 of 2002).



    8.      The following papers are referred to the  Select  Committee  on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs:


        (a)      Proclamation No R.37 published in  Government  Gazette  No
             30521 dated 27 November 2007: Referral of matters of  existing
             special investigating unit and special tribunal  in  terms  of
             Special Investigating Units and Special  Tribunals  Act,  1996
             (Act No 74 of 1996).




        (b)      Proclamation No R.38 published in  Government  Gazette  No
             30521 dated 27 November 2007: Referral of matters of  existing
             special investigating unit and special tribunal  in  terms  of
             Special Investigating Units and Special  Tribunals  Act,  1996
             (Act No 74 of 1996).




        (c)      Proclamation No R.39 published in  Government  Gazette  No
             30521 dated 27 November 2007: Referral of matters of  existing
             special investigating unit and special tribunal  in  terms  of
             Special Investigating Units and Special  Tribunals  Act,  1996
             (Act No 74 of 1996).




        (d)      Proclamation No R.40 published in  Government  Gazette  No
             30521 dated 27 November 2007: Referral of matters of  existing
             special investigating unit and special tribunal  in  terms  of
             Special Investigating Units and Special  Tribunals  Act,  1996
             (Act No 74 of 1996).




        (e)      Proclamation No R.41 published in  Government  Gazette  No
             30521 dated 27 November 2007: Referral of matters of  existing
             special investigating unit and special tribunal  in  terms  of
             Special Investigating Units and Special  Tribunals  Act,  1996
             (Act No 74 of 1996).




        (f)      Proclamation No R.44 published in  Government  Gazette  No
             30527 dated 28 November 2007: Referral of matters of  existing
             special investigating unit and special tribunal  in  terms  of
             Special Investigating Units and Special  Tribunals  Act,  1996
             (Act No 74 of 1996).




        (g)      Proclamation No R.45 published in  Government  Gazette  No
             30552 dated 7 December 2007: Referral of matters  of  existing
             special investigating unit and special tribunal  in  terms  of
             Special Investigating Units and Special  Tribunals  Act,  1996
             (Act No 74 of 1996).




        (h)      Proclamation No R.17 published in  Government  Gazette  No
             30664 dated 11 January  2008:  Amendment  of  Proclamation  in
             terms of Special Investigating  Units  and  Special  Tribunals
             Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of 1996).

    9.      The following papers are referred to the  Select  Committee  on
        Finance:

        (a)      Government Notice No 128 published in  Government  Gazette
             No 30730 dated 5 February 2008: The dimension of, design  for,
             and compilation of, the year 2008 Natura pure gold coin series
             in terms of the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989  (Act  No
             90 of 1989).



        (b)      Government Notice No 129 published in  Government  Gazette
             No 30730 dated 5 February 2008: The dimension of, design  for,
             and compilation of, the year 2008 Protea coin series in  terms
             of the South African Reserve Bank Act,  1989  (Act  No  90  of
             1989).



        (c)      Government Notice No 130 published in  Government  Gazette
             No 30730 dated 5 February 2008: The dimension of, design  for,
             and compilation of, the year 2008 Fifa  2010  coin  series  in
             terms of the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act  No  90
             of 1989).



        (d)      Government Notice No 131 published in  Government  Gazette
             No 30730 dated 5 February 2008: The dimension of, design  for,
             and compilation of, the year 2008 R2 pure gold coin series  in
             terms of the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act  No  90
             of 1989).



        (e)      Government Notice No 132 published in  Government  Gazette
             No 30730 dated 5 February 2008: The dimension of, design  for,
             and compilation of, the year 2008 sterling silver coin  series
             in terms of the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989  (Act  No
             90 of 1989).


        (f)      Government Notice No 133 published in  Government  Gazette
             No 30730 dated 5 February 2008: The dimension of, design  for,
             and compilation of, the year 2008 Crown size and 2½c  sterling
             silver coin series in terms of the South African Reserve  Bank
             Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).


    10.     The following paper is referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and report:


        (a)       Report  on  the  suspension  of  a  magistrate:  Mr  S  P
             Zwelibanzi, an additional magistrate at NgQamakwe in terms  of
             section 13(4)(a)(i) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of
             1993).


    11.     The following papers are referred to the  Select  Committee  on
        Finance for consideration and report:

        a) Report of the Registrar of Short-term Insurance for 2006.


        b) Report of the Registrar of Long-term Insurance for 2006.

    12.     The following paper is referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration:


          a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Public Enterprises for 2008
             to 2011.

    13.     The following papers are referred to the  Select  Committee  on
        Education and Recreation for consideration and report:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements  of  the  Performing  Arts
             Centre of Free State (PACOFS)  for  2006-2007,  including  the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements  for
             2006-2007.


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the National Archivist  and
             the National Archives Advisory Council for 2004-2005.


    14.     The following papers are referred to the  Select  Committee  on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration:

          a) Draft Rules of Procedure for Applications to Court in terms  of
             the Promotion of Access to Information Act, 2000 (Act No  2  of
             2000).



        (b)      Draft Amendments  to  the  High  Courts  and  Magistrates’
             Courts Rules in  accordance  with  section  7(2)  (c)  of  the
             Criminal Procedure Amendment Act, 2003 (Act No 42 of 2003).



        (c)      Report of the Public  Protector,  submitted  in  terms  of
             section 182(1)(b) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
             Africa, 1996, and section 8(2)(b)(i) of the  Public  Protector
             Act, 1994 (Act No 23 of  1994),  on  the  investigation  of  a
             complaint of improper conduct by the President of the Republic
             of South  Africa,  Mr  T  M  Mbeki,  lodged  by  a  member  of
             Parliament, Mr M Waters.



    15.     The following papers are referred to the  Select  Committee  on
        Land and Environmental Affairs for consideration:


        a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Land  Affairs  for  2008  to
           2011.

         (b)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Agriculture for  2008-
             09 to 2010-11.

         (c)      Government Notice No R.137 published in Government Gazette
             No  30739  dated  8  February  2008:  Commencement   of   Bio-
             Prospecting, Access and Benefit-Sharing Regulations,  2008  in
             terms of the National Environmental  Management:  Biodiversity
             Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of 2004).

         (d)      Government Notice No R.138 published in Government Gazette
             No  30739  dated  8  February  2008:   Regulations   on   Bio-
             Prospecting,  Access  and  Benefit-Sharing  in  terms  of  the
             National Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act
             No 10 of 2004).

         (e)      Government Notice No R.149 published in Government Gazette
             No 30739 dated 8 February 2008: Notice of exemption  in  terms
             of  section  86,  in  terms  of  the  National   Environmental
             Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of 2004).

          f) General Notice No 246 published in Government Gazette No 30767
             dated 11 February 2008: Regulations: Fees for the provision of
             aviation meteorological services in terms of the South African
             Weather Service Act, 2001 (Act No 8 of 2001).


          g) General Notice No 253 published in Government Gazette No 30773
             dated   13   February   2008:   Regulating    Committee    for
             Meteorological Services: Nominations for  the  appointment  of
             suitable persons as members, in terms  of  the  South  African
             Weather Service Act, 2001 (Act No 8 of 2001).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Communications

    a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Communications for 2008 to 2011.



2.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

     a) Government Notice No R.15 published in Government Gazette No  30645
        dated 4 January 2008: Notice in terms of section 16 of  the  Marine
        Living Resources Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of 1998).

     b) Government Notice No 19 published in Government  Gazette  No  30666
        dated 18 January 2008: Correction  of  Government  Notice  No  1197
        published in Government Gazette No 30590 dated 18 December 2007, in
        terms of the World Heritage Convention Act,  1999  (Act  No  49  of
        1999).

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

Report of the Rules Committee of the NCOP

The Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, as the Chairperson  of
the Rules Committee of the Council, present the First Report  of  the  Rules
Committee of the National Council of Provinces,  dated  04  March  2008,  as
follows:

To amend the following rules by insertion of the underlined words.


Establishment
147   (1) The Committee on  Members’  Legislative  Proposals  and  Petitions
consists of  one  Council  member  from  each  province  designated  by  the
delegation head.

Chairperson
148.  (1)   The Committee on Members’ Legislative  Proposals  and  Petitions
must elect one of its members as the chairperson of the committee.

Functions and powers
149.  (1) The Committee on  Members’  Legislative  Proposals  and  Petitions
must consider and make recommendations to the  Council  on  all  legislative
proposals made by Council

Decisions
150.  A question before the Committee on Members’ Legislative Proposals  and
Petitions is agreed when at least five  provinces  vote  in  favour  of  the
question.

Referral of proposals to Committee on  Members’  Legislative  Proposals  and
Petitions
179.  (1) The Chairperson of the Council must refer the member’s  memorandum
to the Committee on Members’ Legislative Proposals and Petitions.

Council’s consideration of proposal
180.  (1) The member’s memorandum and the recommendation  of  the  Committee
on Members’ Legislative Proposals and Petitions.

Referral of petitions to committees
234.  After tabling a petition  in  the  Council,  the  Chairperson  of  the
Council must  refer  the  petition  to  the  Select  Committee  on  Members’
Legislative Proposals and Petitions.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

“1.   Report of the Joint Standing Committee on  Defence  on  employment  of
    SANDF for a service in  co-operation  with  the  South  African  Police
    Service, dated 20 February 2008.

        The Joint Standing Committee  on  Defence,  having  considered  the
        letter from the President on the employment of  the  South  African
        National Defence Force (SANDF) for a service in  co-operation  with
        the South  African  Police  Service,  referred  to  the  Committee,
        reports that it has concluded its deliberations thereon.




2.    Report of the Joint Standing Committee on  Defence  on  employment  of
    SANDF in Darfur, Sudan, dated 20 February 2008.

        The Joint Standing Committee  on  Defence,  having  considered  the
        letter from the President on the employment of  the  South  African
        National Defence Force (SANDF) in Darfur, Sudan,  referred  to  the
        Committee,  reports  that  it  has  concluded   its   deliberations
        thereon.”


CREDA INSERT - Insert T080304 – Insert 1 – PAGES 392-401


