---
title: 'Joint Sitting - 27 June 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: Joint Sitting
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/joint-sitting/parliamentary-debates-JS-2008-06-27
---

Friday, 27 june 2008
                                    ____

                        Proceedings AT joint sitting
                                    ____

Members of the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces
assembled in the Chamber of the National Assembly at 09:33.

The Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces took the Chair and
requested members to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.


                          Calling of joint sitting

The Chairperson of the NCOP announced that the presiding officers had
called a Joint Sitting of the National Assembly and the National Council of
Provinces in terms of Joint Rule 7(2) for the purpose of conducting a
debate in celebration of the 90th birthday of the formidable statesman and
father of the nation, Mr Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela, former President of the
Republic of South Africa.

 DEBATE IN CELEBRATION OF THE 90TH BIRTHDAY OF THE FORMIDABLE STATESMAN AND
 FATHER OF THE NATION, MR NELSON ROLIHLAHLA MANDELA, FORMER PRESIDENT OF THE
                                  REPUBLIC

Mr K P MOTLANTHE: Madam Speaker, Chairperson of the NCOP, hon members,
Premiers and MECs here present, Ministers, leaders of the opposition,
comrades and friends, allow me to join the millions of our people and the
peoples of the world who proclaim their respect and admiration for our
leader and former President of South Africa, Comrade Nelson Rolihlahla
Mandela, as this Joint Sitting dedicates today’s work to his birthday.

His birthday will only be on 18 July and that is a special day in his life.
We wish him many happy returns of it as well as bountiful good health. But
to us, every day of his life is very precious. Therefore we celebrate
today, we will celebrate tomorrow, we will celebrate on 18 July, we will
celebrate on 2 August and, of course, generations to come will celebrate
his centenary and for ever thereafter. [Applause.]

Throughout his life, Comrade Mandela has been in harness of the struggle
for liberation from colonialism and national oppression. From his
predecessors he learned about discipline, dedication, humility and
sacrifice. He learned never to demand of others what he himself would not
be prepared to do.

As a student he involved himself in the struggles of students and that
resulted in his expulsion from Fort Hare University. He played an active
part in the formation of the ANC Youth League in 1944. He was instrumental
in crafting and canvassing support for the adoption of the Programme of
Action at the 35th National Conference of the ANC in 1949.

He became the volunteer-in-chief during the 1952 defiance of unjust laws
campaign. He was among those charged for sedition. He was banned and
debarred from participating in meetings and conferences of the ANC. He was
one of 157 treason trialists in 1956. I am saying 157 because The Guardian
was also an accused in that trial. When the time for armed struggle came,
he led from the front and was among the very first of our militants to
receive military training in Algeria. He became the commander-in-chief of
uMkhonto weSizwe. He was the first accused in the Rivonia Trial and was
sentenced to life imprisonment, which he served on Robben Island and in
Pollsmoor Prison.

For all of the 27 years that he spent behind bars, his family was subjected
to unrelenting persecution and harassment at the hands of the State
Security Branch. When many today find fault with Winnie Madikizela-Mandela,
it is only because they have lost sight of what she was subjected to.
[Applause.] Because, literally, the security branches were all over her
place all the time, and of course, human beings can only endure so much
torture. There comes a point when they break.

The movement waged the struggle under four pillars. First was international
mobilisation and the isolation of the apartheid regime, second was the
legal mass work, third was underground organisation, and fourth was the
armed struggle.

It was after the regime banned the ANC that 48 years of peaceful forms of
struggle came to an end. As Comrade Nelson Mandela put it, the leadership
took the view that there comes a time in the life of every nation when the
choice is to surrender or to continue the struggle and the choice they made
was to continue the struggle. Comrade Mandela participated in all four
those pillars, and that is why he is so special in our hearts.

This is because he was the first to be sent by the movement to prepare the
ground for those who would end up in exile. He taught most of the African
states that were on the eve of attaining their independence from
colonisation. He addressed the first meeting of the Pan African Freedom
Movement of East, Central and Southern Africa, Pafmecsa, which preceded the
formation of the Organisation of African Unity.

His comrade, friend, brother and partner at law, Oliver Tambo, led the
campaign for the isolation of the apartheid regime. Not once did Oliver
Tambo accept an award in his own right and his own name. It is because he
understood the power and the symbolism of those who were behind bars.
Everywhere he went all the awards were received in the name of Nelson
Mandela.

It is those efforts that made him an international icon, a world-renowned
struggle leader and revolutionary. Comrade Nelson Mandela waded through his
years in prison with fortitude and remained an inspiration to those of us
who were young, remained an inspiration to our combatants in the camps and
remained an inspiration to our people, even in the remotest of villages.

It was from that same prison confinement that he initiated discussions with
the regime. The first meeting was with Kobie Coetsee, who was Minister of
Justice, to communicate to him the very important message that when all is
said and done, the struggle of our people was surely going to triumph. That
was the beginning of the talks about talks. So, Comrade Mandela, having
played a leading role in the formation of uMkhonto weSizwe, in the
recruitment of combatants, took up arms not because he was a violent person
but because it was necessary to defeat the monster of apartheid.

As the world-renowned German poet Bertolt Brecht puts it in his poem To
Posterity — and I want to quote loosely from only two stanzas of that poem:
“To those who shall emerge from this flood into which we are sinking,
remember that those who took up arms did so in order to lay down the
foundation of kindness.” But they themselves could not be kind because they
had to confront a brutal regime. Therefore, to future generations, to
posterity, to those of us who have benefited from the efforts of the
generation of Nelson Mandela, we have to choose very carefully our
historical obligation, because we cannot take up arms when we have a
democratic constitution and country. [Applause.]

Comrade Mandela led in efforts to attain the strategic objective of uniting
our people and he bent over backwards at certain times – even at the risk
of being criticised by some among our own ranks. He bent over backwards to
reach out to the former ruling bloc that oppressed us, discriminated
against us, and he gave meaning to the preamble of the Freedom Charter when
it says South Africa belongs to all who live in it – black and white – and
that no government can claim authority unless it is based on the will of
the people. [Applause.] He gave meaning to that very, very important
aspiration of our people, articulated at the Congress of the People in
1955.

As I said, every generation has to select for itself its own historical
obligations. Our obligation is to build a united democratic, nonsexist,
nonracist and prosperous South Africa. [Applause.] If all of us put our
efforts towards the attainment of this objective, our children will inherit
a prosperous, democratic, nonsexist country.

Currently we are facing grinding poverty and unemployment. The continent
and other parts of the world face war and violent crime, malnutrition and
disease, HIV and Aids, climate change and natural disasters, land hunger
and homelessness, ignorance and lack of skills, inequality and
discrimination, sexism and ethnic chauvinism, spiralling inflation and
debt, all of which converge and conspire to produce an environment very
similar to what Bertolt Brecht described in his poem when he said, “To
those of you who shall emerge from this flood into which we are sinking”,
because it leaves many people with a sense that we are sinking into a flood
of all of these negative happenings. It is the burden of leadership to wade
through all of these challenges and remain positive in a way that inspires
our people. [Applause.]

Comrade Nelson Mandela has had a very rich life. Even when he said he was
retiring from government and the leadership of the movement, all he meant
was that he was slowing down, because he did not retire. He continued to
mobilise resources to build schools in remote villages where there were no
schools; where children still learned under trees. I cannot forget how he
once took me with him to Zeerust, where the community had only one high
school and they were therefore compelled to resort to a platoon system of
learning: two schools, in essence, with two sets of teachers and two
principals, who had to share one building.

Would you allow me just to finish this account? Nelson Mandela showed his
passion. I remember when the little aircraft that we were flying in landed
on the landing strip outside Zeerust, because he was President of the
Republic, the military was there to protect him. They had taken up position
behind the shrubs and the trees. As he emerged from this aircraft, in his
typical style he walked straight to one whom he saw under a tree, shot out
his hand and said: “How are you? How are you?” As he was shaking that hand,
he saw another one, went to him and said: “How are you? How are you?” To
the chagrin of the commanders of that platoon, he left them in complete
disarray, but out of the power of love and compassion. Thank you.
[Applause.] [Time expired.]

Mr A J LEON: Mr Chairperson, Madam Speaker, Premiers, hon colleagues, it is
a great pleasure to follow the hon Motlanthe on this historic and very
happy occasion.

There are some, no doubt, who feel deprived that Parliament has to share
this tribute to Nelson Mandela on the occasion of his 90th birthday with
the citizens of Great Britain, where President Mandela is present for the
great birthday celebration marking this historic milestone. But perhaps
that is an appropriate metaphor because South Africa shares Mandela with
the world, his party shares him with the opposition, and he uniquely rises
above party and personality as perhaps the most powerful and potent and
positive symbol of all that is good about our country and the message of
hope he and we offer to the world at large.

George Orwell, writing about the Mahatma Gandhi — with whom we can usefully
bracket Mandela as one of the select few who transcend the politics of
their age and rank among the truly good and the great of this world — said
that the problem with conferring a sainthood on Gandhi is that you need to
rescue saints from under a pile of tissues and saccharine. Therefore in
paying proper and appropriate tribute to Nelson Mandela we shouldn’t mind
if we recognise him for what he is, a demonstrable human being, albeit a
remarkable one, possessed of both great strengths and the human frailties
to which we are subject.

Perhaps one of the greatest strengths, in my view, of Nelson Mandela, which
is less recognised than any of his other towering attributes, is his
extraordinary sense of humour. I remember being exposed to it at a very
critical moment in my own life. It was December 1998 and I was about to
undergo a quadruple bypass operation at the Millpark Hospital in
Johannesburg. A few weeks earlier there had been a spat — what’s new —
between the ANC and the opposition. Mr Mandela had referred to us as
“Mickey Mouse parties”, to which I had responded that in that case he must
be the head of a Goofy government. On the eve of the operation I was
awaiting my fate with some anxiety when there was a knock on the hospital
door and the world-famous voice announced: “Is that Mickey Mouse in there?
It’s Goofy here. Can I come in and see you?” [Laughter.] I have absolutely
no doubt that that visit hastened for me a very speedy recovery. In so many
areas Nelson Mandela provides exceptions to the rule and breaks the mould
into which our politics have so often and so predictably been cast.

In 1992, in the previous dispensation, or the previous regime as we now
call it, I was the MP for the Houghton constituency. Arguably the most
famous ex-political prisoner in the entire world and certainly the most
newsworthy South African political leader had moved into the constituency.
It was the time of my annual parliamentary report-back meeting. One of my
party activists suggested that I send Mandela a note, inviting him to
attend the function. This I did, not expecting that he would attend, and
also attached to the invitation a chocolate cake, welcoming him to the
area. I hardly expected either his attendance or even an acknowledgement.

The night after the meeting I returned home quite late and was amazed to
find a message on my answering machine. It was Mr Mandela. I first assumed
it was a friend doing an impressive imitation of what by then was the most
famous voice in the world, but it was the real thing — well, at least a
recording of him — expressing regret for nonattendance and grateful thanks
for the cake. He suggested that we all have dinner at his home and, within
a day or two, Zach de Beer, Ken Andrew and I were invited around to
Madiba’s residence for a meal — just the four of us!

It was my first meeting with Mr Mandela and set the tone and atmosphere for
many to follow: personal warmth, a fascination with people and events and
an engaging enjoyment of debate and discussion. I suppose the most remarked
upon feature of Mandela’s persona and his performance as both a political
leader and as our President is how the deep psychic wounds which one
imagined his imprisoned past would bring to bear on the political present
seemed almost entirely absent in his demeanour, in his actions and in his
policies. This is not to say that Mandela was not capable of deep anger,
which he often — quite rightly, in my view — displayed in response to the
so-called Third Force violence, which formed a bloody and constant
background to the turbulent negotiation process that was led by him.

I also felt the wrath of his tongue when we had heated exchanges about the
Shell House shootings or massacres, for we had our doubts about those
events. Now Mandela never did persuade me about what happened on that day
and my persistence on that topic absolutely infuriated him. But this simply
highlighted the essence of what you might call “the Nelson Mandela
paradox”: at one level he was or could be the most intensely partisan of
politicians and at another level he was a global celebrity cum secular
saint. And if the normal roles of politics didn’t apply to him, he also
wore his power, his immense authority, very lightly.

The day after Parliament first met in May 1994, following his historic
inauguration, I was again amazed that Mr Mandela had the time and interest
to call me up late one night at my Cape Town flat for a long chat and
suggested a follow-up meeting. At the meeting, the consequence of which was
to arrange for my predecessor Zach de Beer to become an ambassador, he was
very frank and honest. He said to me that the job of an opposition was to
hold up a mirror to the government. He announced at that early and critical
stage in the formation of our democracy that both debate and dissent were
very worthy ideals and I believe Nelson Mandela lived up to those ideals
and practised the ideals he preached.

I remember that in 1997 he invited us to join his Government of National
Unity but the terms and conditions were a bit too onerous to accept. Yet,
typically, our concerned rejection of that very generous invitation did
nothing to undermine our relationship, politically and personally. When the
time came in 1999 for Parliament to bid farewell to Mandela, I could inform
the House with utter sincerity that paying tribute to the President
objectively as a political opponent was the easiest speech I ever had to
deliver.  On that occasion I spoke words that were heartfelt and sincere,
which the intervening passage of nine years seems only to have bolstered as
Mandela’s visibility lessens but his stature increases. You have graced
this Parliament, you have graced this country, you have graced humanity.
[Applause.]

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Hon Chairperson of the NCOP, hon Premiers, hon
members, it is my honour to pay this tribute to Mr Nelson Mandela at this
special sitting to celebrate his 90th birthday. 

I first met Madiba over half a century ago, when he was a young lawyer with
Mandela and Tambo at Chancellor House in downtown Johannesburg. This was
the early 1950s, when we were both young men. In fact, we were such good
friends that he wound up the estate of my father-in-law, Mr Zachariah
Mzila. As a lawyer, I requested this from him as he was also a friend of my
family and of my father-in-law. My first impression of him was of a
thrusting man; a young man in a hurry. That never changed with the role
history cast him in, nor has the dignified bearing he has maintained his
entire life.

It is difficult to say if I thought at that time that he seemed destined to
lead the country. There was a crop of impressive young leaders in the ANC
at the time, but it was clear to all of us that this man was destined for a
leadership role.

Our friendship has always been characterised by warmth, affection and, I
believe, mutual respect. I will carry for what remains of my own life fond
memories of him entertaining me in his house in Orlando, when he was
married to Evelyn, and later when he was married to Winnie and more
recently in Maputo, when he was married to Graça. [Laughter.] [Applause.]
This was maintained while I served as Madiba's Minister of Home Affairs in
his single-term administration. Our former President also has — to use a
phrase I would normally associate with my grandchildren — a "wicked" sense
of humour! We have all been depressed by the goings-on in Zimbabwe. I
remember with amusement the occasion when I was with Madiba at a SADC
conference in Mauritius. He was then Chairperson of SADC and he had to
consult other SADC leaders about the crisis in Lesotho of a brewing coup.
For some reason, I think because relations between him and President Mugabe
were frosty, Madiba had not yet spoken to the Zimbabwean president. Now, I
was just about to be appointed Acting President because the then Deputy
President, Thabo Mbeki, I recall, was going to Malaysia. Madiba looked at
his watch and fixed me with that look: "Shenge, it has just gone 12
o’clock, so you are Acting President. You speak to Mugabe!" [Laughter.]

On a more sober note, hon members will know that at times Madiba and I
differed on the means but never once on the destination of this great
country. I am proud of our partnership in promoting peace and
reconciliation in South Africa.

One of the things that I will regret for the rest of what remains of my
life is this: When the amakhosi in the Eastern Cape asked him why he hadn’t
seen me after his release, he said that some of the leaders almost
throttled him and forbade him to see me because he had written to me in
1989. He had been concerned about the low—intensity civil war that was
taking place in KwaZulu-Natal in particular and had said that as soon as he
was out of jail, we were going to meet, but that was never to be. I always
say the history of this country might have been different and perhaps some
lives might have been saved if we had met.

As a father figure to our nation, he has been simply marvellous; pure gold.
He is still playing that role today and I hope that he and Graça Machel are
having some well-deserved time together in London this week.

Within the struggle, consensus was the rarest commodity. Fortunately for
the main players, many of whom are here today — one of them has just
addressed us, the deputy president of the ANC — consensus covered the most
important issue: that apartheid had to go. We only ever differed on how to
kill the wicked beast of apartheid.

In this regard, Madiba made the ultimate sacrifice. He spent 27 years in
prison, in defiance of apartheid. Of my most precious possessions are the
letters that he wrote to me, which I still have, when he was in jail. Just
as no one can give all those seemingly lost years back to him or, as is
often forgotten, his family, no one can ignore or forget the inherent
significance of such a sacrifice.

Madiba captured the imagination of the Western media establishment and
beyond. The worldwide appreciation for Madiba's sacrifice earned him his
iconic status which he, in turn, has used to further the liberation claims
of his people. Most profoundly, Madiba taught us that ultimate liberation
can only be accomplished by liberating the oppressed as well as the
oppressor. Is there not a hint there, among the sometimes shrill and
contradictory calls for action, of how Zimbabwe could find the right path
again? I think there might be.

Hon members, particularly those who served in the first Parliament when
Madiba was President, will remember that Madiba was a consummate
politician, to his very fingertips. He possessed a prosecuting intellect
and a steely determination to pursue his goals to the end. Today, Madiba,
in the words of Byron, soars "above this little scene of things". Madiba
somehow transcended the limitations of race, gender and other economic
markers. He saw us all as South Africans first.

This was especially true in the fight against HIV/Aids. A few hours after
Madiba announced that his son had died of HIV/Aids in January 2005, I
commiserated with him on the telephone, having lost two children myself the
previous year to the same pandemic. There was not a hint of self-pity in
his announcement, but only a heartfelt desire to help break the stigma and
silence surrounding this disease.

This was classic Mandela: country before self. And that is how the country
and the entire world know him. So, today we salute an icon on his 90th
birthday and we raise our hands to Tata Madiba and simply say thank you for
what you mean to us. Aah Dalibhunga! [Applause.]

Mnu G T MADIKIZA: Sihlalo, baPhathiswa ababekekileyo, malungu ale Ndlu
ahloniphekileyo, zindwendwe esizihloniphayo zale Ndlu yoWiso-mthetho,
kuyinyhweba engathethekiyo kum ukufumana eli qonga ukuze ndikhe ndizame
ukutyibela eli nyange loMzantsi Afrika, gxebe le Afrika.

Ndithetha ngenyange lehlabathi liphela ngobubanzi balo. Lo ke ngusingaye
namhlanje, uBawo uRolihlahla Nelson Mandela, ufafa lwakwaMadiba, kwaZondwa,
kooNgqolomsila. Ndithetha apha ngomnumzana, isithwalandwe esahluke kwaphela
kum nakuwe, nangona sinegazi nenyama. Ndithetha ngenkokeli egqibeleleyo,
cwaka.

UBawo uMadiba ngumntu othobekileyo, yaye yena akasiboni nesizathu sokuba
uluntu jikelele lumphakamise kangaka. Akaboni nto ayenzileyo eyodlula leyo
yenziwa ngamanye amagorha omzabalazo, koko yena uzibona njengodlale nje
indima ebimfanele kumzabalazo. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[Mr G T MADIKIZA: Chairperson, hon Ministers, members of this august House,
distinguished guests, it is a great honour for me to have this opportunity
to sing the praises of a legend of South Africa; I beg your pardon, of
Africa. I am talking here about an icon of the world as a whole. He is none
other than the birthday boy, Mr Rolihlahla Nelson Mandela, a tall man of
the Madiba clan, of the Zondwa, of the Ngqolomsila. I am talking here about
a gentleman, a man of extraordinary qualities that set him apart from you
and me, although he is flesh and blood like you and me. I am referring here
to a perfect leader.

Madiba is a humble person, and he does not understand why people should
elevate him so much. He does not regard himself as having played a greater
role than the other struggle heroes, but only an appropriate one.]

To all of us across the aisles here, across the country, across the
continent and across the planet, Madiba is a hero and the focus of our
deepest respect. It is his modesty that contributes to our esteem of him.
It takes a truly remarkable person, one of stern character and integrity,
to remain modest in the face of such adulation. In all of human history,
there have been only a handful of people who are so universally admired.

As South Africans and Africans, we take great pride in this man who
represents in his resilience, his patience, his compassion and his ability
to listen, everything that we aspire to be.

Here is a man who, at a very early age, made momentous decisions, along
with other courageous men and women, to oppose the oppression of Africans,
even if it meant taking up arms. At Rivonia he made his famous statement
about the ideals of freedom and equality for which he was prepared to lay
down his life. And his words reverberated across the world. Indeed at that
moment he skewered apartheid right through its morally bankrupt
heart—truly, a renaissance man, activist, intellectual, warrior, orator and
leader!

He disappeared into prison life, but throughout the world his name remained
on the lips of democrats. He became a myth, a symbol, a mantra. Millions
moved and acted with that symbol in mind. He emerged from prison after 27
years and astounded everybody by proving to be even bigger than the legend.


Throughout Codesa, and later as our first democratic President, he
demonstrated exceptional leadership and wisdom. It would have been easy for
a lesser man to ride upon the wave of his popularity and force people to
overlook his failures and shortcomings, yet he was an extraordinary man for
an extraordinary time in history. Unlike most, he has never hesitated to
admit an error and he has never let power or popularity blind him to the
needs of the people that he led.

Thus, in his leadership after being released, he acted in ways that
expanded the legend, made tangible all the heroic qualities that had been
bestowed upon him during his imprisonment. But he did not stop there. He
did something truly remarkable in 1999: He handed over the reins of power,
after one term in office. He would barely have needed to hint and he would
have been given a second and even a third term, and he knew that. He
retired, and we could say he is a living hero, but Madiba has never been
content with not being a servant to his people. Despite ostensibly being a
pensioner, he has been the driving force behind his Children’s Foundation,
which has done amazing work.

And it doesn’t stop there either. In the face of political folly and
semantics, while the Aids pandemic swept across the nation, he started the
46664 campaign. He turns 90 now, and his work rate puts to shame most
people half his age.

It would be possible to sing his praises all afternoon and still not
exhaust even a fraction of our regard for him. Perhaps I should try and
summarise in four words: We love you, Madiba! [Applause.]

We hope that Madiba will have a happy birthday and that God will grant us
many, many more years with this living icon. [Applause.]

The PREMIER OF THE NORTH WEST (Ms E Molewa): Hon Chairperson, at a time
when we face the internal challenges of safeguarding our economic
performance, managing our political environment, resolving our external
relationships with fellow Africans and building bridges with some of them,
it is appropriate that we converge here in the name of someone whose words
and life symbolise the struggle for the nobility of our political soul as a
nation.
You cannot separate a man, or a woman, from his or her own words. Madiba’s
words speak for themselves. And as his life attests, we can rest assured
that he meant every single word he ever uttered. Indeed, he himself said,
and I quote:


   It is never my custom to use words lightly.

We are blessed as a free and democratic nation to have been led by a person
we do not have to second-guess every time he speaks. Is there a better
lesson and legacy that Madiba can bequeath us as leaders and people? If
there is, indeed it must be the great message that we should live what we
profess and that words alone are wholly inadequate. “The challenge,” he
said, “is to move from rhetoric to action.” And we have seen that in his
life.

We are honouring an icon here today; an icon lauded by spiritual leaders,
fêted by kings and queens, revered by presidents and blessed by the love of
the common people. On this, the occasion of the celebration in this Joint
Sitting of his 90th birthday, our gift to our Tata Madiba should be to
rededicate ourselves to the example he has set for us and reaffirm our
commitment to the path he has charted for our nation.

Let us continue to walk to freedom — to go on the long walk to freedom —
with focus this time on economic development and poverty eradication,
inspired by his message that the sight of freedom on the horizon should
encourage us. When we meet the inevitable barriers, let us be fortified by
his caution that there is no easy walk to freedom.

In honour of this man, our Tata Nelson Rolihlahla, Madiba, who has given us
so much in return for so little, and who suffered for so many with a
promise of nothing for himself, let us reassert our confidence in the
implementation of our Constitution to the fullest. Our Constitution is
renowned worldwide and, in his words, is people-centred and guarantees the
freedom, liberty and/or rights for all.

Let us live his loyalty to Africa and pronounce for all to hear our oneness
with our brothers and sisters from elsewhere on our continent, taking note
of his dream and desire to see Africa’s children playing in the sun. It is
his conviction that the African renaissance is an ideal whose time has come
and he has made a call for the 21st century to be the African century.

We meet here today as two Houses symbolising his legacy of devolving power,
authority, responsibility and indeed accountability from the centre to the
margin, and from the middle to the masses. Our masses must be able to do
things for themselves.

We meet here, from our unique and seemingly divergent focus areas, to
demonstrate that there is a point of convergence in our multi-institutional
democracy. In our democracy we maintain a tradition that symbolises and is
itself personified by Madiba, Tata Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela.

What I am saying, even though I might not have eloquent words to say this,
is that on this day of our celebrating the 90th birthday of Tata, our
father, it behoves us to tell him and the world that his legacy, both of
word and deed, remains the cornerstone of our democracy and that just as he
famously declared his willingness to die for his principles, so are we
willing to die for those selfless principles enshrined in our Constitution.


Our gift to Tata Madiba should be to commit to what he promised this nation
right at the beginning of his presidency, namely:


   Never again; never again shall anyone’s freedom be violated in this
   country.

We dare say that never again shall we allow the need to arise for anyone to
cry out, as Madiba’s beloved daughter Sis Zindzi did in 1980, in a poem
titled Echo of Mandela, when she said, and I quote:


      In silence
      the distant heroes bow their heads
      the chains weigh them down
      they know no laughter
      retreating... retreating
      into a mist of bloodiness
      the decaying skull
      of buried freedom
      emits a dull echo
      of cries
      free me
      free me

Indeed, as we round up yet another blessed decade of a life lived for
humanity, let us begin its centennial decade with a vision
contradistinctive to the one painfully captured by our Zindzi, who was
speaking on behalf of the people deprived of their heroes. Let the next
decade of Madiba’s life be the rebirth of hope for humanity, which he
taught all of us.

As we recreate this world of unbridled hope, we do so with a determination
far bigger than our size as a nation. As we strive to rediscover our
humanity and humanism, we do so with a fiery optimism almost alien to a
continent brutally taught to reduce itself to pity.

We derive our confidence from a man who spent almost three decades of his
life with a back that could be bowed but never broken; a man who strode
into freedom walking tall, and taught his nation to walk as tall.

Madiba taught us to believe that we were second to none and equal to all,
and that we could achieve all that our history had taught us was
unattainable. He made us believe in ourselves and in justice, and to
understand the power of our sociopolitical and economic situation.

He made us appreciate the capacity to change for good, the world and forces
in the lives of our people. As Marianne Williamson, writing to him, said,
in a context involving children but equally applicable to us here today:


   Our deepest fear is not that we are inadequate. Our deepest fear is that
   we are powerful beyond measure. It is our light, not our darkness that
   most frightens us. We ask ourselves: Who am I to be brilliant, gorgeous,
   talented and fabulous? Actually, who are you not to be? You are a child
   of God. Your playing small does not serve the world. There’s nothing
   enlightened about shrinking so that other people won’t feel insecure
   around you.

   We are all meant to shine, as children do. We were born to make manifest
   the glory of God that is within us. It’s not just in some of us; it’s in
   everyone. And as we let our own light shine, we unconsciously give other
   people permission to do the same. As we’re liberated from our fear, our
   presence automatically liberates others.

That is Tata Madiba. He is known to both friend and foe, and both admirer
and secret hater — you can’t afford to hate Madiba openly; you would be
very abnormal!

He speaks the language not of the self, but of others; not of receiving,
but of giving; and not of the dark, but of the light. It is a language of
nobility; a language that ennobles. It is a language of dignity; a language
that dignifies. It is a language of inspiration; a language that inspires.
It is a language to learn. It is a language of nation-building; a call to
our humanity and the sanctity of our souls. It is a call that none could
deny in 1994 and that none should ignore even in 2008.

For many around the world, there is no icon who walks among the common
people. For us here, there is a legend who lives among us. For many around
the world, there is no revolutionary who speaks the language of
reconciliation. For us here, there is a radical who symbolises peaceful
transformation.

If we do not see that as a blessing to our nation, then we shall never know
what a blessing is. If this is not the proverbial touch of celestial
beings, then we shall never know the honour that higher forces bestow upon
nations. [Time expired.]

Die LEIER VAN DIE OPPOSISIE: Voorsitter, die moeilikheid om oor
oudpresident Mandela te praat, is om hom nie tot standbeeld te verklaar
nie, om te bly onthou dat hy ’n mens is, want om hom foutloos te vind, is
om hom sy grootste bate te ontneem: sy menslikheid, juis wat dit moontlik
maak vir iedere Suid-Afrikaner om te glo dat hulle ’n persoonlike band met
hom kan smee, ’n spesiale verhouding met hom kan aanknoop, ’n besondere
plekkie in sy lewe sou kon vul, by sy verjaardagviering aan sy sy sou kon
sit.

Sewe-en-twintig jaar lank mag ons nie sy beeld gesien het nie, het hy net
in ons verbeelding geleef, en tog het hy volksbesit geword. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Chairperson, when talking about former
President Mandela, one should not elevate him to the status of a saint, but
keep in mind that he is human, because to claim he has no imperfections is
to rob him of his biggest asset: his humanity, exactly what makes it
possible for each South African to believe that they can forge a personal
bond with him, that they have a special relationship with him, that they
can fill a special place in his life, and that they can sit next to him at
his birthday celebrations.

For 27 years we were not allowed to see his image, and he lived in our
imagination only, yet he became national property.]

It is a son of the people, a father of the nation, not only the most famous
prisoner in the world, but a man who became almost more famous in his
retirement than before — a unique achievement in the annals of great men.

Ek was nie in die Parlement toe president Mandela hier was nie, en ek sal
seker ook nooit daardie voorreg hê nie. Ek moet rondborstig erken dat ek
jaloers is op almal van julle wat wel daardie voorreg gehad het. Tog is hy
’n integrale deel van my lewe. Sy lewe het betekenis aan myne gegee. Saam
met sy vrylating is ons bevry. My familie was in Pelgrimsrus saam met
Duitse vriende en het saam met almal in die hotel op televisie na sy
vrylating gekyk. Ons opwinding was oorweldigend en het gelei tot vele
rondtes sjampanje vir almal wat saam met ons gejuig het. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[I was not in Parliament when President Mandela was here, and I will
probably never have that privilege. I must admit that frankly I am jealous
of those who had the privilege to be here. Yet he is an integral part of my
life. His life gave meaning to mine. When he was released we were liberated
too. My family were in Pelgrimsrus with German friends and watched his
release on television with the others in the hotel. Our excitement was
overwhelming and led to many rounds of champagne for everyone who cheered
with us.]

”I place the remaining years of my life in your hands,” he said. And he has
lived up to that promise. But it is as though he held us by the hand to
lead us to the Promised Land.
Sy woorde het vlerke gekry. Ná die eerste demokratiese verkiesing het hy
die volgende gesê:

   Ek reik ’n hand van vriendskap uit na al die leiers van al die partye en
   hul lede en vra hulle almal om aan te sluit en saam te werk om die
   probleme wat ons as ’n nasie in die gesig staar, aan te pak. ’n ANC-
   regering sal al die mense van Suid-Afrika dien, nie net ANC-lede nie.

Hierdie was die verbond wat hy met Suid-Afrika se kiesers gesluit het. Dit
is waartoe alle opposisiepartye hulle verbind het. Dit is die hoeksteen
waarop hierdie Parlement gevestig is. Dis waarom ek vandag hier kan staan
en hom namens die DA van harte geluk kan wens met sy verjaarsdag, waarom
ons nie buite staan en na binne loer nie; omdat hy ons deel gemaak het van
hierdie nasie. Dis hoekom ons voel dat hy ook aan ons behoort. Hy het ons
die betekenis van vergifnis, gelykheid en waardigheid geleer. (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[His words took wing. After the first democratic election he said the
following:

   I hold out a hand of friendship to all the leaders of all parties and
   their members, and ask all of them to join us in working together to
   tackle the problems we face as a nation. An ANC government will serve all
   the people of South Africa, not just ANC members.

This was the pact that he made with the voters of South Africa. This is
what all opposition parties agreed to. This is the foundation on which this
Parliament is founded. That is why, on behalf of the DA, I can stand here
today and whole heartedly congratulate him on his birthday; why we are not
standing on the outside and peering in, because he made us part of the
nation. This is why we feel that he also belongs to us. He taught us the
importance of forgiveness, equality and dignity.]

Someone — I don’t know who he was — wrote that the fact that Mandela was a
black man who commanded this universal respect and adulation was doubly
significant. As an ending to centuries of racial discrimination and in a
country of such diversity as ours, we instinctively recognise that we can
truly agree that he has the transcendent capacity to speak not only on
behalf of the interests of the rising nations of the South but to represent
a kind of consciousness which includes all of humanity, makes the world
feel whole and wholesome, and has come to be known as “Madiba magic”.

I read that his greatest pleasure in his most private moments is watching
the sunset, with the music of Händel or Tchaikovsky playing. Then why, oh
why, is the famous 46664 concert not filled with classical music? Imagine
if your heart longed for the enchantment of the classics and you had to
spend the whole night in Hyde Park, listening to music composed for your
grandchildren! Having to listen to Amy Winehouse, Kurt Darren, Josh Groban,
Joan Baez, Johnny Clegg, Queen, Annie Lennox and a whole range of other
minor luminaries — what a sacrifice he’s making! [Interjections.]

My birthday prayer for him, God willing, is that someone will play him Paul
Robeson and the old masters on his special day. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chairperson, Madam Speaker, Madam Deputy Speaker, Mr Mandela,
in your absence, on behalf of the ACDP it is my pleasure to wish you a
happy birthday. We pray that God’s hand will continue to be upon you and
that the coming year will be especially blessed. We would like to express
our appreciation for you and to honour you as we mark your birth.

Who would have guessed the phenomenal importance of the birth of this tiny
little boy on 18 July 1918 in Umtata, Transkei — not only the impact it was
to have on South Africa but on the nations of the world? Only God knew
exactly what He had in mind. Of course, God’s ways are not our ways and the
most important missions often require the one sent to experience enormous
trials and tribulations.

Leading the way of reconciliation and reconstruction in a society that had
been separated by over a century of racial segregation and apartheid took
great vision, great courage and great faith. I’m sure you are as amazed as
anyone at what God can accomplish, often as much in spite of us as He does
through us.

Of all your many attributes, it has been your humility and your empathy
which have moved even the hardest of hearts. We thank you for caring for
children, the youth, the disabled, for the people of Burundi, Zimbabwe and
other countries where their struggle has necessitated great suffering.

Today, it is difficult to think of much else as across our border the
brutal Mugabe regime makes a mockery of the democracy so many have
sacrificed so much for. I will, however, choose to think of the inspiring,
pertinent words spoken by the Deputy President yesterday in the Youth
Parliament, namely that South Africa, like the rest of Africa, had the
great advantage of being a continent and nation of young people.

When we follow the financial news, we hear, “Stocks were up or down today,
in response to the news that ...” and the “news” referred to is usually
either a government’s economic report, or the market’s reaction to an
interest rate cut. This makes sense because buying stocks is essentially
betting on the future of the economy, and the best guide to that future,
one might think, is the action of policy-makers and financial markets.

There is, however, another and arguably more reliable predictor of economic
health and that is demographics, specifically the age of a population or
the ratio of older people to younger people. This point is explored in the
documentary Demographic Winter, where a financial consultant considers two
charts, the first being the performance of the world’s largest provider of
independent credit ratings and the second the number of births during the
“baby boom”.

When he compared them, allowing for a 45-to-50-year lag representing
people’s peak spending years, he found that the Standard and Poor’s
performance and the number of births tracked almost perfectly. In other
words, future prosperity is determined to a significant degree by the
number of children being born today. While this ought to be obvious,
because consumer spending drives the economy, somehow the importance is
missed. The more people you have in their peak spending years, the more
spending you have on everything from housing to travelling and taxes paid.
As the population ages, it spends less.

Most people have been programmed to think that overpopulation is one of the
worst dangers facing the globe. In fact, the opposite is true. As Longman
notes in Demographic Winter, no society has both a shrinking population and
a growing economy. The two are incompatible. Sadly, our society prioritises
self-satisfaction and material prosperity at the expense of future
generations. The irony is that our material prosperity depends on those
future generations.
Mr Mandela, there is a battle raging in South Africa and, indeed,
throughout the world, which you have not yet spoken out on, and that is the
war against pre-born babies. Abortion on demand not only discriminates
against those babies, but takes their lives and deprives Africa of who
knows what potential. [Interjections.] In this matter, Sir, I appeal to
you. Thank you. [Applause.]

Dr C P MULDER: Chairperson, Madam Speaker, Mr Motlanthe, colleagues, ladies
and gentlemen, it is given to only a few men to live out their dreams in
their lifetime. Mr Nelson Mandela succeeded in doing this. Against severe
odds, he realised the vision he had as a young man.

I would like to share with the House this morning two experiences with
regard to Mr Mandela of which I had first-hand knowledge. In 1989 I was a
young Member of Parliament in the opposition. At that stage, the then NP,
under the leadership of Mr P W Botha, was adamant that they would not talk
to the ANC. Those who did, like the Dakar group, were ostracised. We in the
opposition then got word that the NP, unlike what they told the electorate
in the run-up to the 1989 general election, of course, was talking secretly
to Mr Mandela in prison. We then planned to expose these actions of the NP
and started putting questions on the Question Paper in this regard.
Immediately, the then Minister of Justice, Mr Kobie Coetsee, made an urgent
appointment with our then Chief Whip, Mr Frank le Roux. His message was:
Please don’t persist with this. Mr Mandela is very ill. He is a dying man
in prison. We, the NP government, cannot allow him to die in prison.

This message was communicated to our caucus and we, in the national
interest, did not go ahead with our questions. [Laughter.] Mr Mandela was
then 71 years old. He went on to become President in 1994 and today we are
celebrating his 90th birthday. [Applause.] Ironically, Mr Kobie Coetsee, on
the other hand, died eight years ago, in the year 2000. [Laughter.]

The second experience says a lot about Mr Mandela’s humanity as a person. I
often tease the children of my brother and colleague, Dr Pieter Mulder, by
mimicking different kinds of voices over the telephone when I call them. On
a Sunday afternoon there was a telephone call for his daughter Suzanne. At
the time, she was a final-year medical student at the University of the
Free State. That day there was a report in the Afrikaans Sunday newspaper
about her, as she had just received an award from the university as the dux
student of the year. The voice on the other side of the telephone was that
of Mr Mandela. She, however, was convinced that it was me who was having
her on and pretending to be Mr Mandela. My brother had a lot of trouble
convincing her that it really was the President congratulating her with her
achievement. Mr Mandela then did congratulate her and she will remember
this for the rest of her life. [Applause.]

One person in the right place, at the right time, and with the right
approach can make a huge difference. Mr Mandela is such a person. He proved
this statement to be true. He didn’t just have an influence on South
Africa, but on the whole world. There is no substitute in life for hope. Mr
Mandela radiates hope.

Afrikaners het ’n groot respek vir ouer mense. Senior burgers beklee ’n
spesiale plek in die Afrikanergemeenskap. Daarom, weet ek, kan ek namens
Afrikaners praat as ek vandag aan mnr Mandela sê: Baie hartlik geluk met u
90ste verjaarsdag. Dit is ’n besondere mylpaal om in ’n mens se lewe te
bereik; iets wat nie baie mense beskore is nie.

Mnr Mandela se nalatenskap, wat sê dat wit-oor-swart-oorheersing net so
verkeerd is soos swart-oor-wit-oorheersing, is iets wat deur toekomstige
geslagte onthou en uitgebou moet word. Mnr Mandela se reënboognasie, as ’n
politieke konsep waarin daar plek vir elkeen van ons is, stel vir ons almal
’n voorbeeld. Ek wil ten slotte die hoop en vertroue uitspreek dat mnr
Mandela op sy knieë sal gaan en ons Hemelse Vader sal dank vir ’n
merkwaardige en geseënde 90 jaar, want ná alles gesê is, weet ons aan God
alleen kom al die eer toe.

Namens die VF Plus sê ons vir mnr Mandela baie geluk. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Afrikaners have great respect for older people. Senior citizens have a
special place in the Afrikaner community. That is why, I know, I can speak
on behalf of Afrikaners when I say to Mr Mandela today: Many happy returns
on your 90th birthday. It is an exceptional milestone to reach in one’s
life; something that not many people are destined for.

Mr Mandela’s legacy, which states that white-over-black domination is just
as wrong as black-over-white domination, is something that future
generations must remember and build upon. Mr Mandela’s rainbow nation, as a
political concept in which there is a place for all of us, sets an example
to us all. Lastly, I would like to express the hope and trust that Mr
Mandela will go on his knees and thank our Heavenly Father for an
exceptional and blessed 90 years, because after everything is said and
done, we know that it is to the glory of God alone.

On behalf of the FF Plus we would like to say many happy returns to Mr
Mandela. [Applause.]]

Mrs J CHALMERS: Chairperson, hon members of this House, I would like to
extend a special welcome today to the president of the ANC, Comrade Jacob
Zuma. [Applause.] I would also like to extend a special welcome and
acknowledgment to another hero of the struggle who is in the House today,
Comrade Andrew Mlangeni. [Applause.]

Today is a very special day, a day when we celebrate as Parliament and in
Parliament the approaching 90th birthday of our revered, beloved and heroic
leader, Comrade Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela. On Mandela’s birthday, 18 July,
people all over the world, across many nations, will be celebrating his
remarkable life. Indeed, I think, for all of us, the name Mandela evokes
the image and spirit of an extraordinary human being and we all rejoice in
the fact that he is now nearing his 90th birthday in good health and is
still contributing in a marvellous way to making our planet earth into a
richer and better place.

For me, being asked to speak in this debate is an unexpected and wonderful
honour. I wish my husband, who used to sit up there listening to my
debates, could be here to celebrate with us today. I am glad that my
daughter is able to be present.

Much has been written about the life and times of Nelson Mandela and his
role in the liberation of South Africa from the apartheid regime. His was,
and still is, an extraordinary life and his own description of his
childhood in the rural Transkei is wonderfully evocative of that time. I
wish that his book A Long Walk to Freedom would be prescribed reading in
all secondary schools in this country. Archbishop Desmond Tutu says of it:

   This is a splendid book ... Justice, freedom, goodness and love have
   prevailed spectacularly in South Africa and one man has embodied that
   struggle and its vindication. This is his story and the story of that
   struggle. It is a fitting monument. It will help us never to forget, lest
   we in our turn repeat the ghastliness of apartheid.

I think those four words — justice, freedom, goodness and love — embody the
spirit and psyche of Nelson Mandela. Those four words, bolstered by courage
and commitment, resulted in an absolute belief in the precept set out in
the Freedom Charter of a nonracial future for South Africa. All those
qualities melded into a man who combined extraordinary qualities of
leadership with a wonderful leavening humanity and, time and again, a
quickness of wit and humour that left his enemies literally dumbstruck.

I would like to focus here on just one of the words I have mentioned above,
and that is the word “humanity”. It is a word to which Mr Mandela himself
gave quite a lot of care and attention; a word that will recur frequently
in his speeches — those wonderful speeches of his where he manages to
capture in the most remarkable way his hopes and aspirations for his
beloved country, because his hopes were our hopes. He captured our dreams
and aspirations as well.

Two quotations stand out for me and they seem particularly relevant at this
time in our history. The first:

   What challenges us is to ensure that none should enjoy lesser rights and
   none be tormented because they are born different, hold contrary
   political views or praise God in a different manner.

In the second quotation he was referring to his Robben Island years:

   We fought injustice in order to preserve our own humanity.

The lives of those of us born into the white community in South Africa in
the decade when racism was totally legislated and entrenched in our country
continued for the most part untouched by the struggle, courage and
commitment of those who were trying by all means to cast off the shackles
of apartheid. For us, separation was complete from our birth in hospital to
the cemetery that was our final resting place. Separation was total and
complete.

We were hardly aware that a revolution was taking place under our feet. It
was a diabolically clever and effective way of keeping the races apart and
preventing people from getting to know one another, from forming
friendships, from understanding one another’s cultures and, critically,
from being able to communicate in one another’s languages.

For those of us who crossed those barriers, the stated place between the
races, there were consequences, and not only from the government but also
from our own community, the people with whom we had a common culture,
language, heritage and history. It was a big and daunting step to take, but
the gains achieved in becoming part of the liberation struggle far, far
outweighed the pain of being caught by the beady eye of the security
police. It meant, inevitably, being subjected to the strong-arm tactics
common to a fascist regime. It also, very often, meant being ostracised and
labelled as a traitor to one’s own kind.

During this time we knew — and I speak here particularly of being part of a
women’s organisation called the Black Sash — that on a small island off
Cape Town, there were a group of extraordinary men, living in hard and
hostile conditions, in small, cold cells, and among them was Nelson
Mandela. We knew, and were inspired and given hope by the knowledge that,
as surely as day follows night, sooner rather than later, the sun would
rise on a South Africa where those heroes, and the many political prisoners
throughout the country, would walk the streets of our country in their
rightful place as free men and women.

Today, we celebrate the 90th birthday of one of history’s most revered
leaders. I recall a day back in 1988, when Comrade Mandela had his 70th
birthday, and we in our advice office in Port Elizabeth decided it was
cause for a big celebration. So we baked a huge birthday cake, iced it in
the colours of the ANC — black, gold and green — with 70 candles. Most of
our Eastern Cape leaders — Comrade Fazzie will remember this — were
languishing in St Albans Prison at the time because it was during the
second state of emergency, but the party went on. Freedom songs were sung
and all in all it was a great day. Again, there were consequences. Of
course, our advice office was kept under constant surveillance by the
security police and within a matter of days I was woken at midnight to be
told that our office had been set alight and by the next morning it was a
blackened shell. Strong-arm tactics indeed! But the very next day a message
came to us from prison which said: Stay strong, Comrades.

Tributes will be pouring in from all over the world as the memorable day of
Nelson Mandela’s 90th birthday approaches. For each and every one of us, it
will have a special meaning. For those of us old enough to have lived
through the time of his incarceration, we will recall his extraordinary
tenacity and courage during those years of hardship. We used to long for
news from Robben Island, always somewhat fearful of what we would hear, but
time and again, when the fragments of information came through about the
conditions of the prisoners, we were told that Madiba remained steadfast,
his head held high, his spirit as strong as ever and he was inspiring his
fellow prisoners to study. [Applause.] We would know as the years rolled by
that his qualities of leadership remained intact and for us outside his
absolute integrity would continue to be an inspiration.

True leadership is a rare quality. Throughout history there have been many
fine leaders in different lands and at different times. Great warriors,
clever political leaders, passionate revolutionary leaders — all of these
have had their place in mankind, but what is unique about our great South
African, Nelson Mandela, is that he embodies all these remarkable
qualities. He led a revolution in this country that had a peaceful outcome.
He guided our country in the five years following the 1994 election with
tact and wisdom, leading by example, showing tolerance and refusing to make
revenge a part of the policies of the future. He unified the nation, giving
all who lived here a common identity as South Africans and laying the
foundation of what was translated into the Constitution of this land.

I think each and every one of us owes him an enormous debt of gratitude.
Finally, I would like to echo the words of another great hero of South
Africa, Comrade Ahmed Kathrada. In his birthday wish to his friend and
comrade Nelson Mandela he says:

   May you see many more birthdays, may your wisdom and guidance that saw us
   through thick and thin remain with us, may your unshaken commitment to a
   nonracial, nonsexist, democratic South Africa continue to flourish and be
   our beacon for all time.

Thank you. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, I just want to acknowledge a 10-
person delegation of senior public servants from the National School of
Public Policy in Pakistan. They are in the gallery.

Dr A I VAN NIEKERK: Hon Chair and members, in a sense it is ironic that I
should follow on the hon member Chalmers. I come from the previous
dispensation and today I stand here and we can profess and acknowledge the
same principles. That came about through a man called Nelson Mandela. That
is why it is an honour for me to stand here today, with the past in the
past, and commemorating an occasion like this in the present. I would
really like to congratulate Mr Mandela and wish him fortune for the future.
May he experience only pleasant surprises for the rest of his life.

I would also like to thank Mr Mandela for his contribution to creating a
firm base for all South Africans so that we could build a rainbow nation
and unite our various cultures, coming from diverse directions, in a
patriotic South African citizenship. Although we sometimes falter in
staying on this course, the route and the direction which President Mandela
pointed out to us is still the right way to pursue.

I asked some of my friends what I should say on their behalf on this
occasion. The answer was unanimous: Sê vir hom: Baie geluk en dankie. [Tell
him: Happy birthday and thank you.] And then the following words: Sê ook
vir mnr Mandela: Ons wens hy was 30 jaar jonger sodat hy vir die leiers van
vandag kan kom wys hoe dinge reg gedoen moet word. [Applous.] [Also tell Mr
Mandela: We wish that he were 30 years younger so that he could come and
show today’s leaders how things ought to be done. [Applause.]]

To my mind, this wish is a great tribute to Mr Mandela from ordinary people
in the street. I was fortunate to serve in Mr Mandela’s cabinet for more
than two years. That in itself was an experience in our effort to map out
the new road of democratic South Africa. I remember one specific day, while
busy with discussions, he wrote me a letter in perfect Afrikaans after he
had returned from a visit to KwaZulu-Natal. He wrote: “Die Koning van die
Zoeloes het aan my ’n bees geskenk. U departement kan doen met hom soos u
wil.” [Gelag.] Die “hom” het verwys na ’n os, so ons kon nie teel met hom
nie. Op die ou einde het ons hom in pakkies in die President se vrieskas
gepak. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[“The King of the Zulus gave me an ox. Your department can do with him as
you please.” [Laughter.] The “him” referred to an ox, so we could not use
it for breeding. In the end the ox landed up in packets in the President’s
freezer.]

The Afrikaans side of Mr Mandela is relatively unknown. On Robben Island he
learned and mastered Afrikaans as a language and was very fond of reading
Afrikaans poetry. He could recite many phrases.

Graag wil ek aan u, mnr Mandela, dankie sê vir u gewillige oor en sagte oë
waarmee u gekyk het na die taal waarin ek nou met u praat. U het die diepte
en wese daarvan en ook van die mense wat dit praat, begryp en grootliks
gehelp om Afrikaans van ’n verdoemende verlede te bevry. Ek dank u
daarvoor. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Therefore, Mr Mandela, I sincerely want to thank you for the willing ear
and soft eyes with which you looked upon the language in which I am
addressing you now. You understood the depth and the essence thereof, as
well as of the people who speak the language and played a significant role
in liberating Afrikaans from its doomed past. I thank you for that.]

You not only freed the Afrikaner of yesterday but you freed all the people
of South Africa from our past and made us equal for the future. For that we
all thank you and honour you and wish you well.

I also experienced President Mandela’s wrath on an occasion in cabinet when
he did not like my comment in the newspapers that whatever advantages
Pretoria might have as a site for Parliament, Cape Town was where it would
stay. The blazing eyes of Mr Mandela and the stare of reprimand is an
experience no one will ever forget. [Laughter.] But I think for once I was
right. It is still here.

It was amazing to see how the atmosphere in cabinet changed when President
Mandela entered the room. Suddenly the talk was straight. The atmosphere
was different. Even today, we experience some of the Madiba magic in this
Chamber. Even though Mr Mandela is not physically present, the atmosphere
in this Chamber today is different and even festive in comparison to the
normal atmosphere that prevails here. The reason? It is the mere presence
of Mr Mandela’s name and image in our thoughts. I thank him for this
memory. Your example and courage, Mr Mandela, is our inspiration. We honour
you as a great man. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, just a procedural announcement.
We have one of our most important guests in the gallery. I want to
acknowledge the presence of the president of the ANC, Jacob Zuma.
[Applause.] I must apologise, because I was notified late. I wasn’t aware
that he was in the Chamber.

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Motlotlegi Modulasetulo wa Khansele ya Bosetšhaba ya
Diporofense, Mmusakgotla, le ditokololo tse di tlotlegang, ke a leboga.
[Hon Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, Madam Speaker as
well as hon members, I thank you.]

Ndiziva ndinoyolo olukhulu kukuthatha inxaxheba kulentetho-mpikiswano
emalunga neligorha, eli qhawe, le nkokheli, lo mongameli ubawo uMadiba
omde. [I feel honoured to be taking part in this debate, which is a
birthday tribute to a hero, a champion, a leader and a former President,
the tall-as-a-tree Madiba.]

Nelson Mandela is simplicity personified. He is a real doyen of South
African politics and started pursuing the truth from his youth. Nelson
Mandela has been a blessing to this country. He has come to be an
international icon, who has been described as coming second only after Coca-
Cola as a brand. [Laughter.] He is so analogous with South Africa that
whenever the name Mandela is mentioned, South Africa is mentioned, and the
converse. As a statesman he has shown how it is done. Those who doubted his
ability were made to eat humble pie when he showed his mettle at the World
Trade Centre in the first sitting of the Convention for a Democratic South
Africa in December 1999 in Kempton Park. He asked for the privilege to say
something of national importance and then tore into the then President de
Klerk, doing so “go kgalema lenyatso” [to call him to order].

Mandela is confident and sure of himself. That is why he never hesitates to
acknowledge the good that some people have done, regardless of them being
his opponents. On 15 March 1994, when he stepped into the Mmabatho
Convention Centre, he never hesitated to speak out and say that that
imposing building was no different from any one in a large city. He
instantaneously said that if Kgosi Mangope had built this imposing
structure in this area, he deserved to be forgiven. This is the view he
holds even to this day, while lesser mortals hold different views.

We have it on good authority that once he called those who were inclined to
hunt with the hounds and run with the hare and told them that as much as he
appreciated their conversion to the ANC, he was not happy that they left no
legacy of infrastructure, as Kgosi Mangope at least did.

Madiba the statesman has proved to the world that umntu omnyama [a black
person], given the chance, can work wonders. Almost every visitor, be they
tourists, sportsmen and women, artists, whoever, wishes to shake his hand.
He is able to come to the level of the lowliest and equally rise to the
higher levels when occasion demands. He is for all waters as much as he is
a man for all seasons.

It does not matter where one is, locally or overseas, because people speak
of him in glowing terms. Even those who incarcerated him look at him in awe
as he never showed signs of vindictiveness, despite having been denied
freedom for 27 years.

Madiba rose to the occasion when he gave Bill Clinton a lifeline and a
shoulder to cry on when the latter was beleaguered in the Monica Lewinsky
debacle, when all friends had deserted the then president of America. He is
the type of man who will not kick a fallen man in the teeth. He is empathy
and integrity personified. As a man of high moral ideals and standards,
Mandela has never made it a secret that he has lost patience with President
Mugabe regarding the latter’s misrule in Zimbabwe. He lambasted President
George Bush when he defied even the United Nations and attacked Iraq. It
did not matter to him that Bush was the president of a so-called superpower
in the world. To him, morality is the only yardstick.

This charismatic father of the South African nation led this country from
literal bondage and the precipice of disaster to a land of hope. He led
from the front in welding the nation into one that is now a united,
nonsexist, nonracist and democratic nation.

We wish this nonagenarian to grow from strength to strength. We wish him
longevity and pray for his strength, that he may enjoy his birthday on 18
July in good health, peace and happiness.

Wanga uSomandla angakhusela, asikelele ze athamsanqelise eli gorha
linguBawo uMandela. Ndiyabulela. [Kwaqhwatywa.] [May the Lord protect,
grace and bless our hero, Mr Mandela. I thank you. [Applause.]]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, Speaker, Deputy Speaker, colleagues, South
Africa, Africa and the world is extremely grateful to the Almighty for
giving us and sparing us our greatest treasure and icon, Madiba, for these
90 years. On behalf of the MF, and especially our leader Mr A Rajbansi, we
convey our greetings and well wishes to the great father of our nation, the
hon Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela.

There are a few individuals in world history who have exceptional personal
principles above others. Forgiveness, peace, unity and reconciliation are
the building blocks which Madiba has given us. This is a great legacy. He
is a great unifier of the nation and nations. He is loved and revered by
people across the political community and across language and ethnic
divides. Imprisoned for a large portion of his life and kept away from his
family, friends and people, we were all in awe, with the rest of the world,
on his release from prison that he had no bitterness. He is an example to
us. As he said, “We shall forgive but we shall never forget.”

Sizoxola kodwa ngeke sikhohlwe. [Ihlombe.] [We shall forgive, but we shall
never forget. [Applause.]]

He embraced those who had created havoc in our country and has given high
values and principles to our people. It is a known fact that Madiba and the
leader of the MF, Mr A Rajbansi, have a long-standing friendship. I was one
of the few privileged to be at the lunch table when Madiba had a private
lunch at Mr Rajbansi’s residence in Chatsworth, and I shall treasure that
for all my life. We thank Madiba for regularly engaging with the MF
throughout his Presidency.

We must never forget what Madiba stood for and for which he was prosecuted
and sacrificed. As a nation, we need to imbue ourselves with the values and
principles that Madiba has taught us. Through all his challenges, he has
taught us the strength of forgiveness and greatness of unity. His words,
“Let us hold hands together to build a great future”, shall echo forever.
His efforts and dedication to our people ventured way beyond his Presidency
and way beyond the corners of Africa to all countries across the globe. At
his strong age of 90 years, our beloved Madiba, father and friend,
continues to dedicate the days he has to us.

Recently he has taken a highly principled stand against violence on fellow
Africans and the situation in neighbouring countries. His Foundation has
its hand in tackling every challenge we have faced. He has the world’s
trust, respect and support as a result of his selflessness and sacrifice
for humanity.

Madiba is South Africa, he is Africa and he is one of God’s greatest souls.
We thank the Almighty for giving us this opportunity to experience, share
and celebrate this wonderful being, Madiba. We are confident that, in 10
years, our Parliament shall once again come together to celebrate his 100th
birthday.

We call on the nation to revive the spirit and purpose with which Tata
welcomed democracy for us, the vision he had for our people and the hunger
that he had for equality, freedom and the development of our people. We
shall shout and embrace Madiba’s words of 14 May 1994, when he said:

   Never, never and never again shall it be that this beautiful land will
   again experience oppression from one by another.

I take this opportunity to wish Tata a very happy 90th birthday, and I
cannot express enough gratitude and admiration for his high spirit,
kindness and selflessness. You are, Tata, a true example of humility,
modesty and godliness. I pray that God shall spare you many more years with
us so that we may reap of your values, wisdom and greatness. Let us learn
from our Tata not to run away from darkness but to light a candle. A very
happy 90th birthday to the world’s greatest humanitarian, Nelson Rolihlahla
Mandela. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Chairperson, I feel highly honoured to speak on the 90th
birthday celebration debate of the former President of the Republic, Mr
Nelson Mandela.

On an occasion such as this, let me first introduce my party to the person
I am going to pay tribute to, Mr Nelson Mandela, for him to fully
understand who we are. I know he is watching us, wherever he is.
[Interjections.]

The African People’s Convention, the APC, is a party of our democratic
dispensation. Our vision is to be a viable, credible, progressive,
alternative governing party in South Africa. Our mission is meeting the
economic, social, political and cultural needs of our people through mass
mobilisation. [Interjections.] We are an alternative voice for our country.

I am flabbergasted and shocked, though, by the honour bestowed upon me to
speak on the occasion of the birthday of such a great man, a stalwart, a
man for all seasons. What more can I say? He is a man who has stood the
test of time, a wonder to our growing nation, giving us “Madiba magic”.

I further feel too small to talk about uTata Mandela. I don’t think I
deserve such an opportunity. I am told ... [Applause.] ... that only great
men can speak about other great men. I don’t think there could be any
living being who could say anything about uTata Mandela convincingly. It
won’t be exhaustive and it will never attempt to be satisfying to its
audiences. I am trying to say that no utterances on uTata Mandela will do
him justice as you will be accused of not having touched on this and that
aspect of this tower among towers. uTata Mandela, if I may say so, is not
an ordinary person; he is a rare breed.

The first time I personally met uTata Mandela, when I had direct contact
with him, was in June 2003, in his office at the Mandela Children’s Fund
offices. He had a beaming welcome that made me feel so special. After he
had outlined his purpose for inviting us, he was all over us with jokes to
ease our tension. One further thing I could clearly remember was when he
said, “The country needs all of us to be prosperous. The freedom we have
cannot be claimed by a single individual or party but belongs to everyone
of us.” Then it was back to business for this great man, who was giving us
a quick lecture.

Let the writer of books dry up the ink of their pens through this giant. A
further call is made to historians to preserve the legacy of this mountain.
Let the most eloquent and greatest men and women of our country, those who
are blessed with sincerity, speak about uTata Mandela. I don’t think this
country has produced a person who is fit to speak about uTata Madiba
without any challenge from whatever quarter. Long live uTata Mandela! Happy
birthday to you. Long live the father of the nation! [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Thank you, Chair. Comrade Zweli, I
thought I was going to speak immediately after the hon Rajbally of the MF,
in which case I was going to say to you that the House was going to get a
good serving of Indian breyani. [Laughter.]

Comrade Chair, Madam Speaker, Premiers, Ministers and Deputy Ministers,
president of the ANC Comrade Jacob Zuma, Comrade Deputy President
Motlanthe, hon members of this Joint Sitting, our patriotic youth and
compatriots who are here in the public gallery, our nation and the
international community at large, this Joint Session of Parliament goes
into recess by celebrating the birth, life, era and lifetime contribution
of one of South Africa’s and, indeed, Africa’s greatest sons and leaders —
our past President, our revered Isithwalandwe Comrade Nelson Rolihlahla
Mandela.

Listening to the speakers from the various political parties one cannot
help but be astounded at how, even today, Comrade Mandela is the absolute
focal point of national unity, the symbol of national unity and the cement
of the nation in our country.

In his biography, Long Walk to Freedom, Comrade Nelson Mandela said that
all the time that he was in prison he always knew that some day he would
once again feel the grass under his feet and walk in the sunshine as a free
man. This is the moral lesson he imparts to us. It speaks to us and
especially to the youth to instruct us that no matter what the adversity
that one faces in life, whether as an individual, a nation or a country, we
must be able to visualise a better future for ourselves as both a country
and a nation.

As we mark the Youth Parliament this week and pay tribute to Madiba on his
90th birthday, it is crucial that all of us, especially our youth, focus as
a nation and a country on the leadership of the founding mothers and
fathers of our democratic country. We need a role model like Madiba to show
us the way as we continue to forge a better future for all of us who have
made South Africa our home.

Now, more than ever before, we and the youth in particular must draw on the
aspirations, inspiration, ethos and philosophy of our former President, who
said in his book: “The victory of democracy in South Africa is about the
common achievement of all the people of this country.”

This is the legacy he and the founders of our democracy have left for us
that we must revisit, reclaim and take inspiration from on this, his 90th
birthday. Madiba taught us to steer away from the narrow nationalism that
will fracture our common humanity and turn African against African, tribe
against tribe, race against race and one nationality forged by borders
against another, different nationality.

After 27 years of imprisonment, Madiba tended to love instead of hate his
former incarcerators. It is his sense of humanity, humaneness and respect
for diversity that needs to inform, underpin and underline our own
political outlook today.

Notwithstanding these 27 years of imprisonment, his character throughout
his life exudes humanism and a total absence of rancour and bitterness,
founded on the conviction that all men, even the most seemingly cold-
blooded, has a core of decency and if their hearts were touched they were
capable of being changed.

Commenting on this, Madiba further said that prison itself was a tremendous
education in the need for patience and perseverance. It is, above all, a
test of one’s own commitments.

His is a dignity rooted in a profound sense of self, based not on one’s
contempt for one’s enemy but on an acknowledgement of a shared humanity, a
self-worth acknowledged with both pride and humility and which prompted him
from an early age to deal with others on an equal footing and with what he
himself has called a “stubborn sense of fairness”.

The years he spent in jail gave him a new depth, helped him to be more
understanding of the foibles of others, to be more generous, more tolerant
and more magnanimous and gave him an unassailable credibility and
integrity.

Such is the humility of the man that even after many years of struggle he
would say at the treason trial that he was simply the symbol of justice in
the court of the oppressors; a representative of the great ideas of
freedom, fairness and democracy in a society that dishonoured those values.


It was Mahatma Gandhi who said, “Let us be the change that we seek in the
world.” At the time when the Indian community was striving to be a
committed and contributing force in the freedom struggle, we all saw
Mandela as the epitome of all the Gandhian values and our beacon of truth
and justice.

Madiba, you gave to us international respect and a claim as both a country
and a nation. You have raised the flag of South Africa and Africa the world
over. You branded us as among the very best in the world, worthy of respect
and international recognition.

He walked free and with him a nation began to walk to freedom. He became a
head of state, and it seemed as if patience and justice had created a new
brand of politics for the people, one without bigotry or repression.

Writing in 1999 about the era of this President, which at the time was
about to come to close, the renowned South African writer André Brink
described his life as the life of a man who had become a saintly icon for
the world.

At the end of that millennium, at the time when the world’s media were
trying to pick a “man of the century”, the leader of all leaders, the name
of Nelson Mandela featured rather prominently alongside that of Mahatma
Gandhi and Martin Luther King Junior. He stands out as an icon in his own
right, exceptional and unique. His life is a symbol not only of the
principles and values of the nation but the embodiment of hope for the
entire world. He has come to symbolise the triumph of the human spirit
against all adversity and the creation of hope for humanity as a whole.

Words cannot sufficiently and comprehensively convey our sense of
appreciation to you, Madiba, for the service that you have rendered and
continue to render to us as a country and as a nation.

On behalf of the ANC, its leadership and its members, the political parties
in Parliament here, the nation as a whole, we congratulate you, Madiba, on
your 90th birthday. Oh, father of our founding democracy, we pay tribute to
you for the many gifts that you have bequeathed us as a country and a
nation. Your contribution to our country and the nation continues to be the
gift that is forever giving. We continue to draw inspiration and lessons
from your leadership and contribution to both the development of our
movement, the deepening of our democracy and the creation of a better life
for all our people.

We are indeed thankful to you for the many years of sacrifice and service
you have given to our country and our people and the inspiring role model
that you continue to be to us as a country, community and nation.

From all of us, we say, “Long live Madiba!” Thank you from a grateful
nation and country on your 90th birthday for living a very purposeful life.
Viva Mandela, viva! [Applause.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Speaker, I’m not quite in my element this morning. I
should have left this morning for KwaZulu-Natal, where I have lost a
sister, but I did feel that it was important for me to say a few words on
this important occasion.

May I say, then, that during the liberation struggle of our country against
apartheid and colonialism, I spoke in many international fora, including
the United Nations in New York and the Commission on Human Rights in
Geneva. My many activities included the exposure of apartheid atrocities in
this country and campaigns for the release of all political prisoners on
Robben Island, such as Mangaliso Robert Sobukwe, Nelson Mandela, Zephania
Mothopeng, Walter Sisulu, Nyathi Pokela, Govan Mbeki and Jafta Masemola. I
had faith in the ultimate triumph of our struggle, but I never knew that
one day I would be at this podium and in this Parliament, wishing Nelson
Rolihlahla Mandela — now popularly known as Madiba — well on his birthday.

Indeed, James Russell Lowell was right when he said:


   Truth is forever on the scaffold, wrong forever on the throne, yet that
   scaffold sways the future and behind the dim unknown standeth God within
   the shadow, keeping watch above his own.

It is my great pleasure to salute Madiba and wish him a grand 90th
birthday. It is an extraordinary birthday of a man who has lived his life
for others — sometimes at the expense of his own people in his quest for a
harmonious humanity. Madiba has touched many lives all over the world. He
deserves an extraordinary, spectacular and happy birthday.

I want to conclude by simply saying that some of the things I admire about
Madiba are his sense of humour, tolerance, perseverance in struggle and, I
believe, diligence. I also admire the fact that he has been in retirement
and yet he has not retired. But in the true liberation struggle, it is not
like coming to Parliament and then leaving Parliament. Liberation is a
lifelong thing, particularly when we consider that there is economic
liberation to come and must come, otherwise our political power is as empty
as a ... as what? [Laughter.] [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, hon Ministers, Premiers, members and the youth
in the gallery, it is indeed a great honour to be counted among those who
make a contribution to this debate. In honouring Madiba on his 90th
birthday, the FD believes that it is also fitting to celebrate the legacy
of this great leader.
We can say with conviction that Madiba is, indeed, the father of our new
democracy. When we recognise him as the father of our new democracy, we do
not minimise the role of all those who sacrificed and died for this
democracy. We do not at all minimise the role played by other great
leaders, such as Walter Sisulu, Govan Mbeki, Ahmed Kathrada, Andrew
Mlangeni, Robert Sobukwe and many others who languished in prison.

What we are indeed doing today is to pay tribute to a man who, at great
sacrifice, played a pivotal role in the formation of our new democracy and
who became the first President of the new South Africa. A father figure in
any society is one who earns respect, who is able to lead with a shepherd’s
heart, who is willing to undergo sacrifice for a greater good, who is an
inspiration, who is uncompromising on humanitarian values and whose sons
and daughters hope to emulate the ways of their father.

Mr Mandela’s legacy, as the father figure of this land, has shaped the
democracy we aspire to build on. He is a true symbol of unity,
nonpartisanship and reconciliation. He was the President of the people. He
ruled wisely and knew how to manage power. The day he left political
office, he could hand over to the next generation of leaders a country
brimming with the potential to become one of the greatest nations of the
world. He has not failed as a true father of this land.

We celebrate the birthday of this formidable statesman according to the
promise in the Bible, which states that “happy is the man who honours his
mother and father for his days shall be lengthened in the land of his
birth” - and he is such a man. The FD believes the reason that we are still
blessed to have the presence of Madiba among us is because of the love he
has shown towards his elders and his motherland. It is this presence that
continues to benefit the land and inspires the belief that Madiba’s
prevailing spirit of grace, integrity and statesmanship will remain the
foundation of this country. He has lived for one purpose in life and that
was spelled out in his last speech in Parliament when he said, and I quote:


   I belong to the generation of leaders for whom the achievement of
   democracy was the defining challenge.


Like any good father figure, he is probably asking himself whether he has
done enough to forge a truly democratic society.

Madiba’s legacy is the one that still truly binds this nation together. Yet
he is a man who valued the insights and wisdom of others, and he respected
them as equal to himself. He knows that a nation is built by collective
wisdom and vision. His is a legacy that is informed by the role of others.
He has given recognition to those of his generation and hoped that history
would appreciate their contribution to society. Of himself he said, in that
final parliamentary speech, and I quote: “I will not be found wanting
against the measure of their fortitude and vision.”

History will recount that Madiba measured up well in being faithful and
seeing out his purpose as a stalwart of democracy. His wisdom is still as
fresh today as it was when he stood up for justice and freedom against the
apartheid regime. Mr Mandela understands and realises that we are created
to share in the wellbeing of one another. He knows that where wisdom is
absent, greed and hostility operate.

As we celebrate Madiba’s 90th birthday, we do so in respect of his
contribution to a number of areas he has influenced and continues to
influence. He is a family man and we wish him the peace and happiness which
is possible only when surrounded by a supportive wife, loving children and
grandchildren.

In conclusion, we are also reminded that Madiba is a gift from God to South
Africa, and we wish him to open up to the closeness and presence of God in
whom there is love and friendship. On behalf of the FD, I wish you a happy
birthday, Madiba. You have been and still is a blessing to this nation. May
we, in this House, follow your example. I conclude with your words:

   Sometimes it falls upon a generation to be great. You can be that great
   generation.
I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S SIMMONS: Madam Speaker, while I was a member of the NNP prior to 1994,
the overwhelming majority of our supporters viewed Mr Nelson Mandela with a
reasonable degree of suspicion as the new head of state. Needless to say,
today the majority of those people long for Mandela’s highly respected
statesmanship and leadership. I therefore find it easy to concur with my
colleagues about the almost unmatched and above-average sense of fairness
and justice of Mr Mandela.

Mr Mandela’s legacy was ushered in with his famous statement:

   During my life, I have fought against white domination and I have fought
   against black domination. I have cherished the ideal of a democratic and
   free society in which all persons live together in harmony with equal
   opportunity.

This statement by Mr Mandela undeniably shows that he never intended one
group to be favoured above another, as was the case in the previous
dispensation. It is said that Mr Mandela has warned against moving away
from the people. Having said this, I wish to call on the hon members of
this House and, in particular, hon members of the ANC to measure their
policy and conduct against the value benchmark set by the hon Mr Mandela
because we in the NA are not convinced it is currently the case.
Statements such as the one made by the chairperson of the Human Rights
Commission, Mr Jody Kollapen, earlier this year, that Mr Mandela had placed
too much emphasis on reconciliation, must be condemned as it failed to
recognise Mr Mandela’s true contribution to a peaceful settlement and
therefore to laying the foundation of the new South Africa.

The NA wishes to take this opportunity to extend its best wishes to one of
our country’s greatest leaders, the father of the nation, and to give a
sincere word of thanks for his unselfish and continued service and
dedication to South Africa and its children and, indeed, the world. Happy
birthday, Madiba! [Applause.]

Ms M SMUTS: Madam Speaker, soon after Mr Mandela left office I proposed to
Parliament that we should commission a statue of him and erect it here in
the precinct, preferably in front of the pillared and pediment entrance of
this House. To commemorate a person who is still blessedly with us departs
from convention. He was also the leader of the executive, not the
legislature, and he was the first President elected by a fully democratic
Parliament before he moved next door to Tuynhuys. There was a need then and
there remains a need now to reflect in this place the fact that we are one
nation with one history. In fact, that need is very great now.

Last week the bronze head of Archbishop Emeritus Desmond Tutu was struck
off its body in East London. That statue was a representation of the moment
when the Archbishop spread his arms out along the table in front of him —
you will remember — at the first public hearings of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission in the East London City Hall and he dropped his
head forward, overcome with emotion. That moment became iconic and the fact
that that statue’s head was left lying contemptuously on the table now
tells us that this may not have been an act of mindless vandalism or theft.
The decapitation of the Archbishop looks like iconoclasm. It looks like the
rejection of unity and reconciliation.

What a contrast the political climate today strikes with the period when Mr
Mandela was our President. He was and remains the personification of unity
and reconciliation which, do not forget, we constitutionalised in the form
of the postamble to the interim Constitution – the one that made the
amnesty provisions possible. He was the embodiment of one united nation.

It was wonderful to have him here. He was like a prophet and a movie star
all rolled into one; or a rock star, perhaps, considering where he is
today. He could be as thunderous as Ezekiel. Who will forget the shock of
his anger at Codesa? But he normally had the charm of the person who is, as
the French say, comfortable in his own skin. Here, he used to bring the
House down. When he needed a drink of water while speaking at this podium,
he would be the first to interrupt himself by raising his glass and saying
“Cheers!” Others have done it since, but he was the first. It brought the
House down.
It was with the backing of three political parties in 2000 that I made that
proposal for the statue. I want to repeat the proposal. Mr Mandela’s statue
should dominate these precincts, but General Louis Botha should remain
mounted on his horse at the gate. He must not be moved away, as the hon
Mawalal Ramgobin proposed. The hon Mawalal at least accepted the proposal
for Mr Mandela’s statue, but the proposal kind of disappeared into a
committee. What happened? Where is the ANC on this? Why is there only one
statue — which does Mr Mandela no justice — in the commercial precinct in
Johannesburg? Where is the ANC on this? Where is the ANC today? Only five
speakers out of 20? You are entitled to the vast majority of the time.
Where is the ANC today?

We are one nation with one history. We reflect that fact in our anthem. We
reflect it in our public holidays. We should reflect it in our public art
and we must start here in Parliament. [Applause.]

Mr J M SIBIYA: Madam Speaker, Madam Deputy Speaker of the National
Assembly, hon Chairperson and Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP, Your
Excellency the President of the Republic in absentia, former head of ANC
intelligence, former chief representative of the ANC in Mozambique, former
head of the ANC and the Umkhonto weSizwe military high command in KwaZulu-
Natal ... [Applause.] ... former Deputy President of both the ANC and the
Republic, and now the president of the ANC, Comrade Msholozi Jacob Zuma,
bayethe! [Applause.]

This is the second time that I speak in a Joint Sitting of the National
Assembly, this time in a shirt from Nigeria and with my speech in a folder
from Russia. [Laughter.] Comrade Deputy President of the ANC, comrades,
colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, we are celebrating 90 years of a life
dedicated to the struggle against injustice, crime and cruelty; a life
which for more than 40 years was lived under police surveillance and in and
out of prison; a life which for 27 years was lived in a maximum security
prison. I’m referring here to the life of a man whose contribution to a
just society, with equality in political terms, earned the honour and
respect of the whole world. This is the life of a man who was able to
secretly undergo military training in Algeria, under then President Ben
Bella, and in Ethiopia, under Emperor Haile Selassie.

I am making specific reference here to the life of former President Mandela
and the role he played in consolidating the liberation movement and the
anti-apartheid stream we had in this country. We might remember that during
the 1920s, 1930s, 1940s and early 1950s we did have members in the ANC who
were not comfortable with the ANC co-operating with anti-apartheid whites,
Coloureds, Indians and the Communist Party of SA. Comrade Nelson Mandela
was one of those who were assigned by the movement to do a lot of
explaining, and in the end that bore fruit: We had the Congress Alliance.
Today we have the tripartite alliance of the ANC, Cosatu and the SA
Communist Party ... [Applause.] ... and in that respect we will never err
or falter. We will guard it until we reach the destination of our
liberation struggle.

Former President Mandela was once referred to and characterised by Leslie
Harriman, a former chairperson of the UN Special Committee Against
Apartheid and a career diplomat from Nigeria — that’s why this shirt — as a
symbol of Africa’s resistance to colonial rule, and correctly so.

Comrade Nelson Mandela, the first democratically elected President in this
country, lived his life — and still does — according to one basic and
fundamental philosophical belief: that any revolutionary will be able to
survive and to surmount all the storms as long as he or she is able to
combine personal interest with the public interest and subordinate personal
interest to public interest. That is what Comrade Mandela has taught us.
[Applause.]

The life that we are celebrating, comrades, ladies and gentlemen, fits very
well in the political equation by a famous writer from what used to be
Czechoslovakia, in his book Naked among Wolves. This writer wrote, and I
quote:


   Any revolution has people who are able to struggle for 10 years, for
   instance, which is good; there are people who are able to struggle for 20
   years, which is better; there are others who are still able to struggle
   for 30 years, which is better still; but there are those who are able to
   struggle for the whole of their lives ...

Comrade Mandela is one of those. [Applause.]

He concluded by saying, “It is such people without whom no revolution can
do.” In our case, people like Comrade Mandela are the people without whom
the South African revolution cannot do. [Applause.]

How many lessons have we learned from Comrade Mandela? How many lessons are
actually there for us to learn? They are so many. Some of them may not be
easily absorbed by some of us, but there is one basic one that I think each
one of us would do well to assimilate, and that is that unflinching
revolutionaries, every day and always, go about fulfilling revolutionary
duties without expecting any reward both on earth and in heaven.
[Laughter.]

The life we are celebrating has a lot of lessons to do with discipline.
When Comrade Mandela was a prisoner, whatever instruction was given to him,
he carried out ably. At some stage he came out of prison and, while under
house arrest, went to Pietermaritzburg to address a meeting of the ANC.
From there he went underground. The police then learnt that he was
undergoing military training in Algeria, where he was trained in
conventional warfare. He became a general who did not have an army to
command at that point in time. [Laughter.]

We might also remember that when the ANC was banned in 1960, leaders of
this great movement met — by the way, this was all underground — discussed
and agreed on the way forward. They agreed that there was no way the
struggle could be abandoned. Instead, new tactics had to be devised, which
resulted in the armed struggle being adopted.

The first thing that was done after that was to request a few comrades —
and Comrade Mandela was one of them — to go to Comrade Inkosi Chief
Luthuli, the president-general of the ANC, who was under house arrest at
the time, to explain to him that the struggle had to continue, but along
this, that and the other line. The president gave the go-ahead.

That was the reason that it was only in 1990 when the armed struggle was
suspended - I want to emphasise “suspended”, not “abandoned”. [Applause.] I
know that when I say things like this, some people begin to feel: Oh, does
he then mean that there is a possibility of resuming the armed struggle?
That I can’t tell; it is history that will tell. [Laughter.]

Before I conclude my speech, let me remind this august House of what one of
the most important writers in this world, Thompson Dudley — not hon Dudley
who spoke here ... [Laughter.] — wrote in his book titled They are all
Africans. It might have been written a long time ago, but it still has some
significance even today. Referring to former President Mandela, he wrote,
and I quote:

   His personal example and his political vision give him exceptional
   stature among his fellow South Africans, irrespective of race or colour.
   In the entire world, he has become a veritable icon.

Before I conclude, I want to say this to President Mandela: We, the ANC,
will never falter in the instructions he gave us and on the road he has
charted for us. We will continue to fight until all our people have a
better life.

However, we will need his advice here and there. We will need to hear his
voice so that we can learn from both his experience and wisdom. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Hon members, as you are aware, the Youth Parliament met
yesterday and is meeting again this morning. The Youth Parliament has
adopted a declaration in honour of Mr Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela’s 90th
birthday, which reads as follows:


   We, the representatives of the youth of South Africa, attending the  2008
   Youth Parliament in Cape Town,  recognising  former  President  Mandela’s
   particular affection for the youth and his  exceptional  contribution  to
   their development, convey to him our very best wishes on the occasion  of
   his 90th birthday; pledge to him our commitment to devote our futures  to
   being of service to our country and its people; and undertake to keep his
   legacy alive by conducting ourselves in accordance with the principles of
   dignity, fairness and respect for others that he espouses.


I recognise the Youth Parliament members who are sitting in the gallery
this morning, and I actually place this declaration on the record, because
I believe that this is a historic moment for the 90-year-old leader, to
have inspired the youth so much that they hand such a declaration to this
Joint Sitting. [Applause.]

Hon members, I also wish to add that a tree-planting ceremony in honour of
Mr Mandela’s 90th birthday is being planned. We plan to plant 90 trees.
When the new precincts of Parliament are finally erected from next year
onwards, those trees will be transferred to those precincts, because we
believe that Madiba shows us the way forward. So, although we did look at
the recommendation made by the hon Smuts, we believe that Madiba is part of
the future. Hon members will be informed of the details with regard to the
tree-planting ceremony in due course.

Debate concluded.

The Speaker adjourned the Joint Sitting at 11.52.


