---
title: 'Joint Sitting - 30 January 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: JANUARY
month_slug: Jan
section: parliamentary
category: Joint Sitting
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/joint-sitting/parliamentary-debates-JS-2008-01-30
---

                         WEDNESDAY, 30 JANUARY 2008
                                    ____

                        PROCEEDINGS AT JOINT SITTING
                                    ____

Members of the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces
assembled in the Chamber of the National Assembly at 14:04.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

                          CALLING OF JOINT SITTING

The Speaker announced that the presiding officers have called a Joint
Sitting in terms of Joint Rule 7(2) for the purpose of debating the current
national energy challenges.

                     CURRENT NATIONAL ENERGY CHALLENGES

                          (Subject for Discussion)

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Madam Speaker, hon members,
Chairperson of the NCOP, Deputy Speaker, Deputy Chairperson and hon members
of the House Happy New Year!
As I was sitting there having a moment of silence, my daily prayer went:
“Let there be no outages.”

Madam Speaker, let me start by congratulating the former chairperson of the
portfolio committee, Mr Nathi Mthethwa, on his new position as the Chief
Whip of the Majority Party in Parliament. [Applause.] We appreciate his
leadership and guidance during his tenure as our chairperson. Indeed, I
must say that we had an excellent comrade or mother-to-son relationship. I
also welcome Mr Nqaba Ngcobo as the new chairperson of the Portfolio
Committee on Minerals and Energy. [Applause.] I am looking forward to
working with him.

Hon members, over the past two weeks, we have seen unprecedented levels of
electricity supply disruptions in South Africa. The questions on the minds
of most people is how long this problem is likely to persist and whether
enough is being done to resolve it. In some quarters, the sentiment relates
mainly to the need to identify the culprits and to castigate them –
crucify, crucify, crucify!

At the outset, I must take the opportunity to apologise to all South
Africans for the hardships and inconvenience caused by this unfortunate
turn of events. I want to reiterate the apologies by our President and our
Deputy President respectively in expressing sincere regret.

We would like to thank all South Africans for the overwhelming response to
our calls to save electricity. Let me also acknowledge the leadership that
the ANC has provided in helping us deal with this national emergency.

Madam Speaker, Chairperson of the NCOP, the main contributing factors to
the challenge facing us today, amongst others, are the following: the
unprecedented and unanticipated rate at which we are economically growing
as a country; and, to a certain extent, the expansion of electricity
services to previously unserved areas. This we did in the context of
addressing the situation that we find ourselves in, where the majority of
our people in this country did not have a very basic service – electricity.

When we took over the country in 1994, growth had stagnated ...
[Interjections.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: Can I
ask the hon Minister a question?

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: I am not going to take questions now,
sir.

The SPEAKER: Okay. She won’t take any questions!

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: I will take your question when I
finish my speech, if you don’t mind.

When we took over in 1994, growth had stagnated with over 3 000 megawatts
excess capacity of plant in a mothballed state after they had been
decommissioned. Our emphasis as the ANC, in line with our vision, was not
only to use the excess supply for growth, but to also turn excess into
access for those who needed this basic service.

A legitimate question that always arises is - it arises from all South
Africans - why we did not foresee this problem. The major task of the ANC
when it took power in 1994 was to revitalise the economy and extend
services to the majority of our people. As the Department of Minerals and
Energy, which is responsible for the security of supply and energy, we
anticipated this current situation.

When we experienced an electricity demand growth of about 3,34% and 7,1% in
2002 and 2003 respectively, projections were revised. It was confirmed that
new power generation would be required in 2007 and that this should be
peaking plant. In an attempt to address this, we did the following: In
September 2003, my department informed Cabinet that South Africa was
running out of excess capacity faster than expected and that additional
capacity would be required in 2007. The lead time for such projects is
approximately three years and therefore a decision was required as soon as
possible. Cabinet approval was subsequently acquired for proposals that
were geared towards ensuring that South Africa had adequate electricity
supply going forward.

The key decisions made by Cabinet included the following: Firstly, Eskom
should be instructed to ensure security of supply up to 2007, including the
building of new power stations, if necessary, in the short term. Secondly,
70% of new capacity required beyond 2008 would be commissioned by Eskom.
For the remaining 30% of required capacity beyond 2008, a process to bring
independent power producers, IPPs, into the system would be started in
2005. Lastly, Eskom should be instructed to aggressively pursue demand-side
management strategies with clearly defined targets.

What happened with the IPPs? There was no appetite in the private sector to
invest in capacity generation.

In April 2004, Cabinet took a decision to procure a new peaking plant as
the first IPP in South Africa involving Eskom as the sole buyer of power.
Cabinet had also approved that, in line with this obligation to supply,
Eskom should be instructed to enter into a Power Purchase Agreement or
other appropriate agreements with the IPPs, and that there should be no
acceptable bids in the IPP process. Eskom should be asked to build the
required capacity.

Hon members, there might have been a delay. Government, on a number of
occasions through various leaders in government - in the name of the
President himself, the Deputy President, the Minister of Public
Enterprises, the Minister of Minerals and Energy - has considered that
there was a delay. We have even apologised to South Africans. We are
responsible enough. We know that we are accountable to our citizens, and we
have done so. There might have been a delay, as I have indicated, but there
was definitely an attempt to look into the matter. [Interjections.] I have
already alluded to the attempts that we made.

There are other factors, hon members. We are part of the global village.
That is a fact. Whatever happens in the world will also affect South
Africa. Some of the factors that have affected us include a high demand for
energy globally. That is a reality. That is the reason why you see China
experiencing the same problem in 13 of its provinces. This is because there
is a high demand for energy globally. That is a fact. The growth of the
economies of India and China has had an impact. That is a fact.
[Interjections.] This is not unique to South Africa. This is happening
elsewhere in the world. [Interjections.] We have seen a collapse of energy
markets in Ontario. We have seen blackouts in the North Eastern United
States and Europe. All of these are because we are part of the global
village. Brazil has gone through the same experience. So, we had to look at
all of these things in addressing this problem.

We have strengthened the White Paper and the national Integrated Energy
Plan at policy level. We have also developed a national energy master plan,
which Cabinet approved in December last year. Another important policy tool
that we put in place last year is the Energy Efficiency Strategy of South
Africa that has since enabled the Department of Minerals and Energy to
establish the Energy Efficiency Agency, which still needs to be beefed up
in order to roll out the Energy Efficiency Campaign.

Hon members, we are all aware that we have a national emergency which calls
upon Mr Tony Leon here and everyone of us to contribute towards the
management of the situation. We are calling for a partnership between the
people of South Africa and government. We have had a series of meetings
with stakeholders, including the hon the Leader of the Opposition, who is
very supportive of this initiative that we have taken as government – a
very positive contribution, unlike these hon members on this side. We have
since put together a National Electricity Emergency Programme, which speaks
to the supply and demand-side management of the situation.

In our view, the demand-side management can be a quick win because it
entails using energy efficiently, and this can be done now, as we speak.
One element of the National Electricity Emergency Programme is power
rationing. We have already invoked this protocol, where we have called for
a 10% reduction of electricity consumption by all sectors. We are looking
at banning the manufacturing and usage of incandescent lights. This will
give us about 800 megawatts. Of the 10 million homes that are electrified
in South Africa, there are eight incandescent lights per household. So, we
need to bring this down. We will be promoting that South Africans who can
afford to install solar heaters be encouraged to do so. At least the money
from your lectures, Mr Tony Leon, will help. You will be able to buy a
solar heater. We are looking at smart metering, fuel switching, traffic
lights and public lighting, which we will convert to solar power. All of
these are work in progress we are working on them.

The hospitality industry is called upon to retrofit and be energy
efficient. We also call upon them to convert water-heating to solar power.
We will embark on education and public awareness programme, and we will
have material in a month’s time. We will also be looking at regulations
which only came to force on Wednesday last week.

South Africa’s electricity is known to be the cheapest in the world. We
must all brace ourselves for a hike which has been in the pipeline –
nothing new is going to be introduced. What is in the pipeline will be
introduced as a matter of urgency. [Interjections.]

We are confident that we have the ability to turn the situation around. We
reassure the South African community and the world at large that all our
projects will be on course, and the 2010 Fifa World Cup is not under
threat. [Interjections.]

Hon members, I want to conclude by introducing the following tips. It is a
10-point plan that will go towards changing our behaviour in the
consumption of electricity. What I am going to read out are things we can
do when we go out of here. These are easy things that we can do when we
leave: Switch off the geyser between eleven o’ clock in the morning and six
o’clock in the evening, and between nine o’ clock in the evening and five
o’ clock in the morning.

All appliances must be switched off ... [Interjections.] ... at the wall,
and not the remote control. We can save about 40 megawatts there. Switch
off all lights in the home when not in use and go to bed early so that you
can grow ... [Laughter.] ... and be smart. Boil only as much water in a
kettle as is needed. Don’t fill up the kettle when you need only two cups.
Use the microwave oven rather than the stove. Use any other alternative
energy source for heating and cooking rather than electricity. We are
looking at people using gas, wood and so on. [Interjections.]

Take a shower and not a shallow bath. Switch off the lights just like Teddy
Pendergrass’ “Turn off the lights”, especially in offices and government
offices. They are big culprits. It is mandatory for government buildings,
except for security lights, and we want them to switch off between 22h00
and 06h00. While working in your office, use daylight instead of electric
light as far as possible, and please open the window rather than use the
air conditioner.

This is the 10-point plan – easy to implement. As long as people do not
whinge and whine, this can be achieved. We are calling on all of those
positive and progressive South Africans to support us. It can be done and
we will do it. Thank you very much. [Time expired.]

Ms F I CHOHAN: Madam Speaker, hon members, the load shedding we have all
experienced over the last few weeks is, at the very least, irritating,
aggravating and frustrating. To some, particularly those who are shift-
workers and those who own small businesses, the outages mean the loss of
essential income required to make ends meet.

These are the people, and I am sure I can speak on behalf of all of us as
public representatives, that we are most concerned for during this time. It
is when we remember these people that traffic jams caused by power outages
seem easier to bear, and cold, unappetising suppers easier to swallow.

I would like to share with hon members a conversation I had yesterday with
the chairman of the Public Utility Commission in the state of Pennsylvania,
Mr Wendell F Holland, who is currently visiting South Africa. He is a
former judge and the recipient of inter alia the Spirit of Rev Martin
Luther King’s Legacy Award in Public Service. He said two things to me
which I would like to share with hon members today, because I think that
they are quite important.
The first thing he said is: What your country is experiencing is not
blackouts of the nature of a system’s failure. You are experiencing load
shedding, which is an engineering solution to an engineering problem.

He said these are nowhere near the blackouts experienced in some major
cities globally. He reminded me of the fact that some major cities were
without any power at all for two whole weeks.

He said: If you think people are angry in this country, imagine the rage
when the national power grid collapses and people in a major city in
America have no power for two weeks without respite.

Load shedding prevents the collapse of the national power grid. It is a
preventative intervention; it is, he repeated, an engineering solution to
an engineering problem. If we recall ... [Interjections.] ... if we recall,
members, honourable, all of you, the Northwest blackout of 2003, which
occurred in parts of Northeastern and Midwestern United States, as well as
Ontario in Canada on Thursday, 13 August 2003, affected one third of the
population of Canada. It affected 40 million people in eight states in the
United States.

Mr A J BOTHA: Let’s get back to South Africa!

Ms F I CHOHAN: The cause of the blackout was the shutting down of 265 power
plants, 22 of which were nuclear stations. There was no person in the
United States that called it a banana republic.

The incident was referred to as the Power Meltdown 2003. Although more
people were affected by blackouts in Italy just six weeks later in that
same year, I use this example to highlight that power suppliers in the
United States are, in fact, private players, and this idea being mooted by
the DA that Eskom should be immediately privatised and we suddenly ...
[Interjections.] ... will see an end to all our woes is a deeply, deeply
flawed argument.

The cause of the Power Meltdown 2003 was found to be the first energy
corporation’s failure to trim overgrown trees that had come into contact
with high-voltage transmission lines as well as a malfunction in the early
warning system. Generally, then, the problem was the lack of maintenance.
The fallout was huge: transportation failures; communication failures;
sewage flowing into the water supplies; Wall Street having to be shut down;
the United Nations having to be shut down; 600 subway and railway cars ...
[Interjections.] ... trapped under the stations in Ottawa ...

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Talk about South Africa!

Ms F I CHOHAN: ... water pumps had to stop working. Emergency services
responded to 80 000 calls for help and 3 000 fires were caused, mainly by
candles.

Load shedding is an engineering solution to an engineering problem. So says
Mr Wendell F Holland, former judge and chair of the Public Utility
Commission of the state of Pennsylvania.

The second thing that he said was this, and you would do well to listen:
South Africa must, he says, come to the realisation that if Eskom cannot
raise loans at reasonable rates, this is not good for any of you.

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Julle moes na ons goeie ingenieurs geluister het! [You
should have listened to our excellent engineers!]

Ms F I CHOHAN: Capital markets are the lifeline of utilities like Eskom -

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Julle moes net na ons goeie mense geluister het, dan het
dit nie gebeur nie. [You only had to listen to our very efficient people
then this would not have happened.]

Ms F I CHOHAN: These markets are highly attuned ...

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members, we need to hear what the speaker is
saying. [Interjections.]

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Hier het ons Minister ‘n blackout gekry! [Our Minister
just had a blackout.]

The SPEAKER: Hon members, please, this is supposed to be a debate. We want
to hear what she is saying.

An HON MEMBER: Let’s hear what South Africa says!

Ms F I CHOHAN: These markets are highly attuned to perception and
speculation.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, on a point of
order: I think this matter of members switching on their microphones and
then interjecting and heckling has been raised previously in the House. I
think that is totally out of order.

The SPEAKER: Will you please switch off your microphone, hon member?

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Mevrou die Speaker, ek vra om verskoning. Ek het nie
geweet hy is aan nie, maar ek het hom nie eintlik nodig nie. Dankie. [Madam
Speaker, my apologies. I didn’t know that my microphone was switched on,
but I do not really need it. Thank you.]
Ms F I CHOHAN: It is called “the power of his voice”.

These markets are highly attuned to perception and speculation, Madam
Speaker. We must be alive to the perception we create when we make reckless
statements. Reckless and hysterical comment harms investors’ confidence and
the pliancy of capital markets. [Interjections.]

It is up to us, all of us, as policy-makers to inspire this confidence
while not being complacent about any challenges faced by Eskom or any other
utility for that matter.

There is much to be confident about. Eskom is one of the top 10 utilities
in the world by generating capacity; among the top 11 by sales; and its
credit rating is highly placed by international standards.

There have been insinuations and distortions in the media about many things
– one of them is in reference to neighbouring countries. Eskom generates
approximately 95% of electricity used in South Africa and approximately 45%
of electricity used in Africa. Eskom purchases electricity from
neighbouring countries like Mozambique and sells to other neighbouring
countries. [Interjections.] I am coming to Zimbabwe. I think you should
just listen for a bit.

We were assured in the portfolio committee hearings that customer states
are treated like all customers. Some contractual agreements allow Eskom to
cease supply during critical periods while other more firm obligations
visit the same conditions on customer states as would be experienced by any
South African customer. So, if there is load shedding in Cape Town, there
will be load shedding in those customer states.

Zimbabwe – you might want to listen now – is indeed a customer, but it is
not reneging on its contractual obligations, as some in this House seem to
suggest in the media and other places. This morning I again confirmed with
the chief executive officer of Eskom that in fact, and to its enormous
credit ...

HON MEMBERS: We do not believe it!

Ms F I CHOHAN: ... You may not believe it, but this is a fact. Zimbabwe
prepays for any electricity from Eskom. So, insinuations that Zimbabwe for
some reason is being preferred and not paying for electricity we supply to
it are mischievous and aimed, frankly, at creating a misapprehension
amongst a certain calibre of voter who is still driven by the very firm
belief in the “swart gevaar”.

As far as supplying energy to neighbouring countries is concerned, this
amounts to approximately 4% of the energy generated and most of this ...
[Interjections.] ... relates to unfirm contractual obligations, which
essentially means, in layman’s terms, that when we experience a shortage,
we very quickly stop electricity supplies to our neighbours. This no doubt
results in enormous hardships for them in those states, and we are
fortunate, through the sound management of our bilateral relations, that we
still continue to enjoy really good relationships with our neighbours and
we do have to thank those countries for their understanding and their
sharing of the burden with us at this time.

I have very little time left, Madam Speaker, but let me just say that the
issue of skills shortages at Eskom has also been raised. No doubt, with
regard to skills shortages, we are generally experiencing those shortages
throughout the country, and Eskom, like any other business, will not be
immune to these challenges. The current load exercise, however, is hardly
due to a lack of skill. It is important that this Parliament, I think,
extends its gratitude to those people who operate power stations and the
national grid to ensure that during this time of high volume maintenance
and high operating demands, they diligently do their jobs.

Finally, I just want to say to members that electricity is generally
consumed less than a second after it is produced. The demand load on any
power grid must be matched by the supply to it. Any under- or overload to a
generator can cause costly damages that are hard to repair to generators,
and so the grid is disconnected. To revive the system can take up to six
weeks, and I think that is quite important to bear in mind when we use this
important commodity during the coming period.

I think that, as South Africans, as the Minister said, a national effort is
required. Other countries have done it before: Brazil did it in the 1980s,
and there is absolutely no reason why we can’t do it as South Africans.
Thank you very much. [Time expired.]

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Madam Speaker, the DA, at a press conference earlier this
week, made public its response to the national and continuing energy
crisis. We did this not only to provide possible solutions, but, as the
official opposition, also to seek accountability for the current national
crisis.

The DA’s energy plan has been provided to the hon President by the leader
of the DA, Ms Helen Zille. We therefore request the Minister of Minerals
and Energy, Ms Sonjica, as well as the hon Minister of Public Enterprises,
Mr Erwin, to obtain a copy of this document and to consider and study its
contents.

The national energy crisis is a reality. It is possibly the single biggest
challenge to continued economic growth since 1994. However, it need not be
a permanent occurrence.

Five years ago, and in reply to a question by a DA Member of Parliament,
the hon Deputy President, in her capacity as Minister of Minerals and
Energy, and in a display of arrogance, informed us that South Africa - yes,
you’ve guessed it – “would never run out of power”. The result of such
arrogance is evident today. In fact, Cabinet’s crucial decision to embark
on the arms deal in December 1999, instead of investing in our rapidly
deteriorating power-generating capacity, as pointed out in a White Paper of
1998, appears to be one of the most crucial mistakes this government has
made.

We are made to understand that international companies as early as 2002
informed Eskom that government’s own projections for the future supply of
power was incorrect. Considering that the rate of economic growth, against
the backdrop of ageing power stations, would inevitably lead to an
electricity crisis, shouldn’t new power stations have been built much
earlier?

The mining sector in South Africa continues to be a major driver of
economic growth and job creation. Therefore, if the situation is not
proactively managed, an industry that contributes, both directly and
indirectly, 18% towards our GDP and employs over 400 000 people, will be
under threat. This will have disastrous consequences for all South
Africans.

Small, medium and large businesses cannot afford to lose even a week’s
activity owing to power outages without suffering a reduction in jobs and a
severe loss of income.
Certainty with regard to load shedding is of utmost importance if
businesses are to survive and individual households, old age homes and
other entities are to be spared hardships and a negative humanitarian
impact.

This crisis has the hallmarks of a government that is uncaring towards its
entire people, both rich and poor. The recent apologies by the hon
President and Deputy President are noted, but no political leader has,
until today, stepped forward to explain the cause, full extent and expected
duration of the crisis to the public.

Notwithstanding the frustration and anger of the business fraternity, the
public, and everyone else affected by the electricity crisis has,
figuratively and literally speaking, been kept in the dark.

When government adopted the White Paper in 1998, it was informed of the
impending power crisis and the fact that South Africa would run out of
electricity by 2007. Despite this warning, government tried to postpone the
inevitable, by attempting to lure private investors to the energy market.
This sounds plausible, but, have you asked yourself why any international
or local company would invest in power-generation in a country where the
returns would arguably be the lowest in the world?

Eskom’s failure to ensure that additional power-generating capacity was
built automatically ensured that our electricity was the cheapest in the
world.

In addition, the problem seems to be that government did not align its own
energy policy to its own economic policy, or was it rather a vote of no
confidence in its own economic policy of a 6% targeted growth.

Despite Eskom’s request over time to raise the price of electricity, and so
fund new power stations, these requests have been turned down by Nersa, the
National Energy Regulator of South Africa, following government’s political
drive to provide cheap electricity.

As a 100% shareholder in Eskom, government effectively ensured that its
monopoly in generation capacity was maintained, to the detriment of the
country, with the full knowledge of the Deputy President as well as the
former Minister of Minerals and Energy sitting here today. In fact, the hon
Deputy President continues to promote Asgisa, the Accelerated Growth
Initiative of South Africa, which we all support and which, by necessity,
requires an increased demand for electricity, well knowing that we were
running out of power.

The hon Minister of Trade and Industry responsible for Eskom, Mr Alec
Erwin, knowingly and fully aware of the impending crisis, aided and abetted
the introduction of new smelters and energy-intensive users at low prices,
which, incidentally, he was not willing to disclose to the public.

It was as much his responsibility as that of the Deputy President to ensure
that Cabinet and government were informed at all times about the correct
position regarding the supply of the economic lifeline of this country, and
to react accordingly. Their failure to have done so leads to no other
conclusion than that they were grossly negligent, even reckless, in the
exercise of their duties to the public and government at large. It appears
that this approach bears resemblance to a Cabinet out of touch with reality
and one which is betraying the aspirations of all South Africans
systematically, and from crisis to crisis. [Applause.]

The DA therefore calls on the former Minister of Minerals and Energy,
currently the Deputy President, as well as the current Minister of Trade
and Industry, to resign with immediate effect. [Applause.] Failure to do so
places the task to remove them from office on the hon President.

We support the meetings being held between government, big business and
Eskom. The DA proposes that government set up a multidisciplinary task team
that will meet with industry immediately and on an ongoing basis.

The SPEAKER: Order! On what point are you rising, hon Minister?

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Madam Speaker, I just want to check
what planet he’s on. Does he know who the Minister of Trade and Industry is
and who the Minister of Public Enterprises is?

The SPEAKER: Clearly he has his facts a bit wrong.

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Well, you know exactly who I’m talking about, hon
Minister. It was as much his responsibility as that of the hon Deputy
President to ensure that government and Cabinet were informed of the
correct position.

We support the meetings held between government and business. Such a task
team should include representatives of government, major industry, Eskom
and a technical support team that includes independent power producers and
other key players in the energy sector.

The more important proposals, which are contained in the DA’s energy plan,
deal with the breakdown of the Eskom monopoly. Eskom, by virtue of being
determined the sole purchaser of electricity, effectively determines the
price at which it wants to enter into a power-purchasing agreement with
independent power producers.

As Eskom owns the transmission network, IPPs also need to enter into a
commercial agreement with Eskom for the transmission of power generated by
them. This enables Eskom to exert undue influence on determining the cost
of electricity supply. IPPs are expected to compete with the cost of
Eskom’s power-generation whereas Eskom’s capital expenditure for power-
generation from the current power stations has virtually been paid for.

A fair regulatory framework and a reasonable rate of return is the basis
upon which IPPs will bring the necessary expertise, human resources,
operating know-how, risk and operating capital to the immediate aid of the
country.

Certain IPPs have already obtained approval from neighbouring countries to
proceed with power-generation projects and merely require the signing of a
power-purchasing agreement with Eskom to proceed with construction.

As an immediate step, we also propose that Eskom facilitates co-generation
of electricity in those instances where companies such as sugar and paper
mills can release their excess electricity into the electricity network.
This will immediately reduce the most imminent shortage.

We therefore call upon the hon President to ensure that incisive and
immediate steps are taken, including the removal of the Deputy President
and Minister of Public Enterprises, to restructure the electricity industry
without delay, with the required implementation of short-, medium- and long-
term solutions. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. I notice that
many of the members have taken the advice of the Minister to go to sleep
early. Can you please rule that it’s not bedtime yet? Thank you.

The SPEAKER: I’m sure the hon members are up by now. Please proceed, hon
Singh.

Mr N SINGH: Madam Speaker, on behalf of the IFP, I firstly wish members of
this House well for 2008. May the light shine upon you if and when it is
available.

I would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate the Chief Whip
on his appointment. He’s a homeboy, and we wish him everything of the best.

Madam Speaker, although it is regrettable and should have been avoided, the
energy crisis that is currently gripping our economy and causing so much
distress and loss should not come as a surprise. The warning signs have
been evident for some time but they were just ignored. Hindsight, they say,
is the best sight.

We can say, as the IFP, we told you so, but indeed we did, for our
colleague, the hon Lucas, during the Budget Vote debate on 30 May stated
that the current situation with regard to electricity supply is a hindrance
to growth and is not conducive to investment and, as such, should be
addressed urgently. These concerns were unfortunately not addressed.

We are in the middle of a crisis, and our immediate task should be to find
practical and workable solutions that can be implemented speedily in order
to minimise the damage that has been done thus far, as well as to avoid a
repeat of similar incidents in the future.

First, no organisation, be it government or the private sector, can operate
optimally if it does not have the necessary skills that are needed to
perform its duties. The energy crisis would not have occurred had there
been people with the necessary skills in the right positions. Foresight and
good planning were needed but were sorely lacking. The principle of the six
Ps were not applied: proper prior planning prevents poor presentation.

As the IFP we believe that the human resources available to Eskom should be
reviewed immediately. We need to establish whether there are sufficiently
trained people with the relevant technical skills available to maintain
various power stations. We also need people in management and government
who have the ability to forecast and implement plans and monitor progress
to ensure that our economic growth and investment are not hampered because
the demand for electricity cannot be met. Eskom must embark on a
recruitment drive to get enough people with the right skills into key
positions.

Secondly, we in South Africa are too reliant on coal for our energy needs
and, even here, we have transportation problems and the coal is not
transported on time and efficiently to where it is required. We must expand
our energy mix to include other energy sources that can supplement and
eventually replace coal.

The Pebble Bed Modular Reactor has been on the cards for some time and
maybe government needs to invest more money but, having said that,
government and agencies need to ensure that the public is fully informed
and educated about the benefits of going nuclear and the safety aspects
thereof.

Thirdly, while we do acknowledge that it will take time to increase our
generating capacity to meet the demands of our economic growth, short-term
solutions must be found and implemented in order to try and ease the
electricity demand and to get individual households and businesses to use
electricity more efficiently.

Government departments and organisations - Madam Minister, you are right -
should take the lead in this regard. Solar powered geysers, for example,
should be more widely used, and all new government buildings and
developments should be equipped to make use of solar power.

Awareness is very important and we believe as the IFP that there should be
a high level of incentivisation and subsidisation or even tax relief.
Minister Manuel, this must be considered when companies and individuals use
alternative energy sources.

We have to accelerate the roll-out of energy-saving bulbs. I think another
idea we must investigate is the whole concept of daylight saving. It has
worked. I know a company in KwaZulu-Natal that has used it. I spoke to Tony
just now and they’ve done very well and they’ve saved electricity.

This debate today is very emotive as the energy crisis affects the lives of
most South Africans, if not all. It is understandable that while many South
Africans are angry at the inconvenience and losses that this crisis is
causing, we, as politicians, must act responsibly and our priority must be
to contribute to finding solutions to this problem to try and normalise the
situation. No magic wand is going to sort out this problem tomorrow.

We, as representatives of communities and constituencies, must use our
positions and exercise our oversight role. To this end, we in the Umzinto
constituency have organised two meetings - unfortunately I won’t be here
when the Minister replies, because I have to fly back to the meetings -
where senior Eskom officials have been invited to address the public on
cost-saving measures; what load shedding is all about; how important it is
for Eskom to communicate with residents when load shedding is going to take
place, and why is it taking place. We don’t want people to be stuck in
lifts, there’s claustrophobia and a lack of air. We don’t want people who
are on nebulisers to suddenly find nebulisers have gone off. These are
practical things that need to be done and they can only be done through
communication, communication and communication.

What we believe is that government and Eskom must step up and make sure
that they have plans and strategies in place to deal with extra electricity
demand, particularly during the winter months.

I would like to emphasise that we are living in a time when climate change
and global warming are realities that we have to contend with, so when
increasing our generating capacity in the long term, we should keep in mind
these two issues.

The thing, Madam Minister and Madam Speaker, is, we must not say, to
misquote Shakespeare: “The fault, dear Brutus, lies in the stars but not in
ourselves.” The fault lies in ourselves. Certain people have not been able
to see the light at the end of the tunnel. They were not visionary, and we
need to sort these people out before it’s too late.

The other point that I want to make because my time is almost up is that
you know ... Thank you very much. [Time expired.]

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Madam Speaker, Chairperson of the NCOP, hon members, the
electricity crisis is a matter of national shame. Eskom and government have
given every pessimist and sceptic the ammunition to bad-mouth our country.
It must be remembered amongst all this hand-wringing and apologising from
the government that at the time of refusing Eskom’s request for investment,
Cabinet gave the go-ahead for the arms deal. The warped priorities of a
decade ago are now coming home to roost. How many more times must the
nation pay in taxes and embarrassment and lost international confidence?

We note the latest reasons, excuses and promises regarding the electricity
crisis emanating from Eskom and government. The story keeps changing and
new promises are offered, but the only constant is a deepening electricity
crisis.

We need an independent enquiry manned by a panel of experts – which is not
beholden to Eskom or government – to investigate and identify the real
problems and reasons for this crisis. We need answers so that we can fix
the problem.

Let this disaster be a lesson for us about the dangers of monopolies. Let
us not wait for the same problem to happen with Telkom or the liquid fuels
industry. Competition brings efficiency, and does not allow decay to
progress this far before action is taken. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr E N N NGCOBO: Hon Chairperson, hon Ministers - in particular Minister of
Public Enterprise and the Minister of Minerals and Energy - please allow me
first also to echo the sentiments of the previous speakers in
congratulating our new Chief Whip of the Majority Party, hon Nathi
Mthethwa. But also allow me to thank the Ministers for Public Enterprises
and the Minister of Minerals and Energy as well as the Chief Whip for
making this occasion a success by reconvening us in order to really
ventilate our feelings about what is happening in the country in terms of
the energy crisis.

Energy is crucial to the economic progress and social development of
nations. The development of new technologies and emergence of new
production process during the 19th and 20th centuries enabled an increase
in productivity through the substitution of mechanical power for human and
animal power. This in turn led to unprecedented economic growth and
improved living standards as well as, of course, large increases in energy
consumption.

In addition, electrification has played a pivotal role in social
development and welfare by making possible greater access to information
via radio and television, providing a cleaner and more efficient means of
storing and preparing food and controlling enclosed environments to provide
warmth and cooling. In the industrialised society of the twenty-first
century, energy is necessary in order that modern economic activity would
not cease and modern standards of living would not diminish.

Due to the importance of energy to economic and social progress, it is
difficult to separate an input on energy demand from energy policy. In
fact, a recurring theme in energy economies in general has been that of
energy security. According to Bohi, Toman and Walls, energy security refers
to loss of economic welfare that may occur as a result of a change in the
price of availability of energy. And this suggests a close link between
energy and economy.

Thus projections of energy demand are necessary to develop national energy
policies aimed at minimising exposure to international price fluctuations
and maximising energy availability. On a less global scale, projections of
energy demand are also important to the development of corporate business
plans and the establishment of operational parameters for public utilities
such as the Eskom of our country that must develop strategies to fulfil
public service obligations.

Thus the modelling and projection of energy demand is very important in the
formation of policy in general at both national and local levels as well as
in the private sector. Sound energy policy must be predetermined by an
adequate understanding of the economies of energy.
The projections of energy are generally concerned with the manner in which
both non-renewable and renewable energy resources are allocated over time
and across space. A resource is considered non-renewable when the sum over
time of the services it provides is finite or at least not replaceable in a
reasonable time frame. Hence, energy economists have been largely concerned
hitherto with the allocation of non-renewable resources simply because
global energy consumption has consisted largely of the consumption of
fossil fuels.

There have been numerous classic papers as well as theoretical studies of
optimal depletion rates associated with pricing rules given different sets
of assumptions as well as empirical studies designed to test such theories.
In all these assumptions and theories there has been an apparent disregard
for the impact of still underappreciated factors such as technological
change in the extractive industry, development of lower cost alternatives,
an expansion of resource base through exploration activities, influenced
predictions by many scholars and industry analysts in the late 1970s and
early 1980s that oil prices would top US$100 per barrel by 2000.

Therefore, it is very important at this juncture that part of the problem,
apart from increasing energy input, is to look at this element
technological parameter, where in fact the human capital factor, in terms
of skills development and the full utilisation of existing talents, comes
in.

In a nutshell, if these above-mentioned observations and international
experiences can be taken on board by our public utilities in collaboration
with the Department of Minerals and Energy as well as Parliament, over and
above what our ANC-led Cabinet has recommended to our society as a 10 point
plan to save energy, we will again emerge as a winning nation ready to host
the 2010 World Cup with the expected success. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L W GREYLING: The ID shares the outrage of millions of South African
citizens who have been severely affected by our country’s electricity
blackouts. The cost to our economy is immense and, despite the hon Minister
Erwin’s ludicrous statement to the contrary, our economic growth will
undoubtedly be negatively affected over the long term.

Our economy has been built around the premise of cheap and reliable
electricity, but through government negligence this has now been destroyed
in a space of only a few years. Last week the mines were forced to shut
down for the first time in our country’s history with estimated losses of
over R1 billion. This equals a loss of R300 million in tax revenue, the
annual budget of three large hospitals.

Service delivery, the poor and workers will be made to suffer most due to
this blunder on the part of government. Despite this, though, President
Thabo Mbeki has still not fired a single Minister of his Cabinet for this
debacle, making it a mockery of political accountability.

It is unthinkable to the ID that a Deputy Minister can be fired for
allegedly taking an unauthorised overseas trip, but no Minister is
sanctioned for creating this energy and economic crisis.

This self-imposed electricity crisis does, however, force us to look for
opportunities. The ID was the first political party to put forward its
solutions to this crisis which, we believe, must be used as an opportunity
to kick-start a renewable energy industry in South Africa.

The ID has been arguing about this for over three years now and we hope
that the government will finally pursue this with the urgency it requires.
Firstly, we must actually roll out solar water heaters instead of just
talking about subsidies. This can be a great Public Works scheme as
thousands of people will have to be trained to install these in households.


Secondly, the Minister must immediately announce feeding tariffs for
renewable energy producers and scale up the target for renewable energy.
This will create the certainty that the producers need to invest in this
market.

Finally, we should take all the energy efficiency funds out of Eskom and
place them in the National Energy Efficiency Agency, where they rightfully
belong.

The ID is committed to finding sustainable solutions to these crises and we
will certainly play our part in uniting the nation around a common goal of
energy efficiency. In doing this, however, we demand that government plays
its part in enforcing political accountability for this crisis. I thank
you.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Chairperson, the ACDP welcomes this special sitting to
discuss the power crisis that faces our nation. We agree that the people
who got us into this mess should be called to account. The spectacular
gains we have achieved in economic growth as well as the target to halve
unemployment and poverty are now under serious threat. We need openness and
transparency.

The Minister for Public Enterprises must take full responsibility for the
current electricity crisis and do the honourable thing by resigning for
failing in his duties, which include ensuring that Eskom has sufficient
reserves to meet the increased demand for power.

The former Eskom CEO and the incumbent must also join the Minister and
resign for failing to take the public into their confidence when government
did not heed their warnings.

Government should not make the poor and vulnerable suffer for their short-
sightedness; they must be prepared to subsidise paraffin and gas that are
used during blackouts because they refused to act when they were warned
about the looming crisis 10 years ago.

Eskom bonuses this year would be scandalous, unjust and insensitive as
businesses and individuals are losing millions every day.

The ACDP believes now is the time for government to end Eskom’s monopoly
and encourage the private sector to help provide alternative sources of
power to alleviate the current crisis. We believe that such competition
would bring down the cost of power and give consumers a choice of where to
buy electricity.

According to leading economists, government’s 6% growth target seems to be
a pipe dream and will be almost impossible to achieve due to the lack of
power capacity. Investor confidence has also been struck a severe blow. As
stated in the Financial Mail, the blackouts have highlighted the acute
shortage of skills and resources to drive South Africa’s R420 billion
infrastructure plan.

Energy is a critical issue internationally, as well as for South Africa,
for the economy to grow. Government must not downplay the seriousness and
impact of the acute electricity shortages.

The Minister of Energy was quoted as having said: “There is no need to
panic about future investments, as has been alluded by some.”

We have a serious crisis before us. The ACDP therefore calls for a national
disaster fund to cushion the losses that will be suffered by some
businesses, particularly small businesses.

Last year, members will recall that some were upset when I stated that if
we did not deal with crime, hosting the 2010 World Cup might slip through
our fingers. The energy crisis presents yet another serious challenge to
our hosting of the 2010 World Cup. Already tourism authorities are
cautioning that continuing blackouts will discourage tourists from
attending the World Cup as hotels, restaurants and transport will be
affected.

In view of this crisis, this is a very real threat to a successful Soccer
World Cup. Parliament must ensure that all government departments work
together with industry and the private sector to ensure security of our
energy needs and each one of us must do our best to save electricity. To
assist with demand side management, we as South Africans need to pull
together and cut down on our consumption. We fully support measures to
reduce consumption such as those used in Brazil and China.

We need a switch to energy-efficient lighting and to solar and gas for
heating and cooking. We use a huge amount of electricity for lighting and
need to roll out energy saving fluorescent light bulbs. We need incentives
for energy saving as well and a highly visible and wide-reaching
communications campaign which will be advising on how to save power. In the
meantime we will be faced with load shedding. As the Financial Mail stated
last week, managing power cuts should not be ... [Time expired.]

Dr P W A MULDER: Chairperson, hon members, are you scared you’ll lose your
job? Don’t worry. There is a job and a career where you’ll never be fired.
If only you could become an ANC cabinet Minister, you may make mistakes
just as you please – the President will not fire you.

If a Minister in any other country takes decisions that cost the country up
to R650 billion in a matter of days and which brings the whole economy to a
complete standstill, he would immediately be fired. But it doesn’t happen
in South Africa. The FF Plus says that the responsible Ministers, including
the directors and senior officials of Eskom, should be fired, given the
crisis they caused.

Section 424 of the Companies Act provides that directors and officers must
not carry out the business of a company recklessly or fraudulently. Persons
who are knowingly party to the business being carried out in this manner
will personally be liable for the company’s liabilities and will also be
guilty of a criminal offence.

The FF Plus is investigating the possibility of taking appropriate action
against the directors and senior officers of Eskom, specifically in
connection with Coega, and that is a long story.

Wat sê die mense vir my? En hulle bel my mal. Hulle vra dat die regering en
Eskom nie vir hulle moet jok nie. Wees eerlik met ons. Moenie ons IK
onderskat of stories vertel soos ek vandag gehoor het nie. Vertel aan ons
die waarheid en ons sal saam help om die probleem op te los want ons is
saam in die moeilikheid.

Ek stel aan, die Minister so ‘n paar vrae: Is dit só dat nie ’n enkele een
van Eskom se steen-koolkragstasies op die oomblik sy volle kapasiteit
elektrisiteit lewer nie? Is dit só dat amper 6 000 Mw verlede week nie
opgewek kon word nie as gevolg van foute by kragstasies, foute as gevolg
van swak instandhouding en onervare personeel? Volgens my inligting was
9 000 MW van Eskom se krag verlede week nie beskikbaar nie. Daarvan is
3 000 beplande instandhouding, wat ons verstaan, maar amper 6 000 was as
gevolg van onbeplande foute. Hoe verklaar ’n mens dit dat daar in Januarie
vanjaar skielik meer kragonderbrekings is as in die hele jaar verlede jaar?

Ek sê die regering se swak beplanning gaan ons vang, maar oor die langer
termyn. Dit verklaar nie waarom in Desembermaand daar genoeg krag was en
skielik in Januarie te min nie. Die skielike tekort, wat my betref, wat nou
gebeur het moet aan swak bestuur, swak instandhouding en oorhaastige
regstellende aksie toegeskryf word. Die rekord kraggebruik in die winter
was 36 000 MW. Ons het nou maar 33 000 nodig, baie minder, en ons kan nie
daarby kom nie.

Die Ministers se planne skiet tekort deurdat dit die publiek en die
nywerhede verder belas met rantsoene en strafmaatreëls en dit is ongelukkig
nie prakties nie. Hoe gaan jy dit prakties toepas? Ons sal nou moet
geiserpolisie en ligvervangingspolisie aanstel om die maatreëls te kan
toepas. Daarom is die VF Plus besig om ’n taakspan van kundiges saam te
stel om te help met oplossings. Ons aanvaar die Ministers is so diep in die
moeilikheid dat hulle hopelik ernstig na ons voorstelle sal luister om ons
almal uit hierdie probleem uit te kry. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[What are the people saying to me? And they are phoning me like crazy. They
ask that the government and Eskom not lie to them. Be honest with us. Do
not underestimate our IQ or tell stories such as those I have heard today.
Tell us the truth and we will work together to solve the problem, as we are
all in this predicament together.

I would like to ask the Minister a couple of questions: Is it true that not
even one of Eskom’s coal power stations is delivering electricity at full
capacity at the moment? Is it true that nearly 6 000 Mw could not be
generated last week because of faults at power stations, faults because of
poor maintenance and inexperienced personnel? According to my information,
9 000 MW of Eskom’s power was not available last week. Of that 3 000 was
due to planned maintenance, which we understand, but 6 000 was the result
of unplanned faults. How does one explain that there were suddenly more
power cuts in January this year than there were in the entire year last
year?

I say that the government’s bad planning is going to catch up with us, but
in the longer run. It does not explain why there was enough power in
December but all of a sudden too little in January. The sudden shortage, as
far as I am concerned, that has occurred now can be attributed to poor
management, poor maintenance and overhasty affirmative action. The record
power consumption in winter was 36 000 MW. We now only need 33 000, which
is much less, and we cannot meet that demand.

The Ministers’ plans fall short as they burden the public and the
industries with further rations and punitive measures and unfortunately
they are not practical. How are you going to implement then in practice? We
will now have to appoint police to monitor geyser usage and light bulb
replacement to be able to enforce the measures. That is why the FF Plus is
busy putting together a task team of experts to help with solutions. We
assume that the Ministers are so deep in trouble that they will hopefully
listen to our suggestions seriously to get us all out of this dilemma. I
thank you.]

Ms N D NTWANAMBI: Chairperson, Ministers and Deputy Ministers, comrades and
hon members, today’s debate is not meant for those who have long fingers;
those who only blame government without assisting.

South Africans must know that we care and we are concerned, and that is the
reason the debate was organised today.

To those who are affected, I want to say ...

Nyamezelani, izinto seziza kulunga. Ndiyazi ukuba indlela ohamba ngayo lo
mbane yenza ukuba ibe ngathi ngabantu abangathathi ntweni abachatshazelwa
kakhulu kukuhamba kwayo, ngoba uhamba ixesha elide kwelinye icala, uhambe
ixesha elifutshane kwelinye.

Eyona nto ibalulekileyo nefunwa ngabantu kukuba baziswe ukuba kuza
kuphungulwa nini, phi, ukusetyenziswa kombane, le nto kuthiwa yi-load
shedding, ukuze abantu bakwazi ukuzilungiselela. Siyazi ukuba ingxaki
ikhona, kwaye asiyibaleki ke thina ingxaki. Asina minwe ikhombayo xa kukho
ingxaki; siyayijonga, siyibambe ngeempondo ukuze sikwazi ukuyilungisa
ingxaki.

Ngakho oko, ndifuna ukutsho kubantu bethu ekuhlaleni ukuba mabancedisane
norhulumente. Mabangakhanyisi kumagumbi apho kungekho mntu khona. Kwaye
kufuneka siqinisekise ukuba iiplagi zethu zisemgangathweni. Ngokwenjenjalo,
umntu ulungiselela ukuba angabi neendleko ezixhomileyo embaneni.

Kwakhona, kufuneka sithathe uxanduva lokuxelela uCeba weWadi okanye
sithethe noomasipala xa izibane ezitalatweni zihlala zikhanyisile imini
nobusuku. Yenye yeendlela zokonga umbane ke leyo. Lo ngumba esicela ukuba
ungaqwalaselwa nje emakhaya, koko naziinkonzo ezi zethu. Uya kufika
isakhiwo senkonzo sisakhanyisile namhlanje, ukususela izolo, de iphele
iveki. Masiwonge sonke umbane.

Le yimfundo esifuna ukuba isiwe ezantsi kubantwana ezikolweni, kubantu
ekuhlaleni nakubantwana jikelele. Njengomntu ofunde ezilalini, xa igumbi
eli lokufundela lipeyintwe ngombala omhlophe, kukhanya kwelo gumbi
sewungekho umbane. Yenye yezinto ekufanele siziqaphele ke leyo.

Enye indlela yokukhawulelana norhulumente kule ngxaki kukuba sonke sizame
ukuqinisekisa ukuba asiwenzi umba wokukhankasela iivoti lo. Ukuba bakhe
bayiqala loo nto abantu abafana noTat’ uMeshoe, baya kuyazi ukuba
siyavuthulula thina; mabangayiqalisi loo nto.

Futhi, njengoko size apha namhlanje, size kuthetha nabantu bakuthi; size
kubaxelela ukuba mabaqaphele ukuba urhulumente okhoyo uthe xa esakha
izindlu, wanika abantu izindlu ezinombane. Njengomntu waseGugulethu, umbane
unokuba ufike ngo-1981 ekhaya, ngokusuka sizifakele, hayi ngoncedo
lukarhulumente. Ngoko mawuqatshelwe umahluko phakathi korhulumente wangoku,
norhulumente owaye kho ngaphambili, owayengena nkathalo ebantwini.
[Kwaqhwatywa.]

Enye into, kwakuye kufuneke ukuba kule madlana uyifumanayo, uphinde
uhlawule urhulumente ukuze akuzisele le nkonzo. Kodwa ngoku sithetha
ngorhulumente okwakhela indlu enombane, owufumana felefele.

Eyona nto ibalulekileyo nephikwayo ngabantu abaninzi abalapha endlwini, aba
ke baziimfama, kukuba uqoqosho luhlumile kwaye lusahluma. Iinkonzo zona
zazilungiselelwe abantu abambalwa. Abantu abaninzi, nooTat’ uMeshoe aba,
babengenawo umbane. Abantu bakuthi baqale sekukudala abanye bacofa
incukuthu eludongeni.

Yenye yemiceli-mngeni urhulumente ajongene nayo ke leyo, kwaye akakhange
athi: “Ndiyayibaleka le ngxaki sikuyo”. Endaweni yoku urhulumente uthe:
“Nazi izinto. Yintoni esingayenza, sisonke, ukuqinisekisa ukuba wonke umntu
uyazifumana iinkonzo zikarhulumente, ngakumbi umbane ngoba siwubonile
indlela obaluleke ngayo?
U-Eskom uyiqalile inkqubo yokwambathisa iigiza zethu. Thina sifuna ukuhlaba
ikhwelo kubo bonke oomasipala, lokuba mabancedisane no-Eskom ukwenzela
ukuba sikwazi ukonga umbane. Le nto ndiyitsho kuba ngo-2006, umbutho
olawulayo kwiSixeko saseKapa wayenza yayingxaki ye-ANC ingxaki yombane.
Andazi ukuba yingxaki kabani na ke namhlanje, ngoba bayalawula.

Abantu abanamaxhala ngokubhekisele kwimidlalo yango-2010 mabaphole, kwaye
iinkonzo ezingxamisekileyo aziyi kuchaphazeleka, ngakumbi izibhedlele. Into
ebalulekileyo kukuba abantu xa besebenzisa eli qonga, mabalisebenzisele
ukuxelela abantu inyani, bangabalahlekisi abantu.

Okokugqibela, ndifuna ukuthi abantu bakuthi mabangalahli ithemba kuba ubomi
obungcono kumntu wonke yeyona nto lo rhulumente asazibophelele kuyo. Kwabo
umbane ungekafiki kubo, thina siyazi ukuba umbane uyeza.

Mandishiye lo myalezo, wokuba apha endlwini kukho iimfama ngokwengqondo.
Ndifun’ ukucela uQabane, uMphathiswa wezeziMali uTrevor Manuel noMphathiswa
uMandisi Mphahlwa ukuba bavule amehlo aba bantu ndithetha ngabo, ngoba
abakaboni kakuhle. Bayawafunda amagama, kodwa abawazisi ebuchotsheni ukuze
akwazi ukutolikeka kakuhle ngokubhekisele kwindlela urhulumente asebenza
ngayo ukuzisa impucuko apha eMzantsi Afrika. Enkosi kakhulu. [Kwaqhwatywa.]
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)
[Have patience, things will be alright. I know that the way the electricity
goes makes people think that it is only the indigent who are affected by
power cuts, because in certain places power cuts last longer than in other
places.

What is important, and the people need is to be informed about when and
where load shedding will take place so that they can prepare themselves. We
know there is a problem and we do not run away from problems. We do not
point fingers when there is a problem; we look at it, and grab it by the
horns so that we can solve the problem.

I would like to ask people in the community to assist the government. They
must not switch on the lights in unoccupied rooms. We also have to make
sure that we have quality plugs. By doing so, a person avoids exorbitant
spending on electricity.

Furthermore, we have to take the responsibility of informing the ward
councillors or talk to the municipality when street lights remain on day
and night. It is one of the ways of preserving electricity. This is a
matter, we request, that should not only be observed in homes but by our
service providers too. You will find municipal buildings with lights on
today, since yesterday, that stay on until the end of the week. Let us all
preserve electricity.

This is the type of education that has to be transmitted down to the
children at school and in general as well as to the community. As someone
who was schooled in rural areas, I know that when a classroom is painted
white it stays bright even without electricity. It is one of the things of
which we have to take notice.

One other way of meeting government halfway in this problem is for all of
us to make sure that this matter does not become a campaign for votes. If
they can start that, people like Rev Meshoe will know that we are
invincible; let them not start that.

The reason why we have come here today is to talk to our people. We have
come to tell them that they should be aware that the present government,
when deciding to build houses, gave people electrified houses. I come from
Gugulethu, and in 1981, our community organised itself to have electricity
installed in our area, without government’s assistance. Therefore, let the
difference be noticed between the present government and the government we
had in the past, which did not care about the people. [Applause.]

The little money that you got had to pay for the services that government
provided you. Now we are talking about a government that builds you an
electrified house and you get electricity free of charge.

The most important thing that is denied by a lot of people in the House,
those who are blind, is that the economy has grown, and is still growing.
Municipal services were delivered to a few. Many people, including the
likes of Rev Meshoe, had no electricity. Our people pressed buttons on
their walls long after others had started doing so.

These are some of the challenges government faces, and government did not
say: “I am running away from the problem that we are facing.” Instead,
government said: “Here are services. What can we do together to make sure
that all people receive government services, more especially electricity,
because we have realised how important it is?”

Eskom has started a programme of reducing the consumption impact of our
geysers. We want to raise a clarion call to all municipalities that they
must work in close co-operation with Eskom to preserve electricity. I am
saying this because in 2006 the governing party in the Cape Town district
made the electricity crisis an ANC problem. I do not know whose problem it
is today because they are governing.

People who have anxieties with regard to the 2010 games must relax.
Essential services, especially hospitals, will not be affected. What is
important is that people must use this platform to tell people the truth
and not mislead them.

Lastly, I want to say our people must not lose hope because a better life
for all is the main thing this government is committed to. To those who
have not accessed electricity yet, we know electricity is still coming.

This is the message I would like to leave, namely that in the House there
are people who are mentally challenged. I want to ask Comrade Minister of
Finance Trevor Manuel and Minister Mandisi Mpahlwa to open the eyes of the
people I am talking about because they have poor eyesight. They read words
but they do not read them with the necessary comprehension to help them
correctly interpret the way government works to bring civilisation to South
Africa. Thank you very much. [Applause.]]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson and hon members, we have noted what the
Minister of Minerals and Energy said. However, we have these views to put
across.

In the mid-1990s, retired Judge Rex van Schalkwyk wrote a book entitled One
miracle is not enough. In that book, the learned judge chronicles all the
failures of the ANC and SACP government. As early as the mid-1990s, he
could already foresee that things were not all going to go well.

As far back as then, he noted the alarming lapse in public morality. With
this mess of the power failures, political leaders worth their salt would
resign, especially having been advised seven years ago. Political leaders
with a measure of ethics would step down on their own, but we know that in
South Africa politicians remain in office until they are locked up.

We have heard so many speeches from this podium ... [Interjections.] Then
you have copied the wrong thing! We have heard so many speeches from this
podium and elsewhere stating that, since 1994, more houses and even
informal settlements have electricity. That is very true. New developments
have been put up, but no effort was made to ensure that the source of
electricity is extended to cope with the new demand. This is absurd as even
an illiterate man would know that if you have a loaf of bread and an
additional child comes along, you need to have more bread.

This has never occurred to the all-knowing ANC government. It is not
surprising, however, as almost all state institutions have collapsed under
the ANC. The Land Bank is a shadow of its former self. The security forces
are at one another’s throats, spying on each other. The ANC government put
all its energy in transformation, and relegated delivery to the background.
We saw Eskom bosses replacing most of their qualified and experienced staff
with inexperienced and inappropriately qualified people. This resulted in
load shedding, a euphemism for power failure.

There is no doubt that those in power have become our greatest liabilities.
Simply saying sorry is not enough, especially after having been advised
seven years ago.
We notice that the government has always gone out of its way to be critical
of even referring to the past, as is happening now, while they, in their
turn, do not do very well. Their obsession is with rededicating,
reconstructing, renaming and replacing people in jobs instead of being
creative and innovative.

It is best to conclude by quoting Judge van Schalkwyk once more, when he
said:

  In reality, we are probably the most unequal, the most endangered, the
  most stressed, the most abused and least well governed of all countries
  that presume to call themselves democratic.

This country deserves better treatment in respect of being taken seriously
and being provided with services, especially when people come up with
proposals. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, I bring greetings to all of you from the MF.

The MF urges that we immediately get rid of Eskom’s monopoly, which started
in the 1980s, and our current government has maintained this monopoly by
not providing for infrastructure. We should look at countries such as
India, which serves as a good example, where private firms such as Reliance
and SATA are electricity providers.

Government has foolishly waited for private enterprises, but this never
transpired. We need to invite the Chinese and Indian private enterprises
into our country. We need to allow the major municipalities to own their
power stations.

With load shedding, the first load that government must shed are members of
Eskom. Furthermore, we need to invest in the local manufacturing of gas
stoves and power generators at affordable rates accessible to our people.
We need to realise the severity of our dependency upon electricity and the
seizure that takes place in every corner of South Africa when our power is
turned off.

The suggested quota system for power usage may appear attractive as a short-
term solution, but the reality is that we are hugely dependent on
electricity, and that middle-class homes are mostly operational in the
evenings. We need to earnestly look at reinstalling the power houses that
were closed down at the birth of democracy. We need to generate revenue,
subsidise this, and realise that while the costs in doing so may appear
heavy, in the long term, the nation, its economy and employment shall be
serviced.

However, if raising revenue for this is minimal, we should perhaps look at
partially privatising Eskom, opening roads for the private sector to invest
in power generation by both national and international investors.

It is senseless looming between what we could have done when we need to
address a shortfall by introducing a solution that shall, in the long term,
remove the shortfall and still allow us to progress as a Third World
country.

I leave the podium with the question: If we are to introduce quotas as a
solution, how do we monitor and measure the limits of usage that is
individually needed by each household? Is this not contrary to the policy
of basic electricity and power, and is this not then contrary to the human
rights listed in the Constitution?

The electorate has elected us, and today we stand in this august House and
say that we should not shout at each other. Let’s put our heads together
and find a solution to the problems. Thank you.

Ms J L FUBBS: Hon Chairperson, hon members of this House, and indeed all of
us in our country who are affected by what our ANC government has called
``a national electricity emergency’’, rich and poor, together find
themselves on this rare occasion facing the challenges generated by this
emergency. Indeed, the rich are learning, - learning what it is like to
live without electricity, and the challenges that the poor so frequently
face. [Interjections.]

Indeed, our ANC government has called upon the whole of South Africa, all
South Africans, to work together as one nation, one people, to overcome
this emergency. As one people and one nation, we are poised to show the
world that, just as we built a people’s participatory democracy rising from
the political ashes of a racist regime, so too can we rise above this
current challenge, this emergency that is affecting people, including
yourselves, members of this House. [Interjections.] Yes.

This can only be achieved if we rise above this. I pause here so that we
may all listen. If we rise above partisan politics, as indeed some members
of the opposition have chosen to do ... [Interjections.] No, we cannot
afford to undermine the national community wheel.

E, matla a sechaba! [Yes, power to the nation!]

In an opportunistic shot across the bows of a bridge, what we are calling
for is for large business – we are encouraging them – to build bridges
between themselves and small business. [Interjections.] We are encouraging
people and communities, with the same spirit that prevailed in 1994 –
unless you thought it was drivel then – to rise above that, as they did in
1994, and to be persuaded to pool their efforts and share their ideas.
[Interjections.] In an individual challenge, may I say that those who
choose to take part in the triathlon had better get a little bit more
exercise? [Interjections.]

In keeping with the spirit of the Freedom Charter, we, the ANC members of
this House, call on all hon Members of Parliament to pledge ourselves to
strive together, sparing neither strength nor courage until we have
achieved the objective set out in the National Electricity Emergency
Programme. [Interjections.]

Indeed, this electricity emergency extends beyond our borders.
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Order! Let’s give the member a
chance to put her case, please.

Ms J L FUBBS: Die elektrisiteitskrisis strek wyer as ons land se grense tot
by ons buurlande, wat ‘n integrale deel vorm van ons sosio-ekonomiese
ontwikkeling. [The electricity crisis extends way beyond our country’s
borders as far as our neighbouring states, which form an integral part of
our socioeconomic development.]

Indeed, our fight against poverty is one of the three pillars on which we
are building a developmental state. The other two are broadly sustainable
economic development and human capital investment. The imperative, then, as
we face this national electricity emergency, is to identify the human
capital opportunities. Alternative energy resources, as we’ve heard from so
many other informed speakers and experts, are solar, sugar, and indeed
wind. I believe the City of Cape Town itself is involved in that area,
purchasing it from Darling. We need to grab these opportunities and, as
business and government, implement them.

However, we cannot ignore the backlog of inadequate investment in economic
infrastructure over decades. [Interjections.] Unfortunately, we are pitting
ourselves, in 10 years, 14 years, against 40 years, and together, we can do
this. Electricity generation capacity and the identification of alternative
energy resources require that we work together. History will surely condemn
those who abdicate their duty and their obligation to the people of South
Africa. [Interjections.]

Hon members, for those who have ears to listen, the role of reconciliation
was to heal, to build one nation, but it was also to enable South Africans
to work together to serve the people. The ANC is aware that all measures to
overcome the electricity challenge will have to ensure that the objective
of improving social development, which is essential but not sufficient,
continues.

In this way, we can engender a people’s platform for participation and
economic processes. Indeed, I expect, if you like, the term ``window
dressing’’ is more suited to those who have a cosmetic approach to this.
[Interjections.] Yes, part of Eskom’s challenge is related to a critical
skills crisis, but I remind certain members of this House that it was not
and is not unique to South Africa. It was identified in Canada, Brazil,
Chile and California, all of whom have very different political systems and
demographic profiles. The challenge for the critical skills crisis is to
invest in human capital. We have also heard that Eskom, too, would need to
do this.

On 8 January – for those of course who had recovered from their spiritual
spree in the holidays – the ANC President, Jacob Zuma, called on all of us
to commit ourselves to mass mobilisation. [Interjections.] Let it be the
mass mobilisation of transformed mind-sets, fresh mind-sets that will
assimilate the structural challenges in this national emergency.

President Thabo Mbeki, leading our ANC government, has called upon citizens
to become part of the national movement to conserve electricity in the
residential areas and workplaces while ensuring that the key functions in
our society – health, water, safety and security – are not compromised. Hon
Chairperson, I would hope that for the majority of the members in this
House, January 2008 will live forever in our minds as the month that we,
the people of South Africa, put aside our political partisan differences
and worked together to overcome the national emergency ... [Interjections.]
... and, in so doing, developed a fresh source of national unity that will
create a powerful people’s platform on which to consolidate our
achievements.

I say to the people of South Africa, the majority of whom who do want to
work together, let us work together. Phambili, South Africa, phambili!
[Forward, South Africa, forward!] [Applause.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Mr Chairman, we can no longer boast about our leadership as
a nation on the African continent if we do not find ways of utilising
renewable energy sources and alternatives such as solar energy, wind
turbines and biofuels. Energy can neither be created nor destroyed. It is
rather transformed. We are continually changing one form of energy into
another. It is amazing to ponder that although energy changes form, the
amount of energy in the universe will always remain constant.

Two of the world’s largest solar manufacturers are Japanese: Sharp and
Kyocera. In Japan the solar industry has an annual growth rate of more than
30%, and Japan is driving down costs and creating new jobs. Every time the
demand for solar energy doubles, the price comes down by about 20%. In 1976
solar panels cost about $100 per watt, but by 1986 the cost had dropped to
$10 per watt. Today it is $3 per watt and falling.

With all the sunshine available in our beautiful land, why is South Africa
not developing solar energy to mitigate the present electricity crisis?

The electricity crisis in our country is more than just concerns about the
2010 Fifa games or foreign investor confidence. The implications go beyond
candlelight suppers and extra blankets on beds. The lack of reliable power
has already begun to hamper Southern Africa’s regional development and is
clipping more than 2% off the expected annual economic growth rate.

The electricity crisis is a major rural and urban issue, with many
implications for the poor African majority and the elderly. For them it is
development delayed, employed delayed and diminished, and food security
delayed. The electricity crisis threatens to entrench poor health care in
many hospitals where the African majority is treated. Those expecting to go
into theatre for major surgery will delay this at a cost to their very
lives. Our education is already at crisis point. Learners studying by
candlelight do not advance the matric results. Thank you very much. [Time
expired.]

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, hon Ministers and members, the financial
director of Eskom, Bongani Nqwababa, said, and I quote:

  South African business cannot plan or implement any major new energy-
  consuming projects until 2013.

Topco Media, an excellent publishing company in Cape Town, is planning an
Africa energy summit in Johannesburg on 18 and 19 March 2009, and this is
their response to Eskom’s statement on the energy crisis, and I quote:

  This is an unthinkable scenario that would derail not only the South
  African economy but the society that is dependent on it. It means that
  current levels of poverty and unemployment - already catastrophic - would
  significantly worsen. It could also mean that the government would have
  to reschedule foreign debt. It has the potential to cause civil unrest,
  it will encourage the flight of skills, it will demoralise the nation’s
  citizenry, and it will damage - probably irreparably - South Africa’s
  status as a destination for foreign fixed investment.


  We cannot let this happen, and we cannot accept Eskom’s doomsday warning.
  We need to talk, we need to talk urgently, and we need to take decisive,
  far-reaching action.

Government has admitted responsibility for the current energy crisis
sweeping through our country, and we say that is commendable. This
admission is met, however, with a wave of anger, frustration and
disillusionment across the nation, and people are demanding change to the
ongoing underachievement in services they have to contend with.

In 1994 we experienced a change from divide and rule. We are now once again
faced with another opportunity to initiate change, that is, we urgently
need customary change in the way we have governed the resources of this
country over the past few years.

Eskom is the most devastating example thus far of the level to which public
services have been eroded. Eskom’s debacle provides further support to a
recent survey, done by the Institute for Justice and Reconciliation, which
found that there was a steady decline of public trust in our democratic
institutions and political leadership. There is no better time than now for
change in the administration of these organs of state and parastatals that
undermine public trust and the stability of our democracy.

A recent electronic poll conducted by Carte Blanche during a broadcast on
the energy crisis shows that an overwhelming majority of over 90% of the
public have no faith in Eskom to rectify the problem. The public’s despair
may be based on the economic gloom facing us as a result of the energy
crisis. Economists predict that our growth prospects may struggle to rise
above 3%-4%, instead of the 6% touted. This is our Kairos moment – a change
for leadership with a heart for people and a mind for good governance. I
thank you.

Mr S SIMMONS: Madam Deputy Speaker, when confronted with problems as huge
as this, the exploration of solutions is a given. It is interesting that
most of the solutions have for some time now been vigorously debated in
various forums, and most of the answers are therefore there. One should,
however, in the interests of long-term solutions, examine the underlying
causes of the problem faced, to ensure the problem is avoided in future.

Die eerste van twee redes vir hierdie situasie kan ongetwyfeld toegeskryf
word aan ideologiese verknogtheid. Dit gee aanleiding tot besluitneming en
optrede wat totaal en al uit voeling met die werklikheid is. Vandaar die
ignorering van waarskuwings agt jaar gelede! (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[The first of two reasons for this situation can undoubtedly be attributed
to ideological attachment. This leads to decision-making and actions that
are completely out of touch with reality; hence the warning eight years ago
was ignored!]

It is therefore imperative that we see a change in attitude, allowing
decision-makers to start listening and seriously take to heart advice and
guidance from others long before the challenges become a crisis.

Die tweede wat hiermee gelyk staan, is Eskom se hantering van sy
transformasiebeleid. [The second, which is on par with the first, is
Eskom’s handling of its transformation policy.]

I believe that Eskom’s employment equity programme served as a catalyst for
the current capacity problems. It is by now common knowledge that over the
past 10 years Eskom has suffered a huge exodus of vital planning and
operational skills. This exodus correlates very distinctly with Eskom’s
intensifying of their employment equity programme. If hon Minister Erwin is
here to take us in his government’s trust, allow me to propose the
following. Place an immediate moratorium on Eskom’s employment equity
programme in order to regain the lost skills. More plants are useless
without these skills. I thank you.

Dr S M VAN DYK: Adjunkspeaker, die DA het ‘n parlementêre debat aangevra om
die grootste landskrisis sedert 1994 te bepreek en oor Suid-Afrika te
praat, nie Amerika nie. Die feit dat die regering sy land se ekonomie
oorboord gooi met die afgelope paar weke se beurtkrag en die aankondiging
dat die mynbedryf moet sluit, is ‘n skok wat Suid-Afrika tref.

Hierdie gebeurtenis kos die mynboubedryf R1 miljard per dag, met ‘n
verwagte afskaling in ekonomiese groei van net 3% per jaar. Elke
landsburger, trouens, die totale ekonomie, word geraak. Kundiges emigreer,
buitelandse beleggers word afgeskrik, ondernemings word gelikwideer terwyl
werkloosheid toeneem en misdaad styg. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Dr S M VAN DYK: Deputy Speaker, the DA has requested a parliamentary
debate to discuss the biggest crisis this country has had to face since
1994, and to discuss South Africa, not America. The fact that the
government has discarded its economy with regard to the load shedding of
the past few weeks and the announcement that the mining industry will have
to close, is a shock to the whole of South Africa.

This event is costing the mining industry R1 billion per day, with an
expected scaling down in economic growth of a mere 3% per year. Every
citizen of this country, in fact the whole economy, is affected by this.
Experts emigrate, foreign investors are wary of investing, companies are
liquidated, while unemployment and crime are on the increase.]

We acknowledge the absence of the President and the Deputy President in
Parliament today. The shame is that all government is doing now is to say
“sorry”. Unreliable reasons were all that have been given for the
catastrophe, and consumers have been misled by government to the effect
that the economy has been growing too fast. The fact, however, is that
South Africa’s economic growth is still some way off the planned growth
projections and that the growth that has occurred did so on increasingly
insufficient reserve-generation capacity and not because of good governance
or planning.

South Africa’s electricity rates are indeed among the cheapest in the
world, and this may have discouraged savings on consumption. However, even
if the public did take greater measures to cut down on usage, it would
still not make up for the fact that government neglected the crisis warning
in the White Paper on Energy Policy that was tabled in 1998.

Government is still not acknowledging the fact that bad management and a
shortage of crucial skills have contributed to the problem. Furthermore,
government refuses to accept the following as key contributors to the
crisis: One, Eskom’s monopoly as the sole purchaser and supplier of
electricity; two, insufficient maintenance of power-generation
infrastructure; and three, the comparative unattractiveness of South Africa
as an investment destination.

All South Africans are now suffering as a result of government’s
transformation policy, which in its implementation seemed to have
prioritised racial bean-counting rather than contributing to the security
of our electricity supply.

The DA has been saying all along that qualified and experienced personnel
must be appointed at the right place, in the right position, but no heed
was paid to our call. Eskom itself has admitted that it is facing an annual
shortage of 186 engineers, while there is also a shortage of other
technicians to provide the necessary on-the-job training.

It is also disappointing that there has been no indication from government
as to how the state will be going about compensating for the financial
losses that are a direct result of government’s negligence by not investing
timeously in generation capacity.

Apart from the 14% tariff increase this year, government has also not been
able to indicate where and how Eskom will be raising the R300 billion
needed for urgent capital projects. As a public enterprise of the state,
capital injections can only be afforded to the extent that they are allowed
for by government’s budgetary constraints.

As Eskom’s credit rating is now in danger of being downgraded, it will find
it difficult to obtain affordable finance on the capital market. It will
now be expected of the state to provide guarantees for the issuing of
Eskom’s obligations and to subsidise the costs, further to the consumer,
from revenue overruns.

The state will simply have to adjust its ideological and labour policy
frameworks to attract foreign investment for the construction of power
stations. This must also include a modification of Eskom’s current status
as a monopoly to allow other energy producers in South Africa to sell
directly to the consumers. This will undoubtedly increase the amount of
electricity on offer; it will encourage energy consciousness; and will
ensure more rapid progress to a situation where South Africa will once
again have reserve capacity.

The consumer will also be paying for emergency equipment such as power
generators, solar panels, etc. The DA asks that the taxpayer be compensated
for these expenses by making them tax-deductible and by scrapping all
import duties on such equipment.

The DA wants to know why South Africa is exporting electricity while South
African citizens are sitting in the dark. We also want to know if our
neighbouring states owe South Africa any outstanding amounts for
electricity; if increases in our electricity tariffs for exported
electricity are envisaged; and whether South Africa’s neighbouring states
are also being load-shedded by Eskom as it does locally.

Eskom’s chairperson, Mr Valli Moosa, misled Parliament on 9 November when
he addressed the Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises during a
briefing on Eskom’s annual report by not saying one word about the power
crisis. This places a big question mark over the credibility of the content
of Eskom’s annual report as well as the accuracy of information given to
Parliament by Eskom officials. This constitutes a contravention of the
Public Finance Management Act. For this Mr Moosa should be dismissed with
immediate effect.

The R57 million in bonuses earned by Eskom’s top management over the past
three years should also be repaid to Treasury. Of course, this will be
little compensation to the millions that the Treasury will be losing in
lost tax income as a result of losses incurred by the economy owing to
blackouts.

Over and above these, losses will occur as a result of unaccounted-for
income through cash tills, which will result in a lack of ability to
reconcile VAT.

Government’s short-term plans to address the situation are a great source
of concern to the DA as government politicians and their loyalists in the
Public Service will be taking decisions on the implementation of
electricity quotas in future in order to ensure saving in electricity
consumption. This again assumes that the state has the competency to decide
which sectors and business have more development potential than others.

Die verwagting is dat die krisis nog lank nie verby is nie. Laer beurtkrag
en laer binnelandse produksie sal uitvoere laat afneem, wat druk plaas op
buitelandse valutareserwes en die lopende rekening van die betalingsbalans.
Suid-Afrika sal dan meer moet invoer om in die vraag te voorsien, met hoër
invoerpryse tot gevolg omdat die rand reeds begin verswak het as gevolg van
onsekerhede. Dit sal inflasie opjaag, met moontlike verdere
rentekoersverhogings. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The expectation is that the crisis is far from being resolved. Lower load
shedding and lower domestic production will lead to declining exports,
which will then put pressure on foreign exchange reserves and the current
account of the balance of payments. South Africa will then have to resort
to more imports to be able to satisfy the demand, which will lead to higher
import prices, as the rand has already started weakening as a result of the
uncertainties. This will lead to increased inflation, with further possible
increases in interest rates.]

The power crisis constitutes a very important obstacle to the growth of our
economy and the DA believes that it will be a key constraint to growth in
relation to the Accelerated and Growth Initiative for South Africa, Asgisa.


In addition, Eskom must ensure that a reliable and responsive communication
system is put in place to ensure that consumers are informed timeously of
when and where load shedding will be happening so that the lives of our
people and the productivity of our economy can experience as little
disruption as possible. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms A N T MCHUNU: Madam Deputy Speaker, throughout this energy crisis, we
have heard about the negative effects that the blackouts and load shedding
are having on businesses and the people in the cities. The many people and
communities from the rural areas that are also adversely affected by this
crisis seem to be forgotten. I will, therefore, try to highlight measures
to be employed by these communities to save electricity.

When the champion of champions, the champion of all seasons and of all
decades, His Excellency Prince M G Buthelezi, stated that there was a
crisis looming in South Africa, he was rubbished.

Individuals and communities should return to the basic principles of self-
help and self-reliance. This approach, together with the employment of
renewable energy and traditional practices such as using grinding and
pounding stones would ensure that there is electricity saving in these
communities.

When government embarks on exercises to educate and inform people of ways
in which they can use energy more efficiently, they should not forget about
the people in rural and traditional communities and they should encourage
all South Africans to go back to basics and employ traditional technologies
that were used in years gone by. This will not only have the effect of
saving energy, but will also keep traditional practices alive.

Although these measures might seem insignificant to many of you or many of
us, they will contribute to energy saving. The mining industry will benefit
from energy-saving by communities. I have a Wonder Box here, and it is
cooking right now. So, adopt the Wonder Box. [Time expired.] [Laughter.]
The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, the
new Chief Whip and the public at large that are listening to and watching
this debate, the debate provides an opportunity to air the many intensely
held and justifiable views on the current electricity emergency. This
emergency we face at present is a very new experience for South African
citizens and the economy as a whole.

The anger, economic loss and inconvenience of the past few weeks should
rightly be addressed in this House. However, there is no better place than
Parliament in which to deal with the facts and to mobilise a national
effort to deal with this problem. If the country acts in concert, then we
will stabilise the unpredictability of the situation in a matter of a few
weeks. As the ANC, we are already taking a lead in this campaign.

There have been many comments made during the debate and I will deal with
those that require comment and information shortly. I can appreciate that
the political opposition sees a chance to draw blood. That is a nature of
politics and we will address their position in the days and weeks to come.

However, no amounts of baying for sacrificial lambs will obviate the need
for all of us to pull together in order to make a very real contribution to
ameliorating and solving the situation.

Minister Sonjica gave a brief outline of the position in the development of
energy policy. I will add some additional perspectives on this matter.
However, our attention should now be devoted to the immediate situation. It
is also the case that the sacrifices and the user discipline now required
cannot be a one-way street. We have to say what Eskom and government will
do in this situation.

But let me first deal with the critical and immediate action we must take
and have taken. On Friday last week the government set out the short-,
medium- and longer-term plan to deal with the situation. This national
response plan deals with the mandatory provisions and the incentives and
support programmes that will be introduced to increase energy usage
efficiency.

This will allow for growth to continue on the basis of greater energy
efficiency - and I stress that it will have to be on the basis of greater
energy efficiency - and will increase our reserve margin as we bring on
stream new capacity. What has been done is to fast-track an energy
efficiency regime that would have been brought in more gradually over the
next two years. We are now condensing this into a matter of months and
Minister Sonjica has dealt with the main substance of this programme. We
are referring to this set of measures as the Power Conservation Programme
and this programme is essential since real energy-saving behaviour needs to
be inculcated, not only now, but into the future.
To understand the proposals made to large electricity consumers yesterday
we just need to summarise the immediate problems we face. These are
essentially heavy use of the system leading to technical problems in the
system and that is overstretching our maintenance, we have problems of coal
quality and stocks of coal and the resultant potential instability of the
system.

May I take a moment just to stress this for all of us. This is not a matter
for repartee. As the hon Chohan outlined, we cannot envisage any
possibility of the system going down. This is absolutely critical. So, as I
will deal with in a moment, we will err on the side of caution, because she
has outlined in graphic detail the exact implications of the system going
down. The South African system is far bigger than California’s and we don’t
really have any ideas what it would mean. So we are doing everything to
ensure a return to stability.

We have to address these matters urgently and to do so we have to throw
more resources into maintenance to get stations back into service. However,
we cannot do this in the current situation of such a low reserve margin and
unpredictability. Accordingly, the most urgent imperative is to reduce
demand so that we can stabilise the system. The proposals are designed to
stabilise the national electricity system with measures designed to have an
immediate effect.

Yesterday’s proposals were made to the largest users of energy in the
economy. Essentially, we are driving for two phases in this stabilisation
programme. The first is a four-week period, starting with immediate effect,
that seeks to reduce ongoing demand by   4 000 megawatts. This gives us the
space to catch up with maintenance, to rebalance the system and deal with
the various coal supply problems we have experienced. We will also use this
time to refine the targets and supply conditions for our various customer
segments.

The target of 4 000 megawatts is above our overall target of about 10% of
demand in order to address the accumulation of problems that are the direct
cause of the present situation, and I have enumerated these. Thereafter, we
propose that we move into a four-month period that we have defined as a
rationing system. This must reduce overall demand by some 3 000 megawatts.
This will be achieved in two ways: firstly, by agreed supply amounts to key
sectors with specific conditions such as mining, the smelters and other
large users. These are suppliers that Eskom can directly control and
monitor.

In these sectors our target is also a 10% reduction, but implemented in a
way that meets the specific needs of the sectors and users. We were pleased
to announce that we have already begun to implement such a plan in the
mining sector. The crisis that emerged in the mining sector over the past
few days is a good and a very serious example of the kind of the problems
that we can have in an unstable system. We will do everything in our power
to avoid this, but need maximum support to do so. It was in our view
correct to err on the side of caution by informing the key users that we
could not guarantee supply.

I want to stress that’s what happened; we had to indicate in terms of
contract and just plain good faith that we could not guarantee supply.
Quite rightly, the mines then immediately withdrew their people from the
mines. Now, clearly the caution was right and clearly the mines were right
to do what they did. However, what was clearly problematic was that the
kind of protocols - protocols are means of communication between us and our
customers - were not designed for this situation. They caused a confused
state and inaccurate information flowing between us. Now we are rapidly
correcting this and I really would like to express my appreciation to the
mining industry.

We have worked flat-out to achieve this. We have been able to establish new
protocols, but it is not a simple issue. It is a detailed legal matter as
well, and we are now restoring mine energy up to a target of 90%. Once
again my thanks to the mining sector and the mining unions for their co-
operation on this matter.

The second component of the rationing programme is a move towards planned
and predictable shutdowns. All speakers here have pointed out just how
disruptive that is, and as the hon Chohan have pointed out, load shedding
is an engineering issue, but if we can make it predictable, we believe that
this will be far more effective. We will have to share it across the
economy, excluding the sectors I have dealt with in the planned targets.

The advantage of this is that it is predictable and designed to be less
disruptive. However, the disadvantage is that it is still a form of load
shedding. So, what we did yesterday with all the large customers - and
their support was fantastic – was to appeal to the metros and later on to
all other municipalities and all the big users to try and find ways of
closing down 10% of their requirements; find ways of reducing the lighting,
find ways of doing this and that because if we can do that - I want to
stress this - if we can do that, we can avoid even the planned load
shedding. This is a real challenge.

If we can’t do it, we must continue the load shedding. One really can’t
stress this enough, because it is quite clear that this is the arena in
which we can all make a massive contribution. So, the challenge facing us -
and we’re working flat-out over these days – is to find those ways. We’re
engaging with the customers, engaging with the metros, all metros, finding
ways to incentivise the metros. But I really would appeal to this House
because it can play an exceptionally important role.

If we can find ways to cut that 10% out of the system, we can move to a
situation where we reduce, minimise and maybe even eliminate planned load
shedding in a very quick period of time.

Government and Eskom are also taking urgent steps to deal with the supply
conditions. There are three components to the supply-side response. The
first is the Eskom Build programme, which is the long-term one, and we will
move to a greater use of IPPs and I won’t respond to some of the
misinformed comments about IPPs. We will use more IPPs in the coming
period.

But this is a medium- to long-term solution and it does not help the
current situation, therefore the second component of our supply-side
response is to look for forms of energy we can bring into the system
quickly. Here we’re looking essentially at cogeneration. These are sugar
mills, refineries and many other things that produce energy and we have to
see if we can use that energy for electricity. You cannot turn it on
overnight. We had detailed discussions with the users yesterday and there
is a process of bidding and project planning for cogeneration.

The second, of course, is to construct very quickly the kind of gas-fired
turbines that we have here in Atlantis in the Cape and at Mossel Bay, but I
need to stress that although we can bring certain amounts on fairly
quickly, you cannot bring a major capacity on inside 24 or 20 months. The
third area, of course, relates to Eskom itself, where we will have to deal
with this unprecedented condition and improve and change and modify our
maintenance procedures to catch up and keep up with the debate.

There are one or two quick points that emerged in the debate which I would
just like to deal with. I want to stress that of course in a situation like
this we are all experts, we all warned everybody and of course government
is all wrong. [Interjections.] We all forget that we were all sitting in a
massive energy summit in September 2007 and none of you had these brilliant
plans. [Interjections.]

Thank you very much, you were at the summit. If you weren’t you were
sleeping! [Interjections.] Let me make two other very important points; one
piece of blatant misinformation which I must correct to the public: the hon
Van Dyk deliberately misled this House by saying government would decide on
the quotas. He can read the documents and he’ll see that’s nonsense. He can
find someone who participated in yesterday’s meeting or he can talk to us;
it is nonsense. There are very clear protocols for how the protocols would
be decided and this matter will be dealt with in that manner.

The next issue ...

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I rise on a point of order: The hon
Minister has indicated ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! What is your point?

Mr M J ELLIS: The hon Minister has said that ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are rising on what point?

Mr M J ELLIS: On a point of order. The Minister said that the hon Van Dyk
deliberately misled the House and I believe that that is something that
needs to be investigated. But the hon Minister knows as well as I do that
that kind of accusation is unparliamentary.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Minister, that is unparliamentary.

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: I apologise, Madam Deputy Speaker. I
withdraw it, but the information provided by the hon Van Dyk is inaccurate.


The DEPUTY SPEAKER: The deliberate part, that is the part that is
unparliamentary. The facts are okay, but that he deliberately misled, that
is the part that you must withdraw.

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Then I withdraw that, but I would like
to point out to this House that that information is incorrect. Factually
incorrect! [Interjections.] Factually incorrect!

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon members!

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: The apportioning of blame and the
baying for blood, as we have seen, of course, is a luxury that many of us
have, but not those who have to take decisions. Our priority is to deal
with the current emergency. I know that there are many who hope that they
will find some clear-cut culpability lurking in these events. I personally
doubt it, but we will have to debate that. I think we are going to find a
whole confluence of events that comes together. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Hon Minister, your time has now
expired.

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Thank you, Madam Chair. Can I just
make one point of conclusion, if I may?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, I’ll allow that.

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Because I think it is very important.
This concerns the question of investment in our economy. We are engaging
with investors, as we outlined in detail yesterday. We believe that the
investment and growth process will continue and we are also absolutely
certain that there is no risk to the security of electricity supply in
2010. I thank you, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]
Mr E N MTHETHWA: Deputy Speaker and members, before making an input in this
debate, could I, with your permission, Deputy Speaker, propose that we
observe a moment of silence? Comrade John Gomomo, one of us, has departed.
Is that permissible?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, it is.

Mr E N MTHETHWA: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. I want to express my sincere
appreciation to my predecessor, Mr Mogase ... ngomsebenzi awenzile,
ewenzela umbutho wakhe, enikezwe lomsebenzi wokuba uSotswebhu wombutho
wesizwe. Siyabonga kakhulu, baba. [Ihlombe.].

Ezikhathini ezifana nalezi kulula ukuthi sidlalele  izibukeli,  singabhekani
nenkinga esibhekene  nayo  sibone  ukuthi  sizokwenzenjani.  Okufanele  kule
nkulumompikiswano  yethu  namhlanje  kucace,  ukuthi   singumbutho   wesizwe
siyanakekela,   singumbutho   wesizwe   siyazi   ukuthi    abantu    bakithi
basebunzimeni ngale ndaba kagesi. Yingakho kusukela ku Mongameli wezwe  kuya
ko Ngqongqoshe kade sisho ukuthi yobe bantu bakithi  yize  ke  futhi  sibuka
indlela  eya  phambili  okuyikho  okubalulekile.  Amaphuzu  alishumi  abekwe
uNgqongqoshe weZokumbiwa phansi naMandla  nendlela  eya  phambili  eyethulwe
uNgqongqoshe u Erwin, yizinto lezi okufanele sizibhekeu ukuthi  ayikho  enye
into  esizoyenza  kodwa  ukubhekana   nalenkinga   esinayo   sizame   ukuthi
siphendule umbuzo emakhaya ukuthi likhona na ithemba okuyiyona  into  abantu
abafuna  ukuyazi.  Kumele   sisho   futhi   ukuthi   abantu   ababeyingxenye
yokukhululwa kwalelizwe bayazi ukuthi uhulumeni okhona ukuthi angeke  nanini
wabenzela phansi ngamabomu.  Yingakho  ke  ngithi  kumele  sithumele  umbiko
kuwona wonke umuntu ukuthi ... (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[... for the job he did for his party, when he was given this task of  being
the Chief Whip of the African National Congress. Thank you very much, Sir.

In times like these, it is easy to criticise each other in  public,  instead
of dealing  with  the  problem  that  we  are  facing  and  coming  up  with
solutions. What should be clarified in today’s debate is  that  we,  as  the
African National Congress, care. As the ANC, we know  that  our  people  are
experiencing difficulties regarding this issue of electricity cuts. That  is
why, ranging from the President of the  country  to  Cabinet  Ministers,  we
expressed our apologies to our fellow citizens and we are trying to  find  a
solution, which is important. The 10-Point energy saving plan  presented  by
the Minister of Minerals and Energy and the National  Electricity  Emergency
Programme presented by Minister  Erwin  are  the  things  that  we  need  to
monitor because there is nothing else that we can do  except  to  deal  with
this problem we are facing. And we have  to  answer  the  questions  of  the
public with regard to whether there is hope, because  that  is  what  people
really want to know. We should also say that those people who were  part  of
the struggle to liberate this country know that the present government  will
never deliberately let them down. Which is why I say we must put across  the
message to everybody that ...]

... we all have a challenge firstly to communicate clearly with the people
of our land, using all mediums of communication to ensure that the message
is put across; that there is hope; that we are confident of the situation;
that we understand the difficulties and inconveniences our society is
facing currently.

It is against this backdrop that we should not take lightly what people
have raised with us. We should actually try to correct those things; for
instance, the issue of the timetable of load shedding. All of us,
government, public representatives and state-owned entities, should
endeavour to ensure that we provide for our people and forewarn them with
whatever load shedding we may at any time come across.

Some of the things that are contained in the energy plan deals specifically
with the matter raised by the hon Greyling about solar water heaters. Part
of the plan is to roll out, in the next three months, exactly what he was
suggesting - a million solar water heaters to ensure that we correct the
situation.

It is important also to comment on the hon Mr Singh’s proposal that we must
try and find solutions. One speaker said if someone decides to make this a
political football, we may juggle better than them. It is not about that.
It is currently about having the interest of the nation at heart. That is
what we should be doing. I think that’s the line we would want to take.

I don’t think some of these things, like calling for the heads of Ministers
and Eskom, are going to help. If you easily call for someone to be removed
without providing any alternative, like the good reverend has done this
afternoon, I don’t think it would necessarily help the kind of situation we
are in. It would help to show us what we need to do.

We are not being defensive on the matter. We are taking the punches. We
have apologised where necessary, but I think it would help to show some
understanding rather than just to display ignorance towards challenges we
are faced with.

Comparing us with Brazil is way off the mark, because the issue with Brazil
is the abundance of water, which we don’t have. Actually, we are still
grappling with ensuring that people get access to water for consumption
purposes. It can’t be on the agenda of this government to look at
hydroelectricity.

We have had very good intervention from Mr Pheko on renewable energy. But I
must also add that that the committee on minerals and energy, in
particular, sorely misses this very brilliant intervention. Having been the
chairperson of minerals and energy for three years, we always had Mr Pheko
on the register ... kodwa akakaze asivakashele kanti ibingasisiza kakhulu
lento yakhe uma ebengayibeka laphaya ekomitini lethu. [... However, he
never attended our meeting and this could have helped us if he had
presented it in our committee.]

I think the message is clear. I don’t have to waste your time. It is clear.
Let us, as members and public representatives, go all out and spread the
message to the people out there that there are things we still have to do
as government and as Parliament, and that there are things our communities
need to do, and in that way we’d be able, as South Africans, to face the
kind of difficulties we are going through. Thank you.

The Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly adjourned the Joint Sitting at
16:17.


