---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 30 May 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2008-05-30
---

FRIDAY, 30 MAY 2008
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 09:05.

The Acting Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 26 - Housing:

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Thank you very much, Acting Chairperson. Acting
Chairperson, yesterday a friend of mine told me a story that he had heard
from Bishop Tutu and I want to use it as a preface to my input today. He
says:

    Bishop Tutu at some point had become so exacerbated and frustrated with
    the media and how the media was not grasping some of the problems and
    how they would always have a headline that has absolutely nothing to do
    with the story.


He said:


    You know, can you imagine me - this was at the height of the struggle
    and P W Botha in a boat – an imaginary scene. I’m sitting there with him
    trying to explain why it was necessary that he should understand that he
    had to change. He refused. The wind then blew his hat into the sea. I
    dive into the sea to retrieve his hat so that I could put it back on his
    head. The media was watching this. Do you think the media was going to
    say there was an act of great humanity by a man who had suffered long at
    the hands of the other man, who retrieved the hat to give him back his
    dignity? No, they won’t say that! The headline would have been: “Tutu
    kan nie swem nie.” [Tutu does not know how to swim.] [Laughter.]

So far removed from the gravity of what is happening. He is very lucky that
he is talking about a period far removed from now. Today they would be
saying: “A representative of corrupt people cannot swim.” That is now the
current terminology.

Yesterday, I was absolutely, absolutely astounded. The House knows that we
have been grappling with an Auditor-General’s report. The Auditor-General
audited the housing subsidies from 1994 to 2003 - a period before my time
in my department. They came to the conclusion that some civil servants, not
Housing civil servants, had fraudulently got housing grants. Perhaps our
system was not tight enough to make sure that this did not happen. We took
the services of the Special Investigating Unit and completed them. Now,
very proudly, I can go to the NA and say: We have completed this, and this
is what we found. This is the level of corruption in the civil service that
we have wiped out and we are very proud of ourselves.

The headline in The Star, on page three, says: “Corrupt Housing Department
begs for more money.” Now, I am telling you that in the environment that we
are in now, where people out there are very frustrated and agitated, we
have this extent of extreme irresponsibility in the media. My department is
not corrupt. We do not issue subsidies; we monitor them. [Interjections.]

But they should understand that there is a responsibility on all of us to
acquaint ourselves with what we are dealing with. How do we go about, in an
inflamed situation, and say that the department is corrupt? For Christ’s
sake, my department is not corrupt. [Interjections.] Thank you very much. I
had to start there because I had to give vent to my frustration.

Hon members of the House and Chairperson, if you will still allow  me,  this
being our last Budget Vote to this House, I  really  wish  it  had  happened
under a better environment. For me and the department, a better  environment
would have been a fitting end to four  years  of  hard  work  with  tangible
results that I will detail, but there is no escape in this  environment.  It
hangs above all of us.  We  can  only  hope  that  it  blows  over  so  that
normality can once again return to our country to ensure that our vision  of
accelerated delivery is attained.

Cabinet met on Wednesday and concluded that government  would  continue  the
provision of services in line with the “Business Unusual” theme as  outlined
by the President. Government accepts that the pace of delivery needs  to  be
accelerated and therefore urges all  communities  to  reject  any  agitation
using genuine grievances to reduce  this  country  to  lawlessness,  thereby
dashing the hopes of millions of our citizens.

During the debate of my budget in the NA this past week, I was requested  by
a representative of the IFP to look into the matter of hostel  dwellers  and
the conditions in which they line. In this House, on several occasions,  the
hon Mzizi has raised with me  concerns  about  the  conditions  of  hostels.
Again, I would like to report what I said to the IFP on  Wednesday.  We  are
concerned about  the  conditions  of  poverty  of  our  people  in  informal
settlements. We are  concerned  about  the  conditions  of  poverty  amongst
hostel dwellers. We would like all political parties represented here  today
and all stakeholders to help us carry this message  through.  We  care  very
deeply about the conditions of poverty of our people and we continue  to  do
everything we can with the resources that we have available to  us  to  deal
with the matter. I would also like to convey a message  that  we  also  care
for people who live and work in our country. We would like them to  live  in
conditions of safety and express regret about what happened  over  the  past
fortnight.

Again, I have to repeat what I said in the NA  on  Wednesday.  When  I  took
over as the Minister  of  Housing  in  2004,  government  had  produced  1,6
million houses - an achievement we were all extremely proud of. Today,  four
years later, we have produced 2,6 million  houses.  This  means  that  in  a
period of four years, we have provided one million houses to our people.  We
finally managed to attain, in four  years,  a  target  that  had  seemed  so
elusive in the first five years.  In  plain  language,  one  million  houses
translate into providing houses. If you take into account a  family  of  not
less than five people, then we have produced housing for more  five  million
people in four years. This is an achievement we are extremely  proud  of  in
the Department of Housing.

Between 1994 and today, we have provided 2,6 million houses. Again,  if  you
use the figure of an average of five people in a family, it means that  this
government has produced shelter for people in excess of 13 million  free  of
charge. No country has done this anywhere in  the  world.  Perhaps  when  we
reach Mars, we might find that some government there has done  it.  In  this
world, no one has. Our  commitment  extends  to  covering  yet  another  2,1
million houses.
It is important to note right from the outset that throughout the past  four
years, the department’s expenditure  patterns  have  improved  considerably.
Again,  we  are  very  proud  of  this.  This  year,  we  have  recorded  an
expenditure rate of 96% of our budget. It would  have  been  good  to  stand
here, I would have really loved to  do  this,  and  claim  that  we  had  an
expenditure rate of 100%, but unfortunately, we had  a  delivery  glitch  in
the Eastern Cape and we are dealing with it.
 
Since 1994,  our  housing  budget  has  increased  substantially  from  R4,8
billion to R9 billion, representing an average growth of 23% per annum.  The
housing budget is expected to grow from R9 billion last year to R15  billion
in 2010 - an average of 19,4% per annum. I would like to inform  this  House
that, excluding provincial adjustments and roll-overs, we had  R8,3  billion
allocated to provinces in  the  previous  year.  Provinces  have  used  R8,2
billion of this in actual housing delivery - excellent work,  I  would  say.
This represents 98% spending  of  allocations  by  the  national  department
during the year. As I said, unfortunately there were glitches and  therefore
the total spent by provinces is 94%.

In the year 2007-08,  provinces  performed  as  follows,  and  I  will  give
details: The  Eastern  Cape  was  allocated  R509  million  and  spent  R396
million, delivering 12 000 housing  units  which  are  complete  or  in  the
process of completion. We had to take some money from them. I will  indicate
this later. The Free State was allocated R553 million.  They  expended  R474
million and delivered 12 480 houses. Gauteng  was  allocated  R2,5  billion.
They spent R2,6 billion and delivered 90 000 houses – a record  for  Gauteng
province. KwaZulu-Natal was allocated R1,3 billion. They spent R1,3  billion
and delivered 34 400 housing units. Limpopo province received R651  million.
They spent R632 million and  delivered  18 970  units.  Mpumalanga  received
R676 million. They spent R652 million and delivered  16 569  housing  units.
The Northern Cape  received  R231  million.  They  spent  R231  million  and
delivered 8 686 units. Congratulations! The  North  West  province  received
R875 million. They spent R785  million  and  delivered  19 000  houses.  The
Western Cape received R1,1 billion. They spent  R1,1 billion  and  delivered
34 000 units.

You can see that the figures have improved so significantly that,  in  fact,
I had hoped they would be at the rate of 100% expenditure right across.

Chairperson, I am very pleased to inform you that the total  amount  of  the
conditional grant of R9,852 billion for  the  2008-09  financial  year  will
therefore be allocated as follows: The largest amount goes to Gauteng -  not
because this is where the unrest is, but because of statistics that  we  are
all generally in agreement with.  This  accounts  for  R2,579  billion.  So,
26,2% of our budget will be going to Gauteng. We would like  to  think  that
they will use 100% of this. They are followed by KwaZulu-Natal - 16% of  our
budget. They receive R1,57 billion. They are followed by the Eastern Cape  -
12% of our budget. They have been given R1,25 billion. The Western Cape  has
been allocated R1,2 billion - 12% of our budget.  The  North  West  Province
has been given R896,102 million. Limpopo has been  given  R783,247  million,
which is  7,8%  of  the  budget.  Mpumalanga  has  been  allocated  R629,210
million, which is 6% of the budget. The Northern Cape has  been  given  R161
million, which is 1,6% of the budget.

We are now at a point where we all agree that we are  going  to  invite  big
contractors back to  provide  housing  units  for  the  lower-income  target
group. Contractors will be expected to tender for a minimum  of  2000  units
per  project.  My  MECs  and  I  will  continue  to  monitor  the   delivery
performance so that we can institute corrective  steps  in  situations  that
could result in underperformance. These measures seek to ensure that we  can
protect the resource envelope allocated to housing in view of  the  daunting
challenge as depicted by the stubborn backlog that confronts us.

Although the housing grant allocation has been increased over the 2008  MTEF
period, the increase does not fulfil  our  needs,  and  we  have  complained
about this over and over again. In an effort to  ensure  that  provinces  do
not underspend, I  am  happy  to  inform  this  House  that  in  future,  if
provinces  are  likely  to  underspend  their  predetermined  unspent  funds
received from  the  Integrated  Housing  and  Human  Settlement  Development
Grant, the receipt of further funds for that year will be stopped  in  terms
of the Division  of  Revenue  Act,  Act  2  of  2007  and  be  allocated  to
performing provinces in terms of the same Act.

We have implemented this approach in  the  Eastern  Cape  and  in  the  Free
State, whose rates of expenditure  reflected  underspending.  As  a  result,
R500 million was allocated away from the Eastern Cape to  Gauteng  and  R100
million was taken away from the Free State and given to the  Northern  Cape.
We hope that this  trend  will  stop.  It  is  our  intention,  however,  to
reimburse provinces that relinquished their funds at a stage when  planning,
capacity and delivery capabilities improve to such  an  extent  that  normal
delivery can take place.

My department has also put in  place  a  number  of  processes  to  engender
closer interaction with  provinces.  These  include  project  implementation
support and monitoring activities. During February  2008,  senior  officials
from my department visited all nine provinces to  determine  the  provinces’
readiness to  deliver.  Importantly,  a  branch  specialising  in  rendering
assistance to provinces that experience difficulty is now in  place  and  my
department now provides support to assist provinces to  compile  their  five
multiyear development plans.

It  is  expected  that  with  improvement  in  the  planning  service  being
delivered to provinces, they will be able to improve. In  addition,  support
to provinces to unblock slow-moving projects will be pursued  together  with
the programme to address emergency situations through the  once-off  funding
that we have requested through budget processes.

In  order  to  ensure  that  delivery  of  housing   is   facilitated,   the
establishment of the Housing  Development  Agency,  HDA,  is  being  put  in
place. I am glad that I am here today to plead  with  the  House  to  please
assist us to fast-track the HDA. We hope that  this  will  address  all  our
problems and therefore  ensure  that  we  can  grapple  with  the  obstinate
obstacles that are still in our way. Through  the  agency,  we  will,  inter
alia,  be  able  to  access  suitable  land  for  housing  development   and
consolidate  and  rationalise  functions  and   institutional   arrangements
required for housing development.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank, in advance, members  of  the
Select Committee on Public Services because I know they will fast-track  the
HDA. [Laughter.] I have complete faith in them and I  know  they  understand
our situation.

The building sector experiences substantial  price  hikes  in  the  cost  of
conventional building materials. We are all convinced that if not  addressed
appropriately, this will pose a serious  threat  to  the  sustainability  of
government’s intention to deal with  the  housing  challenge.  In  order  to
address this, my department undertakes investigations in respect of the  use
of alternative building technologies which will meet  all  the  requirements
and standards for quality, norms and all that we want in  our  housing.  The
interventions  will  start  with  appropriate  measures  to  popularise  and
destigmatise some of the technologies which have now  been  tested  and  are
being implemented at scale in other countries.

It is of critical importance that alternative technologies are  bondable  by
the banking sector to ensure  an  effective  secondary  market.  Amalgamated
Banks of South Africa, Absa, in conjunction with the National Home  Builders
Registration  Council,  NHBRC,  held  a  national  Absa  and  NHBRC  Housing
Technology Innovation Hub competition  in  2006,  where  various  developers
built innovative housing designs in both the affordable and subsidy  housing
market. In  view  of  the  success  of  the  previous  competition  and  the
overwhelming number of requests by developers to be granted the  opportunity
to showcase their innovative products, Absa and  the  NHBRC,  together  with
the Department of Public Enterprises, agreed to sponsor,  together  with  my
department, a second innovation hub competition which will be based  in  the
Western Cape. The competition will be  conducted  over  30  to  35  serviced
sites and will include Breaking New  Ground,  BNG,  subsidy  and  affordable
housing. The competition will be expanded  to  include  sustainable  energy-
saving systems to satisfy end  users,  as  well  as  to  contribute  towards
energy saving in this trying time.

My department is currently investigating  the  possibility  of  government’s
intervention  to  ensure  that  beneficiaries  of  subsidised  houses   have
insurance cover for their houses against natural  disasters.  This  excludes
any covers currently  falling  under  the  warranty  cover  underwritten  by
NHBRC. This may include the possibility of  providing  a  phased  assistance
programme  in  which  government  subsidises   part   of   insurance   cover
installments for a defined period,  whereafter  beneficiaries  will  sustain
the cover.

Last year I announced that we would  have  a  national  councillor  training
programme. We have done this. I am happy  to  announce  that  the  programme
centres on legislative requirements and ensures  that  our  councillors  are
given  the  necessary  information  to  assist  us  with  effective  service
delivery. More than 700 councilors have since been trained to date.

My department has successfully registered the first Housing Bachelors
degree with the SA Qualifications Authority. This qualification is the
first step in professionalising the housing sector. It is intended for
persons who are currently employed within the Housing department at
national, provincial and local levels, but does not exclude members of the
portfolio committee. I therefore invite the chairperson to consider this
degree. Several universities are interested in offering this degree from
next year and many have started the necessary engagements with the
Department of Education to facilitate this process.

Since our housing programme is often undermined by  unregulated  mushrooming
of informal settlements and shack  farming  which  counteract  the  progress
that was made, appropriate legislation is to  be  introduced  at  provincial
level  to  improve  our  ability  to  regulate  the   growth   of   informal
settlements. This will be finalised by December 2008. By  the  end  of  this
year, we will try to conclude measures we have put in place to assist  rural
villages and communities to access building  materials  through  a  possible
subsidy voucher system to support them as they build their own houses.  This
will also improve the effectiveness of our People’s Housing Process  housing
programme.

We are on track with our objectives. We realize that  the  road  is  fraught
with difficulties and challenges. However,  we  must  acknowledge  that  the
last 4 years saw a marked improvement in housing developments in  integrated
human  settlements.  Our  approach  is  correct  and  contributes   to   the
improvement of the living conditions of  our  beneficiaries.  As  challenges
remain, we count on people in this House to assist us to  send  the  message
that we care very deeply for the poor. We are  committed  to  ensuring  that
they have access to housing. We have provided housing for people  in  excess
of 13 million. We continue to  do  our  best.  For  those  still  out  there
waiting for a house, we depend on this House  to  spread  the  message  that
their turn will come. We are working on this on a constant  basis.  I  thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr G R KRUMBOCK: Deputy Chairperson, in the last years, I have acknowledged
government’s good intentions in supporting its ambitious housing targets
with the required funding, notwithstanding the fact that, as the Minister
herself acknowledged on Wednesday, funding for housing delivery is grossly
inadequate in the light of our current backlog.

Circumstances are going to get more difficult in the short to medium term.
After well-above inflationary increases and budget allocations in previous
years, this year’s budget increase is a more modest 17,7%. The Minister is
quite correct to draw our attention to the fact that since building costs
have escalated even higher than inflation, the budget increase is largely
illusionary. Inevitably, these will exacerbate what the Minister describes
as our ever-increasing backlog. Tough times lie ahead, housing included.

It seems common cause that proper planning is a prerequisite if we are to
meet these formidable challenges, and that presupposes that we know exactly
what the numbers are. So it is frustrating that although we are told that
2,4 million houses have been built, we still have blocked or incomplete
projects worth R2,4 billion in 2006 terms. How many of the 2,4 million
houses are incomplete or, in fact, mainly just subsidies paid out?

On Wednesday, Minister, you suggested that my colleague in the National
Assembly, Butch Steyn, should count the 2,4 million houses if he wanted to
establish the true figure. Unfortunately, the hon Steyn and I are busy next
week and so will not be able to take up your invitation. With respect
though, Minister, your department is spending R10,6 billion of public money
this year, and it should not be beyond the department’s ability to disclose
exactly how many houses have been built.

The Breaking New Ground project was an innovative idea to create
sustainable human settlements that stirred hope across all party lines.
Certainly, in my province, KwaZulu-Natal, some progress has been made, but
has even one of these projects been completed? Why are the provincial
housing departments so disconnected from these nine pilot projects to the
extent that they were unable to report on the status of any as late as last
week?

Perhaps it is another alarming chapter in the litany of good intentions not
being matched by capacity or underperformance. Certainly, this seems to be
the case with Thubelisha homes. In the 2007-08 financial year, Thubelisha
handed over just 2 889 houses out of the 16 290 it had budgeted to hand
over, and other key performance indicators exhibit similar disappointing
statistics.

You would have noticed from their balance sheet, Minister, that Thubelisha
posted a loss of close to R68 million, which was a R117 million less than
the budgeted surplus of R49,5 million, and surprisingly the balance sheet
reveals that the liabilities exceed the assets by over R20 million, which
means they are insolvent. Surely something is wrong.

The housing waiting lists must be one of the most emotive issues fuelling
anger in South Africa. It is unconscionable that, by their own admission,
the Gauteng housing department confirmed last week that housing lists are
inaccurate and rot with procedural gaps, with thousands of housing
applications unprocessed and stacked in offices. Effectively this means
that thousands of applicants are in exactly the same position as those who
never applied at all. We can, and must, do better than this.

Yesterday the hon Mack, in an impromptu and unscripted aside to his speech,
brought a breath of fresh air into this House. He candidly and openly
admitted that there is, indeed, a brain drain of black and white alike
afflicting our country. There are people we can least afford to lose -
educated, skilled, big taxpayers - the kind of people we need to fund
future housing budgets so that we can eliminate the housing backlog. The
exodus is caused by political uncertainty – if that is not too coy a term -
power failures and especially what that symbolises and, of course, crime.

It is not just exceptionally violent crime amounting to savagery or the
fact that our crime rate is eight times the international standard
amounting to slaughter that drives irreplaceable people away, but also the
pervasive view that when crime relates to fraud in government departments,
nothing more than a slap on the wrist will occur and crime will indeed pay.


So, perhaps the most depressing aspect of the civil servants who are to be
prosecuted for fraudulently acquiring Reconstruction and Development
Programme houses is not that there are 31 259 potentially irregular housing
subsidy transactions or 3 800 individual civil servants facing prosecutions
with investigations into their cases having been finalised; no, the most
depressing aspect is that having defrauded the poor out of their homes,
individuals already found guilty will be allowed to keep their houses
provided they now pay the value of the house over five years, a nominal
fine. How can this possibly deter other would-be fraudsters or placate
deserving applicants who must now stomach seeing guilty individuals live in
homes that were intended for them?

Minister, I wish you success in your roll-out programme. You have many
difficult challenges and tight constraints to overcome. The DA and the
whole of South Africa desperately want you to succeed. Good luck, you’re
going to need it. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): That was a breath of
fresh air from hon Krumbock and I thank him. I now call upon the hon R J
Tau, Chairperson of the Select Committee on Public Services.

Mr R J TAU: Thank you very much, hon Chair. I suspect that the hon members
are really taken by surprise, Chair, but of course, we will have to
continue raising certain things. And, of course, I am taking the invitation
from the Minister to register for that degree. I will do so, and report
back.

Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, hon MEC Dyantyi, hon members, officials,
comrades, consistent with our strategic objective of building a united,
nonracial, nonsexist and democratic South Africa, the African National
Congress has ensured that the people of South Africa are well settled in an
integrated way which, in the main, recognises the diversity of our society.
Chairperson, this approach has been our resolve since 1956. Not only did
our forefathers resolve to build a united South Africa, but, in the main
they seek to negate the deep-rooted ideological posturing of Verwoerd’s
government which conceptualised nation-building in separatist, racist and
gender-discriminatory principles. It is these principles that define the
upbringing of some of the hon members - I mean I cannot deny that fact –
and these principles define the upbringing of some of the hon members
sitting in this House. And I must say hon Chair, seeing that we are still
grappling with undoing what their forefathers did, in terms of building one
nation, one would have expected, of course, after 14 years in our democracy
that the hon members would have taken the opportunity to apologise for the
ugly deeds of their grandfather, H F Verwoerd.

Hon Chair, I think it is only proper that this House should pronounce
itself in congratulating the residents of Joe Slovo settlement, who
recently resolved to voluntarily move to Delft in order to make way for the
development and progress with regard to the N2 Gateway Pilot Project. I
raise this, Chair, because I remember that not so long ago, the DA
relentlessly with its opportunistic social movements, and the media in
particular ... [Interjections.] ... Yes, of course, the MEC is here ...
with its opportunistic social movements, in the media in particular, which
in the main are its extension of the organisation, tried to divide our
people through lies, along racial lines, saying that our people are being
removed forcefully and not being given an opportunity, and instead, being
put at the periphery of the economy. It is these kind of acts that
demonstrate that some of the hon members in this House, and the DA in
particular, are still hell-bound in perpetuating what their grandfather,
Verwoerd, taught them. Well, you cannot teach an old dog new tricks.
[Interjections.]

Chair and hon Minister, it is our belief, once more, as the select
committee, that this House must also, notwithstanding the challenges that
the department is faced with, in terms of the provision of housing, rise to
sing the praise of the New Rest Housing Project. Here we have a group of
women who have recognised the enslaving ideological stance of Verwoerd,
which defined women as recipients of goods and services as produced by men.
These are women who stood up and recognised the platform created by our
government to position women in the construction sector. For those who do
not know, these women in actual fact participated to build a unit of
hundred houses in a record time of about 10 days; which is something that
we need to pronounce as this House and say, “Halala, makhosikazi, halala!”.
[Hail the women!]

Hon MEMBERS: Halala! [Hail!]

Mr R J TAU: Chair, we are in line with that. As a select committee, we have
recognised the kind of progress that the department has made in relation to
assisting, developing and registering women in construction. And in that as
well, we once more say, “Halala” to the department and to women.

Chair, we want to raise the issue that some time last year, we were briefed
by the department to say that there is an agreement at a national level,
especially with Salga, to place a moratorium wherein all the municipalities
in the province had a buy-in to place a moratorium on state land or
municipal land for purposes of re-ensuring or making land available for
human settlement. And I think it is an issue that this House once more
wants to pronounce and say: If it has not happened to those municipalities
that are not doing it, please do so. This is a plea from the NCOP because
there is a problem of land for purposes of human settlement.

Chair, we are quite proud that the department has once more, in actual
fact, pronounced itself in implementing the Polokwane Resolution by
ensuring that there is a programme now put in place to put up policy or to
develop policy that would respond to the provision of houses for the
veterans of the struggle. We hope, of course, with regard to the veterans
of the struggle, that when a special dispensation is then created for them,
they will not be accused of not having been in this country whilst this
country was under turmoil. They would not be treated as if they were
foreign nationals because of the time they spent outside this country
struggling for the democracy that we have today.

Hon Chair, we have noted an increase in the national housing budget. No,
before I come to that, hon Minister, here is a very interesting thing: You
know sometimes grandmothers can relate stories. When we discuss this issue
of xenophobia and what is happening and people being attacked, there is
this assumption that they are getting preference of housing and so forth,
not being South Africans.

She related a story to me, which is something that happened to me when I
was still young. Having grown up under those difficult conditions at home,
my uncle apparently got a job somewhere in Gauteng; and having got a job in
Gauteng, coming home, looking at his son, he said:
    The first thing that I am going to do is to liberate this boy from these
    conditions that he finds himself in. To make him feel like a young
    person, I am going to buy him a bicycle.


But Papi being Papi, after two months of riding this bicycle and people
being sure that I have got a bicycle, and not having pocket money to buy
lunch at school, I decided to sell my bicycle. And I sold the bicycle and
with the proceeds I was then able to buy myself sweets and all these other
things until the money was depleted.

The person who bought the bicycle from me was very creative. He used the
bicycle, and with the money that he was given to carry, he then bought
peanuts; and started baking peanuts and used the bicycle to sell and
deliver peanuts. Later on, he became so financially sustainable that I
became jealous of the progress that he has made, by using this bicycle to
make an income, for having recognised the bicycle as an instrument of
wealth, as an instrument of economic development. And as a result, in
actual fact, not only did I steal the bicycle ... [Laughter] ... I
physically dealt with him in order to get my bicycle back. So, ...
[Interjections.] ... why am I raising this thing, hon members and hon
Minister? I am doing so because it is precisely because of the very same
situation that we find our country to be in today where, after oppression,
after disenfranchisement, after being so much on the periphery of our
economy or not even being there, providing our people with housing – a very
key instrument of economic development – instead what they do is that they
then sell these houses to foreign nationals. These foreign nationals
understand the economic power of this asset and then change it into a tuck
shop; they then make money out of it. And as a result, when they realise
that, “Bliksem, I missed the opportunity.” ... [Laughter.] ... they want
their houses back; and in that way, they then accuse the Department of
Housing of providing houses to the foreign nationals and for not looking
after them.

These are real stories that are happening in our constituencies. These are
engagements and responses that we experience on a daily basis in our
constituencies. And of course, hon Minister, we are taking it; we are doing
our best; we are talking to the people out there in our constituencies
during the constituency period. I think it is important that we intensify
this struggle of educating our people in relation to the economic tool that
they have and how best they can use it.

We have noted an increase in the national housing budget which gives effect
to the Polokwane Resolutions, especially on accelerating the development of
sustainable human settlements with intensified efforts as a matter of
urgent priority. The increase in the budget allocation will enable the
department, of course, to increase the rate of housing delivery through
research, amendments to the legislative framework, including the housing
code of 2000.
It is envisaged that the budget increase will assist the department to
formulate a single and efficient housing market. This is anticipated to
promote the creation of human settlements in a sustainable, co-ordinated
and integrated manner and not in line with what Verwoerd wanted.

We, however, note the challenges that the department is faced with due to
the insufficient financial resources to effectively implement the tenets of
the Breaking New Ground housing Strategy. The objectives and measures of
this programme include the implementation of the contract to improve
collective capacities, create partnerships and improve consumer education
which, I think, in part, will also relate to that.

The lack of transparency, of course, and co-ordination emanates from the
lack of guidelines within the BNG housing strategy to promote effective co-
operation. Furthermore, lack of co-ordination and transparency in housing
delivery initiatives hampers the provision of development support to
provincial and local departments of housing. Perhaps, this can also have
some form of a relationship with what the Auditor-General has said about
the capacity of the municipalities, or the capacity of the provinces to
increase that understanding at a local level. This should also include the
officials of the departments.

In terms of transfers and subsidies, as indicated previously, the
integrated housing and human settlement conditional grant is allocated R9,8
billion, while the transfers to housing institutions amount to R227,7
million. This is said to increase over the medium term to reach R346
million. And, of course, the increase makes provision for establishing the
Social Housing Regulatory Authority with the aim to provide support to
social housing institutions in order to manage affordable rental housing.

We must, in actual fact, say, hon Minister, that we as a select committee
are committed to ensuring that these two pieces of legislation, because of
their strategic nature and because of the issues that they want to address,
find immediate attention.

I must state that, hon Minister, through you, Chair, out of the priority
projects that have been identified ... Once more, in the best interest of
my province, I cannot see Lerato Mpaka being mentioned here. I must have
missed it somewhere in the budget speech, but in the response the Minister
might shed some light.

I must state, hon Minister, through you, Chair, of course, on the issue of
Lerato Mpaka, that we have further noted that among the department’s
priorities, the department seeks to introduce housing cover for military
veterans of the struggle and, as I said, I hope they will not be accused by
the DA that they are also foreign nationals due to the time they spent in
exile fighting for our struggle.

Chair, these are several issues, hon members, that I am trying to cover.
Chair, in supporting the Budget Vote, the committee wishes to express its
appreciation, of course, on the work the department is doing amidst all the
difficulties. We have noted that yours are enormous, especially with the
recent developments in our country and the implications or the impact it
has on the image of the country outside.

And to you, hon Minister, with the two seconds left, we say, as a
committee: Amandla! To your officials, from us, we say: “Soldier on. We are
with you. Thank you, very much. [Applause.]

Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson ...

... Ngqongqoshe noNgqongqoshe wesifundazwe, ngithi unwele olude. [... hon
Minister and the provincial Minister, I greet you all.]

The aim of the department is to determine, finance, promote, co-ordinate,
communicate and monitor the implementation of the policy of housing and
human settlement.

The IFP is concerned about the backlog in housing delivery, since there are
people who applied for houses as far back as 1996 and 1997, just to mention
a few, and up until today they have not yet been allocated houses. This is
now coupled with the recent xenophobic violence, because some of the issues
raised by our nationals are that foreign nationals are the ones getting the
first priority of getting houses. Whether this is true or false remains to
be investigated.

The issue of housing delivery is not about foreigners. It is a phenomenal
problem which is facing us and that is why we need to step-up our procedure
in criteria when allocating houses to those who qualify to get houses.

However, one of the department’s aims is to subsidise all South Africans
who qualify for housing subsidies in accordance with their different levels
of finance. These issues need to be ironed out. I want to draw the
Minister’s attention to some areas where it is prevalent. In Kayamandi in
Stellenbosch, when people are applying for a subsidy, they are turned down
on the basis that a person does not have an Unemployment Insurance Fund
card. This raises a concern as to where people must get the UIF card from
if he or she was not working or doing piece jobs?

The department also needs to look into the issues of people occupying low-
cost houses, whilst the rightful owner who is holding a title deed for the
same house does not live in the house. I don’t know whether I should say
this is a double allocation of houses or is due to the incompetence of the
department’s officials or a deliberate awarding of houses to wrong tenants,
because the system should be able to pick up a mistake as soon as you punch
in the details of the same house.

With the budget allocated I hope for the speedy delivery of housing,
reducing the backlog. I also look forward to seeing the implementation of
the Housing Development Agency Bill once it becomes law and how it will
fast-track the delivery of the housing backlog.
If I may engage myself ...

... ngiyathokoza ngoba nangu noNgqongqoshe wesifundazwe ukhona. Ngqongqoshe
angazi noma indaba yaseKhayamnandi isifinyelele kuwena. Ngike ngaya
nakwiziphathimandla zalapha kumasipala, kodwa bafike banginika izicelo
ezenqatshwa zeziqashi ngoba zingenayo i-UIF.

Ngase ngibabuza ukuthi bakuthathaphi lokhu ngoba kwayona iThubelihle lena
iqoqe abantu laphaya yancome ukuthi abanye mabangazitholi izindlu kanti
abanye mabangazitholi kanjalo. Angikholwa ukuthi uhlelo olusebenzayo lolo.
Ngqongqoshe, indaba ukuthi nje angikezi kuwe ngendaba yalaba bantu
abanezimvume zezindlu kodwa bengahlali ezindlini.

Le nto ikhona-ke laphayana eThembisa. Ngizolithola ithuba, Ngqongqoshe,
ngikulethele lezo zinto kodwa-ke siyakuxhasa ukuthi usithole isabiwozimali
ukuze phela uqhubeke ngomsebenzi wezindlu. Unwele olude. Ngiyabonga.
Ngehlela ngezansi. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[... I am also pleased that the provincial minister is present here with
us. Hon Minister, I am not sure whether you are aware of the Kayamandi
issue. I went to see the municipal authorities there, and they showed me
the tenants’ applications which were turned down because they did not have
UIF cards.

I then asked them as to where they got that from, because even the very
Thubelihle programme has since made different recommendations saying
certain people should be given houses and others should not. I honestly do
not think that that programme is working. Hon Minister, the fact of the
matter is that I haven’t come to you yet about the issue of the people who
have title deeds to the houses but do not live in them.

And these things happen in Thembisa. Hon Minister, I will find time, in due
course, to bring these things to your attention. We support the budget so
that you can proceed with the housing task. Long live. I thank you. I rest
my case.]

Ms B L NTEMBE: Chairperson, the beautiful Minister of Housing and hon
members, the housing crisis is a very complicated situation in our country
and is not easy to criticise. It needs to be looked at from all angles. I
call it a crisis, though others may differ from me, due to the fact that
without a house one also does not have a toilet. To be without toilets mean
that a health crisis can occur.

We have the kind of housing such as that at Britstown in the Northern Cape
province where some people live in round houses like igloos, which are
called “pampoene” or pumpkins. These houses are very hot in summer and very
cold in winter. At least there is a roof over the head and some of the
people have been living in it for 15 years.

The question is: When will these people be provided with houses to give
them the dignity the Constitution of the country is talking about? Without
being xenophobic, how are we to accommodate the foreign citizens, having a
backlog of housing for our own citizens as it is? Any citizen of a country
will be irritated if he or she is without a house, while someone from a
foreign country is accommodated. With this, I do not insinuate that the
present situation is due to this reason. However, it has to be looked at.

Please take note that we see all the houses that get built and appreciate
it, but it does not mean that we must use our right to remain silent on the
fact that housing is a challenge in our country presently. We have a
situation about foundations that have been laid in Parys in the Free State
at a time when some people were babies. These persons are having babies
themselves now and the foundations of these houses are still just
foundations. How can it be, hon Chairperson?

The previously advantaged persons need to assist in relation to this
challenge. Can’t those with more than one house, help by giving some of
those extra houses to the previously disadvantaged who need it so much, to
assist with this challenge to show that they are sorry that they have been
advantaged over and above others? This is not a joke; we all need to take
responsibility for what is happening in our country. I am one of the
previously disadvantaged. I wish to assist and to be part of the solution.
Just tell me how. Thank you.

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Chairperson, in her conclusion, the Minister committed
herself to contributing to the creation, among others, of a nonracial
society. But, in the eThekwini Municipality in Durban, the opposite is
taking place. There they are busy with social engineering and entrenchment
of racism in a society which should move forward.

In daardie spesifieke plek is daar drie projekte, en ek het nie tyd vir die
vermelding van die persentasies nie, wat aan onderskeidelik swartmense,
Indiërs, bruinmense en “ander” mense toegeken word. Nou weet ek nie wie
“ander” mense is nie; miskien is ek ’n “ander” mens. Maar die aanduiding
daar is baie duidelik een van die verskansing van rassisme. In plaas
daarvan om finansiële vermoëns te gebruik om die toekenning van huise te
bepaal, word daar nou verwys na die verskillende rasse: swart, bruin,
Indiër en “ander” mense.

Ek wil ook ’n ander aspek onder die agb Minister se aandag bring, en dit is
in verband met Thaba Nchu en Selosesha in die Vrystaat. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[In that particular area there are three projects, and I don’t have the
time to mention the percentages, that are allocated to Africans, Indians,
coloured people and “other” people respectively. I don’t know who these
“other” people are; perhaps I am an “other” person. But it very clearly
indicates the entrenchment of racism. Instead of using financial means to
determine the allocation of houses, reference is now made to the different
races: African, coloured, Indian and “other” people.

I would also like to raise another issue with the hon Minister regarding
Thaba Nchu and Selosesha in the Free State.]

In that particular instance, the ownership of houses is at stake.

Mr Z C NTULI: On a point of order, Chairperson: Will the member be able to
give me the details of what he is saying about eThekwini and the racial
lines along which the houses are allocated?

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon member, you may
continue. That is not a point of order, hon Ntuli.

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: In Thaba Nchu and Selosesha the ownership of houses is
at stake. That is a very serious problem there. The dwelling houses
originally were situated in the old Bophuthatswana and then after the new
dispensation it was transferred to the Free State province and the Mangaung
Municipality. In that municipality, at this stage, matters are becoming
very complicated because of the delay in the finalisation of the ownership
of houses.

Occupiers are approached by attorneys to sign deeds of sale; money is being
paid to private individuals and into attorneys’ bank accounts and nobody
knows where this money is going. This matter was brought under the
attention of the Minister’s department on three occasions already by the
person working with this and up to this point there has been no response. I
think, in all fairness to the Minister, I shall write this down and maybe
in a covering letter attach the necessary documentation to the Minister so
that she can respond.

Dan, ten laaste, daar is seker ’n minuut oor? [Then, lastly, there is
probably one minute left?]

Just referring to the Housing Bachelor’s Degree, the University of the Free
State as well as the University of Stellenbosch offer a BSc in which
housing is one of the major subjects. Maybe the Minister can just take note
of that. I happen to know, because my daughter took this course. She
applied in vain for posts and despite this degree she didn’t get anything.
Luckily she got employed now by a private firm. But be that as it may, I am
not canvassing for my daughter, not at all. I am just bringing this to the
attention of the hon Minister. I think it will be good if she just got some
information regarding these two degrees. Thank you.

Mr R DYANTYI (Western Cape): Mandibulise kuMphathiswa weziNdlu kuzwelonke,
umama uSisulu. Ndibulise kumalungu ale Ndlu yoWiso-mthetho yaMaphondo onke.
[I greet the Minister of Housing, hon Sisulu, and the members of the
National Council of Provinces.]

I think the Minister has covered everything and issued the marching orders
for all of us in the different provinces; starting from when she spoke on
Wednesday. What I really want to speak about is the inspiration that we are
drawing from the Breaking New Ground the BNG, as a national housing policy.
I think many of us here sitting would agree that it’s the best policy that
this country has ever produced, and it’s comparable, if not even better
than those of other countries as well. We are inspired by that policy.

Of course, as provinces our task is the issue of implementation. When those
marching orders are issued, everything is left to us as provinces to see in
what way we succeed in implementing those policies.

I want to start this contribution by reflecting with you on an important
quote that would indicate why we think it’s important for us, as provinces,
to focus on the issue of implementation. Amílcar Cabral, founder of the
African Party for the Independence of Cape Verde and Guinea, and an
important leader in the struggle against Portuguese colonial rule in
Africa, wrote this in 1969, and I quote:

   We must always remember that people do not fight for ideals or for the
   things on other people’s minds. People fight for practical things: for
   peace, for living better in peace and for their children’s future.
   Liberty, fraternity and equality continue to be empty words for people if
   they do not mean a real improvement in the conditions of their lives.

We think this is very relevant in terms of our work as provinces; and in
every respect we are trying to be practical in the work that we do. The BNG
provides us with a menu of options and choices and advocates that there is
no “one size fits all”. This is due to the fact that we are dealing with a
multifaceted kind of challenge, high levels of poverty, unemployment and
all sorts of issues.

In our province, the Western Cape, as part of driving implementation, we
have started implementing the variety of those options and choices as
espoused in the BNG. I want to share with you an example that goes beyond
the very good example of the N2 Gateway project; and these are projects
that flow from the N2 project, which we will be rolled out in August. Those
are projects that include the one we call in Afrikaans “Nuwe Begin”, in
Blue Downs.

Right at the beginning of the Nuwe Begin project we brought in all other
departments. For example, when we lay the first brick for a house, the
education department must be able to come and build a school there. This
also applies to all other departments, including the Health department, in
order for us to demonstrate this integration that we are talking about.
This is going to reflect a combination of all the tools the BNG provides.

We also want to share with you that we are not just talking because
marching orders have been issued. We are already rolling out a number of
other issues like empowering our communities. Early this year we embarked
on a programme that we call the 1000 Volunteers Programme. The aim of this
programme is to bring life to our People’s Housing Process Programme, and
to make sure that people participate in the housing projects.

Furthermore, as part of the BNG, we are also very much at work in upgrading
our informal settlements, as well as dealing with issues of emergency
housing. On Wednesday, the Minister referred to issues of anticorruption
and how, as the provincial departments, we are dealing with some of those
matters. Also, as we speak, in this province as regards the creation of
assets, we’ve transferred over 500 houses that people used to rent for many
years. People are now going to become new owners in order for them to be
proud of these assets.

We are also hard at work in ensuring that the houses that we’ve delivered
to our people are of value and are improving their lives. The type of work
that may be seen in areas like Du Noon is being rolled out across the
province. We want to ensure that the houses that we’ve given to our people
are, firstly, in good condition and also they are with those owners that
we’ve given them to. It’s an important project that we are dealing with. We
are also already starting a programme around the backyarders’ policy, to
ensure that people in many of our overcrowded areas are taken care of.

Arising out of the BNG, we’ve also introduced what we call a Special
Housing Policy that takes care of people with special disabilities. Through
this policy we want to prioritise people who can’t wait in the queues with
everybody else.

In as far as the issue of the waiting list is concerned, I want to indicate
that in all provinces, including our province of the Western Cape, we are
hard at work in cleaning up our housing demand database. The aim is to
ensure that the people we have on our databases are the people who are
going to be benefiting from the houses and whom we understand to better
their conditions.

The Minister has spoken about a marching order relating to how we deal with
this mushrooming of informal settlements. Following KwaZulu-Natal, as the
Western Cape we are also looking at a draft policy in terms of introducing
that legislation. I want to indicate to the Minister that as Western Cape
we are on track in as far as meeting the December deadline of that policy
is concerned in order to ensure that, as part of this implementation, we
are in line with those issues.

Arising out of the Polokwane Resolution, we are very far advanced in
consulting with our military veterans in this province in terms of
providing and assisting them with houses.

As a last point I want to raise that we are also expanding on issues of
rental options. The issues that are facing us are not a “one-size-fits-all”
problem. We are also ensuring that people who are coming to this province
get accommodation for rental, as some of them might not necessarily need to
own a house since they are young. Three months ago we were at Kayamandi to
hand over houses and therefore we are going to follow up the issues raised
by hon Mzizi regarding that area.

I want to thank the members and say that we have listened to the marching
orders. Also, I want to say that as we are on the ground, we are doing all
the things that are relevant for us to do. I thank you. [Applause.]

uMnu V V Z WINDVOËL: Mgcinisihlalo lohloniphekile, ngibingelela Ngcongcoshe
wetfu lotsandzekako weliTiko leTindlu, emalunga lamahle eMkhandlu weNdlu
yeTifundza kanye naMEC wetfu losivakashele lamuhla, babe Dyantyi.

Ngitotsandza kuphawula kafushane ngaloku lokubi lesikubone kwenteka
kuleliVekati lakitsi lapho tinhlanga betihlaselana todvwa. Kubeka nje
ngalamafisha ngicaphune sigayigayi setfu sembutfo wenkhululeko,
inhlonhloloti yenkhululeko yetfu ... (Translation of Siswati paragraphs
follows.)

[Mr V V Z WINDVOЁL: Hon Chairperson, I would like to greet our beloved hon
Minister of the Department of Housing, hon members of the NCOP and our MEC,
Mr Dyantyi, who has visited us today.

I would like to comment on the bad act of xenophobic attacks.  I will
briefly quote our freedom fighter, a hero and stalwart of our freedom ...]

... the late President of the ANC, O R Tambo, and I quote what he said:
   We are one people with a rich cultural heritage which manifests itself in
   many variations. Our task is not to preserve our culture in its antique
   forms but to build on it and let it grow to assume a national character,
   the better to become a component of all evolving world culture.

Ngicaphuna lamagama lawa angibonge hulumende wetfu ngatotonkhe tinhlelo
latibekile kusukela kuhumende losetulu wetifundza letihlukahlukene kanye
naboMasipala bahlangene nemasontfo, bahlanganyele kanye netinhlangano
letingaphandle kwahulumende letatiwa, pheceleti ngemaNGO, kutsi kulekelelwe
labo bebatitfola bebasenkhingeni yekuhlukunyetwa ngenca yebuhlanga.

Siphindze futsi sigceke nalabo lababe nenhlanhla ... (Translation of
Siswati paragraphs follows.)

[As I quote these words, I would like to commend our Government for all the
programmes that have been put in place from the national government,
different provinces and  municipalities that collaborated with religious
organisations, who together with non-governmental organisations known as
NGOs, rendered assistance to those who found themselves in the predicament
of racial abuse.

We also condemn those who were fortunate ...]

... and wanted to exploit the plight of those fellow Africans to try to
politicise the whole issue. I also want to quote, in particular, what the
chief protector Gupta of the United Nations High Commission for Refugees
said in condemning the manner in which our foreign nationals were housed
here in Cape Town, because they were taken very far away from their
communities. We have seen them in tents, towards the beach and so on. I
don’t know whether the municipality is now taking up the policy of the PAC
which, at some time, was that we will drive people to the sea. The policy
of this present government is that we must move towards reintegration of
those people into our communities, and we are committed to that.
[Interjections.]

Angisho, Mgcinisihlalo, kutsi babe Krumbock ... Awutsi ngikubeke ngeSingisi
ngoba kungenteka bangakuhumushi ngendlela latoyiva kahle. [Let me say,
Chairperson, that Mr Krumbock ... let me say this in English because there
is a possibility that they might not interpret it in a manner that he will
understand properly.]

He really quoted the hon Mack out of context. What the hon Mack was saying
in that debate was in response to the hon Van Heerden who said that it was
the whites who were moving out of the country. The hon Mack was saying it
was not only whites; also blacks – blacks and whites.

The issue is not that they are driven by whatever fear they have or power
outages; the issue is that you must realise that 13 years into our
democracy, Mr Krumbock, through you, Chair, South Africa has joined the
international community of nations. There are no longer sanctions applied
against South Africa. In terms of the Constitution and United Nations
conventions, people may move freely throughout the world, wherever they
want to - whether for academic, work-related or other interests. It’s also
in that light that we welcome other people from outside South Africa to
come here to assist us, whether doctors from Tunisia or Cuba, and so on.
It’s in the same spirit that the white farmers, mainly from the FF
constituency, were allowed to go to Mozambique to resuscitate their
agricultural activities there. [Interjections.] So, we must not be narrow-
minded in terms of having a political understanding of our international
standing as a country. [Interjections.]

Mr G R KRUMBOCK: You won’t understand ... [Inaudible.] You are talking
rubbish. [Interjections.]

Mr R J TAU: Hon Chair, is it parliamentary for a member to refer to what
another member has said as “rubbish”?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Hon Krumbock, could you withdraw
those words? [Interjections.] Hon Krumbock, I am asking you to withdraw.
You then have to say you withdraw those words. [Interjections.]
Mr G R KRUMBOCK: Yes, Chairperson, I withdraw.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Thank you. You may continue, hon
member.

Mr V V Z WINDVOËL: Thank you very much, Chairperson, for the withdrawal. It
should not only be cosmetic but come from the heart ... [Interjections.]
... because the other thing which is said ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON: (Mrs M N Oliphant): Order, please!

Mr V V Z WINDVOËL: We may pass legislation to transform the country, but if
the mind-set is not transformed, it will be difficult for us to reach those
targets of transformation. [Interjections.] All said, hon Chairperson ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Order, please!

Mr V V Z WINDVOËL: ... it will also not stop me to put in the correct
context what, I think, was not properly put by the hon Ntembe when she
referred to the shortage of housing and said that foreign nationals were
also coming in to take housing from our people. That statement, to me, is
just as xenophobic as the statement made by another member, the hon Kohler-
Barnard, in a debate in the National Assembly. The issue at hand that we
must understand is that people qualify for these subsidised houses in terms
of the constitutional framework, in terms of South African laws, and in
terms of the regulations and procedures which the Department of Housing has
put in place.

For example, if a person has been in the country for more than five years,
has South African citizenship, or is married to a South African ...
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Order, hon members!

Mr V V Z WINDVOËL: ... and has children, we cannot punish those children
because we say that the ancestors of those people originate from another
country. As long as they qualify, they will enjoy those benefits.
[Interjections.] It’s also not against the whites. If a white person
swallows his pride ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Order, hon members!

Mr V V Z WINDVOËL: ... comes to the department and says, “I am unemployed;
I am indigent,” that person will be given a house and sit next door to
aboMaDlomo naboMaKhuzwayo [Mrs Dlomo and Mrs Khuzwayo] and so on.
[Interjections.] You may ask a question; you’ll get a good answer.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Order, hon members.
Mr V V Z WINDVOËL: Coming back to my speech, I must say that we are at the
end of May ...

Ms B L NTEMBE: 30 May 2008.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Hon Ntembe, order please!

Mr V V Z WINDVOËL: I want to remind members that, in May 1992, the ANC held
a national policy conference to discuss the ANC’s vision for the future.
The conference adopted a policy document, which was famously known as
“Ready to govern – ANC policy guidelines for a democratic South Africa”. In
that document, the ANC said, in recognising the housing backlog facing
South Africa:

  Much of the housing available to the poor is located in monotonous
  townships and underserviced informal settlements far from places of work
  and poorly provided with community facilities, shops, affordable public
  transport and recreational facilities.

I would like to say, with reference to the quote I have given from our
“Ready to govern” document, that the challenges are still there, hon
Minister. And we expect that the Department of Housing, through its Housing
Development Agency, working together with our municipalities, will
aggressively ensure that we acquire land nearer to cities and towns. This
is in line with our agenda as the ANC, as the ruling party in the country,
of ensuring that we deracialise the towns and cities. This is so that the
cities are not only there for the people who can afford expensive,
exorbitant houses. We have seen through experience most of the
municipalities selling land to developers on which, at the end of the day,
the developers build huge estates which are walled, exclusive and do not to
accommodate our people. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Order, please!

Mr V V Z WINDVOËL: I would not mind the noise that is unorganised which I
am getting from some members in this House. As the hon Mazibuko always says
...

Njengoba sibona kutsi; uyabona uma incola ingahambi ngeke ubone tinja
tiyikhonkhotsa kepha nayimile titohlala ngaphansi kwayo tidzimate tilale,
tiyichamele, kodvwa nayihamba lencola njengoba lencola yeteTindlu ihamba,
siatatibona tikhonkhotsa. Sitawuchubeka angeke sime, sitsi nasicedzile
lesikwentako sijike ngobe titawube setidziniwe bese siyatitfwala sihamba
nato. Njengoba sibona kutsi mhlawumbe ngalesinye sikhatsi nemishuco
kubangiswana ngetindlu; ngitawenta sibonelo; nangabe bantfu bavalelekile
basebumnyameni bese kufika inkhululeko ibavulele kutsi baye ekukhanyeni,
batawunyatselana ngobe ngulowo nalowo ujake kufika kucala phambili. Loku
lesikubonako kutsi kukhona tinsita hulumende latiniketela ebantfwini.
Lokukhona kutsi lelisaka lemali alikhoni kwenetisa wonkhe umuntfu ngebusuku
bunye. Njengobe acelile Ndvunankhulu kutsi sonkhe simalunga aleNdlu ...
[Kuhlaba lulwimi.] (Translation of Siswati paragraph follows.)

[We are aware of that. You see, if a vehicle is not in motion, you will not
see dogs barking at it. If it is stationery, dogs will lie under it until
they fall asleep, or pee on it. But if this vehicle is in motion, just as
the vehicle of Housing is moving, we will see them barking. We will
continue; we will not stop. By the time we are done with what we are doing
we will turn back, because they will be tired. We will therefore take them
on board and move with them. When we sometimes observe marches, people
quarrel over houses. I will make an example: If people were captured in a
dark place and freedom opens up for them so that they can be in the light,
there will be a stampede as everyone is rushing to get to the front first.
What we see is as a result of service delivery to the people. The reality
is that our coffers cannot satisfy everybody overnight. As the Minister has
requested from all of us as members of this House ... [Interjections.]]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Order, hon members.

Mr O M THETJENG: Chairperson, I have just checked. The hon member actually
made a statement I would like him to withdraw, which is that the white
people must swallow their pride. I think that is hate speech ...
[Interjections.] [Inaudible.] ... I have just checked, and as I say, hon
Chairperson, I believe this is a form of hate speech. I would like the hon
member to withdraw. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Hon member, I didn’t hear the
member saying that.

Mr O M THETJENG: They are making a noise. I can’t hear ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): I will not give a ruling today. I
am going to listen to the Hansard, and, after that, I will give a ruling
accordingly.

You may continue, hon member. [Interjections.] Order, please!

uMnu V V Z WINDVOËL: Ngicela kutsi ngichubeke nenkhulumo yami wena
wekunene, ngisho kutsi siyabonga kutsi sekwakhiwe tindlu letitigidzi
letingu 2.6 la eNingizimu Afrika, hhayi letitigidzigidzi letingu-2,4
njengobe babe Krumbock bekasho, angati kutsi letinye utintjonta ufuna
kutiyisaphi. Lengitokusho kutsi nakwakhiwa letindlu; sibonga loluhlelo
lolubitwa ngekutsi yiPeoples’ Housing Project, PHP, ngobe lenta kutsi
bantfu babeyincenye yekwakha letindlu. (Translation of Siswati paragraph
follows.)

[Mr V V Z WINDVOËL: May I proceed with my speech, hon Chairperson?

I mean that we commend that 2,6 million houses have been built here in
South Africa, not 2,4 million as referred to by Mr Krumbock. I do not know
where he is taking the others that he is shifting. What I will say is that
these houses are built; we commend the programme that is known as the
People’s Housing Project, PHP, because it incorporates people into being
part of the building of houses.]

... so that people are part of liberating themselves from the condition of
homelessness.

Njengobe sikhatsi sami sesitawuphela, sebatawusindza labanye ngobe ngete
ngisakusho lokunye bengifuna kukucondzisa kubo. Angetame kusheshisa bese
ngibeka kafushane loko lengifuna kukubeka; kutsi njengobe bekasashilo kutsi
naletimali laniketwe tona imphela tincane kakhulu kutsi tin gendlaleka
tifinyelele kubo bantfu.

Ngifuna kuphindza lesincumo lesasitsatsa ePolokwane singu-ANC kutsi
hulumende asibukisise. Kufakwe nje tindodla netindodla tetimali; njengobe
bekacela uMhlonishwa kutsi noma tigidzigidzi letingu-12 tifakwe kube kanye.
Kute kutsi kutawehlisa lomtfwalo losemahlombe eliTiko leTindlu.

Lokunye lengifuna kukubeka, singakacedzi inkhulumo yetfu, sitawucela kutsi
njengobe Ngcongcoshe, Dokotela Sisulu, asafake leliTiko letekuphenya
lelikhetsekile acinise futsi kuhlolisiswe nabahloli kuleliTiko ngobe
labanye ngibo labangeta nalesimo lesititfola sikuso. Baphumelelisa tindlu
letingakapheli, bosonkontileka bakhokhelwe, asati kumbe kukhona lapho
bafike bamunye khona ngaphambili ngobe kuyashiwo kutsi labanye baphosa
ijavelini bqashaye singcivito babe bati kutsi beme ngale emuva ekhoneni
kute batawutfola lokutsite. Loko kugucula lomgomo wetfu we Batho Pele ube
yi-Contractors Pele Batho Kamorau. Sitawufuna kutsi leliTiko likubukisise
kakhulu loko... (Translation of Siswati paragraphs follows.)

[As my time is about to expire, some will be spared because I will not be
able to say what is intended for them. Let me be faster with what I want
put forward, as she has stated that the funds allocated to her are really
not sufficient to satisfy everybody.

I want to reiterate the resolution that we took as the ANC to be considered
by the government. More funds should be allocated.  The Minister has
requested that at least R12 million be allocated at once. This can lessen
the burden of the Department of Housing.

The other thing that I want to put forth, before we finish our discussion,
is that we will request that, as the Minister, Dr Sisulu, has incorporated
the Special Investigating Unit, they must intensify and also oversee
directorate inspectors because some are the ones who perpetuate the
circumstances we find ourselves in. They approve incomplete houses, and
contractors get paid. We do not know - maybe they wait somewhere for a
bribe because it is said that some throw a javelin by approving because
they know exactly that behind the corner, they will receive something. That
changes our principle of Batho Pele to be Contractors Pele, Batho Kamora.
We will therefore want this department to be more vigilant with regard to
the question...]

... does it translate into real delivery on the ground?

Sisho futsi njengobe sesicedza lenkhulumo singumbutfo waKhongolose kutsi
njengobe sike sihambele tifundza ngaloluhlelo lwetfu lwePhalamende
lwekuhambela imimango, siyaye sihlangane nato letinye tinkinga letifaka
ekhatsi lizinganhle letindlu letakhiwako. Niyakhumbula kutsi ngalesinye
sikhatsi yasho iNdvuna kutsi ... (Translation of Siswati paragraph
follows.)

[We also want to say,  as we conclude this debate, that as the ANC, when we
normally visit provinces under the Taking Parliament to the People
programme, we normally do come across some problems which include the
quality of houses built. You will remember that at some stage, the Minister
stated that ...]

... we are moving from quantity to quality.

Sitawutsandza kutsi loko kubukelelwe ngobe letindlu singatibala ngelinani
kutsi tingaka kantsi letinye atisekho. Ekugcineni kumele sibone kutsi
kusetjentiswa kwemali sekuya ku-100%. Kutawuba ngumsebenti wetfu silikomiti
lePhalamende sisebentisana nelikomiti labohulumende basemakhaya
kucinisekisa kutsi le-96% yelucitfo timali ... (Translation of Siswati
paragraph follows.)

[We would like to recommend that that should be taken into consideration,
because we can count these houses in numbers that they are so many but only
to find out that some are no longer there. At the end we must see to it
that 100% of funds are used. It will be our responsibility as a
parliamentary committee, working together with the committee on local
government, to ensure that this 96% expenditure ...]

... does translate into real delivery on the ground.

Ngitawucaphuna emavi lashiwo ngulowo bekaliSekela laMengameli Jacob Zuma
lapho atsi ngalesinye sikhatsi siyaye sijakele kuhlola emabhuku
singakahloli timphilo tebantfu. Singumbutfo waKhongolose sicela kutsi
leNdlu yati kutsi sanelisekile ngaloko liTiko leteTindlu lelikwentako.

Letinkinga letikhona nalamanye emave abukene nato kwengca tsine lapha
eNingizimu Afrika. Sifisela leliTiko indlela lenhle sibambane nalo kute
kutsi timphilo tebantfu bakitsi tibencono kwengca loku betingiko itolo.
Siyabonga. (Translation of Siswati paragraphs follows.)

[I will quote the words uttered by the former Deputy President, Jacob Zuma,
when he said, “Sometimes we rush to audit books prior to investigating
people’s lives.” We as the ANC request that this House, must know that we
are not satisfied with the work of the Department of Housing.

Other countries are also experiencing these problems that we are, even more
than we do in South Africa. We wish the department well in working together
so that the lives of our people can be better than they were yesterday. I
thank you.]

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Chairperson, if you will allow me to go through
the inputs as they were given to me because I think most of them merit a
response.

Hon Krumbock, when I come into the House, I am bound by certain
requirements and certain rules. I cannot mislead the House. When I say that
we have produced 2,6 million houses, we have produced 2,6 million houses.
The reason why I was giving this challenge to your counterpart to go and
count is if he feels that he can do better than our computers by counting
one by one on foot, then I challenge him to do so. Find time to join him
and come with statistics that are different from this. We have produced 2,6
million houses which translate into people in excess of 13 million being
housed by this government.

You were complaining that we must be very careful that we do not take cases
of corruption and give them a slap on the wrist because we are not solving
the problem. I want to say that each case that we dealt with in the Special
Investigating Unit, SIU, was dealt with on a case-by-case basis and on its
own merits, using all instruments available in our criminal justice system.
So, it is not just a thumbsuck or that we liked these people and therefore
just gave them a slap on the wrist. We dealt with this matter in an
extremely professional way, which is why we took on the services of the
SIU. What we have done, in fact, is to send a very strong message that we
will prosecute anybody who fraudulently claims for a house. What we have
also done is clean up the system. We also took money, about R6 million in
this case, which was recovered and we ploughed it back into building more
houses for the poor.

I would like to thank the chair for his very entertaining exposition of the
situation we find ourselves in here today, where people sell their bicycles
and blame it on the national bicycle department. We could not have put it
better, Chairperson. The Chair pays tribute to women in New Rest and
correctly points out that these women built these houses in record time,
but what he omitted to say was that the houses that were built by these
women are better than houses built by men anywhere, anytime. [Applause.]

Hon Mzizi, you were much muted in your attack. I feared the worst. We are
concerned about allegations of unhappiness with regard to the housing
allocation process, which is why we have this - I am going to quote from
the speech I delivered on Wednesday:

   For now, the point is we have taken note of the concerns raised about
   housing allocations, and for our own comfort and the comfort of our
   citizens we have tightened our regulations to ensure that this is
   effectively addressed.

To ensure that this is adhered to at all levels, we are introducing
compulsory adherence to the national housing demand database, which does
not allow any municipality the right of allocation outside of this verified
and audited database. The data, together with the housing subsidies data,
will be monitored by an independent audit company and will report to
Parliament on an annual basis. This will ensure that that our processes are
aligned to the necessary transparency and integrity required for universal
acceptance. Our policy has been amended accordingly and provincial
workshops are currently under way to ensure compliance.

We are dealing with the matter. If you come across any house that is owned
by a foreign national, it is because your people sold it to the foreign
national.

Hon Ntembe, I hope your concerns have also been addressed. You have very
serious concerns around the allegations that we could be housing foreign
nationals when we have such a huge backlog ourselves. Precisely, there is
no way we can cope. We are battling with the rates of urbanisation to deal
with our own population. There is no way we can do this. Our regulations do
not allow it. We are not doing it. Please spread the message.

Thank you for offering to help, hon Ntembe. I want to say to you and the
Chair that we have identified, as MECs and Minmec, that we are going to
target the Northern Cape for a particular project to ensure that we
eradicate the backlog of housing there because it is possible. This will
ensure that, for the first time, we will have a province that will be clear
of its backlog. This is because hon Mzizi comes here and says that some
people have been on the waiting list since 1997.

Hon Mzizi, people in this country have waited for houses for 40 years. This
is what we inherited. Therefore, you have to understand that if we are to
start from the very first, which is what is our priority, and give priority
to the elderly and the infirm, then the people who have only registered in
1994 will have to understand that we are still dealing with the backlog of
apartheid. This is the reality of our situation. We go to those people and
we work overtime to ensure that we can accommodate as many of those who
have registered in this period as possible, but we have an overwhelming
backlog. So, as people out there are complaining about the pace of
delivery, there never was delivery prior to our government coming into
place. Therefore, we will be dealing with the issue of Leratong. Hon
Ntembe, there will be no “pampoens” anywhere on the roadside out there.

Hon Van Heerden, I will look into your concerns. You have committed
yourself to sending those concerns to me. I am very glad that your daughter
has taken up a degree in housing. This only attests to the fact that there
is a member who is clever enough in your family to understand the
centrality of housing. I would like you to please encourage her to try to
apply for work in the new Housing Development Agency. We have employment
possibilities there and we are very keen to take whatever skills we can
get.

Hon Dyantyi has a given a very practical application to the successes of
our policies. He is not a paid advert for the Department of Housing; he is
living it.

An HON MEMBER: He is an “imbongi” [praise singer].

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: He is not an “imbongi” [praise singer].

Hon Windvoël, I am very glad that you have pointed out the tendency to
politicise the unhappy situation that we have here.

Siyabonga wena weKunene kutsi watile kufika ukhulume ngeSiswati
lesicocekile, usichazele kutsi iyahamba lencola le. Kube beyingahambi
bebatakwenta lokunye etukwayo. Iyahamba lencola. [Laughter.] Ngiyabonga
Mlangeni lomuhle. (Translation of Siswati paragraph follows.)

[Thank you, hon member, for being able to express yourself so eloquently in
Siswati. You explained to us that this vehicle is moving. If it was not
moving, they would do something on top of it. The vehicle is moving.
[Laughter.] Thank you, hon member.]
I am running out of time.

My sincerest gratitude goes to the select committee. They have
conscientiously dealt with matters of housing, and now bicycles, on top of
it! [Laughter.] I enjoyed their support tremendously, especially with
regard to taking up issues around the N2. I want to thank members of the
House here for the warmth with which they receive us every time we come
here. I would like to thank them for supporting this Bill, and I would like
to thank you for so graciously presiding over this Vote. I thank you very
much. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Thank you very much, hon
Minister. I further want to thank the Minister, ... [Interjections.] Hon
member, what is going on? I also want to thank the MEC, hon members, our
guests in the gallery and the officials from the department, for your
presence and participation in this debate. Thank you very much.

Debate concluded.

      CONSIDERATION OF REPORT ON PROGRAMME 2009 – (PRIORITIES FOR 2008)

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon Chairperson, hon
members of the National Council of Provinces, allow me to table, for your
consideration, the consolidated document on priorities for 2008 as part of
our continued implementation of Programme 2009.

The document in front of you, which was published in the Announcements,
Tablings and Committees Reports on 28 May 2008, on page 814, provides for
the broad scope of work before the NCOP this year.

The adoption of this document would constitute a division of the priorities
as set out in section B of the Programme 2009 document. Section A of the
Programme 2009 document provides as follows:

   The document would be reviewed annually to ensure that the priorities set
   out in Programme 2009 remain relevant and that the Programme provides a
   proper response to national priorities.

Hence we are bringing this document with priorities for the current year
before you today.

The launching pad for the 2008 priorities was the business planning
workshop held in Milnerton from 24 to 26 February this year, which was
attended by presiding officers, chief whips, chairpersons of committees,
representatives of provincial legislatures and parliamentary management and
their technical team.

The workshop looked at, amongst other things, the work before the NCOP this
year against the background that this was the last full year of our third
Parliament. Strong sentiments were expressed with regard to the need to
prioritise the work, especially legislation before the House in order not
to burden the next Parliament with unfinished business. This includes a
relook at study tours by committees in favour of legislative and oversight
work.

The workshop provided for an opportunity for our committees to begin the
process of drafting their business plans for the year, keeping in mind the
need to wrap up the work we started in 2004. The business plans were
subsequently considered and adopted by the committee and are being
implemented as we speak.

Following this exercise, the document we are considering today consists of
the following areas of work: firstly, key service delivery focus areas,
that is, social and economic transformation, safety and security,
governance and local service delivery. Committees’ business plans would
contain the necessary details in respect of these areas. Secondly, included
is legislation, that is, legislation that has to be considered this year.
You will recall that 2 June is the last deadline for the introduction of
legislation this year.

In their business plans, committees also identified legislation for follow-
up work. Thirdly, there are the Apex Priorities. We have selected 10
priorities that related to section 76 matters from the list of 24
priorities outlined in the state of the nation address.

Interestingly enough, we have been able to link some of the oversight work
highlighted in the business plans of committees back to these 10
priorities, which means that if committees are able to do everything in
their business plans, they would be able to do oversight work with regard
to at least the 10 priorities we have identified. A full list of the 24
priorities would be attached to the document to serve as reference.

Fourthly we have debates on policy issues. We are also proposing that we
look at debating issues of policy with regard to land reform, health,
education, etc, as part of our engagement with policy challenges. Land
reform would be the first, given the challenges in this area.

Fifthly, there are the special task projects. This section deals with the
institutional memory projects we initiated last year, which include the
finalisation of the book on the first 10 years of the NCOP, follow up on
Intergovernmental Relations Summit recommendations, study on the Taking
Parliament to the People Programme and writing up of the report on the work
of the NCOP during the Third Parliament, that is, the Programme 2009
Report.

We call these institutional memory projects because they are intended to
assist the next generation of public representatives.  Lastly, there are
systems and mechanisms. This section covers the implementation areas
extracted from the Milnerton Report, such as the need to ensure that we
align our plans with objectives and targets of the NCOP as set out in the
Programme 2009 document, and the need for committees to keep records of
their proceedings or meetings. We cannot begin to write our Programme 2009
Report if we do not have records. We need to have evidence to be able to
write an objective report.

As I have mentioned, one of the tasks we are embarking on this year is a
study on the impact of the programme Taking Parliament to the People. We
are in the process of appointing an independent research organisation to
assist us in this regard.

We want to hear the views of the people in the areas we have so far
visited, the stakeholders and role-players, both from the executive and the
legislative branches of government, about the programme, with a view to
enhancing it.

Although it is an undeniable fact that the programme has been a huge
success, we do not want to rest on our laurels. We want to assess its
strengths and weaknesses in order to make it a more effective tool for
engaging with the communities.

We think this would help the next NCOP to consider all options with the
benefit of independently established information, when deciding on the
future, shape and character of the programme. We hope to finish this work
before the end of this year.

On behalf of the Presidium, I would like to ask for your co-operation when
approached for purposes of this study because you know the programme better
and you have a lot to say about it. That opportunity is coming. We will
also extend it to members of the other House as well, and representatives
of the different spheres of our government.

Having said that, the document we are tabling today for consideration
contains the work that we have already begun to do as the NCOP as well as
work that we must still complete before the end of this year.

A pocket-sized Programme 2009 document with its revised section B, will be
printed and made available to members following the adoption of the
priorities for this year.

As you know, time is of essence. We have only a few months before we can
look at our final scorecard. So let us run the last lap as if it was the
first one.

With these words, I commend the report detailing our 2008 priorities to the
House.

Chairperson, before I say “thank you”, I would like you allow me to answer
the hon Ntembe with regard to her views when she spoke about “pampoen”
[pumpkin] houses in Britstown. I want to tell her that it was construction
...

Dit was ’n konstruksie wat ons geërf het van die vorige regering. [It was a
construction that we had inherited from the previous government.]

So don’t come and tell us that it’s our government that has put up
“pampoene” [pumpkins] for people. You don’t know what is going on, you are
too young to know and understand what has been happening in the past.

Secondly, your people are pushing population registration ...

... in my kiesafdeling. Ek sê nou vir julle, julle maak ’n groot fout. [...
in my constituency. I am telling you this now, you are making a big
mistake.]
You don’t come with a population register to us. That thing has been taken
off the Statute Book for many years now and had been thrown into the ocean.
So, don’t come with that and talk with Van der Kloof and tell their people
about the population register ...

Hulle moet vir die OD stem, want ons is kleurlinge. [They have to vote for
the ID, because we are coloureds.]

You are making a big mistake with me and I’m giving you ... yes, I’m
telling you don’t come with that story to us. Thank you very much.
[Interjections.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Hon Acting Chairperson! Hon
members, what has been said by the hon Chairperson is not part of the
report.

I shall now put the question. The question is that the report be adopted.

As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I
shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the
Chamber to cast their province’s votes. Are all delegation heads present?

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make their declarations of vote if they so wish.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour or against or abstain form voting.
Eastern Cape?

Mr A T MANYOSI: Eastern Cape is in favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Ondersteun. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Gauteng?

Ms N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: In favour, Chair.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr D D GAMEDE: Siyayisekela. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Limpopo?

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Limpopo re a e thekga, Mme. [Limpopo supports, Madam.]
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Mpumalanga supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Northern Cape?

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Die Noord-Kaap ondersteun die verslag. [Northern Cape
supports the report.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): North West?

Rev P MOATSHE: We support.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Ondersteun. [Support.]

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, and Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 10:49.


