---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 19 August 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2008-08-19
---

TUESDAY, 19 AUGUST 2008
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:05.

The House Chairperson (Mrs M N Oliphant) took the Chair and requested
members to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                             WOMEN’S PARLIAMENT

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the Council -

     1) notes that today marks the beginning of a two-day sitting of the
        fourth session of the Women’s Parliament since 2005, which brings
        together various women across South Africa;


     2) further notes that the Women’s Parliament has grown to be one of
        Parliament’s key public participatory events, which is intended to
        create a forum for women to engage with parliamentarians on
        contemporary issues facing women in South Africa;


     3) acknowledges that the theme for the 2008 Women’s Parliament is
        “Parliament empowering women for poverty eradication”, which is
        derived from Parliament’s 2008 theme of “Parliament empowering
        communities for poverty eradication”; and


     4) takes this opportunity to welcome the hundreds of women who are
        currently attending the Women’s Parliament and wishes them fruitful
        and robust engagements as they embark on an important path to
        define a new direction for the advancement of women in South
        Africa.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

      SOUTH AFRICAN OLYMPIC TEAM’S PERFORMANCE IN BEIJING 2008 OLYMPICS

                             (Draft Resolution)
Mr B J TOLO: Chair, I move without notice:

   That the Council -

   (1)      notes with regret that our Olympic team has not been doing well
        so far in the Beijing 2008 Olympics;


   (2)      further notes that to date we have won only one silver medal;


  (3) therefore congratulates Khotso Mokoena for making us proud by winning
        the only medal to date for the country; and


   (4)      urges our athletes who are still in the competition to soldier
        on and win many more medals for our country. We know they can
        because we are a winning nation!


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                    WORK DONE BY NGOs IN SUPPORT OF WOMEN

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms D ROBINSON: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council –


   (1)      notes with gratitude the superb work done by countless NGOs
        around the country in support of women;


   (2)      notes that their work with abused and raped women is especially
        praiseworthy;


   (3)      recognises that much of this work is carried out despite a
        severe lack of resources;

   (4)      therefore calls on –

             i) government to provide resources for recognised well-run
                establishments;


            ii) South Africans to devote the rest of Women’s Month to
                supporting these efforts through financial donations or
                volunteering time; and


           iii) government to give ever more attention to ensuring that
                perpetrators of abuse and rape are caught and convicted,
                and serial offenders are not given bail.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                     SAPS PROVINCIAL TASK TEAM’S SUCCESS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr D J BOTHA: Chairperson, I move without notice:
   That the Council -

   (1)      congratulates the South African Police Services’ provincial task
        team for the arrest of 16 suspects for cases of house robberies
        committed at Florida Park, Fauna Park and Bendor;


   (2)      notes that these 16 suspects were arrested in connection with 17
        cases ranging from house robberies, rape and attempted murder and
        were committed between June and July this year and that out of the
        17 cases, the 16 suspects are linked to five cases of house
        robberies, five house break-ins and two thefts of motor vehicles;


   (3)      further notes that some of the goods were recovered, including
        two 9mm pistols with ammunition;


   (4)      acknowledges that –

            i) three of the suspects are the masterminds behind these
               crimes;


            ii) the arrested suspects are appearing in different magisterial
                courts in the surrounding areas;

           iii) ballistic and forensic investigations are still ongoing; and
            iv) the arrests were made possible because of the dedication and
                commitment of our provincial commissioner and all the police
                officers in the province;


     5) wishes the SAPS well in their future engagement with the
        communities; and


   (6)      urges the committees and the public to assist the SAPS in their
        fight against crime in the province.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

 ELECTION OF CHIEF WHIP OF COUNCIL AS DEPUTY PRESIDENT OF ANC WOMEN’S LEAGUE


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr S SHICEKA: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council -

   (1)      notes with a sense of pride the election of its brand new Chief
        Whip as the Deputy President of the ANC Women’s League;


   (2)      congratulates this outstanding performance from the NCOP as a
        House in the body politic of South Africa; and


   (3)      believes that her election will contribute in accelerating the
        attainment of women’s rights.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

    ELECTION OF CHIEF WHIP OF COUNCIL AND HON BEAUTY DLULANE TO NATIONAL
                  EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OF ANC WOMEN’S LEAGUE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms J M MASILO: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council -

   (1)      once more congratulates the Chief Whip of the Council for being
        elected to the position of deputy president of the national
        executive committee of the ANC Women’s League; and


   (2)      also congratulates the hon Beauty Dlulane for being elected to
        the national executive committee of the ANC Women’s League.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.
               FINANCIAL SERVICES LAWS GENERAL AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr D J BOTHA: Chair, the Select Committee on Finance, having considered the
Financial Services Laws General Amendment Bill referred to and classified
by the Joint Tagging Mechanism, JTM, reports that it agrees with the Bill’s
proposed amendments. The Select Committee on Finance proposes that
provinces vote in favour of the Bill. I so move. Thank you.

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Order! We now come to the
question with respect to the Second Order. The question is that the Bill be
agreed to. In accordance with Rule 63, I shall first allow political
parties the opportunity to make their declarations of vote if they so wish.
Any political party? There is none.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. Before I call for the
voting, please press button number 1 to confirm your presence. There should
be lights flashing. Are your lights flashing? [Interjections.]

Where are your cards, hon members? [Interjections.]

Order, please! Can the procedural staff assist members by giving them their
voting cards? [Interjections.] Order, please! Hon Kgoshi, you are out of
order. Hon members, can you please keep quiet and wait for your cards. I
know that during the constituency period some of you were partying, and you
are now thinking of going back to partying.

Are all buttons flashing now? [Interjections.]

How many of you do not have cards? Chief Whip, is your card in?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: No, Chair. Please wait!

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Hon Le Roux, do you have your
card?

Mr J W LE ROUX: [Inaudible.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Okay. The hon member on that side
does not have a card.

Do you all have cards now? [Interjections.] I will repeat.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. Before I call for the
voting, please press button number 1 to confirm your presence. There should
be lights flashing. Are your lights flashing? [Interjections.] Is it
flashing now? [Interjections.]

Is yours not flashing?

Mr W M DOUGLAS: No, it’s not that, Madam Chair. The title of the Bill that
it shows here is the wrong one. It is actually the Financial Services Laws
General Amendment Bill that we are voting on now, and this screen shows
that we are voting on the Agricultural Debt Management Repeal Bill.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Yes, we are voting on the
Financial Services Laws General Amendment Bill. [Interjections.]

I said you must press button number 1 to indicate your presence in the
House. If you are present and have pressed it, then the light will be
flashing. Is it flashing? [Interjections.]

Those in favour, please press button number 4, those against press button
number 2 and those who abstain, press button number 3. Have all members
voted?

If any of the members have mistakenly pressed the incorrect button, please
press the correct button now.

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, on a point of order: May I address you on the
voting that we have just conducted and in general? The point I want to make
is that voting should only be used when you are not sure whether the ayes
or the nays have it or when somebody calls for a division. I think we are
wasting a lot of time by voting electronically when the clear majority is
in favour of a matter. [Interjections.] I am not making rules. I am making
a suggestion. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Hon Watson, it is not for the
first time that we voted just as we have done. I will therefore say that
you are in fact out of order.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

                       SPECIAL PENSIONS AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Hon Chairperson, my colleagues, I rise to take this House
through the insights on this Special Pensions Amendment Bill.

The principal Act provides pensions for people who were prevented from
pension-accumulating employment because of their sacrifices in the course
of establishing a nonracial democratic South Africa. The applicants had to
be South African citizens or be entitled to South African citizenship on
December 1996 and had to be over 35 years of age.

The objectives of the Bill are as follows: the right to a pension for
persons who attained the age of 30 but were not 35 yet on 1 December 1996;
the right to a pension for surviving spouses or surviving orphans of
persons who were 30 years of age but lower than 35 years of age by 1996.
The Bill goes on to stipulate a lot of objectives. The finance committee is
therefore of the view that it is unwise to suggest that the proposed age
should be lower than 25 years. Persons who qualify for pensions have until
31 December 2010 to apply. Persons who were between the ages of 30 and 35
on December 1996 will be invited to apply for special pensions.

The Select Committee on Finance appeals to the NCOP to support this
amending Bill in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution. Thank you.


Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

                  AGRICULTURAL DEBT MANAGEMENT REPEAL BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Rev P MOATSHE: Chairperson, hon members, the consideration of the
Agricultural Debt Management Repeal Bill was published in the ATCs of 13
August 2008. The Agricultural Debt Management Repeal Bill wants to regulate
debt that comes from way back when so that the debt could be managed.
Unfortunately, some of the debt has to be written off if it cannot be
collected. Therefore, the select committee places this consideration before
this House for adoption. I hope you will adopt it. Thank you very much,
Chairperson.

Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

                        INSURANCE LAWS AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr B J MKHALIPHI: Chairperson, hon members, one of the crucial tasks
amongst many facing the democratically elected government is the
transformation of the insurance industry. This task should not be
considered as an event, but must be seen as a process that requires regular
review of the insurance industry. The objective of this Bill is to amend
the Long-term Insurance Act, Act 52 of 1998, as well as the Short-term
Insurance Act, Act 53 of 1998.

The Bill does the following, amongst many things: Firstly, it demarcates
health insurance and the medical schemes business. The demarcation was
intended to create a better understanding of what was insurance and what
was a medical scheme - not by creating definitions of these two terms, but
rather by creating a process to align policy decisions between the
Departments of Health and Finance. There was a concern that medical schemes
are used largely by the sick and the elderly while young healthy persons
are covered by normal insurance policies.

Secondly, it clarifies the role of the auditor. The role of the auditor
would be expanded and would be aligned with other pieces of legislation
such as the amended Companies Act. The principle was that the registrar
should be informed of problems before the insurer became financially
unsound, and that the auditor was best placed to discover and report on
this. The name of the individual auditor who undertakes the audit must be
provided to the registrar. The term of the individual serving as an auditor
is limited. The Long-term Insurance Act and the Short-term Insurance Act
would now specify the duty of the auditor to inform the registrar of any
circumstances that might affect the financial position of the insurer.

Thirdly, it clarifies the role of the statutory actuary by extending
reporting duties to the statutory actuary. Currently, the Long-term
Insurance Act requires the statutory actuary to report to the board, but is
not entitled or required to attend meetings of the board, while the Short-
term Insurance Act does not require the appointment of the statutory
actuary. The thrust of this amendment, therefore, is that the statutory
actuary must be in close proximity to the financial management of the
insurer and thus also play an important role in informing the registrar of
any impending irregularity. The proposed amendment therefore requires that
the statutory actuary must attend and address the board at its meetings.
Lastly, it clarifies the role of the audit committee by ensuring that the
amendment of both insurance Acts reflects the recent amendments to the
Companies Act of 2006 and the Corporate Laws Amendment Act. Both the long-
term insurers and the short-term insurers are required to appoint an audit
committee to ensure that corporate governance norms are observed.

Moreover, hon members are reminded that additional corrections are required
to the Insurance Laws Amendment Bill. The two committees on finance have
agreed to have several incorrect cross-references corrected
administratively in the Bill. The Bill, for example, makes reference to
health policy but the corrected reference would refer to accident and
health policy.

The Select Committee on Finance appeals to this House to support this
section 75 legislation. Thank you.

Debate concluded.

Bill, subject to proposed amendments, agreed to in accordance with section
75 of the Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON FINANCE – PROTOCOL AMENDING
     AGREEMENT BETWEEN GOVERNMENT OF RSA AND GOVERNMENT OF AUSTRALIA FOR
 AVOIDANCE OF DOUBLE TAXATION AND PREVENTION OF FISCAL EVASION WITH RESPECT
                             TO TAXES ON INCOME

Ms A N T MCHUNU: Chairperson, the Select Committee on Finance was requested
by Parliament to consider the protocol amending the agreement between the
government of the Republic of South Africa and the government of Australia
for the avoidance of double taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion
with respect to taxes on income. The request was forwarded to the committee
in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution.

Double taxation is a formidable barrier to economic relations between
countries as companies are deterred from operating and investing in
jurisdictions where they may be taxed in addition to being taxed in their
countries of incorporation and location. Over the last number of years,
South Africa has been modernising its tax regime and tax relations with
other jurisdictions. One of the most important features of this process of
modernisation is to do away with the potential for double taxation which
has deterred investment and good economic relations. The committee welcomes
the protocol referred to it by Parliament as it does away with the
potential of double taxation between South Africa and Australia, one of our
most important economic partners.

The protocol also provides for the prevention of income tax evasion, which
is another area in which South Africa has been modernising its systems and
practices over the last number of years. Income tax evasion by companies
and individuals operating in dual jurisdictions cause damage at both ends,
and the committee welcomes the steps to curb these illegal acts. The Select
Committee on Finance, having considered the request for approval of the
protocol by Parliament, reports that it approves the agreement and requests
members of this House to support the protocol amending the agreement. Thank
you.

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Order! I think there are members
who have mistakenly voted. [Interjections.] I am not going to shame them,
but I just want to appeal to members that only delegation heads should vote
if we deal with a report in terms of section 65 of the Constitution. If I
call the delegation heads, I mean all those who are leading the delegations
on behalf of the premiers. If provincial Whips are not here, they must
inform the member who should be voting. For example, there are two members
who voted for the Western Cape, North West and the Eastern Cape. Only one
member must vote. So, I just want to appeal to members to listen very
carefully when we are saying this. I was going to name them if members
hadn’t said “Name them and shame them”. I don’t want to shame members.
[Interjections.] No, they did that mistakenly.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON FINANCE - PROTOCOL AMENDING
 AGREEMENT BETWEEN GOVERNMENT OF RSA AND GOVERNMENT OF REPUBLIC OF SUDAN FOR
 AVOIDANCE OF DOUBLE TAXATION AND PREVENTION OF FISCAL EVASION WITH RESPECT
                             TO TAXES ON INCOME

Mr E M SOGONI: House Chair, South Africa, after being a pariah state for a
long time, has been welcomed into the fold of the family of nations of the
world - Africa in particular. So, this agreement takes place in that
context. It is also in the ATCs. We therefore implore this House to support
it. Thank you, Chairperson.

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Order! I shall now put the
question in respect of the Sixth Order. The question is that the report be
agreed to. As this decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution, I need to ascertain very clearly whether all delegation heads
are present. Are all delegation heads present?

Firstly, I would like to appeal to the members of the Western Cape, North
West and Eastern Cape for their delegation heads to just raise their hands.
Thank you.

Those are the delegation heads from those three provinces where two members
voted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

REGULATION OF INTERCEPTION OF COMMUNICATIONS AND PROVISION OF COMMUNICATION-
                     RELATED INFORMATION AMENDMENT BILL

(Consideration of Report)

Order disposed of without debate.

Question put: That the Report be referred back to the committee.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Question accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 14:58.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                            TUESDAY, 1 JULY 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


          a) Constitution Fourteenth Amendment Bill [B 62 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 74) [Bill published in Government
             Gazette No 31013 of 8 May 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Justice and Constitutional Development of the National
             Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
             (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.


          b) Constitution Fifteenth Amendment Bill [B 63 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 74) [Bill published in Government
             Gazette No 31013 of 8 May 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Justice and Constitutional Development of the National
             Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
             (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.
          c) General Laws (Loss of Membership of National Assembly,
             Provincial Legislature or Municipal Council) Amendment Bill [B
             64 – 2008] (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory
             summary of Bill and prior notice of introduction thereof
             published in Government Gazette No 31151 of 1 July 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Justice and Constitutional Development of the National
             Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
             (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.


     (2)    The Minister of Health


           a) National Health Amendment Bill [B 65 – 2008] (National
              Assembly – proposed sec 76) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
              prior notice of its introduction published in Government
              Gazette No 31114 of 2 June 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Health
             of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint
             Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint
             Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

2.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bills as section 75 Bills:

          a) National Energy Bill [B 52 – 2008] (National Assembly – sec
             75).

          b) Mine Health and Safety Amendment Bill [B 54 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).

          c) Diplomatic Immunities and Privileges Amendment Bill [B 55 –
             2008] (National Assembly – sec 75).

          d) Mineral and Petroleum Resources Royalty (Administration) Bill
             [B 60 – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75).


    (2)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a section 76 Bill:

          a) National Land Transport Bill [B 51 – 2008] (National Assembly
             – sec 76).


    (3)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a money Bill:

          a) Mineral and Petroleum Resources Royalty Bill [B 59 – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 77).

TABLINGS
National Council of Provinces

 1. The Chairperson

     a) Discussion Paper 114: Statutory Law Revision (Legislation
        administered by the Department of Transport, Project 25 – May 2008.




        Referred to the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
        Affairs.

                           WEDNESDAY, 2 JULY 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Referral of Bill to National House of Traditional Leaders


    The Secretary to Parliament has, in accordance with section 18(1) of
    the Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework Act, 2003 (Act No.
    41 of 2003), referred the National House of Traditional Leaders Bill [B
    56 – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 76) and the Traditional Leadership
    and Governance Framework Amendment Bill [B 57 – 2008] (National
    Assembly – sec 76) to the National House of Traditional Leaders, which
    must, within 30 days from the date of the referral, make any comments
    it wishes to make.
2.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) Repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment of Certain
         Laws Amendment Bill [B 50 – 2008] – Act No 7 of 2008 (assented to
         and signed by President on 26 June 2008).

                           WEDNESDAY, 9 JULY 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills sumitted in terms of Joint Rule 159


    1) National Environment Laws Amendment Bill, 2008, submitted by the
       Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism.


       Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and
       Tourism and the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces
1.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Agreement between
   the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the
   Republic of Sudan for the avoidance of double taxation and the
   prevention of fiscal evasion with respect to taxes on income, dated 24
   June 2008.

      The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the request for
      approval by Parliament of the Agreement between the Government of the
      Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic of the
      Sudan for the avoidance of double taxation and the prevention of
      fiscal evasion with respect to taxes on income, recommends that the
      House, in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, approves the
      said Agreement.

   Request to be considered

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Protocol amending
   the Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and
   the Government of Australia for the avoidance of double taxation and the
   prevention of fiscal evasion with respect to taxes on income, dated 24
   June 2008.

      The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the request for
      approval by Parliament of the Protocol amending the Agreement between
      the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
      Australia for the avoidance of double taxation and the prevention of
      fiscal evasion with respect to taxes on income, referred to it in
      terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, reports that it approves
      the agreement.

   Request to be considered
3.    Report of the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs on
    the National Environmental Management: Waste Bill [B39B-2007], dated 24
    June 2008:

      The Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs, having
      considered the National Environmental Management: Waste Bill  [B39B-
      2007] (National Assembly – sec 76), referred to it and classified by
      the JTM as a section 76 Bill, reports the Bill with amendments [B39C
      – 2007].

4.    Report of the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs on
    the National Environment Laws Amendment Bill [B35-2007], dated 24 June
    2008:

      The Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs, having
      considered the National Environment Laws Amendment Bill [B35-2007]
      (National Assembly – sec 76), referred to it and classified by the JTM
      as a section 76 Bill, reports the Bill with amendments [B35A– 2007].

                            FRIDAY, 11 JULY 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills
    (1)    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism


         (a)      National Environment Laws Amendment Bill [B 66 – 2008]
             (National Assembly – proposed sec 76) [Explanatory summary of
             Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
             Government Gazette No 31239 of  11 July 2008.]


         (b)      National Environmental Management: Protected Areas
             Amendment Bill [B 67 – 2008] (National Assembly – proposed sec
             75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
             introduction published in Government Gazette No 31239 of 11
             July 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Environmental Affairs and Tourism of the National Assembly, as
             well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
             classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)    Government Notice No 612 published in Government Gazette No
         31116 dated 5 June 2008: Amendment of the framework for the 2010
         FIFA World Cup Stadiums Development Grant published in Government
         Gazette No 30978, in terms of the Division of Revenue Act, 2008
         (Act No 2 of 2008).


      b) Government Notice No R.680 published in Government Gazette No
         31176 dated 25 June 2008: Amendment of schedule No 2 (No.2/302),
         in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


       c) Government Notice No R.681 published in Government Gazette No
          31176 dated 25 June 2008: Amendment of schedule No 2 (No.2/303),
          in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


       d) Government Notice No R.682 published in Government Gazette No
          31176 dated 25 June 2008: Amendment of schedule No 2 (No.2/304),
          in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

 2. The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

       a) Register of Debt Collectors in terms of section 12(1) of the Debt
          Collectors Act, 1998 (Act No 114 of 1998).

                            TUESDAY, 29 JULY 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills


    (1)    Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 13 - 2008] – Act No 3 of 2008
         (assented to and signed by President on 17 July 2008).

      2) Taxation Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 14 – 2008] – Act No 4 of
         2008 (assented to and signed by President on 28 June 2008).

      3) National Regulator for Compulsory Specifications Bill [B 47B –
         2007] – Act No 5 of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 1
         July 2008).


      4) Social Assistance Amendment Bill [B 17 – 2008 (Reprint)] – Act No 6
         of 2008 (assented to and signed by President on 9 July 2008).

      5) Standards Bill [B 46B– 2007 (Reprint)] – Act No 8 of 2008 (assented
         to and signed by President on 15 July 2008).

      6) Appropriation Bill [B 3 – 2008] – Act No 9 of 2008 (assented to and
         signed by President on 17 July 2008).

      7) National Gambling Amendment Bill [B 31D – 2007] – Act No 10 of 2008
         (assented to and signed by President on 10 July 2008).


2.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(2) classified the following
         Bills as section 74 Bills:

         (a)      Constitution Fourteenth Amendment Bill [B 62 – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 74).

         (b)      Constitution Fifteenth Amendment Bill [B 63 – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 74).


    (2)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(3) classified the following
         Bills as section 75 Bills:

         (a)      Companies Bill [B 61 – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75).


          b) General Laws (Loss of Membership of National Assembly,
             Provincial Legislature or Municipal Council) Amendment Bill [B
             64 – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)    Code of Good Administrative Conduct in terms of the Promotion of
         Administrative Justice Act, 2000 (Act No 3 of 2000).

2.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)    Government Notice No 696 published in Government Gazette No
        31180 dated 4 July 2008: Determination of public benefit
        activities, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of
        1962).


      b) Government Notice No 830 published in Government Gazette No 31190
         dated 4 July 2008: Rate on the interest on government loans, in
         terms of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of
         1999).

      c) Proclamation No 28 published in Government Gazette No 31246 dated
         14 July 2008: Transfer of the administration of the Land and
         Agricultural Development Bank Act, 2002 (Act No 15 of 2002) (the
         Act) and powers and functions entrusted by the Minister responsible
         for Agriculture to the Minister of Finance, in terms of section 97
         of the Constitution of South Africa, 1996.

      d) Government Notice No R.630 published in Government Gazette No 31123
         dated 4 June 2008: Amendment of schedule No 2 (No 2/300), in terms
         of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

      e) Government Notice No R.631 published in Government Gazette No 31123
         dated 4 June 2008: Amendment of schedule No 2 (No 2/301), in terms
         of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

      f) Government Notice No R.698 published in Government Gazette No 31181
         dated 26 June 2008: Cancellation of an appointment of an authorized
         dealer in foreign exchange: Rennies Bank Limited in terms of the
         Exchange and Control Regulations.

      g) Government Notice No R.699 published in Government Gazette No 31181
         dated 26 June 2008: Appointment of an authorised dealer in foreign
         exchange: Bidvest Bank Limited in terms of the Exchange and Control
         Regulations.

      h) Government Notice No 702 published in Government Gazette No 31184
         dated 27 June 2008: Exemption from provisions of the Act to
         facilitate ESKOM’s electricity price increase, in terms of the
         Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
         of 2003).

      i) Government Notice No 797 published in Government Gazette No 31195
         dated 27 June 2008: Effective date of ESKOM’s electricity price
         increase for municipalities and municipal entities, in terms of the
         Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56
         of 2003).

 3. The Minister of Trade and Industry

      a) Government Notice No 304 published in Government Gazette No 30874
         dated 20 March 2008: Standards matters, in terms of the Standards
         Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).

      b) Government Notice No 304 published in Government Gazette No 30886
         dated 20 March 2008: AgriBEE Sector Charter on Black Economic
         Empowerment, in terms of the Broad-Based Black Economic Empowerment
         Act, 2003 (Act No 53 of 2003).


      c) Government Notice No 361 published in Government Gazette No 30917
         dated 4 April 2008: Amendment to the compulsory specification for
         vehicles of Category N1, in terms of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act
         No 29 of 1993).

      d) Government Notice No 362 published in Government Gazette No 30917
         dated 4 April 2008: Amendment to the compulsory specification for
         vehicles of Category M1, in terms of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act
         No 29 of 1993).

      e) Government Notice No 365 published in Government Gazette No 30917
         dated 4 April 2008: Incorporation of an external company as a
         company in the Republic of South Africa, in terms of the Companies
         Act, 1973 (Act No 61 of 1973).

      f) Government Notice No 366 published in Government Gazette No 30917
         dated 4 April 2008: Regulations relating to the payment of levy and
         the issues of sales permits in regard to compulsory specifications:
         Amendment, in terms of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).

      g) Government Notice No 515 published in Government Gazette No 31021
         dated 9 May 2008: Notice in terms of section 18(3): Withdrawal of
         certificate in terms of section 18(2) of the Trade Metrology Act,
         1973 (Act No 77 of 1973).

      h) Government Notice No R604 published in Government Gazette No 30713
         dated 29 May 2008: Amendments to the National Credit Regulations,
         2006 in terms of the National Credit Act, 2005 (Act No 34 of 2005).

      i) Government Notice No R574 published in Government Gazette No 31084
         dated 30 May 2008: National Building Regulations, in terms of the
         National Building Regulations and Building Standards Act, 1977 (Act
         No 103 of 1977).

      j) Government Notice No R575 published in Government Gazette No 31084
         dated 30 May 2008: Proposed introduction of a compulsory
         specification for preservative treatment of timber, in terms of the
         Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).

      k) Government Notice No R576 published in Government Gazette No 31084
         dated 30 May 2008: Proposed introduction of a compulsory
         specification for lamp controlgear, in terms of the Standards Act,
         1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).

      l) Government Notice No R577 published in Government Gazette No 31084
         dated 30 May 2008: Proposed amendment of the compulsory
         specification for electronic apparatus, in terms of the Standards
         Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).

      m) Government Notice No R578 published in Government Gazette No 31084
         dated 30 May 2008: Regulations: Payment of levy and the issue of
         sales permits in regard to compulsory specifications: Amendment, in
         terms of the Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).

      n) Government Notice No R579 published in Government Gazette No 31084
         dated 30 May 2008: Proposed amendment of the compulsory
         specification for personal floatation aids, in terms of the
         Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).

      o) Government Notice No 603 published in Government Gazette No 31098
         dated 30 May 2008: Incorporation of an external company as a
         company in the Republic of South Africa, in terms of the Companies
         Act, 1973 (Act No 61 of 1973).

      p) Government Notice No R633 published in Government Gazette No 31125
         dated 4 June 2008: Substitution of the regulations relating to the
         standard of training of estate agents, in terms of the Estate
         Agency Affairs Act, 1976 (Act No 112 of 1976).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs
    on the Renaming of High Courts Bill [B 5B-2008], dated 24 June 2008.



    The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
    considered the subject of the Renaming of High Courts Bill [B 5B-2008]
    (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it, reports the Bill with
    amendments as follows:



                    CLAUSE 4

    1.     On page 4, in line 36, after “if” to insert:

        “one or more places have been appointed in terms of section 2(1)(I
        A) within the regional division in respect of which the magistrate
        in question had been appointed for the adjudication of civil
        disputes, and”


                           THURSDAY, 31 JULY 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills

     (1)    Mr P A Gerber


          a) Methodist Church of Southern Africa (Private) Act Repeal Bill
             [B 68 – 2008] (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Bill and
             prior notice of its introduction published in Government
             Gazette No 31159 of 13 June 2008.]


          b) Dutch Reformed Churches Union Act Repeal Bill [B 69 – 2008]
             (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Bill and prior notice
             of its introduction published in Government Gazette No 31160
             of 13 June 2008.]

          c) Bible Society of South Africa Act Repeal Bill [B 70 – 2008]
             (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Bill and prior notice
             of its introduction published in Government Gazette No 31161
             of 13 June 2008.]

          d) The Apostolic Faith Mission of South Africa (Private) Act
             Repeal Bill [B 71 – 2008] (National Assembly – proposed sec
             75) [Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
             Government Gazette No 31158 of 13 June 2008.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Arts and
         Culture of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint
         Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule
         160.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister for Public Enterprises

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Transnet Ltd and the Group
        for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
        the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.

2.    The Minister of Safety and Security

     a) National Instruction on Sexual Offences in terms of section 66 of
        the Criminal Law (Sexual Offences and Related Matters) Amendment
        Act, 2007 (Act No 32 of 2007).


     b) Report of the National Commissioner of the South African Police
        Service (SAPS) for the period of July 2007 to December 2007, in
        terms of section 18(5)(d) of the Domestic Violence Act, 1998 (Act
        No 116 of 1998).

3.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

     a) Report and Financial Statements of Mhlathuze Water for the year
        ended 2007, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements for the year ended June 2007.

National Council of Provinces

1. The Chairperson
     a) Investigation at the Letsemeng Local Municipality in terms of
        section 106 of the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000
        (Act No 32 of 2000).


     b) Notice of Intervention in the Ditsobotla Local Municipality, in
        terms of section 139 of the Constitution, 1996.


     c) Notice of Intervention in the Amajuba District Municipality, in
        terms of section 139 of the Constitution, 1996.


        Referred to the Select Committee on Local Government and
        Administration for consideration and report.


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    Report of the Joint Standing Committee on Defence on employment of
    the South African National Defence Force (SANDF) to the Democratic
    Republic of Congo (DRC) and within the Republic of South Africa, and
    extention of the deployment of the SANDF in other countries, dated 18
    June 2008.


        The Joint Standing Committee on Defence, having considered the
       letters from the President on the employment of the SANDF to the
       Democratic Republic of Congo and within the Republic of South
       Africa, and extension of the deployment of the SANDF in: Burundi,
       the Democratic Republic of Congo, Darfur (Sudan), Central African
       Republic, Uganda, Ethiopia and Nepal, referred to the Committee,
       reports that it has concluded its deliberations thereon.


National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Public Services on the Air Services
    Licensing Amendment Bill [B 25B – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75),
    dated 30 July 2008:


        The Select Committee on Public Services, having considered the
        subject of the Air Services Licensing Amendment Bill [B 25B – 2008]
        (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and classified by the
        Joint Tagging Mechanism  as a section 75 Bill, reports that it has
        agreed to the Bill.

                           TUESDAY, 7 AUGUST 2008

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Report of the Auditor-General on the repair and maintenance of
         correctional centres at the Department of Correctional Services [RP
         121-2008].


2.    The Minister of Finance
    (a)     Responses of the South African Revenue Service (SARS) to the
         Resolution of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on SARS Annual
         Report for the period 2006/2007.




    (b)     Government Notice No 819 published in Government Gazette No
         31293 dated 1 August 2008: Regulations made under section 86: Call
         for comments, in terms of the Cooperative Banks Act, 2007 (Act No
         40 of 2007).




    (c)     Government Notice No 778 published in Government Gazette No
         31256 dated 25 July 2008: Borrowing powers of water boards listed
         under Schedule 3 Part B of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999
         (Act No 1 of 1999).



3.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

    (a)     General Notice No 722 published in Government Gazette No 31209
         dated 4 July 2008: Policy on Boat-Based Whale and Dolphin Watching,
         in terms of the Marine Living Resources Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of
         1998).



    (b)     Government Notice No 723 published in Government Gazette No
         31210 dated 4 July 2008: Policy on White Shark Cage Diving (WSCD),
         in terms of the Marine Living Resources Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of
         1998).




    (c)     Government Notice No 724 published in Government Gazette No
         31211 dated 4 July 2008: Regulations: Management of white shark
         cage diving, in terms of the Marine Living Resources Act, 1998 (Act
         No 18 of 1998).

    (d)     Government Notice No 725 published in Government Gazette No
         31211 dated 4 July 2008: Regulations: Management of boat based
         whale watching and protection of turtles, in terms of the Marine
         Living Resources Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of 1998).




    (e)     General Notice No 868 published in Government Gazette No 31239
         dated 11 July 2008: Introduction of the National Environmental
         Management: Protected Areas Amendment Bill, in terms of the
         National Environmental Management: Protected Areas Amendment Act,
         2003 (Act No 57 of 2003).




    (f)     General Notice No 869 published in Government Gazette No 31239
         dated 11 July 2008: Introduction of the National Environmental
         Management: Protected Areas Amendment Bill, in terms of the
         National Environment Laws Amendment Bill, in terms of the National
         Environmental Management Act, 2003 (Act No 107 of 1998).



    (g)     Government Notice No 742 published in Government Gazette No
         31220 dated 11 July 2008: Correction Notice, in terms of the World
         Heritage Convention act, 1999 (Act No 49 of 1999).




    (h)     Government Notice No 741 published in Government Gazette No
         31220 dated 11 July 2008: Declaration of a Management Authority for
         Ukhahlamba Drakensberg Park World Heritage Site, in terms of the
         World Heritage Convention act, 1999 (Act No 49 of 1999).



    (i)     Government Notice No 741 published in Government Gazette No
         31220 dated 11 July 2008: Declaration of a Management Authority for
         Ukhahlamba Drakensberg Park World Heritage Site, in terms of the
         World Heritage Convention act, 1999 (Act No 49 of 1999).



    (j)     Government Notice No 740 published in Government Gazette No
         31220 dated 11 July 2008: Declaration of a Management Authority for
         Taung Skull Fossil World Heritage Site which is a Component of the
         Fossil Hominid sites of South Africa, in terms of the World
         Heritage Convention act, 1999 (Act No 49 of 1999).



    (k)     Government Notice No 739 published in Government Gazette No
         31220 dated 11 July 2008: Declaration of a Management Authority for
         the Richtersveld Cultural and Botanical Landscape World Heritage
         Site, in terms of the World Heritage Convention act, 1999 (Act No
         49 of 1999).



    (l)     Government Notice No 738 published in Government Gazette No
         31220 dated 11 July 2008: Declaration of a Management Authority for
         Makapan Valley World Heritage Site which is a Component of the
         Fossil Hominid Sites of South Africa, in terms of the World
         Heritage Convention act, 1999 (Act No 49 of 1999).



4.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Botshelo Water for the year
         ended 2007, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for the year ended June 2007.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Insurance Laws
    Amendment Bill [B26B – 2008], dated 6 August 2008:

    The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the Insurance Laws
    Amendment Bill [B 26B—2008] (National Assembly—sec 75) referred to it
    and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism; reports the Bill with
    proposed amendments as follows:

                                  CLAUSE 1
    1.     On page 4, in line 17, to omit “72(1A)” and to
substitute”72(2A)”;

                                  CLAUSE 6
    1.     On page 6, in line 41, to omit “acordance” and to substitute
“accordance”.

                                  CLAUSE 18

    1.     On page 11, in line 31, after “paragraph” to omit “(b)” and to
      insert “(a)”;
    2.     On page 11, in line 35, after “paragraph” to omit “(b)” and to
      insert “(a)”;
    3.     On page 11, in line 42, after “paragraph” to omit “(b)” and to
      insert “(a)”;
    4.     On page 11, in line 45, after “paragraph” to omit “(b)” and to
      insert “(a)”;
    5.     On page 12, in line 2, to omit “(b)” and to insert “(a)”;
    6.     On page 12, in line 11, after “paragraph” to omit “(b)” and to
      insert “(a)”;
    7.     On page 12, in line 13, after “paragraph” to omit “(b)” and to
      insert “(a)”;
    8.     On page 12, in line 18, after “paragraph” to omit “(b)” and to
      insert “(a)”;
    9.     On page 12, in line 37, to omit “2(b)” and to insert “2(a)”.

                                  CLAUSE 46

    1.     On page 26, in line 34, after “paragraph” to omit “(b)” and to
      insert “(a)”.
    2.     On page 26, in line 38, after “paragraph” to omit “(b)” and to
      insert “(a)”;
    3.     On page 26, in line 45, after “paragraph” to omit “(b)” and to
      insert “(a)”;
    4.     On page 26, in line 48, after “paragraph” to omit “(b)” and to
      insert “(a)”;
    5.      On page 27, in line 11, after “paragraph” to omit “(b)” and to
      insert “(a)”;
    6.     On page 27, in line 13, after “paragraph” to omit “(b)” and to
      insert “(a)”;
    7.     On page 27, in line 19, after “paragraph” to omit “(b)” and to
      insert “(a)”;
    8.     On page 27, in line 37, to omit “2(b)” and to insert “2(a)”;

                                  CLAUSE 52

    1.      On page 29, in line 42, to omit the second “a” and to insert”an
           accident and”;
    2.      On page 30, in line 5, to omit “a” and to insert”an accident
           and”.

                           MONDAY, 11 AUGUST 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson
1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(3) classified the following
         Bill as a section 75 Bill:


         (a)     National Environmental Management: Protected Areas
             Amendment Bill [B 67 – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75)

    (2)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(4) classified the following
         Bill as a section 76 Bill:


          a) National Environment Laws Amendment Bill [B 66 – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 76).

National Council of Provinces

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance for consideration:


          (a)     Submission of the Financial and Fiscal Commission on the
             Division of Revenue Bill for 2009-2010, tabled in terms of
             section 9(1) of the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act,
             1997 (Act No 97 of 1997).

    2 The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Economic
        and Foreign Affairs for consideration:


          (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Minerals and Energy
             for 2008/2009-2010/2011.

    3.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration:


          (a)     Strategic Plan of the Office of the Public Protector for 1
             April 2008 – 31 March 2012.


          (b)     Draft Regulations in terms of the Criminal Law (Sexual
             Offences and Related Matters) Amendment Act, 2007 (Act No 32 of
             2007).


          (c)     Government Notice No R.391 published in Government Gazette
             No 30953 dated 11 April 2008: Regulations prescribing the
             tariff of allowances payable to witnesses in criminal
             proceedings, in terms of the Criminal Proceedings Act, 1977
             (Act No 51 of 1977).


          (d)     Government Notice No R.392 published in Government Gazette
             No 30953 dated 11 April 2008: Regulations prescribing the
             tariff of allowances payable to psychiatrists and clinical
             psychologists who appear as witnesses in court, in terms of the
             Criminal Proceedings Act, 1977 (Act No 51 of 1977).


          (e)     Government Notice No R.393 published in Government Gazette
             No 30953 dated 11 April 2008: Tariff payable to a psychiatrists
             or clinical psychologists for an enquiry into the mental
             condition of an accused, in terms of the Criminal Proceedings
             Act, 1977 (Act No 51 of 1977).


          (f)     Government Notice No R.394 published in Government Gazette
             No 30953 dated 11 April 2008: Tariff of allowances payable to
             witnesses in civil cases, in terms of the Magistrates’ Courts
             Act, 1944 (Act No 32 of 1944) and the Supreme Court Act, 1959
             (Act No 59 of 1959).


    4.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Education and Recreation for consideration and report:


          (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Nelson Mandela
             National Museum for 2006-2007, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP
             242-2007].

     5. The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Local
        Government and Administration for consideration:


          a) The Business Plan for the Department of Provincial and Local
             Government for 2008-09.


          (b)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Provincial and Local
             Government for 2007-2012.


          c) Strategic Plan of the Public Service Commission (PSC) for
             2008/2009-2010/2011.


    6.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs and the Joint Standing
        Committee on Defence:


          (a)     The Acting President of the Republic submitted a letter
             dated 15 April 2008 to the Chairperson of the National Council
             of Provinces informing Members of the Council of the extension
             of the employment of the South African National Defence Force
             in the Central African Republic, for service in fulfilment of
             the International Obligations of the Republic of South Africa
             towards the Central African Republic.


          (b)     The Acting President of the Republic submitted a letter
             dated 9 May 2008 to the Chairperson of the National Council of
             Provinces informing Members of the Council of the employment of
             the South African National Defence Force in the Democratic
             Republic of the Congo, for service in fulfilment of the
             International Obligations of the Republic of South Africa
             towards the Democratic Republic of Congo.


          (c)     The President of the Republic submitted a letter dated 23
             May 2008 to the Chairperson of the National Council of
             Provinces informing Members of the Council of the employment of
             the South African National Defence Force for a service in co-
             operation with the South African Police Service.


    7.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Education and Recreation for consideration:


          (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Sport and Recreation
             South Africa for 2008-2012.

    8.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Land
        and Environmental Affairs for consideration and report.


          (a)     Report of the Commission on Restitution of Land Rights for
             2007-2008 [RP 30-2008].


    9.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Economic and Foreign Affairs and the Select Committee on Finance
        for consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Accelerated and Shared
             Growth Initiative for South Africa (ASGISA) for 2007.


     10. The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Labour
         and Public Enterprises and the Select Committee on Economic and
         Foreign Affairs:


          a) Joint Initiative on Priority Skills Acquisition (JIPSA) –
             Report on Activities in 2007, April 2008.

     11. The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Local
         Government and Administration for consideration:


          a) Municipal Performance Report for 2005-2006, tabled in terms of
             section 48 of the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000
             (Act No 32 of 2000).


          b) Report of the National Disaster Management Centre for 2006-
             2007, tabled in terms of section 24 of the Disaster Management
             Act, 2002 (Act No 57 of 2002).

          (c)     Report on the Implementation of the Intergovernmental
             Relations Framework Act for 2005-2006 and 2006-2007, tabled in
             terms of section 46 of the Intergovernmental Relations
             Framework Act, 2005 (Act No 13 of 2005).

     12. The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Education and Recreation for consideration:


          (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Arts and Culture for 1
             April 2008/09 – 31 March 2010/11.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Report of the Auditor-General on a performance audit of the
         management of the Municipal Infrastructure Grant at the Department
         of Provincial and Local Government – June 2008 [RP 120-2008].


    (b)     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
         South African Institute for Drug Free Sport.


    (c)     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
         Iziko Museums of Cape Town.
    (d)     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
         Artscape

 2. The Minister of Finance

    (a)    Convention between the Republic of South Africa and the Kingdom
         of the Netherlands for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the
         Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income and on
         Capital, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution,
         1996.


    (b)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention between the Republic of
         South Africa and the Kingdom of the Netherlands for the Avoidance
         of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with
         respect to Taxes on Income and on Capital.


    (c)    Protocol Amending the Convention between the Republic of South
         Africa and the Kingdom of the Netherlands for the Avoidance of
         Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect
         to Taxes on Income and on Capital, tabled in terms of section
         231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


    (d)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Protocol Amending the Convention
         between the Republic of South Africa and the Kingdom of the
         Netherlands for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention
         of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income and on Capital.

 3. The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

    (a)    Proclamation No R.23 published in Government Gazette No 31189
         dated 27 June 2008: Commencement of section 62(1) to (5) of the
         Regulation of Interception of Communications and Provision of
         Communication-related Information Act, 2002 (Act No 70 of 2002).

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

        a) Notice issued in terms of section 106(1)(b) of the Local
           Government Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000), on
           allegations of fraud, corruption, or any other serious
           malpractices within the Govan Mbeki Local Municipality.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    The following report replaces the report published on page 1492 of
   the ATC of 7 August 2008:

   Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Insurance Laws Amendment
   Bill [B26B – 2008], dated 6 August 2008:




       The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the Insurance
       Laws Amendment Bill [B26B—2008] (National Assembly—sec 75), referred
       to it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism, reports that it
       has agreed to the Bill.


2. Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs on
   the Mandating Procedures of Provinces Bill [B8D-2007] (National Council
   of Provinces – sec 76(2)), dated 25 June 2008.


       The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
       considered the subject of the Mandating Procedures of Provinces Bill
       [B8D-2007] (National Council of Provinces – sec 76(2)), amended by
       the National Assembly and referred to the Committee, reports that it
       has agreed to the Bill.


                           TUESDAY, 12 AUGUST 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Withdrawal of Bill

    The Minister of Defence withdrew the following Bill on 4 August 2008:
    (1)    Defence Amendment Bill [B 6 - 2008] (National Assembly - sec
         75).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

  1. The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

     (a)    2006-2007 Yearly Report to Parliament in terms of section 26(1)
           of the National Environmental Management Act (NEMA), 1998 (Act
           No 107 of 1998).

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

     a) Notice of intervention in the Mohokare Local Municipality, in terms
        of section 139(1)(b) of the Constitution, 1996.

        Referred to the Select Committee on Local Government and
        Administration for consideration and report.


     b) Tabling of the correspondence from Mr L L Makhasi, a community
        member in the Inkwanca Local Municipality, Eastern Cape Province.

        Referred to the Select Committee on Members Legislative Proposal.
COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

   1. Report of the Select Committee of Economic and Foreign Affairs on the
      Consumer Protection Bill [B19-2008] (National Council of Provinces –
      sec 76(2)), dated 6 August 2008.

      The Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs, having
      considered the subject of the Consumer Protection Bill [B19-2008]
      (National Council of Provinces – sec 76(2)), referred to it, and
      classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) as a section 76 Bill,
      reports the Bill with amendments [B19A 2008].

   2. Report of the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs on
      the Liquor Products Amendment Bill [B22B-2008] (National Assembly –
      sec 75), dated 7 August 2008:

      The Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs, having
      considered the subject of the Liquor Products Amendment Bill [22B-
      2008] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it, reports the Bill
      with a proposed amendment as follows:

                                  Clause 2
1.    On page 3, in line 12, after "shall", to insert ", after consultation
with Parliament,”

                          WEDNESDAY, 13 AUGUST 2008

COMMITTEE REPORTS
National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Land and  Environmental  Affairs  on
      the Agricultural Debt  Management  Repeal  Bill  [B24-2008]  (National
      Assembly – sec 75), dated 7 August 2008:

      The Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs, having
      considered the subject of the Agricultural Debt Management Repeal Bill
      [B24-2008] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it, reports that
      it has agreed to the Bill.

                           FRIDAY, 15 AUGUST 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Translations of Bills submitted


     (1)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


          a) Veertiende Wysigingswetsontwerp op die Grondwet [W 62 – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 74)


             This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the
             Constitution Fourteenth Amendment Bill [B 62 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 74).


          b) Vyftiende Wysigingswetsontwerp op die Grondwet [W 63 – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 74)


             This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the
             Constitution Fifteenth Amendment Bill [B 63 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 74).


          c) Algemene Regswysigingswetsontwerp (Verlies van Lidmaatskap van
             Nasionale Vergadering, Provinsiale Wetgewer of Munisipale
             Raad) [W 64 – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75)


             This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the General
             Laws (Loss of Membership of National Assembly, Provincial
             Legislature or Municipal Council) Amendment Bill [B 64 – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).

2.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Portfolio Committee on Communications


          a) Broadcasting Amendment Bill [B 72 – 2008] (National Assembly –
             proposed sec 75) [Draft Bill and memorandum setting out its
             objects published in Government Gazette No 31215 of 4 July
             2008.]


             Bill initiated by the Portfolio Committee on Communications of
             the National Assembly, and referred to the Joint Tagging
             Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

3.    Withdrawal of report tabled

      Please Note: The Report of the Parliamentary Oversight Authority on
      Proposed Policies on Parliamentary Travel and Computer and other
      Equipment for Members of Parliament, published on page 613 of the
      Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of 13 May 2008, is
      withdrawn.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1. The Minister of Finance

   (a)      Agreement on Customs and Tax Administration Co-operation between
        the Government of the Republic of South Africa, the Government of
        the Republic of India and the Government of the Federative Republic
        of Brazil, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
        1996.


    a) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement.

    b) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and
       the Government of the Republic of the Sudan regarding Mutual
       Assistance between their Customs Administration, tabled in terms of
       section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

    c) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement.

    d) Annual Report of the Bank Supervision Department of the South
       African Reserve Bank for 2007.

    e) Annual Report of the Registrar of Friendly Societies for 2006.


2. The Minister of Transport

    a) Air Services Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
       South Africa and the Swiss Federal Council, tabled in terms of
       section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


    b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement.

                           MONDAY, 18 AUGUST 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces
1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance for consideration and report:


         (a)     Convention between the Republic of South Africa and the
              Kingdom of the Netherlands for the Avoidance of Double
              Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to
              Taxes on Income and on Capital, tabled in terms of section
              231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention between the
              Republic of South Africa and the Kingdom of the Netherlands
              for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of
              Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income and on
              Capital.


         (c)     Protocol Amending the Convention between the Republic of
              South Africa and the Kingdom of the Netherlands for the
              Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal
              Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income and on Capital,
              tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


         (d)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Protocol Amending the
              Convention between the Republic of South Africa and the
              Kingdom of the Netherlands for the Avoidance of Double
              Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to
              Taxes on Income and on Capital.

                           TUESDAY, 19 AUGUST 2008
ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)    Bills passed by National Assembly on 19 August 2008:


          a) Films and Publications Amendment Bill [B 27D – 2006] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).


          b) Social Housing Bill [B 29D – 2007] (National Assembly – sec
             76(1)).


    (2)    Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 19 August 2008:


          a) Financial Services Laws General Amendment Bill [B 21B – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).


          b) Agricultural Debt Management Repeal Bill [B 24 – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).


          c) Insurance Laws Amendment Bill [B 26B – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).


          d) Special Pensions Amendment Bill [B 29B – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).

2.    Bill referred to Mediation Committee

    (1)     Bill, amended by National Council of Provinces and rejected by
        National Assembly on 19 August 2008, referred to Mediation
        Committee in terms of Joint Rule 186(1)(b):


         (a)      Housing Development Agency Bill [B 1D – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 76(1)).

3.    Translation of Bill submitted


     (1)    Portfolio Committee on Communications


        a) Uitsaaiwysigingswetsontwerp [W 72 – 2008] (National Assembly –
           sec 75)


             This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the
             Broadcasting Amendment Bill [B 72 – 2008] (National Assembly –
             sec 75).

4.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(3) classified the following
         Bills as section 75 Bills:

          a) Broadcasting Amendment Bill [B 72 – 2008] (National Assembly –
             sec 75)

          b) Judicial Matters Amendment Bill [B 48 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 75)
National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


    (1)    Bills passed by National Assembly and transmitted for
         concurrence on 19 August 2008:


         (a)      National Qualifications Framework Bill [B 33B – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).


            The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Education
             and Recreation of the National Council of Provinces.


         (b)      Higher Education Amendment Bill [B 34 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).


            The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Education
             and Recreation of the National Council of Provinces.


         (c)      General and Further Education and Training Quality
             Assurance Amendment Bill [B 35B – 2008] (National Assembly –
             sec 76(1)).


            The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Education
             and Recreation of the National Council of Provinces.
         (d)      Skills Development Bill [B 49B – 2008 (National Assembly –
             sec 75)].


            The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Labour and
             Public Enterprises of the National Council of Provinces.


         (e)      Broadcasting Amendment Bill [B 72 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).


            The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Labour and
             Public Enterprises of the National Council of Provinces.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister of Education

      a) Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Quality
         Assurance in General and Further Education and Training – Umalusi
         for 2007-2008, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
         the Financial Statements for 2007-2008.




COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


CREDA INSERT REPORT T080819e-insert1 – PAGES 1532- 1550

