---
title: 'National Assembly - 16 May 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2008-05-16
---

FRIDAY, 16 MAY 2008
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 9:03.

House Chairperson Mr K O Bapela took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chairperson, on behalf of the ACDP, I give notice that I
shall move:


  That the House debates the controversial issues surrounding the teaching
  of evolution in South African schools.

Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Is there any other motion?
[Interjections.] I looked around and you didn’t stand up. [Interjections.]
It’s too small? My apologies.
Mrs S A SEATON: I hereby give notice that I shall move as follows at the
next sitting of the House:

  That the House –


     1) notes with concern the incidences of violence against foreign
        nationals in Alexandra and other areas;


     2) rejects the violence against foreigners in the strongest terms
        possible, and


     3) accepts the IFP’s proposal for the immediate establishment of a
        commission of inquiry into the root causes for the attacks on
        foreigners, the commission’s terms of reference to include making
        recommendations to government on how to prevent future attacks.

                 CONDOLENCES TO THE FAMILY OF PINKY MSELEKU

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnu B Z ZULU (ANC): Singumbutho wesizwe i-ANC sifisa ukwedlulisa ukuzwelana
kwethu nomndeni wakwaMseleku ngokushona kukaNksz Pinky Mseleku. UNksz
Mseleku ushone mhla zi-4 kuNhlaba 2008. Ubekade aziwa kakhulu ngemisebenzi
yakhe emihle kwezomculo kanye nemidlalo yaseshashalazini. Ungomunye
wabasunguli be-Cape Film Commission kanti futhi uke wahola ne-National
Television and Video Association. UNksz Pinky Mseleku uyohlala ekhunjulwa
njalo ngemisebenzi yakhe yokugqugquzela umculo we-jazz kusukela eminyakeni
ye-1960. Ngesikhathi esekudingisweni eseZimbabwe uke wadlala kanye
nezingqungqulu zomculo ezifana no-Hugh Masekela, okwathi emva kwalokho
wamenywa umfowabo, uBheki Mseleku, ukuthi ayodlala e-London.

Ekubuyeni kwakhe ekudingisweni uNksz Mseleku wavula isikole sokuphucula
imfundo eThekwini ngenjongo yokusiza intsha ehluphekile. Esebenzisa
ezokungcebeleka uNksz Pinky Mseleku wabamba iqhaza elikhulu emzabalazweni
wenkululeko yaleli zwe. Sithi kwabakwaMseleku akwehlanga lungehli!
Ngiyabonga. (Translation of isiZulu member’s statement follows.)

[Mr B Z ZULU (ANC): The African National Congress sends its condolences to
the Mseleku family on the death of Miss Pinky Mseleku. Miss Mseleku passed
away on 4 May 2008. She was well known for her music and stage plays. She
was one of the founders of the Cape Town Film Commission, and she was also
a former acting head of the National Television and Video Association. Miss
Mseleku will always be remembered for promoting jazz music from the 1960s.
While in exile in Zimbabwe, she performed with jazz legends like Hugh
Masekela. She was later invited by her brother, Bheki Mseleku, to perform
in London.

When Miss Mseleku returned from exile, she opened a further education
school especially for poor pupils in and around Durban. Miss Mseleku used
the entertainment industry to play a role in the struggle for freedom for
this country. And to the Mseleku family, we say that what happened is a
matter of destiny. May they find solace in accepting it as such. Thank
you.]

      LACK OF RESPONSE TO RECOMMENDATIONS OF PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr E W TRENT (DA): Chairperson, it is clear that government is not serious
about rooting out financial mismanagement in government departments. The
latest example of this indifference comes from Wednesday’s meeting with the
Standing Committee on Public Accounts, where we met with the Public Service
Commission, PSC.

The PSC questioned the seriousness of departments when it comes to
reporting financial misconduct, taking action against officials and co-
operating with the commission. Whilst there has been a significant increase
in the number of cases reported, few end in criminal proceedings. In fact,
in 83% of the cases of guilty officials, they were merely given written
warnings. Even more worrying is the decline in the discharge or firing of
officials from the Public Service as an appropriate sanction.

Parliament has allocated more than R100 million to the PSC in the current
year, yet departments often simply choose to ignore the recommendations
made in these reports, thereby undermining the intended role of the PSC in
its attempt to help with good governance. The large number of departments
who receive qualified audits year after year illustrates this point.

The DA calls on the Minister to explain to Parliament what she has done in
response to the PSC recommendations in more than 30 reports. There are 30
reports that I know of – there might be more – that have been tabled since
January last year. That’s not even two years. There are 30 reports. What
has the Minister done to make sure that the departments respond to those
recommendations?

I think it’s shocking because, in fact, what she is doing now, by  not
responding or insisting on a response, is condoning what I would call
``fruitless expenditure’’. [Time expired.]

                   ISSUES AROUND TEACHERS’ STRIKE IN 2007

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs S A SEATON (IFP): Chairperson, the general strike by Public Service
workers during 2007 in a dispute over pay increases caused major damage to
various sectors of South African society, not least the education sector,
where learners suffered greatly due to absent teachers and classroom
disruptions.

Many thousands of teachers went on strike, but there were also many
thousands of other teachers who did not go on strike and diligently showed
up at their schools, willing to teach. Of course, the ``no work, no pay’’
rule applied to the strike, and the IFP has no problem with that, but we do
have a major problem with the fact that deductions were made from the
salaries of teachers who had not gone on strike.

Due to administrative incompetence, thousands of teachers suffered
unnecessary financial loss, putting them in a precarious position. To add
insult to injury, many thousands of teachers are, to this day, still
waiting for the erroneous deductions to be rectified by the Education
department. That this is allowed to continue almost a full year later is
indicative of the dismissive attitude of the department to teachers and
their contribution to the education of our youth.

The IFP therefore calls on the national Minister of Education to urgently
intervene in the provincial departments to ensure that the deductions made
from salaries of teachers who did not participate in last year’s strikes
are immediately returned to those dedicated teachers who have suffered
enough.

                            ALLEGATIONS OF RACISM

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr C V BURGESS (ANC): Chairperson, during the last constituency period, the
Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security undertook tours around some
parts of our country.

Among the places visited was Badplaas police station to investigate
allegations of racism. It had been alleged that white police officers use
separate toilets from the black police officers and black police officers
are not allowed to use vehicles.

Another incident of racism took place in the North West. A father and his
son were arrested following an alleged racially motivated attack during
which one victim’s arm was broken at Swartruggens. Samuel Morumula and
James Mpeti, both aged 58, were assaulted at Doringskom Farm where they
wanted to meet the owner to discuss business on Worker’s Day last week.

Racism, one of the great evils of our time, bedevils human relations
between individuals and nations and across continents. It brutalises entire
peoples, destroys persons, warps the process of thought and injects into
human society a foul air of tension, mutual antagonism and hatred. It
demeans and dehumanises both victim and perpetrator, locking them into a
vile relationship of master race and untermenschen – superior and inferior
– each with his position defined by race.

The ANC condemns all forms of racism and calls on all South Africans to
fight and expose racism in all its forms. [Applause.]

                     POST-ELECTION VIOLENCE IN ZIMBABWE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs C DUDLEY (ACDP): Chairperson, the following is not just news headlines,
but it is the reported reaction of four international ambassadors and
retired South African army generals investigating post-election violence in
Zimbabwe: “Shocking levels of state-sponsored terror”, “Extreme brutality”,
“Murder”, “A horrifying picture”, “Absolutely urgent the world sees what is
going on”, “Violence has to stop.”

Twenty-four people have been murdered and a thousand hospitalised in what
Doctors for Human Rights say is unprecedented brutality and callousness.
Reporters have said President Mbeki was shaken by these reports. Is he
shaken enough to say what needs to be said?

In response to a previous ACDP statement in this House, the hon Deputy
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ms Van der Merwe, assured us that government
would be vigilant. So, when will enough people have been beaten, tortured
and murdered before the vigilance leads to official condemnation?

SADC says Zimbabwe’s political environment is not secure, safe or fair for
a runoff vote for the presidency. The ACDP agrees; however, every extra
night, thousands more Zimbabweans are violated. The runoff vote must be
held without delay and South Africa and SADC can and must induce this. As
more and more people seek asylum in South Africa every day, enormous
pressure is being placed on overcrowded and underresourced communities.
Last night on TV we saw foreigners fleeing to police stations because of
xenophobic violence in Alexandra, and now in Diepsloot.

Yes, President Mbeki denounced the brutality, but why is brutality wrong in
South Africa, but condoned in Zimbabwe? Thank you.

                       COLLAPSE OF ZIMBABWEAN ECONOMY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr C P MULDER (FF Plus): Chairperson, the crisis in Zimbabwe is getting
more serious every day. The Zimbabwean Central Bank yesterday issued a new
Z$500 million banknote worth less than R15,00 to try and ease cash
shortages amid the world’s highest rate of inflation. The previous highest
denomination note was for Z$215 million issued only 10 days ago.
Toe Mugabe president van Zimbabwe geword het in 1980 was die inflasiesyfer
7% en teen 1990 het dit gestyg tot 17%. In 2000, toe die Zimbabwiese
kiesers Mr Mugabe se referendum verwerp het, was dit reeds 56% en gister
was die inflasiekoers 165 000%.

Sedert die verwerping van die konstitusionele referendum in 2000 is die
politiek in Zimbabwe gekenmerk deur die agteruitgang en wegbeweeg van
demokratiese bestuur. Dinge soos demokratiese verkiesings, die
onafhanklikheid van die regbank, regsoewereiniteit en die vryheid van
rassediskriminasie het in die slag gebly. Hoe het die ANC-regering daarop
gereageer? Met stille diplomasie. Stille diplomasie wat gelei het tot
stilswyende goedkeuring en geimpliseerde ondersteuning. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[In 1980, when Mugabe became president of Zimbabwe, the inflation rate was
7% and by 1990 it had increased to 17%. In 2000, when the Zimbabwean voters
rejected Mr Mugabe’s referendum, it was already at 56% and yesterday the
inflation rate was 165 000%.

Since the rejection of the constitutional referendum in 2000, politics in
Zimbabwe has been characterised by the deterioration in and a movement away
from democratic governance. Issues such as democratic elections, the
independence of the judiciary, the rule of law and freedom from racial
discrimination have been sacrificed. How did the ANC government respond to
this? With quiet diplomacy. Quiet diplomacy which has led to tacit approval
and implied support.]

At independence in 1980 Z$1 was worth more than US$1. Today just one in
five of the adult population is believed to have a formal job and some 3
million Zimbabweans have left the country for a new life in South Africa.
These three million Zimbabweans can do Southern Africa, Africa and the
world a big favour. There is enough time until the postponed second-round
election takes place. Return to Zimbabwe and use your democratic vote to
get rid of the dictator Mugabe once and for all.

                         HUMANITARIAN AID TO MYANMAR

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S J NJIKELANA (ANC): Chairperson, at a recent meeting of the EU
Commission, the Foreign Policy Chief of the EU, Mr Xavier Solana, made the
following statement: “We have to use every means to help those people”,
obviously referring to the people of Myanmar, due to the tragedies that
have recently befallen them.

Furthermore, the Junior Minister of Human Rights in France, Rama Yade,
indicated that her country, together with Germany and Britain, was ready to
deliver aid without Burmese government consent, and she made reference to a
2005 UN principle.
What do these statements imply? It baffles me. Even journalists had pains
in further questioning Mr Solana about his dubious statements. Then the
question also arises: Will the Western World once again impose itself on a
sovereign state under the guise of ensuring human aid? On the other hand,
the behaviour and attitude of the Myanmar government, with its alleged
resistance to external humanitarian aid, cannot be condoned at all. Any
endeavour to save human lives in a genuine and honest manner deserves
positive response as well as praise. However, we have to commend the
leadership of Mr Ban Ki-moon in ensuring that the United Nations provides
the desired aid for the people of Myanmar. As for those who want to thrive
on human tragedy and use it for selfish ends as well as political and
economic interest, I have one message: You are living on borrowed time and
posterity will judge you even when you are in this world no more.

Hi khensa ngopfu. [Thank you very much.]

              COMMENDABLE LEADERSHIP IN CAPE TOWN MUNICIPALITY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr W P DOMAN (DA): Voorsitter, die DA is trots daarop dat die Ouditeur-
generaal weer eens die munisipaliteit Kaapstad, met Helen Zille aan die
spits as burgemeester, ’n skoon, ongekwalifiseerde finansiële verslag vir
die afgelope jaar gegee het.

Dit is maar net weer ’n bewys dat waar die DA leiding neem, skoon
administrasie aan die orde van die dag is. Dat dit vermag is ten spyte van
al die politiekery om van die DA-geleide koalisie ontslae te raak – ons tel
nou al 13 pogings – spreek boekdele vir die leierskap wat aan die dag gelê
word.

Ironies, vermeld die Ouditeur-generaal dat daar verbeter kan word met
waterverslagdoening en skuldinvordering – albei sake wat oorgeërf is van
die vrot administrasie van die ANC onder burgemeester Mfeketo en die ANC se
lakei, die munisipale bestuurder, dr Wallace Mgoqi. [Gelag.]

In skrille kontras met Kaapstad, is daar die swak bestuurde en dikwels
korrupte munisipaliteite onder leiding van die ANC dwarsoor die land. Ons
daag die ANC uit: Stel vir ons ’n lys van ANC-beheerde munisipaliteite
beskikbaar wat ’n ongekwalifiseerde verslag ontvang het. Ek was voorverlede
week in Kimberley waar die Sol Plaatje-munisipaliteit die sewende
agtereenvolgende jaar so swak gevaar het dat die Ouditeur-generaal weereens
geweier het om selfs ’n opinie uit te spreek oor die munisipaliteit se
finansies. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr W P DOMAN (DA): Chairperson, the DA is proud of the fact that the
Auditor-General once again gave Cape Town Municipality, with Helen Zille at
the head as mayor, a clear, unqualified financial report for the past year.
This only illustrates that where the DA takes the lead, clean
administration is the order of the day. The fact that this was achieved
despite all the politicking to get rid of the DA-led coalition – we are
aware of 13 attempts thus far – speaks volumes for the leadership that is
being displayed.

Ironically, the Auditor-General mentions that improvements could be made in
terms of reporting on water and recovering debt – both matters that were
inherited from the ANC’s bad administration under Mayor Mfeketo and the
ANC’s lackey, the municipal manager, Dr Wallace Mqoqi.[Laughter.]

In sharp contrast to Cape Town, there are the badly managed and often
corrupt municipalities under the ANC’s control throughout the country. We
challenge the ANC: Make a list available of ANC-controlled municipalities
that received unqualified reports. The week before last I was in Kimberley,
where the Sol Plaatje Municipality had performed so badly for the seventh
consecutive year that the Auditor-General once again refused to even
express an opinion on the municipality’s finances.]

Section 136 of the Municipal Finance Management Act states that if the MEC
for local government in a province becomes aware that there is a serious
financial problem in a municipality, the MEC must promptly act.

Why are the ANC MECs afraid to act? Why are they neglecting a legislative
duty? Are they afraid of comrades? Are they toeing the party line? Are they
not liable for this inaction? South Africa deserves better financial
management at municipalities. [Applause.]

                         EASTERN CAPE RAIL TRANSPORT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr N B FIHLA (ANC): Yesterday the Eastern Cape Rail Conference got under
way in Port Elizabeth. The conference will, amongst others, investigate
ways to encourage commuters, particularly those living in poor areas, to
make use of rail services.

The conference convenes under the theme: “Back to rail - connecting the
Eastern Cape”, and is hosted by the Eastern Cape Department of Transport
and Roads. The conference will, in search of the means to make rail viable
in the Eastern Cape, look carefully at the framework governing the rail
industry in South Africa, including legislation, regulations and the
involvement of key stakeholders.

The conference will feature an exhibition of the Kei Development Corridor
Mega Projects. Specific projects in the corridor include mega projects in
various sectors such as agriculture, tourism and the industry, such as the
Wild Coast, N2 toll road, Kei Rail, Ugie-Langeni road and mass food
production.
The ANC believes that it is important to encourage people to use rail
transport as there has been an increase in the levels of road traffic from
freight public passenger and private passenger vehicle transport.

There is, furthermore, a need to put measures in place to ensure the
strengthening of rail infrastructure in preparation for the 2010 Fifa World
Cup. The conference also presents an opportunity for the private sector to
take part in the exciting initiatives that are expected to boost economic
development in the Eastern Cape. I thank you.

                     CORRUPTION IN ALLOCATION OF HOUSES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs I MARS (IFP): Chairperson, 26 public servants appeared before the
regional magistrate on Thursday and were fined R2 000 and R5 000 with
alternative six to twelve-month jail sentences, for taking part in housing
scams. A further 30 are to appear in court in connection with similar scams
each month until December. There are thousands of people who have been
struggling and waiting for years for the houses.

It is through unscrupulous public servants such as these that the people
who really qualify for and deserve houses are made to suffer. It is
questionable whether such light fines will be a deterrent and stop
dishonest public servants from committing similar offences in future. The
capacity of the relevant managers, as well as the anti-corruption measures
within the departments concerned, must be questioned and re-examined.

Measures must be taken to correct this mess and root out the criminal
element within this and all government departments. We have got to stop the
rot if we are going to deliver on our promises. I thank you.

                             ICT INFRASTRUCTURE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D A OLIFANT (ANC): Hon Chairperson, the ANC-led government has
identified the Broadband Infraco-led African West Coast Cable, or the AWCC
project for short, as a lead initiative to create sustainable and
comparative international bandwidth market in the country. The process
towards the launch of the undersea cable in partnership with the private
sector and other governments on the continent is at an advanced stage.

The AWCC is a 3 840 gigabits super-cable, which will stretch from the
Western Cape to the United Kingdom with capacity terminating in London.
This project has brought together 40 nations and some of the world’s most
influential telecommunications players in a joint effort to use the state-
of-the-art technology in linking people.

The ANC believes that information and communications technology, along with
biotechnology, can make major contributions to reducing world poverty. This
is because ICT can overcome barriers of social, economic and geographical
isolation and increase access to information and education. I thank you.

                     CONDITION OF SCHOOLS NOT IMPROVING

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G G BOINAMO (DA): Chair, in January two young learners died after they
fell into a pit latrine at Hlalanikahle Primary School in Bushbuckridge.
Subsequent reports by members of the school governing body reveal that the
pit latrines had no foundations and that a slab had merely been placed over
corrugated iron sheets and untreated pine poles that were laid across the
pit. However, the DA is shocked to hear that almost five months later
nothing has been done by the Department of Education to improve the
situation.

While teachers have made their toilets available to the learners, the
children are scared to use them, choosing rather to use school grounds and
not only is that a health hazard but it is also degrading for these
learners.  A reply to a DA question in March revealed that 14 years since
the ANC came into power and promised to make conditions in schools better,
some 80% of public schools in South Africa still either entirely depend on
pit latrines or a combination of other types of sanitation facilities. Only
20% of schools have proper sanitation. The DA calls on the ANC to stop
simply making promises. It needs to start holding accountable those
responsible for the poor delivery of basic services at schools and start
giving our children the education they deserve. Thank you.

                        REHABILITATION OF EX-CONVICTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms B T NGCOBO (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC-led government is indeed making a
difference to the lives of the people. The continued support, networking
and partnership of NGOs from Kokstad with the Correctional Services towards
stability in the community has yielded positive results in the district
towards the rehabilitation of ex-convicts, particularly the youth.

It is worth noting that there is a group of youth that has progressed in
the following areas: A group of five youths has registered a viable general
trading on co-operative for which a tax clearance has been done and
furthermore, has registered with database of different sectors. There is a
group of youths that is running campaigns at the schools around Kokstad
alerting learners of the consequences of being involved in drugs and crime,
as well as addressing the issues of HIV/Aids and teenage pregnancy.

Two members of the youth are engaged in welding and are making burglar bars
and other steel equipment; two have gone back to school at a tertiary
level, and six have been employed by the municipality with the support of
the local economic development manager. The municipality has also begun to
recognise the effectiveness and the role that the NGOs play in ensuring
implementation of service delivery. Only the ANC is able to move this
quickly, and we would encourage other areas in the country to do likewise.
Thank you very much.

                   EASTERN CAPE MARKETING OF FARM PRODUCTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Nksz N M TWALA (ANC): Sihlalo, urhulumente osemikhaleni, nokhokelwa
ngumbutho wesizwe i-ANC uthe rhoqo, ubambisene namahlakani ayimbumba
yomfelandawonye, uzama ukuphucula ubomi babantu. uMasipala okwingingqi
yeNciba ubambisene neSebe lezoLimo kwiphondo leMpuma Koloni uthe
ngoLwesihlanu ogqithileyo waba nomboniso wemveliso yamafama akule ngingqi.

Le mini yaziwa ngegama lokuba yiNguni Production Day. La mafama akule
ngingqi aye afumanisa ukuba imveliso yawo, ingakumbi kwimfuyo yeenkomo
zesinguni iyaziwa kakhulu ngabantu abavela kwindawo ezingaphandle kweNciba.
Isebe lezoLimo nalo liye lababonisa, lubacacisela ngoncedo abanokuthi
balifumane abantu xa bejongene nemiceli-mngeni kwezolimo. Thina,
singamalungu ombutho wesizwe siyakuhlala sithe nca kwisibhambathiso
esasenza nabantu sokudala amathuba emisebenzi, nokulwa nendlala.
(Translation of isiXhosa member’s statement follows.)

[Mrs N M TWALA (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC-led government is constantly
working together with its alliance partners to improve people’s lives. Last
Friday the Great Kei Municipality, together with the Eastern Cape
Department of Agriculture, held an agricultural show of farm products from
the district.

This day is known as the Nguni Production Day. The farmers in the district
discovered that their product, especially in the breeding of Nguni cattle,
was well known by people outside the Great Kei. The Department of
Agriculture also explained to them what kind of help they would receive
when faced with challenges in agriculture. However, we, as members of the
ANC, will continue to stick to the promise we made to our people, namely
that of creating job opportunities and alleviating poverty.]

                     CAUSES AND SOLUTIONS OF XENOPHOBIA

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr J SELFE (DA): Chairperson, xenophobia constitutes a very serious
challenge to South Africa and its people. If the incidence of violence
against foreign nationals in Alexandra and Diepsloot are anything to go by,
then xenophobia is on the brink of becoming a national crisis. We take this
opportunity, once more, to express our sympathy with those affected. Our
appreciation to the police and the emergency services for containing this
explosive situation.

But it is very important that we understand the root causes of xenophobia.
These are principally the competition for scarce resources, mainly jobs and
housing, and the perception that foreign nationals receive these resources
ahead of citizens of South Africa. Unless our economy is unshackled to
create jobs, and unless the government has a coherent policy of managing
migrants, these problems will persist.

Most importantly, unless government beefs up border security, illegal
foreign nationals will continue to pour into South Africa, placing
intolerable strain on our capacity to provide even basic humanitarian
assistance to migrants.

But we also need to urgently deal with regional instability, notably, the
political crisis in Zimbabwe. The failure of President Mbeki’s policy of
silent diplomacy is directly responsible for the flood of the migrants to
South Africa and, indirectly, for these incidences of xenophobia.
[Applause.]
                 CONDOLENCES TO THE FAMILY OF PINKY MSELEKU
                            ALLEGATIONS OF RACISM
                     CAUSES AND SOLUTIONS OF XENOPHOBIA
                     POST ELECTION VIOLENCE IN ZIMBABWE

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Chairperson, I would like to
respond to a couple of the statements that were made by members in this
House. On behalf of our government, the Ministry and the Department of Arts
and Culture, I would like to join the ANC in expressing our deep-felt
condolences to the Mseleku family on the passing of the legend, Pinky
Mseleku. It’s not only a loss to the Mseleku family; it’s also a loss to
the creative sector as a whole - and to the South African nation.

Also, what I would like to just point out, although we might be discussing
it further, is that in so far as racism is concerned, it seems like it is
only a sector of the South African population that is concerned about
racism. We must remember that all of us are in this together and we just
have to fight racism.

Also, I would just like to say that we are all concerned about the violence
in Zimbabwe. We are all concerned about the economic crisis in Zimbabwe,
but, I’m not sure whether other people think that it is going to be helpful
to just say these things here in South Africa. What the President is doing
is mediating in Zimbabwe and talking to all the parties there.
[Interjections.] I’m not sure whether you are listening or you don’t want
to hear. Zimbabwe is a sovereign state. Zimbabwe is not a tenth province of
South Africa. Thank you.

              CONSIDERATION OF NATIONAL GAMBLING AMENDMENT BILL

                             (Draft Resolution)

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

  That the Bill, as amended, be passed.

Motion agreed to.

Bill accordingly passed.


                      SOCIAL ASSISTANCE AMENDMENT BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Hon Chairperson, hon delegates, ladies
and gentlemen, at the many izimbizo that other Ministers and I have
attended there has always been one recurring question. It is a question
that has irked us and disheartened us. There is a question we have come to
expect, and one which we have not been able to provide a satisfactory
answer to, until now.

The question is: Why, if the Constitution stipulates equality between men
and women, have men been handed the short end of the stick in terms of the
pensions and are men only eligible for the old-age grant from the age of 65
years, while women receive the grant from the age of 60? I can assure you,
as I have reassured many, that it is not want but rather economic necessity
that dictates the rules of eligibility for the old-age grant. We have
ridden roughshod over the rights of older men, as we have perceived them to
be the stronger sex and more able to handle life's hardships than older
women. It is a liberty we have taken reluctantly and one which the Social
Assistance Amendment Bill seeks to remedy.

Our system of social security has expanded significantly in respect of
social assistance, growing from the average rate of R2,5 million in 1999 to
over R12,7 million in 2008, amounting to 3,4% of the GDP and covering at
least 28% of the population. Therefore, it is unquestionable that social
grants are the cornerstone of all present social security systems.

The recent income and expenditure survey still shows that the income
inequality, as measured by the Gini Coefficient, continues to worsen with
10% of the population receiving 50% of the income. The impact of social
transfer on the Gini Coefficient is substantial and plays a significant
role in reducing inequality in our country. We must thus make an effort to
remove all access barriers to social assistance with the view of expanding
access and coverage.

Following the findings of a study undertaken by the Economic Policy
Research Institute, we have discovered that the means test acts as a
deterrent to retirement saving among the poor, and I will be announcing
changes to this in due course. In continuing to improve access to social
security, let me now turn my attention to the Social Assistance Amendment
Bill. The Bill has two objectives. The first one is to equalise the age
eligibility for men and women over a period of time.

Once again, financial necessity prescribes that this occur progressively in
the following manner, with men being eligible for the old-age grant after 1
April 2008 from the age of 63, after 1 April 2009 from the age of 61, and
after 1 April 2010 from the age of 60. It is envisaged that a potential 450
000 men will benefit from the passing of this legislation, with
approximately 121 000 coming on board this year.

These are mainly black males who were excluded by the apartheid regime from
obtaining benefits that would prepare them for their retirement and protect
them against poverty. In conjunction with the National Treasury, we have
allocated R1,2 billion during this financial year to accommodate these new
recipients.
The legislation acknowledges the strategic role that older persons play in
society. Older persons are instrumental in caring for the needs of their
children, grandchildren and orphans as a result of the HIV/Aids pandemic
that is crippling our nation. We cannot simply regard them as grant
recipients, but we also need to recognise and appreciate their role as
providers of care and ambassadors for moral regeneration.

However, this added responsibility has created a burden, especially for men
aged 64 years and younger, as they lack income support to continue to build
the nation through their role as primary care givers. We are well aware
that poverty and unemployment has caused many families to rely on social
pensions for their survival, especially where a social grant is the only
source of income in a household.

To this end we must continue to reform the retirement industry in a
consistent and co-ordinated manner. Let me point out that in the area of
social insurance, we are making steady progress in the development of a
proposal for the reform of our retirement provisioning on issues relating
to this. In particular, we have developed concrete proposals on the
introduction of a mandatory contribution for all those in employment.

The overarching goal of this reform work is about ensuring that no citizen
of this country is forced to live in poverty and to prevent everyone from
falling into poverty. For those who have the means to contribute or save,
we must create a system that provides income-smoothing over their lifetime,
and protects against severe reversals of income due to unavoidable events
such as death, disability and old age.

Our view is that the contributory system must be as inclusive as possible
without severely reducing the disposable income of low-income earners. For
this reason, we would like to see the mandates applying to all those
earning R1 000 per month and above, with government providing some
assistance in the form of our contribution subsidy to those who earn very
low incomes.

In order to provide reasonable income protection in retirement, we would
like to see a large proportion of the contribution going towards a defined
benefit at retirement. At a minimum, our income replacement rates must be
well above the current levels of 28% offered by the private retirement
industry. Given the low income levels in this country, we think that a
responsible government should be able to guarantee a minimum income of at
least 40% of lifetime earnings at retirement.

As most of us are aware, mortality rates are extremely high, especially at
the income levels we are targeting. There is a likelihood that a
significant proportion of our contributors will either die or become
disabled before they reach retirement age. This has important ramifications
for the financial suitability of our proposals. And this is why we are
carefully investigating the feasibility and affordability of providing for
death and disability benefits as part of the mandatory contribution.

Initial indications are that this will not come cheap, and may require an
estimated 4% of the mandatory contributions to be dedicated to this. Our
work in this regard is due for completion at the end of this month and
further details will obviously be thoroughly discussed, along with the rest
of our proposals, in a transparent manner.

Unemployment poses an important constant constraint on our ability to
create a well-functioning social insurance system. In our context, the rate
of unemployment stands at an uncomfortable 40%, while the ability of our
formal sector to absorb new job-seekers has been declining. Those who lose
their jobs in the current climate have a high risk of staying unemployed
for extended periods. As a result, the benefits provided by our
Unemployment Insurance Fund have been shown to be wholly inadequate, with
the maximum benefits only providing cover for up to 234 days – about eight
months.

For this reason, we are working in collaboration with the Department of
Labour to examine the feasibility of linking our social assistance benefits
to enhance those available to UIF beneficiaries, while providing support to
ensure quicker reabsorption into the labour force. Much analysis has been
done, and we are now considering some specific proposals that we will
publish for consideration during this year.

Of course, the reforms under consideration will necessitate a re-
examination of our tax system and the levels of income across subsidies
provided within the social insurance framework. For our part, we have made
specific recommendations for the introduction of a contribution subsidy
which can be financed by removing the existing tax expenditure subsidy.

Our view is that the existing system is regressive in that it favours the
rich while condemning the low-income earners to rely on the old-age state
pension. In attempting to create a comprehensive and inclusive social
security system, government will have to examine the current institutional
environment to ensure that we improve its performance and coherence. The
current fragmentation and gaps in the system will provide a total
reconfiguration of the whole institutional framework, including the
administration, management, governance and oversight of both private and
public participants in the system.

This is one of the more vexing challenges facing us, and we will need to
challenge some vested interests while protecting the legitimate and vesting
rights of those who have contributed to date. We will also need to fix the
car while it moves, as we take into account the significant capacity of the
private retirement industry and other public social insurance schemes while
considering the appropriate allocation and institutional design of the new
National Social Security Fund.

Clearly, we will have to create a fund to act as the key vehicle for
mandatory contributions from low-income members who are currently not
covered. On the subject of existing funds, I must take this opportunity to
stress that government has no intention of raiding any existing retirement
funds or absorbing them into the new social security funds.

On the contrary, we would like to ensure that all those who have previously
contributed receive the full benefit of their contributions when they reach
their retirement age. In fact, I wish to applaud all those employers,
unions and other stakeholders who had the foresight to establish their
retirement funds, be they provident or pension funds, before government
embarked on this initiative. International evidence suggests that we are
all myopic and tend to rely only on saving for old age when compelled to.
The fact that some stakeholders took the responsible measures they did to
encourage saving for retirement is worthy of praise rather than punishment.


Therefore, I must assure all provident and pension fund members that their
savings are safe, and the reform proposals under consideration will look at
how to improve and enhance these savings rather than reduce them in any
way. If anything, we are exploring various scenarios of how government can
contribute to people's savings and what mechanisms can be employed to
improve the benefits they receive at retirement.

Government is prepared to invest in the establishment of a new national
social security fund and provide contribution subsidies to those who have
very low incomes, while preserving the benefits of those who have made
contributions through other vehicles. We will even be bringing proposals to
all stakeholders on possible exemption for specific funds where adequate
risk pulling is occurring and the funds are meeting the desired criteria
for accreditation in the new environment. [Time expired.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON: (Mr K O Bapela) Hon Minister, I even added one
minute and twenty-three seconds to your speech because of the cough, and my
apology on that one. Your time has expired. [Laughter.]

Before I call the next speaker, hon Minister, you were heard calling us
delegates. We know that you are attending many government conferences and
parties, but we are still hon members, not delegates. [Laughter.] I am just
saying that on a lighter note.

Mr T M MASUTHA: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, colleagues and
friends, before I proceed, may I express - I believe on behalf of the House
at large - our common sense of empathy with Mr Mkhongi, who is an alternate
member of this committee and who was due to participate in this debate this
morning, but who, because of having taken ill this morning, is unable to be
part of this debate.

Let me also start by indicating that there wouldn’t have been a better
occasion for this debate to take place other than on the occasion where
this country has celebrated many milestones and many historical events,
including the struggles of women who fought against apartheid in the 1956
rebellion that women waged at the Union Buildings and many others.

I do not only rise on behalf of the ANC to support the Bill before us, but
I also rise to invite this House and the rest of our country to join hands
in celebrating this momentous occasion of historical importance.

Our Constitution says in section 27, which is part of the Bill of Rights
that everyone has the right to social security, including the appropriate
social assistance, if they are unable to provide for themselves. We, as the
elected tribunes of our people and therefore the custodians of their best
interest, have the added responsibility not only of upholding the
Constitution but also of making the promises that the Constitution made to
them a reality.
In 2004, this Parliament rose to the occasion when it passed the current
Social Assistance Act and its companion, the South African Social Security
Agency Act, to centralise the administration of the social assistance
programme in its entirety in the national sphere of government.

This was done amidst a plethora of court challenges initiated by our people
against various provincial administrations for their failure to pay social
grants due to them for various shortcomings due, amongst other things, to
high levels of inefficiency, lack of capacity and other related
difficulties experienced by provinces or provincial administrations.

On that occasion, Parliament did not wait for the courts to conclude on the
legality and, more importantly, constitutionality of the transfer of this
function to the provincial sphere.  It promptly proceeded to rectify the
situation as is indeed required of it by the Constitution by ensuring that
the entire system is centralised.

Today another milestone will be reached when this Parliament, for the first
time in the history of this country and as one of the few nations of the
world, brings true fulfilment to our constitutional promise of equality
between men and women where, unlike most instances, it is the men that are
aggrieved.

This is not all.  One of the things that is not contained in this Bill but
equally of historical importance is the raising of the age from 14 years to
18 years for children who qualify for the Child Support Grant.  This is a
change that only requires to be effected through regulations by the
Minister, and the portfolio committee will soon be calling the department
to provide a progress report in this regard.

But all these great reforms to our social security system must be placed in
the proper context. The ANC has, for some time now, been advocating for the
integration of our social security system as a step towards the eventual
creation of a comprehensive social security system.  This would assist in
eliminating current high inefficiencies, especially with regard to the
equitable distribution of the massive resources already locked in within
the system.

I understand, for example, that over R3 trillion, that is approximately
three times our GDP, is locked up in retirement funds which are supposed to
constitute the central pillar of our social security system.  These funds
are savings that are meant to allow our people to retire in dignity.

Ultimately, whilst social assistance provides the most needed safety net
for those in dire need, the primary challenge is to ensure that the
constitutional obligation in section 27 that I alluded to earlier, must
eventually be realised, namely that everyone has a right to social
security. We therefore look forward to a progress report from both the
Minister of Social Development and the Minister of Finance, who is
responsible for Treasury, on the progress that has been made in reforming
especially our retirement and our health insurance system.

Many people who should have benefited from some of these funds over many
decades have not benefited due to many challenges, including unclaimed
benefits, which are mainly due to lack of information on the part of
beneficiaries or failure by some of these schemes to trace beneficiaries.

Social security cannot be limited to income, substitution or support but it
must include healthcare cover, which becomes even more critical as people
grow older. It must ensure adequate provision for such basic necessities as
adequate nutrition, housing, transport, etc.

We are a caring society.  We are a people-centred society. All of these are
ideals which the ANC, as a liberation, a revolutionary and a democratic
movement, has struggled for and won in its fight against apartheid.  The
ANC leads, the ANC lives, Limpopo has decided, JZ has confirmed and Thibos
has given the go-ahead, and so it shall be done.

Let me, however, clarify that these changes cannot take effect until this
Parliament has changed the law, hence the Bill currently before us.  As the
committee, it took us two days to finalise and report on this Bill, which
included giving an opportunity to all political parties participating in
the committee to brief their caucuses last Thursday, before we passed the
Bill that afternoon.

As chairperson, I made an initial attempt to intervene in the tagging of
the Bill by proposing that Parliament uses the much quicker legislative
route under section 75 as opposed to the much longer route of section 76 of
the Constitution in passing this Bill.  Unfortunately, the State Law
Advisors insisted and remained adamant that this is a section 76 Bill and I
decided not to pursue the matter, even though I am still convinced that
their opinion was legally incorrect and mine correct. I felt that any delay
in the tagging of the Bill could further jeopardise the speedy conclusion
of the legislative process.

I also wish to advise potential applicants that this law does not provide
for retrospectivity. This means that applicants who reach the age
qualification of 63 this year can only lodge their applications for the
social grant due to them from the day the law takes effect. That means
after Parliament has passed it and the President has signed it into law.

We debated this matter extensively in the committee and concluded that to
do otherwise would result in iniquitous situations, which time does not
allow me to expand on at this point in time.  What remains, though, is for
all of us to do all that is our power to expedite the completion of this
task in order to ensure that the legislation is put in place and people can
start to benefit.

Hunger is upon many of our people and these grants are going to have an
impact far beyond the direct financial benefit that will be due to the
beneficiaries in that it will extend to the entire family, the entire
household and the whole community who very often look up to these grants
for their very survival.

Let me conclude by expressing appreciation to my colleagues in the
committee across political parties - and I am very confident that all
political parties will not oppose this Bill because all of us have long
been waiting for this occasion to eventually arise; the Minister for his
tireless commitment to service to our people; but, more importantly, our
people, under the leadership of the ANC, for bringing us all here,
especially the ANC members, to be able to provide the service, to be their
representative and to ensure that their aspirations are finally realised. I
thank you.

Ms J A SEMPLE: Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, public
representatives across the country are continuously inundated with queries
about social assistance grants. There is no doubt that these grants are, in
many cases, the only way that millions of poor people in South Africa
survive, and the only way they can put food on the table, however little
that may be.

However, we must guard against South Africa becoming a total social welfare
state. We cannot allow people to be born, live and die, merely relying on a
social grant to survive. There must be opportunities for people to acquire
skills and, even more so, opportunities for them to get jobs so that they
have their own way to benefit from their own earnings.

By equalising the age of eligibility for men and women, even though this is
staggered from 63 years in the current year to 61 in 2009 and to 60 in
2008, a large number of indigent men will be able to live out their old age
in slightly better circumstances and dignity than they would have otherwise
been able to do. It must be remembered, though, that the old-age grant is
only applicable from the date of application, and it is not retrospective
to the date on which the applicant reached the appropriate age. It must
also be remembered that the grant is subject to a means test. This means
that not every person who turns the relevant age automatically qualifies
for the grant, as the husband of one of our members of the portfolio
committee discovered, much to his disgust!

The means test also applies to the income of both partners if they are
married. The DA has dealt with so many old people whose combined income
puts them just outside the minimum amount or other old people who have to
draw on their meagre savings to pay the rent and then have their pensions
deducted with the same amount. We almost feel that the means test
discourages savings and have even told elderly people not to get married in
case they lose their pensions! The same applies to domestic workers who
have been given a small pension by their employers but are then told that
they do not qualify for a state pension as well. We appreciate the
Minister’s commitment today to safeguarding people's existing savings
towards their retirement.

We realise that social assistance grants are for the poorest of the poor
but many people who are not quite as poor feel entitled to their share. I
am not referring to well-paid civil servants in this regard but those who
are just over the poverty line. The DA welcomes indications that the means
test has been re-evaluated, as this will bring relief to many people who
are on the border of poverty and suffer hugely as a result. We look forward
to the Minister’s recommendations on the new social assistance retirement
fund, but I do hope that hon Masutha’s reference to the R3 trillion locked
up in retirement funds does not mean that the ANC is thinking of plundering
these funds. This would be a huge mistake.

A further amendment to the Social Assistance Act is to allow the Minister
of Social Development to establish an appeals tribunal to hear cases where
applications for social grants have been denied. Once again, there are
thousands of these - over 20 000 appeals on disability grants in KwaZulu-
Natal alone. Clearly, it is impossible for the Minister and his office to
deal with this mammoth task or indeed to give them the proper consideration
they deserve.

The DA questions the fact that disabled people have to have their disabled
status verified every six months. Surely a person with a permanent
disability can be classified as such? A further problem is that it appears
that one state doctor can overrule another state doctor. We have an example
at present where Dr A says Mrs X is disabled and entitled to the grant,
while Dr B says the same Mrs X must go and get a job at Spar when she has
had a stroke, dribbles and is incontinent. How can she possibly be
employed?

We receive heart-wrenching letters from people who cannot even afford to
buy bread, and cry that nobody wants to know them in case they get asked to
provide that loaf of bread. Let’s hope that the appeals tribunal will at
least bring some consistency to these decisions. Considering the current
number of appeals, the DA questions how long it will take the new appeals
tribunal to get through the backlog that seems to grow with almost every
passing week. We do not, however, dispute that there is a desperate need
for such an appeals tribunal, and the sooner it starts, the better.

The DA supports the amendments to the Social Assistance Amendment Bill.
[Applause.]

Mrs I MARS: Chairperson, the Social Assistance Amendment Bill before us
today consists of half a page. However, not withstanding its size, this
Bill will impact positively on the lives of many of our most deserving
citizens.

In the first instance, and very importantly so, the Bill gives effect to
the right of equality enshrined in our Constitution by removing
discrimination against men on grounds of gender in the qualifying age for
social assistance. This must be welcomed as it finally removes one of the
last forms of statutory gender discrimination still existing in South
Africa.

The IFP, and I think most of us, would have liked to have this implemented
immediately. However, we accept that it is a section 76 Bill, and we have
to wait for the finalisation of all this. We also accept that the phasing-
in of the age equalisation over a period of time must be deemed a prudent
approach as it allows the funding implications to be more easily managed.

With staggering increases in transportation and basic food prices, any cash
injection into poor households must be welcomed and, as such, this House
should seriously consider relooking the issue of the basic income grant.

Home Affairs indicates that the smart card will be available in the very
near future, and grants will be accessible through the smart card.

The IFP welcomes the creation of an independent appeals tribunal because it
creates an alternative to the courts to adjudicate disputes arising from
rejected social assistance applications. This, we feel, will alleviate the
pressure on the courts and avoid the build-up of massive backlogs currently
experienced.

We are, however, concerned that although the budgetary implications of
creating provincial appeals offices are obvious, the fully fledged tribunal
only comes into effect in April 2010. This raises the question as to
whether the interim arrangements will be able to effectively deal with the
current backlog of tens of thousands of cases.

We totally agree that the issue of the means test needs to be discussed as
a matter of absolute urgency. I think my colleague from the DA has gone
into this in more detail, and we totally agree that there are so many
marginal cases that we will have to find a mechanism to accommodate these
also very needy and desperate people.

We suggest that Parliament maintains careful oversight over this process
and ensures that all deadlines regarding the full implementation are
observed.
The past accumulation of massive backlogs remains a matter of great
concern. How long can we expect an aged person to wait for a decision as to
their eligibility to qualify for social assistance? Of course, this applies
to sick and injured people as well.

The continuing reform of social assistance is heartily supported by the
IFP, and we thank the Minister. Thank you, Chairperson. [Time expired.]

Mr I E JENNER: House Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, the ID
strongly supports this Bill and believes that it is long overdue.

We have consistently argued, for many years, that the previous dispensation
regarding pensions was unconstitutional and that it discriminated on the
basis of both age and gender. Old-age pensions have also proven to be one
of the greatest poverty alleviation measures in South Africa and
grandmothers and grandfathers have often had to support their entire
families on these pensions.

The amending Bill, which will ultimately give men their pensions at 60
instead of 65, will therefore go a long way in providing much-needed income
to families that are being burdened by spiralling food and energy prices.
Our only regret is, Minister, that this amending Bill will only equalise
pensions in a staggered manner over the course of three years. We believe
that with our huge budget surplus, the government should have implemented
these changes immediately, to provide urgent relief to millions of families
in South Africa.

Die ander kwessie is, Minister, dié van ’n totale welsynstaat wat op
hierdie stadium irrelevant is. Mense van 60 kan nie meer vaardighede en
alternatiewe inkomstes bekom nie. Die mense van Gode in die Oos-Kaap, die
mense van Rietpoort in Namakwaland, en die mense van Vanrhynsdorp verwelkom
hierdie stap en vandag is die geskiedenis, met betrekking tot pensioene,
herskryf. Baie dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The other issue, Minister, is that of a total welfare state which is
irrelevant at this stage. People who are 60 years old cannot acquire new
skills and alternative incomes any more. The people of Gode in the Eastern
Cape, the people of Rietpoort in Namaqualand, and the people of
Vanrhynsdorp welcome this step and today the history, with regard to
pensions, was rewritten. Thank you.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chair, the ACDP supports this amendment to the Social
Assistance Act of 2004 which attempts to address inequality regarding the
age of men and women eligible for a state pension. When it is fully
implemented, eligible men will be able to access their pension when they
turn 60. The phasing in of this, of course, is unfortunate, but appears
presently to be the most practical solution.

The ACDP welcomes the Minister’s statement with regard to
much-needed plans to re-evaluate the present means test and sees this as a
priority. The Bill also provides for an independent tribunal appointed by
the Minister to consider all appeals against decisions of the agency.

As these amendments to the Social Assistance Act are not controversial and
have been well explained by previous speakers, I will take the opportunity
to comment generally in terms of grants and poverty alleviation. We all
know that much-needed grants, in addition to pensions, are a necessary
short-term intervention in the face of tremendous needs and wide-spread
poverty. We also know that money alone never has been – and never will be –
a lasting solution.

Poverty is not a money problem. It is a skills and relationship problem and
throwing money at it will not make a sustainable difference. Skills
acquisition and mentoring are the real needs and we must find ways to
create greater opportunities for skills transfer and mentoring.

The ACDP calls on the Minister of Social Development to take up the mission
of convincing government to introduce significant incentives such as tax
breaks for companies employing numbers of people for the purpose of skills
development and mentoring. It will be tragic if our people stay trapped in
dependence and poverty when economic freedom could be their reality. Thank
you.
The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, I take this opportunity to
thank the House for accepting this Bill. Quite obviously, there are many
issues which need to be accelerated as fast as possible.

In our offices we’ve got quite a large number of people who have already
applied for this because they understood that when the President speaks, it
becomes the law, and, as such, they’d expected that this Bill would be in
effect from 1 April. Unfortunately, because of the tagging of this Bill, it
had to go through a process whereby it had to go to the provinces.

We have discussed this whole issue with the presiding officers - the
Speaker and the Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces. Although
we agree that it should not have gone that way because provinces have very
little to do with the grants at the present moment since the establishment
of the SA Social Security Agency, we didn’t want to stop the process as it
was. So, I take this opportunity to appeal basically to the House and also
to the NCOP to accelerate this thing as soon as possible.

On the issue of when this is to take place, I think we would have loved
this to start in June, but it depends mostly on the process in the NCOP. I
hope the processes will move as fast as possible.

On the independent appeal tribunal, we are just waiting patiently for this
Bill to come into law. We’ve already appointed the people. We are only
waiting for the Bill to be passed, and would start – hon Mars - in KwaZulu-
Natal, where there are lots of problems which need to be resolved.

On the question of the doctors and on decisions not agreeing with each
other, I think it could help if members of this House could intervene many
times and try to assist these people. It takes a long time to write a
letter to the MEC; sometimes people don’t understand, and take that all the
way to Pretoria.

If you see somebody who is disabled and you can, as a commissioner of
oaths, give your stamp or signature, for us that is enough, so that the
person can get the necessary pension that he or she is entitled to.

With regard to children, as the last speaker said, we agreed in Polokwane
that a child is a child until the age of 18, and that cannot be changed by
any individual or government because that is the definition given by the
Constitution and we can’t change it. We are trying in government to ensure
that this does become that way. On the issues being raised, members of
Parliament should also help us to assist those children who are in dire
need.

Sassa is there to assist as much as possible, and I think we have ordered
that they should assist and talk to the members of Parliament to resolve
some of these issues because everything is upon us. We might disagree
ideologically, but these are our people, and we should serve them as best
we can. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

 REPORTED INCIDENTS OF VIOLENCE AND ALLEGED XENOPHOBIC ATTACKS IN ALEXANDRA
                              AND OTHER AREAS.

                                  (Debate)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Madam Speaker, the reported
xenophobic incidences in Alexandra, and now in Diepsloot, that captured the
headlines and news this week are shocking, horrible and shameful. These
incidences must be condemned and denounced by every South African.

I was born and grew up in Alexandra myself, and all those years in the yard
where I stayed we had foreign nationals from Mozambique, and in the yard
next to us there were foreign nationals from Malawi. As children, we went
to the same schools, lived together, played together and were just simply
Africans. We were just human beings. Alexandra has had foreign nationals
who stayed in the area since the 1930s. This is not a new phenomenon or
occurrence – having foreign nationals there. We had and continue to have
people who are born and bred in Alexandra. We have children who came from
the rural areas and grew up in the township. The area has been occupied by
African migrant workers since 1912, when Mr Papenfus, the owner of the then
farm, was unable to attract white buyers and later sold the plots to
Africans in the place known today as Alexandra, named after his daughter.

We are also proud to have had people who lived in Alexandra such as Moses
Kotane, Nelson Mandela, Alfred Nzo, B A Xuma, Florence Mophosho and many
others, among whom were foreign nationals, such as Samora Machel, who once
stayed in Alexandra when he was a migrant worker in Johannesburg. Samora
Machel later emerged and formed the Frelimo movement, became its leader and
then liberated Mozambique. We also had Chinese shops in the township. We
grew up buying from their shops. We did not just trade in Alexandra, but
lived there as well. We have always had Indian neighbours as well.

On Monday this week, when my children were preparing to go to school, we
got a call from their grandmother to say that they did not sleep the night
before, on the Sunday night, as there were screams, shootings and people
running up and down the street and they did not know what was happening.
Later the news came that there were attacks and foreigners were the
victims, hence the commotions of the night before. No sooner had the
information been heard than the incidents spread. There were battles in the
streets with the police, who were trying to calm the situation and protect
the residents.

My daughter is in Grade 11 in the Wendywood High School and is a member of
the Learner Representative Council. She asked a question as the news was
spreading, and her question was: Daddy, we have children at our school who
are from other countries. I, myself, have a friend who is from the DRC, who
is the granddaughter of Patrice Lumumba, the former Prime Minister of the
freed Zaire – now known as the Democratic Republic of the Congo. “What
explanation am I going to give?” she asked, and this was quite
embarrassing, but I had to give a response by going through the history of
South Africa – how South Africa is intertwined with the continent, its
history, the migration flow to South Africa in the sugarcane fields, the
mines from Mozambique and Lesotho, and that it has always been this country
that has had foreign nationals staying with us, and how this has
contributed to our economy. I also gave the history of Alexandra, as
articulated in my earlier input.

Thousands in Alexandra, I know, do not approve of what has happened.
Speaking here and being associated with Alexandra myself, just like Job
Sithole, sitting there at the back, and other MPs who were once members
here, like Nat Kekana, Joe Nhlanhla and Wally Serote – we would like to say
to our African brothers and sisters that we are sorry about what happened
and that our resolve for a united Africa and its prosperity remains solid.
We grew up in the ANC that taught us as individuals and the entire
community about the Freedom Charter, which says there shall be peace and
friendship. And I am sure that the late Alfred Nzo, Thomas Nkobi, Moses
Kotane, Martin Ramokgadi, Florence Mophosho, Choabi, Thoko Mngoma, Vincent
Tshabalala, Zephania Mdakane and many of our other heroes and heroines must
be turning in their graves about what has happened.

In engaging closer with the developments and speaking with our own comrades
and members on the ground, I can confirm without a doubt that criminals and
hooligans are running amok. Not only foreigners were victims, as there are
known to be South Africans who got killed in the incidences.

On Tuesday, before leaving Johannesburg to come to Parliament, during the
day we went to the Alexandra transit camp, which was one of the areas
attacked the night before. Most of the people there are South Africans who
are in transit to get their homes, or are some of those whose houses were
gutted by fires and who are being accommodated temporarily there. They said
that the people who attacked them came in at night and ranged from the age
of 15 to 22. These people told them to produce their IDs and they asked
them who they were, and once you said you were South African and from a
particular ethnic grouping, they would then say “join us”. If people didn’t
join them, they were attacked, and in the attacks their possessions were
also stolen, as they did with the other foreign national groupings. Popular
items that were stolen there were DVDs, televisions, music systems,
cellular phones, money and jewellery and, in one incident, even a fridge.

As we debate in this House today, many of those houses have been taken
over, and their owners have fled and new owners have occupied them. We
hope, therefore, that the police will later investigate this, once the
situation has calmed. These violent attacks that started that night and
affected the people of Alexandra and the foreigners who had to flee to the
police station were protected there.

The statistics are indicated in the following, just to indicate the
criminality of the incidents: Two people were killed - the third person’s
death was not related to these incidents; one is a South African and one is
a foreign national. Besides those, there were two unconfirmed deaths that
were reported yesterday, but they are not yet verified. Of the 65 injured,
40% are South Africans and 60% are foreign nationals.

In the course of the arrests that occurred just around those particular
incidents and in those areas where this happened, two people were arrested
for carrying illegal firearms, and of the 60 arrested, three were arrested
for rape; 24 for public violence; two for causing grievous bodily harm; and
14 for housebreaking and theft. This, then, begins to indicate the type of
criminality that is going on there. In characterising the situation briefly
regarding these groups of 15 to 22-years-olds, when you calculate from
1994, you will find that most of them were between three and seven years
old at the time. They do not know where we come from as a country; they do
not know where we are, where we are going and who we are. I think there is
a lot of work that needs to be done by parties and organisations to ensure
that we educate and create consciousness and awareness within this
particular population because it is going to be a growing population of
born-frees who don’t know where we come from, where we are and where we are
going. Therefore, this is a challenge to political parties and I hope that
more money will be allocated to party-building and party organisation in
whatever way.

The people of Alexandra have already responded to the situation and I think
as we go there in the coming week, as Parliament, we need them to also give
that particular support. On Tuesday, a meeting of 8 000 people was convened
to call for calm. Addresses were made by various leaders from the province
and also from the local communities. Quite a number of other leaders had
visited the area as well.

The IFP and the ANC are working together in the area to ensure this and
have, since Tuesday, been appearing in all the meetings together to ensure
that we indeed do deal with that particular situation. Other organisations
such as the NGOs, civil society, religious groups, and so forth are giving
relief. We also need to begin to contribute to that. The challenge facing
us is: What do we do?
Other people in the debate will probably want to say that there is a
failure of services in Alexandra or it is the failure of the Presidential
project, but it is not like that. I come from Alexandra. We know what the
situation is. The land issue is a problem. The land in Limbor park – people
are refusing to allow that. There are many objections there. Also, with
regard to the land in Leeuwkop – it ended up in court and then we lost that
court battle. It could then halve the population of Alexandra. What is
happening is that people are fighting for the limited, scarce resources
that are there. Housing has developed so phenomenally to the extent that
people are now beginning to ask who should be benefiting. It is not about
“Where the houses are?”; it is about who should be the beneficiaries. Some
say that it should only be people born and bred in Alexandra, whereas
others say that those who are from rural areas should not be benefiting.
Foreign nationals are also included in that particular issue. Therefore, as
we debate this issue, let’s look at this.

Lastly, Parliament will be visiting the place next week and we are hoping
that the Speaker will look at the memo. We are also organising a prayer
service as we visit the place next week Friday. A task team from Parliament
will then be meeting on Tuesday next. [Time expired.] Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mrs S M CAMERER: Thank you, Madam Speaker. South Africans are exceedingly
xenophobic. The underlying causes are complex and include South Africa’s
racist history along with extreme levels of poverty. Largely, black African
foreigners face abuse and discrimination, with South Africans reacting to
refugees, asylum seekers and undocumented immigrants with hostility and
resentment leading to intermittent violent attacks.

These are the findings of the SA Human Rights Commission in its
comprehensive 2006 report on its joint hearings with Parliament’s Portfolio
Committee on Foreign Affairs on xenophobia. Accordingly, for the Home
Affairs Minister to pretend, as she did in this House earlier in the week,
that the xenophobic attacks still going on in Alexandra township and now
spreading to surrounding areas such as Diepsloot and Olifantsfontein are
being stoked by a “third force”, is nonsensical disinformation.

The 2006 findings confirmed extensive earlier research on the subject.
However, the Alex violence is perhaps the worst xenophobic outbreak that
South Africa has experienced. The DA condemns xenophobia which, as I said,
keeps exploding in areas of our country where really poor South Africans
have to rub shoulders and compete for services and resources with large
numbers of refugees and foreigners.

On behalf of the DA’s public representatives involved with the Alexandra
township, including myself, I would like to register our outrage over these
attacks, mostly against Zimbabweans and Mozambicans, in the past few days
in Alexandra township. We make an earnest appeal to all concerned for calm
and to restore peace to Alex and for all residents to co-operate with the
police. We are pleased to note that 200 extra metro cops have now been
deployed to Alex to cope with this emergency. If necessary, there should be
civilian intervention by the SA National Defence Force to provide back-up
for the SA Police Service to prevent the attacks from spreading and further
loss of life. It is vital for government, all local public representatives,
civil society, trade unions and faith-based organisations to work together
to this end.

It must be acknowledged, in spite of the denials of the previous speaker,
that the reasons for this boiling over of resentment in Alex Township are
in line with the findings of the SA Human Rights Commission. A large
majority of the residents of Alexandra Township live in appalling
socioeconomic conditions. Social services have all but collapsed in many
areas. These impoverished residents fear that foreigners are taking from
them desperately needed resources, including jobs. Times have become harder
with the recent steeply rising cost of fuel and food. However, this is no
excuse for violent attacks as we have seen in Alex and earlier in Worcester
and the Cape Flats.

To address the slum conditions after similar unrest in Alex Township in
2001, President Mbeki announced the Alexandra Renewal Project. Seven years
later, despite these promises, very little has been done and the dynamics,
as I am sure the previous speaker will have to agree, have not
substantially changed. Once again there has been a failure of policy
implementation by the Mbeki government.

The part of Alex that falls into my constituency is in Ward 91 - a crazily
composed ward. [Interjections.]

Mr D J SITHOLE: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: I rise to raise an
issue ...

The SPEAKER: Hon member, are you asking the member a question or are you
rising on a point of order?

Mr D J SITHOLE: I am rising on a point of order, Madam Speaker.

The SPEAKER: What is the point of order?

Mr D J SITHOLE: The hon member is misleading the House when she says
nothing is happening in Alex. I grew up there. I know exactly how many
units and how many roads ...

The SPEAKER: No, hon member. I think that is giving information. If she is
not deliberately misleading the House, then that is not an issue. Please
take a seat, hon member.

Mrs S M CAMERER: Thank you. Well, if you listen to my speech you will hear
why I say that.

The part of the Alexandra Township that falls into my constituency is in
Ward 91 – a crazily composed ward - half the super-rich suburbs of Illovo,
Inanda and Atholl, and the other half a very poor Alexandra residents.
There are no xenophobic attacks on the rich side, although crime afflicts
them all and now criminals have got into the act in Alex, piggybacking on
these ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Will the member take a question?

The SPEAKER: Will you take a question, hon member?

Mrs S M CAMERER: No. I have far less time than you, hon member.

The SPEAKER: She doesn’t want to take a question.

Mrs S M CAMERER: ... piggybacking on these Alex attacks. One of our DA
councillors who lives in Alex told me yesterday that it was now mostly
criminals who are chasing foreigners out of their homes in Alex and
stealing their TVs, phones and whatever possessions they have.

In its National Action Plan for the Promotion and Protection of Human
Rights published nearly 10 years ago, government acknowledged that we had a
problem of between 2,5 and 8 million undocumented aliens as well as the
need to do something about this. At the same time, a Roll Back Xenophobia
campaign was announced by the Human Rights Commission. Well, 10 years on,
the problem has got worse and again, little has been done. In fact, the
Human Rights Commission acknowledges this but pleads inadequate resources
in its 2006 report. The DA believes that government should urgently
allocate resources to revive this Roll Back Xenophobia campaign.

We believe that in the short term there is a desperate need for crisis
management to contain the dire social situation that is developing around
over a thousand foreigners who are encamped around the Alex and Bramley
police stations in appalling conditions.

In the medium to long term, however, a number of steps need to be taken and
shortcomings addressed which were identified in the 2006 report, including
the urgent transformation of Home Affairs. The report found that those
officials tasked with protecting foreigners such as the SAPS and the
Department of Home Affairs display the highest levels of xenophobia,
despite official condemnation of it. There is an urgent need for training
for these officials. The long mooted refugee council should urgently be
established. There is a need for greater public awareness. More pro-active
strategies to combat the scourge of corruption and bribery in the
Department of Home Affairs are needed.

To those steps the DA would like to add the following key issues which need
to be dealt with in order to prevent future violent attacks: An end to the
government’s denial about the extent of the problem of xenophobia in South
Africa: recent attacks on Somalis were dismissed as purely criminal acts.
We’ve got to address the security vacuum along our borders and we have to
commission a survey to determine exactly how many illegal immigrants there
are in South Africa and where they are located, and develop solutions which
will see them properly integrated into South Africa or returned to their
countries of origin.

Minister Nqakula, like his boss on Zimbabwe, says there is no crisis in
Alex. If not, it certainly will become one unless the government acts
speedily to remedy its administrative shortcomings right away. Thank you.
[Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Uzocinywa ubani? [Who is going to
switch it off?]

Madam Speaker, I must say that it pains me immensely to have to stand
before this august House to refute what is obviously an evil Machiavellian
propaganda attempt to apportion the blame onto other political parties and,
at the same time, pledge my party's sympathies for those affected by this
senseless violence.

There are conflicting versions regarding the causes and implications of
this incidence. For this reason the IFP urges the President and government
to immediately institute an independent commission of inquiry to
investigate the real factors underlying this violence. Other measures will
simply be superficial.

Just after xenophobia had reared its monstrous head in Atteridgeville, the
IFP issued a statement appealing to political leaders of all the political
parties, including religious leaders in South Africa, to break the silence
and condemn xenophobia which has now become rampant in our country.

We lamented the horrors of seeing men, women and children hunted down like
wild animals; their property destroyed simply for taking refuge in our
country. Yes, those foreigners who are seen to be involved in criminal
activities should be reported to the law enforcement agencies, and let the
law of the land take its course.

It is equally criminal for local residents to take the law into their own
hands, resulting in wanton theft, destruction and killings that we are now
seeing - as the hon Bapela described so aptly. Criminal elements will
definitely latch onto this situation of semi-anarchy to fulfill their evil
intentions, and the police ought to be firm in curbing lawlessness.

Regrettably, this mayhem could be indicative of the reaction from sections
of people who, after 14 years of liberation, still suffer the severe
psychological, social and economic "unfreedoms" and deprivation; warning us
all that the legacy of colonialism and apartheid added to the illusive
freedom and nation-building can be a lethal combination. It is, in fact,
the recipe for a protracted social conflict. We ought to guard against that
and we ought to be realists.

Lastly, the IFP commends government Ministers, all political parties, the
NGOs, the law enforcement agencies, local government officials and all
members of our society who are now co-operating in these conflict areas to
bring tolerance, peace and normal life for all. Thank you.

Mrs P DE LILLE: Madam Speaker, the ID condemns the senseless killings and
attacks of foreigners. I want to deal with some of the causes of xenophobia
before coming to the solution. Xenophobia is happening because we have no
proper mechanism to deal with the refugees and illegal immigrants. We have
also failed to meet our UN Convention on Refugees and AU obligations. We
have no proper control at our borders and there is wide-scale corruption at
Home Affairs.

The African Union has also failed to deal with the rogue leaders who cause
war and instability in their countries and do not treat their people with
dignity. These rogue leaders drive people to what they think are greener
pastures in South Africa; only to find that our own people are struggling
to get the most basic needs, leading to competition for scarce resources,
where the poor turn on the poor instead of focusing their anger on
government.

The government took the easy option by issuing work permits to refugees,
which is creating more competition for scarce jobs. What are the solutions?
We need stricter control at our porous borders. UN obligations must be
provided at the point of entry and we need an education campaign to teach
our people the difference between a refugee and an illegal immigrant. The
genuine refugees who have been displaced in Alexandra and Diepsloot must be
accommodated in safe refugee camps as soon as possible and illegal
immigrants must be deported immediately. Thank you.

Ms C M P RAMOTSAMAI: Madam Speaker, hon Members of Parliament and fellow
South Africans, it is with great regret that we too today, as South
Africans and MPs, debate the ugly incidence of violence and attacks on our
fellow Africans.

Madam Speaker, I tend to disagree with the statement made by hon member
Sheila and I believe the statement she made is far from the truth. As far
as I can remember, Madam Speaker, we as South Africans have lived side by
side with our fellow Africans, fought together in trenches and planned how
to overcome colonialism in our countries and to gain freedom in our
country.
The previous hon member Bapela has articulated some of these matters. I
just want to give you one example of these: In the Western Cape, and in
Cape Town in particular, labourers who came from the then South West Africa
- Namibia today - worked in Cape Town. Included amongst those people was
Comrade Toivo ja Toivo, who stayed in the Langa flats in Cape Town. We
believe, Madam Speaker, that the formation of the South West African
People’s Organisation, Swapo, was planned in the flats in Langa, and I
think we need to remember this and actually see it as a jewel for us as
South Africans. This they did with comrades such as Tinto and Annie
Silinga. And these were not South Africans - they were Namibians. They were
migrant labourers but they were actually staying together with South
Africans at the time.

Chairperson, why do we experience incidents of xenophobic behaviour today?
There are a number of reasons and Comrade Bapela has articulated some of
the issues that happened in Alexandra.

In the Western Cape, Madam Speaker, this attack has mainly happened in the
areas such as the Masiphumelela squatter camp; in Lawaaikamp in George; in
Dunoon, which is in Table View; in Worcester; and recently, perhaps, in
Valhalla Park.

The arrival of foreigners in Cape Town and the Western Cape, we must admit,
has increased drastically since the more efficient processing of
documentation by Home Affairs. The opening of a refugee process in Home
Affairs office in Nyanga has meant that whereas 3 000 foreigners were
processed on an average of a year in Cape Town, that number now was
processed between January and March this year, which clearly shows a
drastic increase.

In these acts of xenophobia, Madam Speaker, there are strong agitations in
communities. At first, people call these African foreigners ”amakwerekwere”
and they see them as stealing their jobs and money from fellow South
Africans. These acts led to intimidation, until some of these Somalians
left their spazas and businesses and were ultimately killed, with some
burning of their belongings and lootings taking place as well.

Madam Chair, Somalians, in the case of the Western Cape, have very good
entrepreneurial skills, and local spaza owners see them as breaking the
rules of business because they sell according to the people’s needs. They
sell bread by the slice, the tea by the teabag and the sugar by the
teaspoon, etc, whereas South Africans only sell in prescribed packs or
boxes.

South African people thus saw the Somalians drawing people away from their
businesses. It therefore became clear that xenophobia was inspired by the
South African shop-owners and spazas, and not by the community. The
community, in this case, saw the Somalians as a benefit. And how can we
begin to look at and solve some of these problems, Madam Chair?
In the years 2005 and 2006, when these incidents happened in the Western
Cape, the Office of the Premier of the Western Cape established a
directorate of social dialogue to bring harmonisation where these
communities live side by side. It was established that in some cases some
youths were paid to attack shop-owners who are Somalians and, later,
ordinary Somalians. This directorate was created to foster co-operation
between Somali businesspeople and South African businesspeople, and this
built a very good relationship.

In some cases, some Somalians became wholesalers and South Africans
retailers, and it became clear that the fight over economic resources can
be overcome when people talk to each other. It’s not like this government
is not doing anything about it. It is how quick we can actually look at and
consistently deal with this thing. It is not about the South African
government not doing anything about it. It is not that South Africans have
always been xenophobic.
Employers, Madam Speaker, have also contributed to this mayhem by employing
the African foreigners for cheap labour - avoiding paying good salaries and
avoiding South African labour laws. [Interjections.]

Mrs S M CAMERER: Madam Speaker.

Ms C M P RAMOTSAMAI: What are you saying, hon Sheila?
The SPEAKER: Order! Do you want to ask a question?

Mrs S M CAMERER: Yes, please. Would you take a question?

Ms C M P RAMOTSAMAI: No, I am not prepared to take a question. Sit down.
[Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: No, she is not prepared to take a question. [Laughter.]
She learnt from your example.

Ms C M P RAMOTSAMAI: In this case, Madam Chair, South Africa has laws that
protect workers. And what do employers do? They go and poach people who are
in need and prefer to pay them almost next to nothing because they would
take anything. They actually would not fight for rights in South Africa.

That is not fair of the foreigners because they are actually being
exploited. It is also not fair for our fellow South Africans because there
are workers’ rights in this country that all of us must follow, and some
decide to actually avoid that.

Madam Speaker, my only call is that we, as South Africans, must be tolerant
of our fellow Africans in this country. We have lived with them for a very
long time and this can only be overcome if we realise that we are all the
children of one continent.

And unfortunately there are other foreigners. There are Chinese, Indians
and all others. Why then are we doing this to our fellow African
foreigners? It is a fact that we need to sit down and tighten up our laws.
Yes, I agree but that should not actually lead us into killing our own
people. We are Africans, they are Africans, and they actually had all the
guts to keep us for all these years while we were suffering under the
apartheid rule. They actually were tolerant and did everything good for us.
They assisted us in getting the freedom we are benefiting from today.

Therefore, comrades, I call upon all of us in this House, on whatever side
of the House, to go to these communities and actually talk to our people,
to be tolerant while we solve the long-term problems that have been created
by the apartheid system in this country. I thank you, Madam Chair.

Mr S N SWART:  Madam Speaker, the ACDP is similarly shocked and appalled at
the continuing xenophobic attacks in Alexandra and elsewhere. The situation
appears to be spreading and worsening. It is disgraceful that people who
flee from violence, oppression and starvation in their home countries are
being subjected to these horrific acts of violence. The ACDP condemns these
acts in the strongest terms and expresses its condolences with the families
of the deceased persons.

We welcome the appointment of the special task team to probe these attacks
and the deployment of more policemen. We agree that poor service delivery
and the rising costs of living, whilst being a reality, can never justify
such attacks. As South Africans have also been attacked, it is clear that
criminals are using this as an opportunity to run rampant.

Terwyl die ACDP gevolglik hierdie xenofobiese aanvalle ten sterkste
veroordeel, moet die regering daadwerklike stappe doen om die onhoudbare
situasie in Zimbabwe aan te spreek. Wydverspreide intimidasie en geweld in
Zimbabwe sal meebring dat ál hoe meer vlugtelinge na Suid-Afrika sal kom.
Dit kan op sigself verdere xenofobiese aanvalle op hierdie vlugtelinge in
Suid-Afrika meebring. Die Zimbabwiese krisis moet indringend aangespreek en
opgelos word. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[While the ACDP, therefore, condemns these xenophobic attacks in the
strongest terms, the government must take active steps to address the
intolerable situation in Zimbabwe. Wide-spread intimidation and violence in
Zimbabwe will result in more refugees coming to South Africa. This in
itself may result in further xenophobic attacks on these refugees in South
Africa. The crisis in Zimbabwe must be addressed incisively and be
resolved.]

The ACDP appeals to all to show compassion and to help those who have
frequently run from unimaginable hardships in their home countries, many
fleeing torture, oppression and persecution. Let us provide them with a
safe refuge.

We also appeal to church leaders, faith-based organisations and other
members of civil society to get involved as peacemakers and to encourage
congregations to extend compassion, help and assistance to all foreigners
and South Africans suffering at this time. I thank you.

Dr C P MULDER: Madam Speaker, things do not just happen. People do not get
up one morning and decide that they are going to be xenophobic today. No,
it does not work that way. There is a causal link between things. Today
everybody is condemning these xenophobic attacks and rightly so. The FF
Plus also deplores these actions because they are completely wrong.

But suddenly government is taken aback and astounded: How could this
happen? And we view it today. Well, maybe the policy-failure chickens of
the ANC are coming home to roost one after the other. I have already said
that there is a causal link. Let me name four policy failures by the ANC
government which the FF Plus believes played a direct link in these events.

Firstly, there is the issue of the silent diplomacy towards Zimbabwe since
2000, which eventually led to tacit approval and implied support for what
Mr Mugabe and Zanu PF are doing. The effect of this is that three million
Zimbabweans had to flee from Mugabe’s tyrannical rule to South Africa.
Secondly, the ineffective department of home affairs and that of safety and
security are incapable of securing South Africa’s borders and processing
refugees. Thirdly, racially motivated labour equity laws make it very
difficult for small and medium enterprises to flourish and employ as many
people as possible. This would have assisted with growth and job
opportunities for all. Fourthly, there is very poor service delivery at the
grassroots level by inept ANC-ruled local councils marked by corruption and
infighting.

All these factors are conducive to the xenophobic outbursts that we have
seen. I want to predict that these reasons will not be taken up in any
investigation and that the opposition parties will be blamed for various
reasons. The fact of the matter is, we cannot get away from this. The
Zimbabwe crisis is now escalating beyond Zimbabwe into the Southern African
region. It will not go away; we have to address that. Only then can
Zimbabwe be a success and will these kinds of things not happen. That is
the real reason. Thank you, Chairperson.

Ms M M MDLALOSE: Madam Speaker, it is crucial for the government and the
people not just to place a blanket label of xenophobia on the Alexandra
attacks. Thorough investigations and analysis need to be conducted on these
violent attacks before we can categorise them. The community of Alexandra
is not being exposed to foreigners for the first time. This community has
had a number of foreigners living and working within this township. Thus
the question we need to be asking is what has triggered this sudden
animosity in the community.

The government needs to accept that lack of employment, entrepreneurial
skills and general dissatisfaction with the quality of life among some of
the people are the root causes of the attack.

As we are all aware, skilled foreigners often come from their countries as
a result of political violence and cross onto South African soil in search
of safety, economic opportunities and a better life. When these skilled
foreigners secure employment and a better life, then there will definitely
be a rise in tension levels among the poor who do not get these
opportunities. That is the root of the problem.

Abantu bakithi bahluphekile, bese-ke bethatha ukuhlupheka kwabo bekubhekisa
kwabafikile ngoba bona bebonakala bengathi yibo ababathathela amathuba.
Sidinga ukuthi sikuchithe lokhu okwenzekayo kodwa futhi sidinga ukuthi
sibheke indlela yokwelapha isimo sase Alexander nakwamanye amalokishi lapho
kunezinkinga khona. Ngiyabonga (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Our people are destitute, and as a result they exhibit their destitution
through the attacks on foreigners because they believe that foreigners take
their jobs. We need to condemn what is happening but we also need to find a
way to remedy the situation in Alexandra and other townships where there
are problems. I thank you.]

Mnr S SIMMONS: Speaker, vreemdelingehaat kan ontstaan wanneer vreemdelinge
gemeenskappe binnedring en met plaaslike gemeenskappe meeding om
werkgeleenthede. Wanneer die situasie egter sulke ernstige afmetings
aanneem dat die plaaslike gemeenskap se vermoë om werkgeleenthede te bekom,
bedreig word of hulle moet kompeteer met die vestiging van ondernemings in
die gemeenskap, kan die vreemdelingehaat oorgaan in geweld teen die
vreemdelinge.

Geen Suid-Afrikaner sal hierdie optrede van geweld teen vreemdelinge
goedpraat of ondersteun nie, en dit is verblydend dat die polisie gou
opgetree het. Leiers van verskeie vlakke en organisasies is tans besig met
die betrokke gemeenskappe om vrede te bewerkstellig en met die gemeenskappe
van Alexandra en Diepkloof te onderhandel om hulle optrede te beëindig.

Soos dit maar altyd die geval is, duik die skelms op om die situasie tot
hulle eie voordeel te gebruik. Hierdie element moet gou en dringend
uitgeroei word. Die Parlement moet sy sterkste misnoeë en teleurstelling
teenoor die betrokke gemeenskappe uitspreek en versoek dat hulle hul
optrede onmiddellik staak. Daar moet egter onmiddellik ’n ondersoek geloods
word om te bepaal waarom die betrokke gemeenskappe so opgetree het ten
einde te voorkom dat ’n herhaling van hierdie vreemdelingehaat plaasvind of
uitbrei tot ander gemeenskappe.

Ons moet dit alles in oorsig neem ten opsigte van ons migrasiebeleid. Die
NA is van mening dat die regering hopeloos te tegemoetkomend is ten opsigte
van die instroming van buurlande. Die Engelse spreuk lui, “Charity begins
at home.” Die maatskaplike omstandighede van arm Suid-Afrikaners kan nooit
ondergeskik wees aan dié van inkomelinge nie. Die staat skep vir hom ’n
enorme maatskaplike las, wat tot nadeel is van arm Suid-Afrikaners. Ek dank
u. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr S SIMMONS: Speaker, xenophobia could develop when foreigners infiltrate
communities and compete with local communities for job opportunities.
However, when the situation reaches such alarming proportions that the
ability of the local community to obtain job opportunities is jeopardised,
or when they must compete to establish businesses in the community, then
xenophobia could turn in to violence against these foreigners.

No South African would justify or support these acts of violence against
foreigners, and it is heartening that the police have acted so swiftly.
Leaders at various levels and from various organisations are currently
engaging with the relevant communities to bring about peace and are
negotiating with communities in Alexandra and Diepkloof to cease their
actions.
As is always the case, thieves are surfacing to exploit the situation to
their own advantage. This element should be eradicated urgently and
quickly. Parliament should clearly express its dissatisfaction and
disappointment with the communities concerned and request that they put an
end to these actions immediately.

However, an investigation should be launched at once to determine why the
communities concerned acted in such a manner, in order to prevent
xenophobia from recurring and spreading to other communities.

We should review this in respect of our migration policy. The NA is of the
opinion that the government is hopelessly too obliging with regard to the
influx from neighbouring countries. There is an English saying, “Charity
begins at home.” The social circumstances of poor South Africans could
never be subordinate to those of foreigners. The government is creating an
enormous social burden for itself which is to the detriment of all poor
South Africans. I thank you.]

Mr W M SKHOSANA: Madam Speaker, hon members, I think we need to ensure
that, as we speak here, we do not speak as a country which is not part of
the global world.

We have been part of all laws which govern refugees and asylum seekers.
South Africa is part of the refugee phenomenon. For instance, we have the
Refugees Act, Act 130 of 1998 and the Immigration Act, Act 19 of 2004. The
Refugees Act stipulates that South Africa has agreed to the 1951 Convention
Relating to Status of Refugees, the 1967 Protocol Relating to the Status of
Refugees and the 1969 Organisation of African Unity Convention Governing
the Specific Aspects of Refugee Problems in Africa. In agreeing to the
various conventions and protocols, South Africa has agreed to and has
committed itself in terms of accepting refugees and dealing with them.

As part of this, the ANC, by taking the matter forward in its conference
resolutions in Polokwane, identified challenges regarding the movement of
people, as we all know that we have this mobile life that we live. With the
mobility of labour and skills which characterise the world outlook come new
challenges that confront us, such as xenophobic tendencies and the lack of
appreciation of new developments and their positive spin-offs. The
conference therefore resolved that the ANC reviews the current policy and
systems, including our laws that also take on board new decisions on the
free movement of people and regional economic communities.

We also need to take into account that as a SADC country, we have long
relations with our neighbouring countries. People who are in Swaziland move
into parts of Limpopo, and there is no problem regarding that. People who
are in Lesotho also pour into parts of the Free State, and there is no
problem with that. The same applies for people in the North West, as well
as in Namibia. We have people who were residents and citizens of Namibia,
as my fellow comrade has said, Mampe here, who came and worked here and
formed organisations which liberated them. So, we are all South Africans,
as one. We have it in ourselves that ...

... umuntu ungumuntu ngabanye abantu. [... a person is a person through
other people.]

We cannot leave this out.

The conference also resolved that there is a need to work closely with SADC
countries and ensure that policies that relate to particular countries are
harmonised in as far as issues of immigration are concerned, and that they
are in line with our protocols as a region. The conference also resolved
that our policy needs to take into account the United Nations’ codes on
refugees that we have ratified to ensure that the manner in which we treat
refugees is humane, including taking lessons from other countries which
give support like education and social welfare.

I don’t think it is correct for us, like the hon Patricia de Lille said,
that we need to take refugees into camps. We have taken a conscious
decision that we are not going to take refugees into camps. But we will
ensure that we integrate refugees with the people of South Africa.
But we also need to identify certain problems which might be the cause of
this. I think on that aspect, we might also need help from the side of our
fellow members here, the DA, on issues regarding land. If you look very
closely at the Linbro Park land, and the Leeuwkop land and even the land
that is around Kelvin, you will see that the ratepayers association clubbed
together with the DA to ensure that there is no development that will take
place in and around those areas that will enable houses to be built so as
to allow our people to have access to housing. So, we make this appeal to
say that as much as we work together with our people, alliances and
churches, you need to ensure that you, with the people that you have an
alliance with, identify this problem and assist us to resolve this
particular problem. It is very important to work as a team.

It is also important to identify that in as much as we are in this new
democracy, people must understand that we have upheavals like in the case
of farmers, whom I don’t want to align with the FF Plus and so on, who just
go across the border of Limpopo and grab people to come and work on a farm
and thereafter, towards payday, call the police and tell them that the
people are foreigners. These farmers also agitate the issue of having
uncertainty and problems in that particular part of the country.

It is also important to identify certain things that go in line with the
issue of trading. As South Africans, we need to acknowledge that those
people who come from our neighbouring countries try very hard, especially
those from Zimbabwe - women in particular. You will see them going around
selling their handworks to fellow South Africans. We all appreciate the
amount of work they put into these handworks. So far, we need them as much
as they need us on this matter. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 11:11.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly on 16 May 2008:


          a) National Gambling Amendment Bill [B 31D – 2007] (National
             Assembly – sec 76(1)).


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

CREDA, PLEASE INSERT COMMITTEE REPORTS OF ATCs OF FRIDAY 16 MAY 2008 –
PAGES 751-758. PLEASE DO NOT INCLUDE THE NCOP ON PAGE 758.


