---
title: 'National Assembly - 18 June 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2008-06-18
---

WEDNESDAY, 18 JUNE 2008
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 15:05.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

                                  ECONOMICS
                                  Cluster 3

MINISTERS:

    Steps by economics cluster to address food and fuel prices and energy
                                 challenges

123.  Mr S J Njikelana (ANC) asked the Minister of Trade and Industry:

      Whether the economic cluster in the Government intends taking any
      steps to address (a) food prices, (b) fuel prices, and (c) energy
      challenges; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                        NO1676E

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Madam Speaker, rising food prices are a
major concern for government, and our view is that increasing agricultural
production is one strategy to address this concern.

The economics cluster has a number of programmes that are focused on
agriculture and agroprocessing, which include speeding up land and agrarian
reform, and the provision of skills for emerging farmers. The work of the
cluster focuses on improving the capacity of government to proactively
improve our ability to address anticompetitive structures and behaviour,
which will improve our ability to address domestic pricing.

Dealing with unfavourable trade conditions due to high levels of
agricultural subsidies in developed countries is also a critical issue that
is being addressed by government. However, this work, which is led by the
Department of Trade and Industry, is reported on through the international
relations, peace and security cluster.

It is important to note that short-term and long-term measures are required
to deal with soaring food prices. Most of the economic cluster
interventions are focused on the medium to long term, and social sector
interventions would be critical to provide short-term relief for the poor.

With regard to fuel prices, the rapid increases reflect market forces in
global supply and demand, and perceptions of supply and demand. The key
focus of the economics cluster has been to ensure that South Africa’s
energy infrastructure is sufficient to support economic growth.

In addition, the cluster has also, through a programme led by the
Presidency, been developing a framework for economic regulators that will
make an important contribution to the management of networks and regulated
industries. On the production side, the production of synthetic fuel is
crucial to cushion the country against supply insecurities.

The initial response of government to the electricity emergency was the
establishment of the National Electricity Response Team, which was proposed
in the economics cluster’s presentation to the Cabinet lekgotla in January
2008. It was, however, decided that the National Electricity Response Team
would best be co-ordinated by the Presidency directly while the cluster
maintained its medium to long-term focus.

The cluster’s approach focuses first on the need to ensure that there is
security of supply, which can be provided through policy certainty and the
roll-out of additional energy infrastructure. This not only includes
electricity generation and distribution, but also areas in liquid fuels
such as increasing refining capacity, the provision of pipelines, port
infrastructure, storage and distribution capacity.

It has also become clearer that alternative energy sources need to be
developed. Key to this will be the roll-out of nuclear energy and the
development of a local nuclear industry as an affordable and
environmentally sound alternative, while the cluster also identified solar
energy and other alternative and renewable sources such as biofuels that I
referred to earlier.

Whilst looking for longer-term solutions to South Africa’s energy needs, it
is necessary to find ways of reducing our current levels of energy demands
without adversely affecting our economy. As part of a broader strategy to
deal with the issue of energy supply, we need to promote the efficient use
of energy.

Energy efficiency does not only mean efficiency in the final consumption of
energy, but efficiency in its production and transportation as well. A
programme to implement energy security is therefore a vital component of
the cluster’s programme of action. Thank you.
Mr S J NJIKELANA: Thank you, hon Minister. Your response has been quite
encouraging, particularly the fact that you are working as a cluster and a
team.

Minister, can you please go beyond our borders, and just share with us to
what extent you have interacted with SA Development Community members, and
also at the level of the African Union, in addressing the same issues.
Thank you.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Madam Speaker, I thank the hon member
for the question.

The member would be aware that, for quite some time, among countries within
the SADC region, there has been a process that has been underway, which was
a process that was initiated based on projections that were made that if we
did not do something collectively as SADC countries we would face an energy
squeeze by 2007.

So, a programme was initiated where, collaboratively, countries are working
in concert in order to make sure that, as a region, we can beef up our
ability to generate more electricity. So, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is part of that team, along with Namibia, Angola, Botswana and South
Africa. There is a process that is underway, whereby countries are each
going to be contributing a percentage to the overall energy pool in the
region. So, certainly, it is a matter on which we are collaborating with
other countries.

I am not aware that we have had that kind of discussion in the African
Union. It may be that I have missed it, but I am not aware of that. Of
course, in the context of the current energy challenges that we have faced
as a country, that is something that has had an impact on some of our
neighbours. I think Mozambique, for example, in so far as it gets
electricity for its own aluminium smelter from South Africa, has
experienced an impact, but it is something that we are trying to manage in
a collaborative way. Thank you very much.

Dr P J RABIE: Madam Speaker, hon Minister, and hon members, Cabinet
recently took a decision not to reduce the taxes on fuel. Now, in the light
of the escalation in prices of basic foodstuffs, is it possible to furnish
the House with reasons why Cabinet decided not to reduce the taxes on fuel?
Thank you, Minister.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: I think that the statement in this
regard that was issued following the Cabinet meeting was a statement that
said that the Minister of Finance as well as the Minister of Minerals and
Energy should continue to consult on a much broader basis than just a
question of whether you are going to cut fuel levies or taxes or not. But
you continue to consult in order to come up with the best way in which we
can ameliorate the impact of the fuel prices that have risen sharply.
So, in a sense, Cabinet gave direction to these Ministers, and I think what
Cabinet sought to make clear was that it hasn’t adopted a position around
the reduction or elimination of fuel taxes, but that it is a matter on
which, on an ongoing basis, the two Ministers need to interact and advise
Cabinet.

Mr N SINGH: Madam Speaker, I was also going to ask a question on fuel
taxes, but I will change my question.

The hon Minister spoke about the production of biofuels, which is the way
many countries are going at the moment. I would like to know whether the
economics cluster has applied its mind to the production of biofuels, given
the fact that maize would be required in its production, and with food
being required by the people of this country. What are the views of the
economics cluster in this regard?

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Madam Speaker, we have been very clear
as government on this matter. From the time that we communicated the
completion of the work of developing a strategy for the biofuels industry,
we made it very clear that maize would not be one of the inputs that would
be used in the production of biofuels.

We took that position precisely because of our sensitivity to the issues
around food security. Of course, there is continued contestation and
perhaps lobbying around this issue but, as government, we are actually
quite firm in saying that we are not going to use maize. We will use other
sources that will also give us the same results but, certainly, maize is
not one of them.

So, in a sense, the issues around the rising food prices do not impact that
much on whether we proceed or not with our biofuels strategy. It’s a
question of there being many things that you need to do when you undertake
that exercise of producing biofuels. There are regulatory issues, there are
licensing issues and also mechanisms that you put in place in order to
ensure that production can actually take place.

Prof E S CHANG: Madam Speaker and hon Minister, there are energy
challenges. Is the Minister aware of that? There are two elements in the
electricity bill. The one is the monthly charges. It goes according to peak
times. Even if you only switch on for one second in peak time, for the
whole month, you have to pay based on peak time rates. So, that means that
84% to 87% or even over 90% of your electricity bill is taken up by your
monthly charges.

The other aspect is the variable energy charges, which constitutes the user-
end consumption. It is very little. It is perhaps less than 50% of what you
pay on your electricity bill.

Particularly now, we are calling on everybody to try to save power. It
doesn’t help us at all, because if you switch on for one second, you get
charged peak rates, and you have to pay based on those rates for your
monthly charges, which as I said before, constitute 83% to 87% of your
bill. Even with what they call the power factor corrections, the majority
of your bill will still be based on your peak time usage.

So, Minister, maybe you can talk to your colleague next to you, the
Minister for Public Enterprises, to find out ways of helping us to pay this
bill of monthly charges.

The other question I want to ask deals with fuel prices. Has government ...
[Interjections.] [Time expired.]

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: I will try to answer to the best of my
ability.

It seems to me that the question revolves around the issue of higher costs
at peak times. What I really want to say is that part of what I think we’ve
got to manage well is the issue of managing those peaks that obviously
occur from time to time. For example, we know that during winter there is
just a general increase in the demand for electricity. Therefore, we would
encourage homes to have an energy mix so that at those times you could have
the use of solar energy for things like heating water, for example.

It is those kinds of things that can help us to better manage those periods
or seasons when there is that general trend towards an increase in use. I
think that those things will therefore reduce what it costs us when those
peaks do happen.

I hope that I have come close to addressing the concerns of the hon member.


      Strategies to enable subsistence farming to contribute to poverty
                         alleviation in rural areas

117.  Mr J Bici (UDM) asked the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs:

      Whether any strategies are in place to enable subsistence farming to
      contribute towards the alleviation of poverty and hunger in rural
      areas; if not, what is the position in this regard; if so, what are
      the relevant details?        NO1670E

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Madam Speaker, I hope
we are not repeating the same answers, basically, to the same question.

To be specific regarding the two departments that fall under the Minister,
in terms of the Department of Agriculture, we are working, in general, in
terms of the integrated food security strategy.

The Department of Agriculture – now this is one of those Schedule four
functions – working through the provinces via the provincial departments
for agriculture, provides support to vulnerable households to produce for
their own sustenance by establishing backyards and/or community gardens.
Perhaps the most prominent amongst these programmes is the household food
production programme, in which case once-off grants for agricultural
starter packs are being provided, as well as the required technological
know-how.

It is very interesting that these starter packs through which we reach
about 70 000 households in South Africa have different compositions as
required. It might, for example, be the obvious vegetable production type
of packs. It might be livestock production packs for poultry or goats, etc.
It might also be infrastructure for fencing or for boreholes, water control
components, for example, water harvesting, and training and capacity-
building.

With regard to the Department of Land Affairs, we have the Settlement and
Implement Support Strategy, which was officially launched by the Minister
in February 2008. It attempts to better the support systems for land reform
beneficiaries by ensuring that all relevant role-players are on board. It
is, in most cases, a difficult act of co-ordination between the national
and provincial governments and the municipalities.

I just want to say that in this year’s Budget of the hon Minister of
Finance, the most exciting event was the increase in the budget for
developing agricultural extension services. We hope to provide an extra
package of support services to prospective farmers, and increase it from 3
000 in 2008 to 10 000 in 2011. The delivery capacity of extension officers
are, mostly, on a provincial level. We need to have more national action,
with at least 1 000 officers being provided for. This is one of the most
important general things that we are doing.

It is true that these high food prices are, indeed, reaching very critical
proportions and need a response - it can’t be business as usual – which is
beyond what we are doing at the moment. There is much to talk about in the
trade and financial circles of government about what must be done.

All that I can add from the agriculture and land perspective is that, at
one stage, you can say you must produce more, and farmers must produce
more. We must produce where nothing is being produced now.

At some stage, theoretically, you can, perhaps, reach the point where a
country becomes self-sufficient in terms of food while it may have been
competitive by importing in other ways. I think the danger is a global one
that countries are, in an agricultural economic sense, starting to become
balkanised. I think we must guard against that, and must put in place extra
support systems. We are working very hard, together with Trade and Finance,
on this. Thank you.

Mr J BICI: Madam Speaker and hon Deputy Minister, what steps have been
taken to identify arable land lying fallow that may be cultivated to
alleviate immediate poverty in rural areas and address long-term household
food security threats facing the nation as the global food shortage and
economic crisis deepens? I thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Madam Speaker, I must
say that the land lying fallow in some areas is mostly in areas that have
been neglected for many reasons over a long period in history.

We don’t have any specific programme addressing that problem, except that
it is addressed generally over all the programmes of both Agriculture and
Land Affairs. Let me give an example: The old so-called fallow land fell
under the old agricultural assistance schemes or “bystandsrade”. That land,
in most cases, has been loaned or leased to farmers, and when the leases
lapse, those farms are immediately sold or given, through a lot of
assistance, to the farmers who are presently farming there.

There are areas in South Africa – this has a lot to do with the history of
this country – where the land may be lying fallow. It doesn’t help to run
away from that problem. We’ll have to work with the provinces and get that
land active, which can only be done by state-led development. In other
words, if some area around Queenstown is lying fallow – it was formerly
part of one of the old governments there – it must be identified and
supported by giving the necessary agricultural assistance to the farmers
who are living there or, on a fair basis, be distributed.

This is a very difficult task to perform because you must co-ordinate
between all role-players concerned in that area, which might sometimes be
quite a difficult task. It doesn’t help to ignore anyone, whether the
municipality or other leaders, in that area.

We must be realistic. The challenges are still huge. Well, I can also add
that we need - speaking to my side here – more assistance for Agriculture
and Land Affairs. We’ve really got by with too little support up to now.
The Ministry and the Treasury have now shown that, in their Budget, they
are intending to support agriculture more and more. That is the intention
of this government. I’m glad to be a part of it. I thank you.

Dr A I VAN NIEKERK: Speaker and hon Deputy Minister, could I say, in
response to what you’ve said, that what we need in agriculture today is to
do more and talk less.

Of the 4,5 million hectares of high potential agricultural land, one
million hectares is basically utilised by subsistence farmers in South
Africa. The production level is poor because of the high acidity of the
soil and the absence of trace elements, basically, zinc, copper and
molybdenum. It is relatively easy to rectify the shortcomings, and if this
is done, it will increase the production of these subsistence farmers
tenfold.

The research in this regard has been done and the solutions are ready to be
applied. What actions does the Department of Agriculture contemplate taking
to assist these subsistence farmers in this regard to increase the food
production and to help them to survive in these difficult conditions?

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Madam Speaker, the
acidity problem in areas such as the former Transkei is quite well known.
In fact, South Africa has the scientific knowledge available through soil
research by the very good Agricultural Research Council, which is still
doing very good work.

We have the knowledge and lime through which we can change the acidity
levels and the molybdenum levels in the soil. If I could say I will do it
tomorrow ... [Interjections.] Hon Botha, dis baie maklik om te sê. [Hon
Botha, thats very easy to say.] But it takes a lot of organisation, and
that is what we are doing now.

The Minister and the former Minister have changed a lot regarding the co-
operation between the national government and the provinces. It is very
good at the moment because it is unfortunately just a fact of life that we
have provinces and municipalities. That is what democracy is about, and we
have to work with it.

It is not always so easy to control. For example, KwaZulu-Natal is doing
excellently - I don’t want to comment on the provinces - and school gardens
are doing very well in the Free State. The Western Cape is producing a lot
of nice wine. I don’t know much about wine. [Laughter.] Why drink wine if
you can have water? [Interjections.] I am really not a great taster.

We know about the acidity problem. The problem is that you just don’t take
a lorry full of lime and go and tip it down near Queenstown or wherever you
go. It is the whole process of management and of controlling the situation
by looking at what is the situation on the ground and getting people
involved. You can’t do agricultural support systems from top to bottom. You
can’t do it. It must grow.

That is the reason why I personally believe the present strong agricultural
commercial sector must and is doing a lot because they have the knowledge
and experience and we must move together. In South Africa, there is a lot
being done together to change it around.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Rule 113 (3) says
that the reply to a question is limited to three minutes, but if the
Presiding Officer is of the opinion that the matter is of sufficient
importance, an additional two minutes can be granted. I cannot believe that
what the hon Deputy Minister is saying is of such importance.

The SPEAKER: Mr Ellis, take your seat and let the Deputy Minister finish
his point.

Mr M J ELLIS: He’s been remarkably long-winded this afternoon, Madam
Speaker.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: I’ve been remarkably
long, you’ll kindly tell me. No, I was looking for a good joke on which to
end this, but unfortunately, you are not funny at all today.

Madam, the point is that there is a lot of goodwill in South Africa in
agriculture at present. It’s a question of being organised. Thank you.
[Interjections.] [Time expired.]

Mr S ABRAM: Madam Speaker, arising from the initial response of the hon
Deputy Minister, we wish to know what monitoring mechanisms are in place
regarding successes on the ground, and whether the hon Minister will be in
a position to provide some statistical information on the number of starter
pack beneficiaries and the number of established backyard and community
gardens.

Regarding the Settlement and Implement Support Strategy, since its launch
four months ago, can the hon Deputy Minister indicate how the roll-out is
progressing on the ground, especially in view of the ever-increasing input
costs? One must remember that diesel and fertilizer prices alone have, in
the past 12 months, escalated by almost another 100%. This places a strain
on poor households to get their gardens going because, without fertilizer,
nothing grows.

Since the hon Deputy Minister had digressed in his response, may I say that
we can, in South Africa, get another 50 000 hectares of land under
irrigation, provided the hon Minister of Finance is willing to increase the
agricultural budget from the current less than half a percent of the total
national Budget to closer to 10%. We can roll-out and develop the rural
areas; we can address the alleviation of rural poverty; we can become a net
exporter of food, instead of being a current net importer. If we are
willing to make massive funds available to roll-out infrastructure ...
[Time expired.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Madam Speaker, if
specific numbers are required, I will gladly request, through you, Madam
Speaker, that the question be asked.

I should perhaps just say that, eventually, we must get the numbers from
the provinces. At the moment, the information I have is that about 70 000
households are being reached through these programmes. But, for example,
there are a number of programmes under the household food production
programme which are implemented at provincial level, for example, in the
Eastern Cape, Mpumalanga, North West, etc.

The programme provides agricultural production packs and if you ask
specifically for these numbers, we must obtain them through the provinces.
At the moment, I would say about 10%, according to my information, of the
Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme and the equitable share of
provinces is used for these support systems. Thank you.

Mr M W SIBUYANA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to find out from
the Deputy Minister what plans the department has to resuscitate the once
prosperous agricultural projects, namely projects in Bushbuck Ridge such as
the Dingledale and Dumfries projects, or projects in Giyani which drew
water from the Letaba Dam.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Thank you, hon
member, through you, Madam Speaker.

Resuscitation of previous projects is a constant concern, especially in
Land Affairs where land reform projects take place or where there is land
restitution. I must say that we can do more but we have to realise that
there is budget fragmentation.

In most of the places, like Taung for example or Giyani, you must repair
the irrigation systems, you must build the canal, you must get old
irrigation systems which were put down there, most of which are not
working, you must sometimes have the funds to do this. For example, just to
get some life into Taung will cost us a couple of million rand. I think
this must be addressed in a special request from the Minister.

If specific information about these projects is required, I will ask for a
written question on that. Thank you.

    Programme to train and create awareness among Public Service managers
                  regarding employment of disabled persons

122.  Mr M J G Mzondeki (ANC) asked the Minister of Labour:


      (1)   Whether his department has any programme aimed at training and
           creating awareness among public service managers on the
           employment of disabled persons as per the code of good practice
           on the employment of disabled persons; if so, what were the
           successes achieved by the programme; if not,
      (2)   whether there is a plan to embark on such a programme; if not,
           why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                                   NO1675E

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Madam Speaker, I was informed that there was going
to be a change but, anyway, I’m fine.

Noxa ndingenguye uMphathiswa weSebe leeNkonzo zasebuRhulumenteni noLawulo,
asisebenzi ngabo kuphela, sisebenza ngabo bonke nje abaqeshi jikelele kweli
loMzantsi Afrika. Rhoqo ke, nyaka ngamnye, soloko sisiba neendibano
zokufundisa abantu ngalo mthetho, i-Employment Equity Act, ukuze bazi
ngokupheleleyo ngawo. Oku ke sikwenza sigqale kubo bonke abaqeshi, ngakumbi
abo babandakanyekayo ngokomthetho lo, kwakunye neli Sebe leeNkonzo
zasebuRhulumenteni noLawulo.

Sizama ke ukunqanda nokuphelisa nya, sisuse neengcambu ucalu-calulo phaya
emisebenzini, ngakumbi ngokubhekiselele kubantu abangoomama nakubantu
abakhubazekileyo, ukuze umthetho lo usetyenziswe ngendlela eyiyo.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[As much as I am not the Minister for the Public Service and
Administration, they are not the only people we deal with; we work with all
the employers here in South Africa. We always have annual meetings where we
educate people about this legislation, the Employment Equity Act, so that
they should know more about it. We do this exercise aiming for all
employers at large, especially those who are directly affected by this
legislation, and also the Department of Public Service and Administration.

We want to prevent and totally stop discrimination in the workplace,
especially when it comes to women and people with disabilities, so that the
legislation can be implemented in the correct manner.]

Yes, there are plans to continue creating awareness and educating employers
regarding their legislative duties as designated employers under the
Employment Equity Act. In order to strengthen the implementation mechanisms
of the Act, it is important to note that this year my department will again
be embarking on employment equity awareness campaigns in July and August
throughout all the provinces.

This time the campaigns will focus on raising awareness and educating
employers on various employment equity tools, is the Codes of Good Practice
on the employment of people with disabilities, the management of HIV and
Aids in the workplace, including the technical assistance guidelines that
accompany these codes.

In addition to the above initiative, my department has, in collaboration
with the Department of Public Service and Administration, conducted an
awareness-raising workshop. The workshop focused mainly on educating the
Public Service on the various Codes of Good Practice, the employment of
people with disabilities, the management of HIV and Aids in the workplace,
including other legislated duties of designated employers such as
consultation, preparation, implementation of an Employment Equity Plan and
submission of employment equity reports that are due on 1 October 2008.

Ndiyabulela, Somlomo. [I thank you, Speaker.]

Mr M J G MZONDEKI: Thank you, Minister. I’m very happy to realise that
there is a working relationship between you and the Department of Public
Service and Administration. You would note, Minister, that many of the
departments are still struggling to reach their minimum target of 2%. One
of the reasons for that is that people are not even able to define what a
disabled person is.

As an example, one official from a department was asked why they only
employed one disabled person and what the disability of that person was. He
said that the person looked very short. If that person understood that
there is what we call the Code of Good Practice, if he understood the
concept of reasonable accommodation, he would know that although it’s a
short person, he could be reasonably accommodated. But thank you very much
for the efforts between yourselves and the Department of Public Service and
Administration. Thank you.

UMPHATHISWA WEZEMISEBENZI: Somlomo, mandikhe noko ndimumathe elinqatha
linesihlunu ndilinikwa ngokaMzondeki. Kumnandi kaloku ukunconywa; utsho
ukhukhumale. Ndivumele ke nam ndikhukhumale ndiphume amadlu, njengenkwenkwe
yakuQoboqobo.

Ndiyayibulela into yokuba lo kaMzondeki azi ukuba kukho abantu, ngeli xesha
uThixo asabanike imilenze emibini, abanye asabaphe amehlo, abanye
abangekatyhobeki kwiingozi zeemoto, abangaqondiyo ukubaluleka kwabantu
abakhubazekileyo kuba umntu ngalo mzuzu esengumntu opheleleyo. Kanti
ubukhulu becala, lo uzibona ephelele ngalo mzuzu, kuthi kanti ingqondo yona
ayiphelelanga. Yingozi kakhulu ke loo nto.

Sonke kweli loMzantsi Afrika kufuneka sazi ukuba laphela ixesha
lokuthabatha abantu abakhubazekileyo bafakwe ngasemva emakhitshini. Nabo
ngabantu, bamele ukuze bathabathe inxaxheba ekuhlumeni kwemo yoqoqosho
kwilizwe loMzantsi Afrika. Enkosi mntakaMzondeki. (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Speaker, I appreciate the compliments that I get
from hon Mzondeki. I feel great when I get compliments. Allow me to be
proud and feel great as a boy who was born in Keiskammahoek.

I am grateful that hon Mzondeki appreciates the fact that there are people
who, while the Lord has given them two legs, have eyesight, and they have
not been involved in car accidents, do not understand how important people
who are living with disabilities are, just because they are not disabled at
this present moment. Yet, you will find in most cases that the brains of
the ones who regard themselves as able now, are not functioning well. That
is a big problem.

All of us in South Africa must know that the days that people with
disabilities were hidden in backyard rooms are gone. They are also human
beings; they are also entitled to take part in the economic growth of their
country, South Africa. Thank you, hon Mzondeki.]

Dr U ROOPNARAIN: Hon Minister, apart from the training, which is purely
theoretical; how do we ensure that recreational facilities like crèches,
canteen facilities, parking facilities, are made more accessible to people
with disabilities? Also, one of the findings from Disabilities in the
Workplace shows that most people with disabilities are relegated to lower
paying jobs. How do we ensure their movement up the corporate ladder? Thank
you very much.

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: That’s a very important question that you are
asking hon member. I hope employers are listening to the trend of your
questioning because what it says is that we must make sure that workplaces
are accessible to people with disabilities. We must make sure that they are
able to park their cars, and after parking their cars they are able to
access their offices.

But, thirdly, you are saying it’s important that we know that some of the
people with disabilities are highly qualified and there is absolutely no
reason why they should be in low paying jobs. They should be in jobs that
in many instances are better than that of Mdladlana himself sitting here.
There is no school where you train as a Minister of Labour, my sister. So,
anyone can become a Minister of Labour. I must never pride myself and think
that I’m the permanent Minister of Labour. That’s nonsense.

Therefore, it is very important that we all understand that people with
disabilities also need to participate in the economy and they must also get
everything other people are getting. According to Chapter Two of the Bill
of Rights in our Constitution, there should be no discrimination on many
grounds and one of those grounds is disability. Thank you very much for
your question hon member.

Mr S J F MARAIS: Minister, we’ve heard that employment of the disabled,
especially within the Public Service Sector is appalling and in most cases
doesn’t meet the targets. Also the conditions of safety in the workplace
itself more often than not do not meet the minimum standards. What
strategies has your department implemented to prevent unfair discrimination
against them in the future, to consult with disability representative
bodies and to enforce the constitutional rights of this economically very
able group of people? Thank you.

UMPHATHISWA WEZEMISEBENZI: Njengokuba bendikhe ndatsho ke ndathi andinguye
uMphathiswa weSebe lezaBasebenzi bakaRhulumente. Kodwa, okubalulekileyo
kukuba azi umhlekazi lo ukuba siyazi, asiyikhanyeli loo nto, amasebe
amaninzi karhulumente awabanganakho ukuba awuphumelelise ummiselo
ebebewubekelwe. Ambalwa kakhulu athe aphumelela.

UMphathiswa ke uye wasixelela kwiKhabhinethi Lekgotla ukuthi bonke
abaPhathiswa kufuneka babhinqe omfutshane baqinisekise ukuthi amasebe abo
ayabaqesha abantu abakhubazekileyo. Ngenxa yomsebenzi wethu ke kuye
kunyanzeleke ngelinye ixesha ukuba singene kwezi ofisi zikarhulumente.
Sesinee-ofisi ezifana nezamapolisa esesizivalile. – uMphathiswa weSebe
leMicimbi yaseKhaya akakho apha, sesine-ofisi esiyivalileyo kwela sebe
lakhe. – Nale yeSebe lezaBasenzi phaya eNelspruit kwaye kwanyanzeleka ukuba
ndithi mayivalwe ngoba asinakho ukuthi sivumele abasebenzi bakarhulumente
basebenze kwiimeko ezinkenenkene. UMphathiswa lo uphambi kwam weMisebenzi
kaRhulumente silwa yonke imihla ngaloo nto.

Owam umsebenzi kukukhusela amalungelo abasebenzi, nokuba baqeshwe
ngurhulumente, nokuba baqeshwe nguthathatha phaya esitalatweni; ngumsebenzi
wam lowo. Andikhathelele kuthandwa ke ngaloo nto. (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF LABOUR: I have told you that I am not the Minister for the
Public Service and Administration. But, the important thing is that the hon
gentleman should know that we know that and we are not denying that many of
the government departments did not succeed in meeting their target. Those
that have succeeded in doing so are very few.

The Minister told us in the Cabinet lekgotla that all the Ministers must
pull up their socks and see to it that their departments do employ people
with disabilities. Due to our work we are sometimes forced to go to these
government offices. We have closed some offices like police offices. The
Minister of Home Affairs is not here, we have closed an office in her
department. And I was forced to close the office of the Department of
Public Works in Nelspruit, because we cannot allow government employees to
work under bad conditions. The Minister of Public Works - who is in front
of me - and I fight about that every day.

My job is to protect the rights of employees, whether they are government
employees or employed by somebody in the street; that is my job and I do
not have to be liked for that.]

          Maintenance work done to buildings leased in Richtersveld

119.  Mr Z Kotwal (ANC) asked the Minister for Public Enterprises:

      Whether any maintenance work has been done by a certain company (name
      furnished) to the buildings it leased in the Richtersveld in terms of
      the compact between the Richtersveld community and the Government; if
      not, what is the position in this regard; if so, what are the relevant
      details?                          NO1672E

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: The question relates to the settlement
between the Richtersveld community and the company Alexkor. Alexkor has
been maintaining the premises referred to, ie gardens, structural
maintenance, electrical maintenance, painting, replacement of broken
equipment and windows, and clearing of various infrastructures such as
drains. Approximately R3,3 million has been spent on this since the signing
of the deed of settlement.

This is part of a process of transferring these assets to the community and
also forming a properly proclaimed township for Alexander Bay. It is a
process which is currently being undertaken with the province and with the
assistance of the sustainable communities programme to make sure we fulfil
our obligations in the deed of settlement to establish quite a significant
property and housing base for the property companies established by the
community.

Mnu Z KOTWAL: Ngiyabonga, Somlomo. Ngqongqoshe, Qabane Erwin, ngiyabonga
ngempendulo yakho. Kuyasijabulisa ukuthi uhulumeni kaKhongolose uyazigcina
izethembiso zakhe. Siyacela ukuthi nibaphathe kahle laba bantu base-
Richtersveld ngoba bathathelwa umhlaba wabo ngumbuso wobandlululo.
Siyabonga futhi siyajabula ukuthi uKhongolose ubuyisele umhlaba kubanikazi.
Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Mr Z KOTWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Minister, Comrade Erwin, thank you
for your response. We are grateful that the ANC-led government is keeping
its promises. We are asking that you should treat these people of the
Richtersveld very well because they were deprived of their land during the
apartheid era. We are thankful and grateful that the ANC has returned the
land to its rightful owners. Thank you. [Applause.]]

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: I support what the hon member has said
and I think this is quite an historic occasion. This particular question
with regard to the houses and other properties in Alexander Bay is going
back to the history of this and it is actually very interesting indeed and
quite symbolic.

Those of you who have been to Alexander Bay will know that at one point it
was divided into two separate parts, the so-called “binnekamp” and the so-
called “buitekamp” and people were allowed behind the fences of the
“binnekamp” where the mining took place. You went in for 6 months at a time
and were not allowed out. So, there is tremendous symbolism in breaking
down these barriers and rebuilding the township and proclaiming it from a
mining town to a proper municipality.

We sincerely hope that this will form the basis of economic activity in the
Richtersveld. As you know, the other components of this settlement also
include the transfer of agricultural assets, maricultural assets to the
community and we are also implementing the pooled and shared joint venture
which is a partnership between the community and Alexkor for the actual
mining of the diamonds. It’s a very complex settlement but I believe its
going very well. My own personal respect for that community is immense and
I think they’ve managed this process very well indeed.

Dr S M VAN DYK: What criteria, policy and procedures are employed by your
department when granting contracts and how do you determine the
creditability of those entities? Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: That’s a pretty vague question. I’m
not sure what it refers to. Is it contracts in the department, in which
event the department has had an unenviable record of unqualified audits
continuously or it is contracts with relation to Alexkor, which would be
covered by the PFMA, and to the best of our knowledge and from the
financial statements of Alexkor, there have been no major problems with
that.

If you are referring to the complex system of subcontracting for the
diamonds, that is a process that is being conducted through a range of
measures. Currently there are very few of the subcontractors operating
because the mining operation is regarded as a care and maintenance
activity.

The SPEAKER: In the absence of any more follow-up questions, we move on to
Question 135 from the hon Opperman to the Minister of Public Works.

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Sorry, Madam Speaker. On a point of
information, I have a Budget Vote in the NCOP. If you would excuse me,
we’ve made arrangements that the rest of my answers would be given in
writing to those people that ask questions.

The SPEAKER: We have one more question, but if you have a Budget Vote in
the NCOP, I think you have to go and deliver it, hon Minister.

  Study to determine amount of land transferred under previous land reform
                                 legislation

135.  Mr S E Opperman (DA) asked the Minister of Public Works:

      Whether, with regard to the Expropriation Bill [B16—2008], she has
      conducted a study to determine the amount of land that was transferred
      under the previous land reform legislation; if not, why not; if so,
      what are the relevant details?          NO1690E

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Before I
answer this question, I would like to thank the chairperson of the
portfolio committee and members who have suspended their public hearings on
the very matter of the Expropriation Bill that is under public hearing as
we speak, to come to this House, because one of the hon members who asked
the question happened to be part of that sitting. So, I would like to thank
all members for that.

With respect to the question that has been asked: We did not think it was
necessary to conduct any study because all of us know how much land has
been transferred thus far as a result of the Restitution Act, as well as
other land-related legislation, since 1994. That question, in part, was
answered by the Deputy Minister of Agriculture when replying to the
question.

But, with regard to the Expropriation Act of 1975, one cannot have data, as
we speak, of how much land we have actually expropriated as a result of
that Act for public purposes such as roads, rail and other related matters,
which have been for state requirements. So, in terms of the question, I
think I have answered it, but one would then wait for the follow-up
questions from hon Opperman with regard to this question. Thank you.

Mr S E OPPERMAN: Thank you, Speaker and Minister. I think it is not just
about the land that is available; it is also about the effectiveness of the
programmes that we are dealing with. As it is one of the objectives of the
Bill to provide government with the tool to achieve its commitment to land
reform, Madam Minister, are you aware that 50% of projects started under
the Land Reform legislation are a failure because of a lack of post-
settlement support? If there is a lack of capacity we are setting people up
for failure. I want to know from the Minister: How will the new legislation
change the situation, and has the government carried out an economic
assessment of the draft Expropriation Bill? I thank you.

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Hon Speaker and hon member, I think the
issues we are trying to answer, while related, are actually not specific to
the legislation. With the Expropriation Act, its function has always been,
in the past and in the present, to assist the state to compulsorily acquire
land for public purposes for one of the things that I have mentioned
earlier such as road construction, rail and for other construction of state
or parastatal assets.

Land reform is one of those aspects that have been introduced as a result
of our Constitution in respect of public interest, particularly for dealing
with issues of social justice and equity in our society. So, it is a
necessary instrument that we would have required as government whether you
had a need for land reform or not, because it is an instrument that you
require in order to compulsorily acquire land for development purposes.

Therefore, the issues referred to by hon Opperman around the support to
land reform beneficiaries is a matter that indeed, as a state, we have
deliberated on. That is why the Department of Agriculture has brought to
Cabinet some proposals on what may need to be done to give post-settlement
support.

As you would know, the way in which we implemented the programme from 1994
was such that land acquisition and land reform were driven from the Land
Affairs Department, and post-settlement support had to be done through the
Department of Agriculture particularly at a provincial level as well as
other support mechanisms by municipalities. That has not always worked very
well and that is why the Department of Agriculture has reviewed that
process on how we could make it better.

So, in respect of support to land reform beneficiaries, I am confident that
the proposals brought by the Minister of Agriculture and the department
will assist us to ensure that the land that people have received can
actually be put to productive use. However, it is important in the context
of South Africa’s history that we should not juxtapose the issue of social
justice and productive use of that land as though those are actually
opposed. Both of them are necessary.

If we want to deal with the legacy of our past and the land question in
South Africa, there is no way we can say we will postpone land delivery to
those who were historically disenfranchised in order to maintain the
economic viability of land to those who have it. I think that would be
wrong. We cannot therefore postpone the problem forever. We must deal with
the contradictions, as they may seem, in order to achieve both objectives.
Thank you very much.

Mr L D MADUMA: Thank you very much, hon Speaker. Minister, I must thank you
for responding quite eloquently around the role that will be played by this
Expropriation Bill when it comes to its enactment, given the challenges of
land reform in the country.

Minister, as the current Expropriation Act, Act 63 of 1975, predates the
Constitution and is thus inconsistent with the Constitution, how is this
Bill consistent with the spirit and provisions of the Constitution,
especially with regard to equality in section 9 and property in section 25,
just to mention a few? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Thank very much, hon Maduma, for your
question.

I would first like to deal with the issue of the general application of
this Act. One of the objectives of the Act is actually to bring the current
legislation in line with the Constitution. If you look at section 25 of our
Constitution, where it deals with property, it actually indicates, if one
were to read subsection (1), that:


  No one may be deprived of property except in terms of law of general
  application and no law may permit arbitrary deprivation of property.


Subsection 2 says:


  Property may be expropriated only in terms of law of general application
  –


        a) for a public purpose or in the public interest; and
        b) subject to compensation, the amount of which and the time and
           manner of payment of which have either been agreed to by those
           affected or decided or approved by a court.

If you look at the current Bill that is under discussion, on the one hand
we are seeking to align the various expropriation instruments that are
there not just in the national sphere of government but also in the
provincial and municipal spheres, as governed by the various ordinances.
So, we are trying to bring about an alignment because there is
inconsistency in the manner in which such expropriation is done currently
in the various spheres of government.

Secondly, to ensure that we deal with issues of equity where we tamper with
the rights of individuals, we have actually, through that legislation,
indicated procedures that must be followed when such expropriation must be
taken into consideration.

Thirdly, we also indicated how the Minister, as an executing authority,
will actually determine compensation and how, where such negotiations have
failed, the Minister having taken such decision, the courts may also be
approached by those who are not satisfied to ensure that justice is being
done.

In my view, we have dealt with the issue of equity and we have also dealt
with issues that relate to fair compensation in the manner in which this
legislation, if passed, will actually be implemented. Thank you very much.

  Position regarding continuation with or changes to government’s inflation
                              targeting policy

139.  Mr H J Bekker (IFP) asked the Minister of Finance:

      (1)   Whether he will continue with the Government’s policy of
           containing inflation by (a) setting inflation targets and (b)
           using the interest rate to achieve this goal; if so, what are
           the relevant details; if not,


      (2)   whether he will announce any change in policy; if not, why not;
           if so, what are the relevant details?        NO1697E
The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, the question, if I understand
correctly, relates to inflation targeting and whether we will pursue this
policy. It is important to remind ourselves that inflation is a sustained
rise in price levels and the result of too much money chasing too few goods
and services. And when that happens, it impacts very directly on people on
fixed incomes. So, when food prices rise then clearly working families are
seriously out of pocket. They must make the adjustment.

In pursuance of sections 2 to 4 of the Constitution, which set out the
primary objectives of the Reserve Bank, we have opted to adhere to what is
presently best practice available, and that is an environment of inflation
targeting to create certainty and predictability in respect of what the
Reserve Bank would do.

The target that we have in South Africa of between 3% and 6% is relatively
generous. In respect of the application of the monetary policy, interest
rates are one of those measures that Reserve Banks around the world use in
the exercise of that power.

The Constitution is also abundantly clear about the fact that in pursuit of
the object of price stability, the Reserve Bank must be able to pursue its
work without fear or favour. So, the independence of the Reserve Bank over
the instruments it uses is clear. The constitutional imperative, the
target, is set by government, however. In the absence of any available
evidence to the contrary we will pursue that approach. Thank you, Madam
Speaker.

Mr N SINGH: Madam Speaker, I am glad to be called Bekker today. I just want
to follow up on the hon Minister’s answer.

Hon Minister, given that today we learnt of another price increase for
electricity and also given that the price increase is about 27% this year,
inflation is – you are quite correct – a sustained increase in price
levels. But many of these factors are extraneous factors - fuel price
increases, food price increases and now electricity price increases too. We
do value the independence of the Reserve Bank. But given this, shouldn’t
government be relooking at the target that it has set because, by and
large, consumers seem to be spending less and less because of high interest
rates, and we are asking if government is ever going to consider revisiting
the target. There has to be a target but also a revisiting of that target.
Thank you.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, the hon Minister of Public
Enterprises spoke about the Richtersveld. There is a wonderful little dorp,
a hamlet in the Richtersveld, called Lekkersing - the question being a
combined question from hon Bekker and hon Singh. The question comes from
Bekker-Singh and, therefore, it is a new part of the lexicon.

Let us just revisit what happens when there are these constant price
increases. The earnings of families are reduced and they buy less. And if
you say that price instability does not matter to working people, I think
that you are making a fundamental mistake. Price rises remove the earnings
of people. It’s tantamount to a reduction in wages earned. And if, every
time you are under pressure, you take the target and throw it overboard
then you are saying to working families and those with a fixed income ``the
quality of life that you are living does not matter to us’’.

If you look at the trend around the world at present, there are many, many
countries that have inflation targets. Most countries that have inflation
targets are going through exactly the same trials and tribulations that we
are. One country, namely Turkey, has set a new target. But Turkey lives in
a different world. For 20 years Turkey had an inflation rate of between 83%
and 87%, averaging 85%. South Africans have never adjusted to that and most
people in the world haven’t. The only country that has stayed closer to its
inflation target happens to be Canada.

Now, you know, we have described inflation targeting as an anchor for
monetary policy. If every time you are in a storm you cut loose your
anchor, you have no control over how you steer the ship, when you steer the
ship and what you do when you get that ship into safer waters. It is for
this reason that the present target of between 3% and 6% must be
maintained.
The Reserve Bank and members of the portfolio committee know this, because
the Governor has been there twice a year to explain to the committee that
it doesn’t even favour the escape clause and prefers that we continue to
struggle, because as a country that enjoys what we now know to be the least
worst of all systems of monetary policy, namely inflation targeting, we
will have to return to a band of inflation that is more suitable to the
rest of the world.

But price stability is an object worth striving for, because it means that
there is just more certainty for families, trade unions, investors and
employers. And that remains an object of what the Constitution asks us to
do in clause 217. Thank you.

Mr K A MOLOTO: Madam Speaker, Minister, there is a pervasive view in
certain quarters that South African banks are inflation hawks, who focus
narrowly on speedily bringing the Consumer Price Index, CPIX, back within
the inflation target range without giving due consideration to economic
output.

Minister, is this view supported by any evidence? If we are not inflation
hawks, what is the reasonable timeframe in which we can bring CPIX within
the target range?

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, this is indeed an important
question. I am not competent to answer that. What do you call those people
who know about birds; ornithologists or something? I can’t choose between
hawks and doves. I don’t know these things. I am not a tutor.

But, if you look at the recent economic history of this country, between
the years 2003-07 we were within the inflation bands. During those years we
had the lowest interest rates that this country has known since the early
1970s. That must say something about the method.

Before inflation targeting the Reserve Bank, in its own documents,
described its monetary policy as erratic. So, it looked at a bit of
inflation; it looked at exchange rates; it looked at a bit of money supply
and then somehow took a decision. Many of us were indeed members of this
House in 1998 when interest rates increased to above 20%, when there were
increases of 8% in one year. If that is an environment the people would
like to return to, with so easily attached epithets - hawk, dove,
neoliberal, this that and the other - it is fairly easily managing this in
a world of price changes, but when the object is to improve the quality of
life of people, it is lot more complex.

I am saying that the evidence between 2003-07 speaks for itself and speaks
for the tried and tested method which I am saying is the least worst that
the world now knows, namely inflation targeting. Thank you.

Mr S J F MARAIS: Madam Speaker, Minister, the DA subscribes to an inflation
target policy, especially if it can assist in lowering the inflation
expectations, decreasing the money supply and consumer spending.

However, interest rate hikes and, amongst others, increases in the
administered prices, increases in salaries of government employees of 10,5%
and the further increase today of 13,3% in Eskom tariffs, will have major
second-round inflationary effects. How do these increases align with the
Asgisa objective and meet an inflation target of between 3% and 6%? What
measures do you propose to stabilise the economy under these circumstances?
Lastly, could you please explain to the ordinary citizens where to from
here?

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, I think the first issue that we
have to deal with is that it is not correct in a high inflation environment
to say to workers that they have to bear the brunt. So, there will always
have to be moderation, but I think in dealing with those issues there also
has to be a moderation of expectations.

Regarding the issue of second-round effects, I think it has two parts. The
first is that too many South Africans live their lives on credit. Our
savings ratios are low, and therefore, we live for today from tomorrow’s
income. This means that we are different from countries that have grown
sustainably at higher rates, because they have always had higher savings
rates. Unless we can deal with that problem, I think that we will snuff out
the prospects for the future.

The second issue is that credit is very readily available, notwithstanding
very significant changes arising from the introduction of the National
Credit Regulatory Act, which curtails the ease with which credit is
obtained. There is still the notion that actually we don’t have to borrow
because plastic is the order of the day. I think that is part of dealing
with it and I would invite the hon Marais and all members of the House to
study the inflation report in some detail. Similarly, they should look at
the Monetary Policy Committee Announcement because it contains what they
are looking for.

It is very clear that the Reserve Bank does not hope to bring down the oil
price or food prices by increasing interest rates, as it did last week, by
50 basis points. You have to take those exogenous factors out of the
equation and then try to understand what the rest is all about. You then
need to try to understand what the rest is all about.

Take the case of a loaf of bread on the shelf at R7,50 more or less. Only
36% of that is now occasioned by the wheat price, and 39% of it is
occasioned by the fuel price. So, it is converted fuel and we have no
control over the oil price. We frequently feel that we might be eating a
combination of wheat flour and yeast but it is actually something else.

So, you find all of that detail available and I think that we must give the
Reserve Bank credit for keeping a firm hold on this and not see it as an
attempt to impose difficulties. Inflation is the rate of change. The broad
sense is that we have lived through some very stormy waters over the last
while. We tried to sail through it but the rate of change is unlikely to be
as high in the future.

The question I think the jury is still out on this - is whether the prices
will remain at a new and higher plateau. It is more likely for that to
happen and for prices to reduce but the rate of change is likely to be less
strong than what we have seen over the past period. Thank you.

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Madam Speaker, hon Minister, I am expressing the viewpoint
of a think-tank in this question and it relates to the printing of money.
Does government or has government in the past 10 years printed money and
put it into circulation in the economy and how often is that done? And if
it is done on a regular basis, has that had an effect on inflation?

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: I am not quite sure what lies behind the question,
because frequently when people speak of government printing money, they are
talking about monetising the deficit. And this is clearly not something
that we have done.

We have a system of primary dealership. When we are issuing debt, we issue
it on auction every Tuesday morning. Our debt, even our locally issued
debt, is held widely across the world. So, we have never used the printing
press to finance the deficit, thank heavens, because once you embark on
that road, there is no recovery from it.

There is a country not far from here that shall remain nameless where apart
from the budget that is announced and appropriated by Parliament, there are
also a whole series of extra-budgetary expenditures undertaken by that
government and for that money is printed. I forget the name of the country,
but when I last checked inflation there was rising at 42% per hour and it
doesn’t rest, it runs 24/7 to give you 1 100 000% a year. But that’s what
happens. Once you start on that slippery slope, I think it is very hard to
recover from it.

The oversight of our Parliament here. is very strong, our Constitution is
very strong, our legislative framework through the Public Finance
Management Act is very strong. And I think that this Parliament should pat
itself on its collective back, because it has not allowed the situation to
get out of control. I think that’s what quality oversight and democracy
ought to deliver. Thank you.

              CONGRATULATIONS TO MEMBERS WHO COMPLETED STUDIES

The SPEAKER: Hon members, before I leave the Chair, I wish to take this
opportunity to congratulate the hon members that graduated yesterday in the
context of the Leadership Development Programme. [Applause.] As we speak,
53 members completed their studies in Leadership Communication, 19 members
completed Information Knowledge Management, 10 members completed Public and
Parliamentary Leadership, 24 members completed Advanced Diploma in Economic
Policy and seven members completed their B.Comm Hons.

I would like to highlight, in particular, the fact - just to prove the
point of the relevance of the training - that an hon member who spoke on
behalf of the graduates yesterday, hon Tuelo Gibson Anthony illustrated how
he used the research module to do something in his constituency which led
to a community whose land claim had been neglected, because of an absence
of information in fact being given that land back on 8 February 2008.
[Applause.] This is a case that he has been working on since 2005 when it
reached his constituency office. That shows how relevant the training is.
Now we have more than a one hundred members who have been better empowered.
And we must also thank and congratulate the Deputy Speaker who has led this
particular area of work. [Applause.]

   Action taken regarding state of disrepair in public rail infrastructure
136.  Mr S B Farrow (DA) asked the Minister of Transport:

      (1)   Whether he or his department acted on warnings over the past 14
           years (details furnished) that the public rail infrastructure
           was in an advanced state of disrepair; if not, why not; if so,
           (a) on what basis did he arrive at the conclusion, (b) why was
           funding delayed while infrastructure went into a state of
           disrepair and (c) who was responsible for (i) the delay in
           accessing funding and (ii) allocating it;


      (2)   whether any action has been taken against officials failing to
           allocate funding to the rail infrastructure over the past 14
           years; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details;


      (3)   whether he has acted on the views expressed by the Chief
          Executive Officer (name furnished) of the SA Rail Commuter
          Corporation; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant
          details;


      (4)   whether he intends resigning as a result of the state of the
          rail infrastructure; if not, what is the position in this regard;
          if so, what steps will be taken?         NO1692E

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (On behalf of the Minister of
Transport): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Government is on record as
having stated that passenger rail had suffered under three decades of
severe underinvestment.

In January 2005, the Department of Transport authorised the due diligence
examination of the three passenger rail entities in preparation for their
consolidation into the South African Rail Commuter Corporation. The due
diligence report gave a very clear indication of the severe backlogs the
passenger rail sector is facing due to the underinvestment referred to.

In December 2006, Cabinet approved the National Rail Passenger Plan which
provides the long-term strategic direction for the passenger rail industry
in South Africa. In February, the recapitalisation of the passenger rail
service was made a key action plan of the economic cluster of government
and later that year government approved the turnaround strategy for
passenger rail, which was accompanied by significantly increased investment
in the system.

The sum of R25 billion is earmarked for passenger rail between 2007-08 and
2010-11, covering a capital grant, an operational subsidy, funding
preparations in the passenger rail system for the 2010 FIFA World Cup and
some funding for Shosholoza Meyl.

These are government’s concrete actions and responses aimed at reversing
the backlogs in the passenger rail system. And, therefore, Madam Deputy
Speaker, in relation to Question 4, the Minister of Transport is not going
to be resigning over this. Firstly, because he has addressed quite
concretely, as I have tried to show, the challenges in so far as rail is
concerned but also, because the Minister of Transport has not been the
Minister of Transport for a period of over 14 years. Thank you very much,
Madam Deputy Speaker.

Mr S B FARROW: Thank you very much, Deputy Speaker. This question, I might
say, was prompted by some research that I did and I am very glad that the
Minister has agreed with some of the aspects of that research; the fact
that there were three decades of underexpenditure.

This timeline that I have here on this research document indicates clearly
that if you go to every annual report, it says that every year, from either
the Chief Executive Officer or even the chairman of that board, there is a
desperate need to go and invest in this particular sector. Now this has not
happened until 2006. So, my question which I put there was really to
actually look at that in light of that type of research, as opposed to what
you have revealed to us today. But even more importantly, when the CEO
reported to us this year from SARCC, he indicated to us that the dilemma
they are finding themselves in is even worse than the dilemma that Eskom
found itself in. Hence the question as to whether in fact the Minister
would resign, because as far as I am concerned the buck has to stop
somewhere.

Now, I also know that the Minister was wearing two hats, one in Public
Enterprises prior to coming to Transport or maybe other Ministers before
him. But then I must ask you the question, sir: Do you then take it in the
same light as the Eskom Minister there, Mr Erwin, who was earlier
collectively blamed or singly blamed? We have a crisis where we now have
R35 billion to spend before 2010 and in the meanwhile we have lost over
R100 million’s worth of passenger fares in the process, with a dilapidated
rail service, rolling stock which is over 40 years old, and a system which
is failing in terms of both safety and security. Thank you, Chairperson.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Thank you, Deputy Speaker, I think that
what I tried to show through the response was that over the life of this
particular government - a government that has been in office from 2004 and
whose term will expire in 2009 - there have been concrete interventions
that have been undertaken in order to address the challenges in so far as
passenger rail is concerned.

I think that if I go back to the original question it is whether we are
going to be taking or have taken action against officials who have not been
allocating moneys for purposes of investment in passenger rail. I think
that what we have to look at is whether what we have put in place by way of
allocating resources, having plans and strategies in order to address these
challenges is going to give us the results we want.

What we have put on the table is a three-phased programme, the first phase
of which is aligned to the 2010 Soccer World Cup, but it is a programme
that goes on until 2021. Therefore, when you ask for a Minister to resign
on the basis of putting in place programmes and ensuring that they have the
necessary allocations, I do not think that that is actually reasonable.

If we look at what has happened that has made a big difference between 2004
and now generally in economic terms, at the beginning of the term of this
government the rate or level of investment as a percentage of gross
domestic product in this economy was 15%. Today the rate of investment
stands at about 21% and that’s because government and the public sector,
more broadly, have actually taken the view that there is a need to increase
the investment by government, by parastatals, to contribute to the overall
increase in the rate of investment in the economy.

I think that this is a qualitative change that has taken place in this
economy over the last few years. I think government needs to be commended
for that and in particular that this Minister has actually put in place
very clear plans to address the weaknesses that arose from the
underinvestment in passenger rail. Thank you very much, Madam Deputy
Speaker.
Mr J P CRONIN: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. The hon Farrow’s original written
question is misdirected, I think, in two respects. First of all, as the
Minister has been responding to the question he has specifically said that
this Minister, together with his Cabinet colleagues, had led a very bold
programme for major rail recapitalisation.

In the second place, the question is somewhat misdirected because it
focuses on infrastructure and the problem is not particularly on the
infrastructure side of things, it is in terms of rolling stock, where the
rolling stock in passenger rail is typically 40 years old and more.

I am glad, in a way, that other Ministers are present and our Minister is
not answering. I think the challenge going forward is to make sure that
with this R25 billion planned expenditure on rail recapitalisation it is
imperative that we make sure that we co-ordinate this recapitalisation with
the respective policies of other departments. We have seen some rail
infrastructure development and rail capitalisation development, which is
very important indeed. It is a rail programme whose name I have forgotten,
like the hon Minister of Finance forgot the name of the neighbouring
country, but it begins with a “G” in this case.

It is very important that we align our rail projects with our industrial
policy programmes. The Minister of Finance has said they have been worried
about the oil price, but surely we can do something about the amount of oil
we import and invest in rail infrastructure and rail capitalisation, as an
important contribution to that. Would the Minister agree?

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I would agree,
and in a sense, this is something that we have already identified as part
of our Industrial Policy Framework as well as the Industrial Policy Action
Plan. We have identified that we could reduce the import element of the
major infrastructure investment that is taking place in the economy. We
should promote those industries that can provide the capital goods or the
capital inputs that are necessary as part of that public infrastructure and
investment programme.

We can promote those industries and these are capacities that we have in
the country already. At a point when the country was investing quite
heavily in infrastructure these were vibrant industries and these are
capacities that still exist. That industry at the moment employs about 218
000 people. So, you are talking about some significant capacities that are
there and we are looking at creating more employment by ensuring that we
align with the infrastructure investment that is taking place, but we can
also address other important priorities. Our skills development programmes
can also benefit from ensuring that we promote those industries.
Thank you very much, Deputy Speaker.

Mr N SINGH: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I am glad that I have had this
opportunity to ask this question, because there is something that quite
intrigues me.

Madam Deputy Speaker, we know that when we watch television or listen to
the radio we get traffic reports and even air traffic and road traffic
reports but something that surprises me or intrigues me is when the radio
station that I listen to every morning speaks of train failures, trains not
leaving on time or trains being cancelled.

I just want to know whether there is anything wrong with the rail
infrastructure in the case of Cape Town. In fact, the other day, Deputy
Speaker, as I was driving through, I saw a train just stopping in its
tracks in the middle of nowhere and people were jumping off the train and
running around. So, is the rail network in Cape Town adequate to cater for
the needs of the people of the city? Thank you.
The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Well, while I cannot answer that
question specifically an important element and aspect of the rail network,
as well as the train services, that we are able to get from that is also
investment in signalling equipment. And so, in the general underinvestment
that has been manifested in the rail sector, obviously one of the things
that would have suffered in that regard would have been the kinds of
investments we need to make in signalling equipment. So, in general terms I
would say, yes, clearly signalling would have to keep up with whatever
investment you are making in rail infrastructure as well as locomotives.
Generally also, there is a drive towards bringing more people back into
rail as well as more goods back into rail so that you can reduce the
pressure on the road network.

Mr S B FARROW: I just wanted to reiterate that the hon Cronin and I are
singing off the same song sheet when it comes to that big “G” – you know,
that project in Gauteng. If you look at that project, it cost in fact, as
you actually outlined now, nearly three times more 12 to 14 years down the
line. It is a single-line project which is actually providing a particular
short passenger service very sophisticatedly. But needless to say, the
question now is whether, after all these years of knowledge, of
knowingness, the investment that went into that big “G” should have been
better placed by putting it into Metrorail and having today a service which
is going to be as good as, if not better than, that particular project at
half the cost. Is it not now a case of too little too late, because it
takes three years just to get a coach and we do not really want to go, as
my colleague has just said, and import this particular coach when we
actually now have the facilities in this country both to manufacture them
and to refurbish them – all 5 000 of them?

I ask you the question: Is it too little too late, and shouldn’t that
investment rather have been put into what we are talking about now – the
R25 billion up to 2010?

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: I think, hon member, that the issues of
alignment are important - in other words, whether we have adequately
aligned the work that has been done in terms of the Gautrain as well as
this work that I was talking about. But, I think that it is important to
understand that there is still a lot more that is going to be done even as
the Gautrain project is proceeding, because part of the challenge that we
also have to ensure is that Gautrain is not just a train that can ferry
people that are moving from Johannesburg to Pretoria but that the rest of
your rail and other public transport system can effectively link into the
Gautrain project. So, there is still a lot of other work that is going to
be done and that is part of what the current public transport strategy will
also be trying to address. Thank you very much.

 Promotion of indigenous languages as languages of research and development

137.  Mr B J Mnyandu (ANC) asked the Minister of Science and
      Technology:

      What were the contributions of science and technology since 1999 to
      promote the use of indigenous languages as languages of research and
      development?                                 NO1693E

TONA YA LEFAPHA LA SAENSE LE THEKNOLOTŠI: Mothuši wa Modulasetulo, mo
lefapheng le re na le ofisi yeo e lebeletšego ditsebo tša batho ba ga
borena yeo e lego gore e thomile go ba gona ka 2006. Ga bjale, ofisi ye e
na le tšhelete yeo e šomišwago go dira dinyakišišo mabapi le tsebo ya batho
ba ga borena yeo e laolwago ke NRF. E dira dinyakišišo mabapi le dihlogo
tšeo e tlogo ba e di filwe ka dinako tše di fapanego.

Ofisi ye ga se ya ka ya ba le mošomo wa gore e nyakišiše ka go šomišwa ga
maleme a rena mo lefaseng la ga borena. Fela, go na le dilo tše mmalwa tšeo
di ilego tša dirwa gomme di kgopetšwe go dirwa diyunibesiting tša go swana
le Stellenbosch le Zululand. Gape NRF e ile ya kgopelwa ke PanSALB gore e
dire dinyakišišo mabapi le ditaba tšeo di sepelelanago le tšhomišo ya
maleme a ga borena. Gore ofisi ye e tle e kgone go dira mošomo wa yona ka
tshwanelo, re šetše re rile batho bao ba šomago ka tsebo ya batho ba mo
lefaseng la gaborena gore ba šomiše maleme a bona go hlatholla dilo tšeo ba
nyakago go di hlatholla. Ebile pholisi yeo re nago le yona, re rile e
hlathollelwe go maleme ao a tshelelago a mo lefaseng la gaborena. Gape re
kgopetše gore dikopano tšeo di tlogo ba gona mo lefaseng la ga borena go
tloga bjale di dumelelwe go šomiša maleme a mo gae bjalo ka ge go šetše go
thomilwe diprofenseng tša Lebowa-Bodikela le KwaZulu-Natal.

Gape re re go dirwe dipego tšeo di tlogo bewa ka tsela yeo e lego gore
batho bao ba šomišago tsebo ye ya ga borena, ba tlo kgona go humana
senyakwanyana goba go anya tsebong ye ya bona. Re rile dipego tšeo re
swanetše go di dira gore di be ka maleme a rena ka moka ga wona, ebile re
re go tla ba le motšhene woo o tlago go lokišwa gore o kgone go hlatholla
tsebo yeo e ka bago e le gona ka leleme lefe kapa lefe mo lefaseng la
gaborena gore e tle e kgone go humanwa ke ba bangwe bao ba dirago
dinyakišišo ka maleme a mangwe. (Translation of Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Deputy Speaker, there is an office
in our department that started in 2006 and its main focus is on people’s
skills. This office has funds that are currently allocated for skills
research purposes by the NRF. They are conducting research on topics that
they have been given at various times.

This office has never been tasked to conduct research into the use of our
languages in this country. Nevertheless, there was research that was
conducted at the Universities of Stellenbosch and Zululand. NRF has also
been approached by PanSALB to conduct research on issues relating to
languages. We have appealed to our human resource department to ensure that
the reports are published in all official languages. We also suggested that
the policy should be translated into the six other official languages.
Furthermore, we made an appeal that in all the meetings that are to be held
at a later stage in our country, indigenous languages must be used, as is
already the case in KwaZulu-Natal and North West.

The reports must be written in such a way that people in the science and
technology industry will be able to benefit from them. All the reports will
be written in all official languages and there will be a device that will
be used to explain all the information gathered so that it may be utilised
by other future researchers.]

Mr B J MNYANDU: Thank you very much, Minister, for the response. As you
know, the corporate strategy for the Department of Science and Technology
is to have a national system of innovation that will take this country
towards a knowledge-based economy. Knowledge is a commodity, therefore,
that should be sold in the market to improve the economy and, in that case,
is a kind of commodity that requires construction and for construction to
take place, we need very strong language development in the early stages of
the child’s learning in school.

In that case then, language is much more than just an identity. It is a
tool to construct knowledge. My follow-up question is - I am not too sure
if the Minister was able to cover this because I was trying to get through
to the translation: How will the non-use of the indigenous languages affect
South Africa in particular and Africa in general in this effort to create a
knowledge-based economy in the 21st century and beyond? Also, how will this
in turn affect the realisation of the African Renaissance? Thank you very
much.

TONA YA LEFAPHA LA SAENSE LE THEKNOLOTŠI: Mohlomphegi o boletše gabotse.
Efela re ka se thome ka go nyaka gore maleme a rena a šomišwe ke
boramahlale go dira dinyakišišo mola e le gore maleme ao ga re a šomiše go
gongwe le go gongwe mo a swanetšego go šomišiwa gona go swana le go tša
molao, tša kgwebo le tša thuto, bjalo ka ge mohlomphegi a fetša go bolela.
Re swanetše re dire gore maleme a a ga borena re a šomiše go gongwe le go
gongwe, kudukudu mo thutong. E swanetš e e be maleme ao e lego gore re ya a
hlompha.

Ge re ka dira bjalo, re tla humana e le gore re kgona le go pana batho ba
ga borena gomme ra šomiša tsebo le kwešišo ya bona gore re tle re be le
tšwelopele. Ge e le gore re šomiša sekgowa fela, kudukudu bana dikolong, re
ba direla mathata k a gore pele ba ka kwešiša dilo tše ba swanetšego ba di
kwešiše, ba swanetše ba kwešiše maleme a batho ba bangwe pele. Ke ka lebaka
leo ga bjale dithutong tša go swana le tša Dipalo le Saense, bana bao e
lego gore leleme la bona ka gae ga se leleme la Se-Afrikanse goba la
Sekgowa, ba goga ka kgara.

Bjale re be re re, mokgalabje, re swanetše go lebelela maleme a ga borena
thelebišeneng goba re bale le dikuranta tša maleme a ga borena. Ge re
lebelela mo thelebišeneng, re humane e le gore maleme a ga borena a bolelwa
gabotse gape le ka dikolong bana ba rutwa ka wona. Go tla ba le mošito ge
bjale re tlo botšiša re dira dinyakišišo ka boramahlale bao ba šomago ka
dilaporatoring tša rena gore na ba kgona go šomiša maleme a naa. Re ka se
thome ka bonyakišiši bjo mola e le gore ga re šomiše maleme a rena ka
tshwanelo ka dikolong le mafelong a mangwe. (Translation of Sepedi
paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: The hon member said a mouthful.
However, we cannot expect our languages to be used by scientists while
other sectors like the legal, business and education sectors are not using
them yet. We must make sure that our languages are highly regarded and
widely used, especially in the education sector. By so doing, we will be
able to utilise our people and their skills and knowledge for development.

If English is the only language used, then we are going to have problems,
especially with learners at school because this will make it difficult for
them to understand what is being taught to them. Because of this, many of
our learners are now struggling with Maths and Science, especially those
who do not have English or Afrikaans as their home language.

Now we appeal to you to ensure that our languages are being used on
television and that newspapers are also written in our own languages. We
also want to see proper usage of those languages on television and also
that they must be used as a medium of instruction at schools. In this way,
it will be proper for us to conduct research on whether or not the
scientists are able to make use of our languages in the laboratories.
However, we cannot start with the research while our languages are not
properly used at schools and other institutions.]

Dr U ROOPNARAIN: Minister, I just want to know whether there are any
constructive peer dialogues in sharing of information on common experiences
in order to reinforce successful and exemplary practices amongst African
countries with African scholars. Here I am talking about an exchange of
best practices, especially coming from academia. I also want to know
whether there is any budget in your office or your department for the youth
- since we are in the youth month – who are from a disadvantaged
background, but who are also in the intelligentsia or academia. Thank you,
Minister.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: The question has deviated a bit from the initial
question. It is up to the Minister to respond.

TONA YA LEFAPHA LA SAENSE LE THEKNOLOTŠI: O nepile, mmagorena o tšwele
tseleng. Ke a bona o be o se wa theeletša le go theeletša. Re šomišana le
Lefapha la Thuto - lefapha leo le hlokomelago bana ge ba le ka dikolong le
go hlokomela gore ke bafe bao ba hlokago gomme ba thuše ka tsela ye ba ka
thušago ka gona kua dikolong le diyunibesiting.

Fela re na le kwano le mafase a mangwe a Afrika ao re thalathadilego
ditsela le wona tša gore na re tlo šomišana bjang. Re na le go kopana re le
Matona fela gomme nakong ye nngwe re kopane re le bahlankedi ba mmušo.
Nakong ye nngwe go kopana boramahlale bao ba lego diyunibesiting tša
gaborena le bao ba dirago dinyakišišo mo dikhanseleng gomme re bontšhane
gore na ba ka dira eng ka seo ba se nyakišišago ka nako yeo. (Translation
of Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: You are right, the hon member is
out of order. I am sure you were not listening at all. We work jointly with
the Department of Education - the department that deals directly with
children and helps them with their needs at schools and universities.

However, we have an agreement with other African countries on how we are
going to handle this problem together. We usually meet as Ministers and
sometimes as government officials. Scientists at universities and
researchers at various committees also meet to strategise the research.]

Mr J P I BLANCHÉ: Deputy Speaker, the question relates to science and the
development of indigenous people. I think the department should not only
look at science, but should also be looking at technology. My follow-up
question is: Have any of the entities reporting to the Minister - the SA
Human Sciences Research Council, the National Research Foundation and
others - ever done research to find out whether any books should be written
and printed in the indigenous languages so that technology can become a
driving force for underdeveloped people?

Let me illustrate what I am getting at. We do not have manuals for
electricians or tradesmen to do trade tests in any of the indigenous
languages and this is the area where we need to train people, so if the
research had been done ... I have already done it and it is not available.
Can it not be done by the department to ensure that somebody starts writing
manuals to train plumbers, electricians, trains drivers, policemen and
everybody else who wants to become something? We cannot just rely on
science only to develop the nation. I think your department must look at
science and technology. Has your department done anything to have any
manuals printed in the indigenous languages?

TONA YA SAENSE LE THEKNOLOTŠI: O e swere, gape o nepile. Bothata bjo re
nago le bjona re le batho ba Afrika ka moka ga yona ke gore re nagana gore
Sekgowa ke tsebo. Ka baka leo, ga re kgone go ruta batho ba ga borena tsebo
ka ntle le gore ba ithute leleme la motho yo mongwe. Bjale, mafase a mangwe
ao a bilego l e tšwelopele a šomiša maleme a bona. Ba dira dilo tše dibotse
tša go šomiša theknolotši tšeo re di šomišago efela ba sa tsebe Sekgowa.
Molobanyana ke be le Japane mo ba dirago dilo tše dintši tšeo re di
tsebago. Mo go bego le garetene, o šupa ka selo fela namile ya bulega. Ge o
batamela ntlwana ya boithomelo, e a bulega gore o name o ithuše o iketlile.
Ebile go na le konopi mo o tobetšago gona namile ya tutela. Le go kgona go
go hlapiša e ya go hlapiša ge o dutše gona moo. [Disego.] [Tseno ganong.]
(Translation of Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: You are absolutely right. The
thing is we, as Africans, believe that if one has an excellent command of
English, it means that one is highly knowledgeable. It is difficult for our
people to learn and understand things in a language that is not known to
them. However, other developed countries are using their indigenous
languages. Despite the fact that they cannot speak or understand English,
they still manufacture good technological products.

I was in Japan a few days ago and I witnessed a lot of technological
innovations. They use remote controls to open the curtains. As for the
toilets, the doors just open as you approach. There is also a button in the
toilet that you press and it gets warm. It also cleans you while you are
still on the seat. [Laughter.] [Interjections.]]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Minister, you may spare us the details! [Laughter.]

TONA YA LEFAPHA LA SAENSE LE THEKNOLOTŠI: Dilo tše ga di dirwe ka Sekgowa,
di dirwa ka tsebo. Bjale, re humana e le gore batho ba gaborena ba bantši
re ba tima tsebo ka gore re nyaka ba ithute Sekgowa pele. Mohlomphegi
Blanché o bolela nnete ge a re re dire dibukana tša go swana le tše a
bolelago ka tšona ge re ka kgona gore batho ba gaborena ba bantši ba tle ba
kgone go ithutela go ba dilo tše a bolelago ka tšona - ba tsebe ka ga
mohlagase le go dira dipompi. Mešomošomo ye mentši yeo e nyakago tsebo ga e
nyake Sekgowa, e nyaka tsebo. Bjale, o boletše nnete mokgalabe yo. Ke ya mo
thekga. [Legoswi.]

Moh S D MOTUBATSE-HOUNKPATIN: Morena Mangena, ka moka re a tseba gore
leleme la motho ke selo se bohlokwa. Seo ke nyakago go se botšiša gabjale
ke mabapi le tšhomišo ya theknolotši. Ge dikhomphutha di fihla go wona
mafase a o šetšego o boletše ka wona, Japane, China, Russia, bjalobjalo, di
fihla ka leleme la gabobona. Ba kgona go ngwala tšeo ba ratago go di ngwala
ka leleme la gabobona. Na go ka kgonagala gore rena re le mo Afrika-Borwa,
ge re nyaka go ngwala lengwalo ka Sepedi re kgone go hwetša maswao kamoka
mo khomphutheng? Ge ke rata go dira mohlala, gabjale ge ke nyaka go ngwala
“tša”, khomphutha e ile go nnea “tsa” goba ya mphošolola ya re ga gona selo
sa go swana le seo ke se ngwalago ka ge e ngwadilwe ka Sekgowa. Malebo.
TONA YA LEFAPHA LA SAENSE LE THEKNOLOTŠI: Wo mongwe wa mešomo yeo e bego e
filwe NRF ke PanSALB, ke wa gore na ba ka kgona go fetolela tsebo ye e lego
gona kua dikhomphutheng gore e bolele ka maleme a gaborena. Ba ile ba lema
tema yeo e kwagalago. Ebile ke a tseba gore kua Yunibesiting ya Limpopo go
na le batho bao ba šomago ka yona taba ye ya go fetolela tsebo yeo e lego
moo gore e tle e be ka maleme a gaborena gape le gore dikhomphutha tšeo di
tle di tsebe go kwešiša maleme a batho bjalo ka ge ba bolela gore batho ba
tle b a kgone go boledišana le tšona ka maleme a tšona. Esego gore ba
tlanye. Ba bolele le tšona ka tsela yeo e lego gore letšatši le o tlogo go
ba o šetše o godile bjale, mokgekolo, o ile phenšeneng, o kgone go ya kua
go ATM gomme o fihle ore wena ke wena semangmang gomme o nyaka phenšene ya
gago. Khomphutha yona e tla go fetola e re ga ona tšhelete gomme o eme moo
ka ge ba go phumutše ba Sassa. Go tlo kgonega gore go direge bjalo. Taba
yeo e kgauswi gore re kgone go e tšweletša pele. Ka mokgwa wo ke kwelego ba
šoma ka gona, ke bona okare e se kgale dilo tše o di bolelago ka moka re
tla kgona go di dira ka dikhomphutha tšona tše mamohla re sa kgonego go di
šomiša ka tshwanelo. (Translation of Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: One does not need to know English
to be productive. You only need skills to do that. We often deprive our
people of valuable skills because we expect them to be good in English
first. Hon Blanché is right when he says we need to introduce manuals that
will assist our people to learn more about electrical and plumbing skills.
Most of the hard labour jobs do not require a knowledge of English, only
skills are needed. This man is right, I support what he said. [Applause.]

Ms S D MOTUBATSE-HOUNKPATIN: Mr Mangena, we all know that one’s language is
very important to one. My question is based mainly on the usage of
technological devices. Countries like Japan, China, Russia and others
invented computers and they have been programmed in their own languages.
They are able to give instructions to them and they respond in their own
languages. What I want to know is: Is it possible for us, in South Africa,
to write whatever we want to write in Sepedi and be able to get the
response and instructions in our languages? For example, if I want to write
“tša” on a computer it will only write “tsa” or it may consider my spelling
to be wrong because it was programmed in English. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: One of the tasks given to the NRF
by PanSALB is to investigate whether technology can make it possible for
our languages to be available in computer programmes. They have done their
part. We also know that a team has been delegated at the University of
Limpopo to embark on the task of converting computer language into our
languages and to programme them to understand our languages. Not to say
that they must type them. They must programme them in such a way that they
are also user-friendly. So that even the old and retired can just go to the
ATM and withdraw their pension money. The computer will be able to tell you
in your own language that you have no funds since your name has been
deleted from the SA Social Security System. It is possible for computers to
do that. We are getting closer to the completion of this task. From what I
heard, it is possible for us to get all that has just been mentioned on
computers - things that we are unable to access.]

    Position regarding possible exemption from requirements of Employment
    Equity Act of institutions having a broadly representative workforce

124.  Ms A M Dreyer (DA) asked the Minister of Labour:

     Whether the Government will consider granting exemption from the
     requirements of the Employment Equity Act, Act 55 of 1998, to
     institutions which have a broadly representative workforce, such as the
     public service; if not, (a) why not and (b) what practical indicators
     does the Government use to determine whether affirmative action has
     worked; if so, when?    NO1677E

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: May I remind you, hon member, that the purpose of
the Act is clear: The promotion of equal opportunities and fair treatment
in employment through the elimination of unfair discrimination and the
implementation of affirmative action measures to redress the disadvantages
in employment experienced by designated groups. This includes Black people,
women and people with disabilities, to ensure their equitable presentation
in the workplace across all occupational categories and levels in line with
the demographics of the economically active population with regard to race
and gender. Therefore, even if the institution is broadly representative,
this institution still has to ask itself a very important question: Is my
organisation’s workforce equitable in terms of the representation of all
designated groups across all occupational categories and levels?

There are various mechanisms that are used to assess whether affirmative
action is working or not. These mechanisms include, amongst other things,
the proactive, reactive and blitz inspections that are conducted on a daily
basis by labour inspectors in workplaces, focusing on administrative
compliance with the requirements of the Act. The director-general’s reviews
that were introduced in the 2006-07 financial year are focusing on an
ongoing basis on the substantive compliance of some companies, currently
concentrating on the top one hundred Johannesburg security exchange-listed
companies.

Lastly, there is the analysis of the employer’s employment equity reports
that are being submitted on the first working day of October to the
Department of Labour. It is important to know that these reports outline
the progress made by all designated employers in implementing affirmation
action in their own workplaces.

The outcome of this analysis is reported in the annual reports to the
Commission for Employment Equity and its reports are available on the
departmental website. Therefore, it is important to note that the results
of all these measuring tools indicate that progress made by the labour
market in implementing affirmative action is moving at a snail’s pace and
there is more that must be done to strengthen both the enforcement and the
implementation mechanisms of the Act. Thank you.

Ms A M DREYER: Firstly, I am glad that the Minister has shown us that he
can count. Secondly, I am sure everyone will remember that there were five
reasons why the DA opposed his budget. In terms of his answer to my
question, my follow-up question is: How much worse does the skills crisis
have to become before the Minister takes off his ideological blinkers and
removes racist criteria for appointing people?

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Unfortunately the hon member has forgotten one very
important document that caused the African National Congress, the party
that’s going to win the next election, to introduce the Employment Equity
Act to enable us to implement the Constitution of the Republic of South
Africa. If the hon member is saying that the Constitution of the Republic
of South Africa is racist, then I don’t know what remedy I can give to the
hon member.

In actual fact, if you say employment equity is racist, then you are saying
that the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa is racist, because
the Employment Equity Act is an enabling Act. It enables us to implement
what is written in Chapter two of the Bill of Rights of our Constitution.
I don’t really understand what it is the hon member is talking about. Is it
racist to affirm people with disabilities? Is it racist to affirm women?
Employment equity affirms those people as well. I don’t really understand
where the DA got this hon member from. Please send this hon member back to
school. [Applause.]

Dr R RABINOWITZ: The number I want to use is 55 and then add three zeros so
that I come to 55 000. That is the number of posts that are vacant in the
Department of Health. We understand the BEE component and that it is
necessary. I’m not sure what you have to do in your cluster with the hon
Minister of Health, because part of her human resources programme is BEE.
I’m not sure how much you know about the impact of 55 000 vacancies.
Whether you do know or don’t know anything, what is your view of BEE as
applied to health employment equity if that is a factor in causing such
high vacancies in the Department of Health? Thank you.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Again the question is not related to the principle
question. It is up to the Minister to answer that or we could ask the hon
member to put the question afresh for a later response.

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: The question is also directed at the Minister of
Health. Suffice it to say there are 4 million white people in the country
and 43 million black people in the country. Just remember that; it’s not me
who says so, it’s the statistics of the Republic of South Africa. Though
all together we are 47 million people in the country, the majority must
participate in the decision-making in the country and they participate in
the economy. You must remember that this majority is the one that was
dominated by the minority in the past. If we want this country to be
stable, one of the fundamentals of making this economy grow is to make sure
that there is stability in this economy and the best way to make it stable,
is to allow all the people in this country to participate in the economy -
black, pink and yellow.

Ms A M DREYER: I want to ask the Minister: Is he aware that what the ANC is
trying to do with their racist affirmative action is to impose quotas at
the end of the process, to see the end result? What the DA wants to do is
to improve or open up the gates so that more people have access to the
process. Is he aware that the international advisory panel on economic
growth says that at the top level we are the reshuffling people and that’s
keeping people from the bottom level out and we want to improve the bottom
level for the unemployed black youth?

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: What I can tell you, as a person who knows a step
ladder - I did a lot of painting a few years ago – is that we are very few
at the top; the majority of our people are at the bottom of the ladder.
What I know - and now the prophet is talking – is that the poor people will
rise up and shake the step ladder. We will all decide in this room, whether
it would be the tummy first or the head first. There will be no time for
consultation. There will be no time for mandates, no portfolio committee
meetings, and when you reach the ground with a huge tummy like mine, they
will open it up and eat you alive.

Mr M J ELLIS: The hon Minister raised the issue of the elections in 2009,
and I simply want to ask him: What he will be doing after the 2009
elections next year?

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: I am a member of the African National Congress,
very disciplined, very loyal, no crossing of the floor. I will be
campaigning for the ANC and I will make sure the ANC wins the election.
Whoever comes into government, whether I become a Member of Parliament, the
members of the ANC will determine. I will come here and you will be
retiring in Durban because you are not going to come back into this House -
I can assure you of that. [Applause.]

                 Government’s programme for funding of Eskom

140.  Mr N Singh (IFP) asked the Minister of Finance:

      (1)   Whether, in light of the announcement that the Government will
           fund Eskom with R60 billion over the next five years, any form
           of funding programme has been finalised; if not, why not; if so,
           what are the relevant details;


        2) what types of funding vehicles are being considered?

                  NO1698E

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: This is a Singh-Singh question without the Bekker.
The funding of Eskom would be through a subordinated loan with equity-like
features. After consideration and a series of meetings with Eskom, we
thought that this would be the most viable funding method. The modalities
will be finalised as we proceed and it is important to recognise that the
R60 billion is part of the announced R343 billion of a build and
maintenance programme that Eskom would have over the next few years.

In respect of the second question, clearly there will have to be an
evaluation of the guarantees but it is important to understand that in its
almost one hundred years of history Eskom has always been funded off its
own balance sheet, paid for by its consumers, with one exception of a
subordinated loan granted to Eskom in 1934. So that has been the
relationship essentially and it’s clearly one that we would like to return
to, namely that the subordinated loan is an interim measure, but we would
like to return it to good financial health at the earliest opportunity.
Thank you.

Mr N SINGH: I think my question was largely linked to the modalities of the
R60 billion which you’ve indicated are still being worked on. Could we have
a timeframe by which you think that modality would be on the table and the
money would be handed over to Eskom? But further, during the public
hearings recently which Nersa conducted, there were reports, right or
wrong, that government may still assist Eskom further in terms of financial
assistance. Is there any truth in that?

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: On 29 May I advised the hon Singh not to believe
everything that he reads in the newspaper or everything that he may read in
the wrapper of a certain bubblegum, the name of which I cannot mention
because it will have commercial value.

What we’ve said is that we will engage with Eskom; there’s clearly been a
series of issues that have been quite uncertain. The application that Eskom
made to Nersa was for an increase substantially higher than that agreed to
by Nersa. The announcement by Nersa now would place Eskom in a position
where a number of assumptions would have to be revisited. So, the talks are
going to be ongoing about this.

I think that we want to ensure that all South Africans understand that this
is not something we are sitting on our hands about. There can’t be any
South African who relishes the difficulties that Eskom is living through at
the moment. We want to ensure that the utilities are restored to the best
possible financial health in the shortest space of time, that we can put
this period of power outages behind us and that there is certainty as
regards power supply and power costs.

In the generation of power there will also be a keen appreciation of
environmental concerns. Those are our concerns, and these are issues that
will be resolved with Eskom. I think that there are also issues outside of
the immediacy of the relationship, namely that market conditions are
tightening. Eskom, for a long period was the benchmark by which South
African debt was measured. That is no longer the case but that happens in
an environment where, apart from finance and fuel prices, there’s also a
credit squeeze internationally, so you cannot just approach global capital
markets and hope to borrow at the same rates that you did a few months ago.


These are all issues that you have to take into account and I can give the
hon Singh and this House the assurance that the Treasury in general, and
the assets and liability division of the Treasury in particular, remains in
very close collaboration with Eskom to ensure that we can emerge from this
period stronger. Thank you.

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Hon Minister, while you are refurbishing Eskom, you are
also undertaking measures to relieve the pressure on Eskom and the chance
of having to spend more on Eskom in future, and on other projects to
increase our electricity supply. There are millions of people in this
country who are looking forward to purchasing renewable energy and
supplying renewable energy as an option but they need assurance in terms of
financial mechanisms. One of the options that has been suggested by Nersa -
in fact it’s on their website - is the feed-in tariff. To what extent are
you considering the possibility of introducing feed-in tariffs soon to
promote the uptake of renewable energy in the country and also a secure
market price for industries who generate their own electricity? The lack of
that has been an inhibitory factor in bringing in these other sorts of
solutions into the market? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Deputy Speaker, I need to borrow the Joint Rules
from the hon Motlanthe, because I don’t know what the Rules say about
follow-up questions. I don’t believe this is a follow-up question; it’s a
wide shot and it doesn’t come close to the direction of what we are talking
about, so I will defer the question. It can be reformulated and directed to
the appropriate Minister. Thank you.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: The just thing to say is not that you need the Joint
Rules; you need the Rules of the National Assembly. [Interjections.]

Dr D T GEORGE: We certainly hope, Minister, that you are coming back next
year. It is good to know that Eskom will be funded, ultimately consumers
will pay, and it’s just a matter of how the pain will be distributed.

Eskom is not just any company. We rely on Eskom to ensure our electricity
supply. It is insurance for our economic growth and it needs to be
financially sound. Why then did government receive dividends from Eskom
when they were not in a financially sustainable position to issue the
dividends? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Deputy Speaker, I thank Dr George for the question
but this is also a matter that was canvassed just recently. I think part of
the context for this is one that the Democratic Alliance has raised from
time to time. There was a period in history when government took the best
advice and considered that it no longer had the sole responsibility to
generate all electricity through its utility, Eskom. During that period it
actively sought to bring private sector players into generation, but
transmission would remain an Eskom responsibility. There would be
independent power producers and then the issue of the distribution would be
substantially restructured. This was a model followed; there was very
extensive advice about changes in global trends and so on.

A series of things have happened in the interim, including the repeated
power outages in the state of California and then in the north-eastern part
of the United States. There was the collapse of Enron and that funding
model, and suddenly all the private sector players, who previously had
sniffed around, walked away from this. But over and above that there has
also been the reality that energy prices in South Africa are still the
lowest in the world.
We had a situation where a utility that had generator surplus had clearly
been able to provide for its future, however, that future was determined.
It was going to be a smaller future with other players coming into the
generation of energy. It no longer needed that capital, in terms of the
models available and the profit primarily to the government and some of
this was continuous across the first elections in 1994. The work started in
the early nineties and continued after the arrival of democracy in South
Africa. It was the best available advice. Government took it, and I think
as President Mbeki has said “we apologise for having taking the advice and
acted thereupon”. Those were the circumstances.

The relationship - and it’s a well-documented relationship between
government and Eskom - is one where Eskom not only provided the electricity
paid for by consumers of electricity, but was able to provide a range of
special tariffs to industrial customers and the mining sector in
particular. Eskom was able to maintain this for well over 80 years through
paid dividends and taxes. It didn’t turn to the fiscus for injections. This
has been the relationship but what we are saying now is that the model is
changing. Thank you. [Interjections.]

Ms N R MOKOTO: Hon Minister, if Eskom is going to raise the rest of its
envisaged R343 billion required from the expenditure of the markets -
besides the R60 billion loan - how will this affect the external borrowing
requirements and external vulnerability of the country in light of the
current account deficit? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: The total Capex that Eskom is working to is
something in the order of R343 billion at the moment. The amount that they
have pencilled in for borrowing over the next five years is approximately
R148 billion; the rest would have to be raised from user fees and other
charges. The R148 billion, we think, can be absorbed fairly easily by
capital markets, primarily because government is in a position now where we
have significantly reduced our borrowing. In fact, we are in a position of
fiscal surplus and the only financing we are doing right now is
refinancing.

The external vulnerability includes a measure of short-term debt as well as
long-term foreign debt. Then to that you add the current account deficit
divided by the official reserves.

Since Eskom is not planning to borrow on its short-term foreign debt, the
borrowing will not have an immediate, measurable impact on the external
vulnerability. As the matter stands - and they could change after the
election - there is no immediate borrowing plan from government over the
next five years.

Therefore, the management of the liability portfolio is something that can
be managed, because part of what we have to see includes issues that were
raised earlier to ensure that all state enterprises, including those
responsible for the provision of rail transport and so on, and the roads
agency, have access to capital markets. One has to manage this and part of
what I think the Treasury will have responsibility for, is managing what
may appear to be a queuing system to ensure that our agencies and
government don’t compete in the market. This should not be seen as an
attempt to try to take away the market share opportunities in the scramble
to ensure that we can all have access to an adequate supply of long-term
debt. Thank you.

Questions concluded.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

The House adjourned at 17:20.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

      1) The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bills as section 75 Bills:


          a) Higher Education Amendment Bill [B 34 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).


          b) Intelligence Services Amendment Bill [B 37 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).

    (2)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a section 76 Bill:

          a) General and Further Education and Training Quality Assurance
             Amendment Bill [B 35 – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 76).

2.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Transport


          a) National Land Transport Bill [B 51 – 2008] (National Assembly
             – proposed sec 76) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
             notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
             31060 of 15 May 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Transport of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
             Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
             Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.


     (2)    The Minister of Minerals and Energy
          a) National Energy Bill [B 52 – 2008] (National Assembly –
             proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
             of its introduction published in Government Gazette No 31124
             of 3 June 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Minerals and Energy of the National Assembly, as well as
             referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
             classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

CREDA INSERT REPORTS - T080618e–insert1 PAGES 1258-1273


