---
title: 'Joint Sitting - 03 June 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: Joint Sitting
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/joint-sitting/parliamentary-debates-JS-2008-06-03
---

TUESDAY, 3 JUNE 2008
                                    ____

                      PROCEEDINGS OF THE JOINT SITTING
                                    ____

Members of the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces
assembled in the Chamber of the National Assembly at 14:25.

The Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces took the Chair and
requested members to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

           ADDRESS BY PRESIDENT OF THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF NIGERIA

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, Mr President, we have amongst us
today His Excellency Mr Alhaji Umaru Musa Yar’ Adua, the President of the
Federal Republic of Nigeria, who has been invited to address the Joint
Sitting of Parliament on the occasion of his visit to South Africa.
President Yar’ Adua, at this opportunity I want to welcome you on behalf of
the Parliament of the Republic of South Africa. I now call upon the hon
Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly, Ms G L Mahlangu-Nkabinde, to
introduce His Excellency President Yar’ Adua. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson of the NCOP, Madam Speaker, Your Excellency
the President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, Alhaji Umaru Musa Yar’
Adua ... [Applause.] ... and Alhaji Turai Umaru Yar’ Adua ... [Applause.]
... President Thabo Mbeki and Mrs Zanele Mbeki ... [Applause.] ...
excellencies and distinguished guests from Nigeria, South Africa and other
countries, we welcome you.

The House is honoured today to receive President Yar’ Adua and his
distinguished delegation. The visit is indeed not only an honour for South
Africa but also fortunately timed, in that it gives us an opportunity to
reaffirm our friendship with the government of the Federal Republic of
Nigeria, and indeed with all the peoples of Nigeria.

The history of the friendship between the peoples of our two countries is a
long one. Prior to the first democratic elections in 1994, Nigeria was a
supporter of the international campaign against apartheid. For that support
we remain deeply grateful. The relationship forged during the years of our
struggle is now bearing fruit for the African continent as a whole.

South Africa and Nigeria share a vision of an African renewal. In pursuit
of this vision our countries are partnering, through a range of formal
structures, to give practical meaning to that shared vision. This vision of
an African renewal is a noble enterprise, an enterprise in which Nigeria is
giving leadership. The custodian of that leadership and vision is today our
honoured guest, the President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, who came
to power after a general election that took place on 21 April 2007. Twenty-
three political parties participated in the election, which was won by the
People’s Democratic Party under the leadership of President Yar’ Adua. This
election has seen a civilian-to-civilian transfer of power.

In his inaugural speech in May 2007 President Yar’ Adua committed his
government to the eradication of corruption. It is a commitment that he has
honoured. That he has honoured that commitment is not a surprise. President
Yar’ Adua was chosen as the presidential candidate for his party by an
overwhelming 3 024 votes as against 372 votes received by his closest
rival. It is said of him that his popularity is due to, and here I quote:
“That he was one of the few serving governors with a spotless record,
devoid of any suspicions or charges of corruption.” [Applause.]

President Yar’ Adua is the second president of Nigeria’s fourth republic
and comes from a family with a tradition of service to the country. His
father, a former minister of Lagos during the first republic, held the
royal title of Mutawalli or “Custodian of the Treasury” of the Katsina
Emirate, a title which President Yar’ Adua has inherited. Congratulations.
[Applause.]

President Yar’ Adua attended Ahmadu Bello University in Zaria and attained
a BSc in Education and Chemistry, followed by an MSc in Analytical
Chemistry. He began his working life in education, after which he moved
into the corporate sector and into the service of his country. President
Yar’ Adua was elected governor of Katsina in 1999 and re-elected in 2003.
During his governorship he focused on the transformation of educational and
health institutions and the provision of urban and rural roads,
electrification, water supply and the development of the agricultural
sector.

Mr President, we are so pleased to have you visit our country and grace
these halls of freedom and pride of the nation of South Africa. We hail
your august visit as one of peace and friendship during this particular
time in South Africa. We know your visit will extend the bonds of unity
between two great giants of Africa, Nigeria and South Africa. We appreciate
the brotherhood you offer with your presence here today, and honour you and
your commitment to oneness of our great and promising continent that is on
its way to its ultimate prosperous destiny. We hope that while you are
here, you will experience the best of South African hospitality and ubuntu,
and that your state visit to South Africa will be a memorable one, as it
most certainly is for us. “Sanunku duzua nagwode.” Thank you. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, His Excellency President Yar’
Adua will now address Parliament.
PRESIDENT ALHAJI UMARU MUSA YAR' ADUA: Thank you very much. Chairperson of
the NCOP, Madam Speaker, Your Excellency and my dear brother President
Thabo Mbeki, Mrs Mbeki, Mrs Yar’ Adua, leaders of political parties in
Parliament, hon Members of Parliament, Your Excellencies Ambassadors and
High Commissioners, distinguished ladies and gentlemen: It is my distinct
honour and privilege to address this very distinguished House on the
occasion of my first visit to the Republic of South Africa, indeed my first
state visit to an African country. [Applause.]

I bring you the goodwill and warm fraternal greetings of the government and
the people of the Federal Republic of Nigeria. I would like to begin by
commending the leadership and distinguished membership of the Parliament of
the Republic of South Africa for your effective support and productive
partnership with the government of President Thabo Mbeki. That South Africa
is today a respected major player on the global stage is attributable to
the synergy of a robust and vibrant legislature and a focused, committed
executive. I salute you all. [Applause.]

My country Nigeria and the Republic of South Africa are inextricably bound
by the historical forces of Pan-African liberation and the imperatives of
Africa’s regeneration and repositioning in the face of prevalent global
realities. The degree of solidarity, support and sacrifice which the
government and people of Nigeria exhibited in the quest for the elimination
of apartheid and the enthronement of democracy and majority rule in South
Africa was such that Nigeria, not minding the geographical distance, became
identified as a frontline state. We remained steadfast and resolute in the
struggle until all of Southern Africa was liberated from the shackles of
colonialism and our continent became truly free and truly African.

Posterity beckons us all once again to drive the process of Africa’s
reverse. Our two nations have the historical and moral responsibility to be
at the forefront of frankly confronting our continent’s endemic
developmental challenges. These are critical times for Africa and they call
for single-minded, courageous, people-focused and result-oriented
leadership. I dare aver that this is not a matter of choice. It is an
abiding duty which South Africa and Nigeria owe Mother Africa.

We must once again rekindle that flame of solidarity and unyielding
commitment to our common goal which saw to the emergence of our free
democratic South Africa. The requisites for Africa’s regeneration and
transformation are a function of the degree of structural and institutional
cohesion and stability within our respective national borders. We cannot
hope to make meaningful progress with weak economic and political
structures and institutions. Democratic consolidation and clearly defined
economic strategies are key to any enduring developmental process.
Fortunately, we have one dominant political party in both our countries ...
[Applause.] ... the ANC in South Africa and the People’s Democratic Party
in Nigeria, with due apologies to the other parties in South Africa and in
Nigeria. [Applause.]

This situation ordinarily should make for greater cohesiveness, evident
unity of purpose and stability. It is therefore incumbent on the political
leadership in both countries to subordinate primordial loyalties and narrow
interests to the collective national interest. We must manage our
respective transitional processes with utmost good faith and consummate
courage. We can only practically face up to our economic and sociopolitical
development challenges through the adoption and engendering of a new
political culture that is conducive to long-term growth and development.

I am encouraged by the evident progress which our strategic partnership
under the binational commission is already indicating. I am confident that
the commission will not only drive our shared vision for our peoples but
also provide the platform for a structured approach to tackling our
continent-wide challenges. We in Nigeria have anchored our pursuit of a re-
energised, stable and prosperous nation on the fundamental principles of
democracy, good governance, free enterprise and the rule of law.
Accelerated economic growth, sustained development and the achievement of
significant improvement in the living conditions and opportunities
available to our peoples are goals to which we are irrevocably committed.

Since the advent of our administration in May 2007, we have taken further
definitive steps to strengthen, broaden and deepen our sociopolitical and
economic reform processes to drive sustainable economic growth and
stabilisation of the polity.

Madam Speaker, hon members, permit me to salute all those heroic sons and
daughters of South Africa who willingly sacrificed all and made their
bodies bridges to the promise that is today’s proud and prosperous nation:
Albert Luthuli, Oliver Tambo, Govan Mbeki, Robert Sobukwe, Steve Biko,
Chris Hani, Joe Slovo and many others who paid the supreme price and
sacrifice for South Africa’s emancipation. [Applause.]

Madiba, Nelson Mandela, remains the quintessential African icon and a
consummate leader who has come to epitomise the universal essence of
resilience and commitment to mediation. [Applause.]

My brother President Thabo Mbeki has steadfastly and courageously carried
on the torch of democratic consolidation alongside economic prosperity. He
has constantly promoted and defended the African cause. He deserves our
commendation for his efforts at peacemaking and conflict resolution, not
only within the Southern African region, but beyond. [Applause.]

It is our collective hope that the present political situation in Zimbabwe
will be resolved positively in the interests of the peace, stability and
prosperity of that country. The realities of today’s fast globalising,
knowledge- and technology-driven world make it incumbent on us all as
leaders to work towards greater political and socioeconomic integration
within Africa. We must seek to transmute from the present state of regional
economic communities into continent-wide economic and political
integration, if we are not to be further marginalised by globalisation.

This is the kernel of the African Union’s preoccupation with modalities for
the realisation of the vision of a union government for Africa. Nigeria has
steadfastly supported this vision, albeit with emphasis on the need for a
gradual and realistic approach to its environment in the light of the
social, economic and political realities within and among member states of
the African Union and the critical need for the strengthening and
consolidation of internal governance and growth structures.

Our continent is faced with redoubtable economic and sociopolitical
developmental challenges. These challenges are surmountable if we all
sufficiently subscribe to the tenets of democracy, good governance,
accountability, transparency, due process, equity, justice and focused pro-
people leadership across the continent.

Mother Africa demands of us a renewed commitment to the regeneration of our
continent. Our two nations have a historic obligation once again to deploy
our all as the frontline states in the quest for a new, stable, secure and
prosperous Africa.

My dear brothers and sisters, possessed of a clear vision of a resurging
dawn for our continent, let us resolve this day with unbounded
determination to rededicate ourselves and hold aloft the banner of hope for
Africa’s prosperity. May God continue to bless the Republic of South
Africa. May God continue to bless Nigeria. May God continue to bless
Africa. Thank you. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I now call upon the hon Deputy
Chairperson of the NCOP to propose a vote of thanks.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Mr Chairman, Madam
Speaker, Your Excellency the President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria
and Mrs Yar’ Adua, President T M Mbeki and Mrs Mbeki, hon members,
distinguished guests, Salaam Aleikum. [Peace and blessings upon you all.]

I would like to thank His Excellency President Yar’ Adua for his important
message this afternoon. It certainly resonates with the role that Nigeria
and South Africa are playing in the struggle for the revival of Africa. The
bond between our two countries is of course a time-tested one. Nigeria
played a critical role in the fight against racial discrimination in South
Africa through its support for the international campaign against
apartheid. It is therefore fitting that the two countries continue to
maintain a strong relationship, especially with regards to the challenge of
the renewal of our continent.

Your Excellency, your visit to South Africa is an important step towards
ensuring the entrenchment of this growing relationship between our two
countries. As you would agree, we share the dream of building an Africa
that is free from the clutches of poverty and hunger, an Africa that truly
promotes good governance and the sharing of the fruits of democracy among
the people. It is a dream that must enable us to conquer the vestiges of
colonialism. Through co-operation between our individual countries, we have
to succeed in building one continent that belongs to its entire people. Our
strength is in unity. We have to act to reverse the divisions created by
years of colonialism. This must include dealing firmly with acts of
violence among fellow Africans, such as what we witnessed in our country
recently. A famous politician once said: “To build may have to be the slow
and laborious task of years; to destroy can be the thoughtless act of a
single day.” We are clearly aware of the challenges of uniting our peoples
in the midst of the contest for meagre resources.

Your Excellency, on a lighter note: We have noticed the civilised manner in
which your country treated our side as the Super Eagles beat our Bafana
Bafana in the field of play during the World Cup qualifier match two days
ago. [Laughter.] We had thought that the Eagles would show some respect to
a country that is poised to host the next Fifa World Cup. [Laughter.] What
makes us very concerned is the fact that we have not been able to beat the
Eagles in an official competition since 1992. Surely this needs to be
corrected ... [Laughter.] ... perhaps with the assistance of His
Excellency. A memorandum of understanding in this case would not do any
harm. [Applause.]

May I, on behalf of our Parliament, extend our warmest appreciation for
your address this afternoon on the occasion of your state visit to South
Africa. We wish you and Mrs Yar’ Adua, and your team of distinguished
guests, a successful visit. May you enjoy your stay in our beautiful
country. In Hausa we say: “Nagodi.” Thank you. Salaam Aleikum. [Peace and
blessings upon you all.] [Applause.]

The Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces adjourned the Joint
Sitting at 14:52.


