---
title: 'National Assembly - 06 May 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2008-05-06
---

                             TUESDAY, 6 MAY 2008
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:04.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                 CONDOLENCES ON THE DEATH OF ANDREW MASONDO

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House –

     1) notes with a deep sense of sorrow the death on Sunday, 20 April
        2008, of Andrew Masondo, a retired lieutenant general of the South
        African National Defence Force, who passed away after a long
        illness;
     2) recalls that Lt Gen Masondo joined the African National Congress
        Military Wing uMkhonto we Sizwe (MK) in 1962 and was arrested the
        following year for carrying out acts of sabotage against the
        apartheid state and for furthering the aims of a banned
        organisation, was sentenced to 13 years on Robben Island and upon
        his release in 1976 rejoined MK in exile and was appointed as
        Political Commissar;


     3) further recalls that Masondo was a highly motivational person who
        could speak all the country’s languages and it is, amongst other
        things, because of these qualities that he was chosen to shoulder
        the daunting responsibility of building spirit in the newly merged
        South African National Defence Force (SANDF) at the dawn of
        democracy in our country;

     4) believes that Lt Gen Masondo served our country with distinction and
        that he committed his life to the noble cause of defeating the
        unjust apartheid colonial system as well as to the rebuilding and
        defence of a South Africa free of racism, sexism and poverty; and

     5) conveys its condolences to the Masondo family, the South African
        National Defence Force and the African National Congress.


Agreed to.
                              NOTICES OF MOTION

The SPEAKER: I note that the previous item was a motion without notice. I
had just asked for notices of motion. We now go back to notices of motion.

Mr M WATERS: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that I intend moving the
following motion:

  That the House debates how best we can protect the children of our
  country in light of the Child Protection Week starting on 26 May 2008.

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that I intend
moving the following motion:

  That this House debates the South African government’s response to the
  current situation in Zimbabwe.

Thank you.

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice on behalf of the UDM
that I will move at the next sitting of the House:

   That the House –


     1) recognises the growing international and domestic food crisis and
        the risk it poses to South Africans in general and the poor in
        particular;


     2) acknowledges that South Africa’s agricultural sector has a major
        role to play in ensuring our domestic food security;

     3) further notes that government policy has put existing farmers under
        huge pressure with the wholesale withdrawal of subsidies and other
        supportive measures, while simultaneously failing to provide
        adequate support for emerging farmers; and

     4) debates how these matters are linked, and what possible solutions
        South Africa could implement to avert a major food crisis.

Thank you.

              CONDOLENCES ON THE PASSING AWAY OF ZOLILE MALINDI

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without
notice:


   That the House –
     1) notes with sorrow the passing away of Mr Zolile Malindi, who died on
        Monday, 21 April 2008;


     2) recalls that Comrade Zolie, as he was affectionately known amongst
        his peers, was an anti-apartheid activist and a former provincial
        president of the United Democratic Front in the Western Cape in the
        1980s, and an internationalist who committed his life to the service
        of the people, expecting no personal gain, be it in terms of high
        positions or wealth;

     3) further recalls that Malindi, together with other comrades, worked
        to build the civic movements which played a key role in the fight to
        end apartheid and that many of the comrades he fought with were
        assassinated by the apartheid security police, while others were
        detained and tortured, and in recognition of his contribution to the
        struggle for peace and social justice, our country has honoured him
        with the Order of Luthuli; and

     4) conveys its condolences to the Malindi family, the African National
        Congress, the South African Communist Party, the South African
        National Civic Association and the Congress of South African Trade
        Unions.

Agreed to.

     CONDOLENCES ON UNTIMELY DEATH OF ITALIAN AMBASSADOR TO SOUTH AFRICA

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House –


     1) notes with profound sadness the untimely death on Saturday, 19 April
        2008, of the Italian Ambassador to South Africa, His Excellency
        Alessandro Cevese;


     2) further notes that His Excellency Cevese passed away in a car
        accident that took place in a private game park in Limpopo Province;

     3) recalls that Ambassador Cevese joined the Italian diplomatic service
        in 1978 and had held several high positions in the foreign ministry
        of his country before moving to South Africa in 2006;

     4) further recalls that His Excellency Cevese was a Knight Commander of
        the Order of Merit of the Republic of Italy; and

     5) conveys its condolences to his loved ones, the government and the
        people of the Republic of Italy.

Agreed to.

                              WORLD ASTHMA DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –


     1) notes that today is World Asthma Day and that this has a special
        significance for South Africa as nearly one in every five children
        in South Africa is affected by asthma;


     2) encourages continued focus on positive living and healthy lifestyles
        by the government and the people of South Africa, as this greatly
        reduces the impact of this condition; and

     3) calls on the government to continue its vigilance in enforcing
        regulations with regard to environmental pollution, which increases
        the spread of asthma.

Thank you.
Agreed to.

                         CELEBRATION OF MOTHERS’ DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –


     1) notes that –


            a) on 11 May 2008 Mothers’ Day will be celebrated; and


          b) in an era where South Africa’s population is primarily
             socialised by mothers and the pivotal role our mothers play in
             the people we become and how we are to embrace this country
             and its people;

     2) takes this opportunity to –


          a) pay tribute to every mother and women in South Africa and to
             thank them for the important role they play in the progress
             and development of South Africa; and


          b) once again denounce all forms of abuse and violence imposed on
             women and children and give a standing ovation to all men who
             respect this and uphold the value that every woman plays in
             our country; and

     3) wishes all mothers a very happy and an enjoyable Mothers’ Day.

I thank you.

Agreed to.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                          (The late Ms N C Kondlo)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move the
motion printed in the name of the Chief Whip of the Majority Party on the
Order Paper, as follows:

   That the House –


     1) notes with profound sadness the untimely death of Comrade Ncumisa
        Chwayita Kondlo, who passed away on Monday, 24 March 2008;


     2) recognises that the hon Kondlo was a dedicated communist, human
        rights and gender activist, and a hard-working member and leader of
        the African National Congress and a Member of our Parliament and
        that, during her lifetime, she had a loving heart that embraced many
        in her line of duty;

     3) recalls that the hon Ncumisa Kondlo became active in politics from
        an early age during her student days at Fort Hare University and
        that her passion to liberate the poor was also inspired by her
        upbringing in the rural village of Peddie in the Eastern Cape, where
        she was exposed to the inhumane living conditions spawned by the
        barbaric colonial apartheid system, and that she was active in the
        broad range of structures of the Mass Democratic Movement and of
        workers’ movements including Azaso, Sanco, the Black Students
        Movement, Neusa, Sayco, the South African Democratic Teachers’
        Union, Sadtu, and Sadwu;

     4) further recalls that at the time of her passing away, the hon Kondlo
        was the deputy chairperson and a member of the Central Committee of
        the South African Communist Party and that she was also a member of
        the National Executive Committee and National Working Committee of
        the ANC and the chairperson of the ANC caucus in Parliament;

     5) acknowledges the great contribution that the hon Kondlo made in the
        struggle to create a nonracial, nonsexist, democratic and prosperous
        South Africa and as a Member of Parliament, and that she discharged
        her responsibilities with dedication, discipline, diligence and
        humility; and

     6) conveys its condolences to the Kondlo family, the African National
        Congress and the South African Communist Party.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, I cannot comment in any detail
on the political history or contribution in this field which was made by
our departed colleague, as we were far apart in political thinking. But I
know her history speaks of bravery and service to a great cause.

What I want to record - and I asked specifically if I may speak to this
motion - is the little relationship that developed between me and her in
our period of service together in the NCOP, where I got to know her as a
fierce fighter, and subsequently, since 2004, when we were together in this
House. We became friends; we became woman friends. We always chatted to
each other in the corridors, laughed together, exchanged ideas about
clothes, teased each other and generally experienced the kind of collegial
warmth which many of us are lucky enough to share across the political
divide.

After the loss of her husband, she was clothed in the black of mourning for
a long time. She bore her grief with dignity. Some time afterwards, I gave
her a pair of blue earrings which I had worn and she had liked. When she
wore them when I was Chairperson and could see them, we used to exchange a
little smile of recognition.

When she reached the position of caucus chair, I was proud of her as a
woman and as a friend. When she died, I was quite devastated. So short is
life, and sad. Let’s remember her as a valued friend who touched the lives
of people around her. May her soul rest in peace!

Mr H J BEKKER: Madam Speaker, the IFP would like to extend its condolences
to the majority party and the family and friends of Ncumisa Kondlo, who
passed away suddenly on 24 March 2008.

I knew her personally. As a member of the Portfolio Committee on Public
Enterprises, I wish to convey my personal sympathies and condolences to all
concerned. I was also fortunate to know Ms Kondlo on that special committee
and in the special role that she played in the committee as an overseer of
the executive – a task which she carried out with discipline and great
commitment.

During a parliamentary portfolio committee visit to South America, she fell
ill and was hospitalised and had to stay behind. How well I remember when
we went to say goodbye to her; how well I remember the embrace she gave,
and how well I remember the way she looked at us at that stage. We wondered
whether we were going to see her again. Then she recovered so wonderfully
that she could continue her task with absolute dedication.

Furthermore, it came as no surprise to me when she was elected as a member
of the ANC National Executive Committee and the ANC National Working
Committee, as she had always exhibited great leadership qualities in
Parliament, the ANC and the SA Communist Party. Her lifelong dedication to
their causes testifies to this effect.

Parliament, the ANC and the SA Communist Party have lost a valuable member
in Ms Kondlo. She will be sorely missed. Yet, we must not think of
ourselves only, but most importantly we should think of her family, friends
and loved ones at this difficult time. To them we say: Honour her memory
and dedication, and remember her as a guiding light in your lives. Thank
you.

Mr J BICI: Madam Speaker, it is sad that the first order of business we
have to return to should be to say farewell to another of our fellow
democrats. We wish to express our sincerest condolences to the family,
friends and colleagues of the late hon Kondlo. May God be with you during
this time of bereavement.

The hon Kondlo will be missed. We salute her commitment to her
parliamentary work and the active role she played in the committees that
she served on. Even where we may have differed over policies, we know that
she shared our passion for making this country a better place for all. We
hope that her loved ones will take consolation in the fact that she was an
architect of this democratic institution and that her legacy will live on
through the decisions and legislation to which she contributed. May her
soul rest in peace!

Thank you.

Mnr I E JENNER: Speaker, ek bring vandag hulde namens my party, die OD, aan
’n held van die stryd om bevryding. Haar bydrae sal ons onvergeetlik bybly.
Ek bring hulde aan die geskiedenis van ’n kameraad. Sy sal onthou word as
’n stryder, ’n agent vir verandering en ’n vrou wat in donker tye opgestaan
het.

Die vlaktes van my grootword by Jakkalskop verby gedenk haar nagedagtenis,
haar bydrae en haar opoffering. Haar naam sal gevoeg word by die helde van
die vryheidstryd. Sy was ’n lewendige voorbeeld van ’n produk van die
rewolusie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr I E JENNER: Speaker, today I pay homage on behalf of my party, the ID,
to a hero of the liberation struggle. Her contribution will never be
forgotten. I pay homage to the legacy of a comrade. She will be remembered
as a crusader, an agent for change and a woman who stood up during dark
times.

The plains of my early years past Jakkalskop honour her memory, her
contribution and her sacrifices. Her name will be added to the heroes of
the freedom struggle. She was a living example of a product of the
revolution.]

Let us pick up the spear of a fallen hero, a true compadre, a
revolutionary, and fulfil the mandate of the national democratic
revolution. Today we salute a person of character and principles, a symbol
of humbleness and a true reflection of the struggle for liberation.

Mag die vrede van God die familie vergesel en die seer van hul verlies met
tyd heel. [May the peace of God be with the family and heal the pain of
their loss with time.]

Hamba kahle, qabane, qhawe lamaqhawe. [Rest in peace comrade, hero of
heroes.]

Mr H B CUPIDO: Madam Speaker, the ACDP joins this House in conveying our
sincere condolences to the family and friends of the hon Kondlo. It is our
sincere hope that they have an assurance and confidence that she has gone
to be with her Maker, and pray they will experience the peace of Jesus
Christ at this time.

Hon Kondlo is recognised for her contribution to the liberation of South
Africa and the postapartheid reconstruction process. Hon Kondlo was
especially vocal on human rights and gender issues, and we salute her for
this. Hon Kondlo was also a former MEC for Welfare in the Eastern Cape
provincial government. She has played a paramount role in bettering the
lives of many poor people during this time. It is of course her loved ones,
her family, friends and colleagues, who knew her best and who will miss her
most. We ask God, therefore, to strengthen her colleagues, family and
friends at this time. May God bless you with His peace, which transcends
all understanding, to guard your hearts and your minds in Christ. Amen.
Thank you.

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Madam Speaker, the UCDP notes with regret the passing
away of Comrade Ncumisa, who contributed selflessly to the formation of the
teachers’ union in the Border region and subsequently in the establishment
of the SA Democratic Teachers Union. In the eighties she was heavily
involved in organising for the SA Domestic Workers Union. Her contribution
in the upliftment of the social and cultural structure won her an award, as
she was involved in the South African women’s struggle. She was
internationally recognised for this and received an award from the Swedish
Society Party.

A re mo tlogeleng a tsamae ka kagiso. O dirile go tlala seatla ka nako e
khutshwanyane. Mokgatlho wa ANC, amogelang gore Modimo o ne o neile, mme
Modimo o tshotse. Ba lelapa la moswi, ra re lalang ka ntho madi a tshologa
le pelo di gamuketse botlhoko di tlaa fola. A go bakwe leina la Modimo.
(Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[Although she was granted half a life, she was remarkable. May she rest in
peace. Our condolences go to the ANC. As God has given, He has now taken.
We would also like to convey our condolences to the bereaved family and we
hope they will be strong and find a healing power in grieving. May the name
of the Lord be praised.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, on behalf of the leader of the MF, the hon A
Rajbansi, and the entire team of the MF, I extend our heartfelt condolences
to the bereaved family and friends of the late hon Ncumisa Kondlo. It is
never easy to lose a loved one, but we have to move forward and do so with
utmost respect and in loving memory of the wonderful and committed person
that she was.

In the past term we have had to bid farewell to so many comrades who have
played a pivotal role in the delivery and development of democracy. Our
sympathies are extended to the Mthwazi families. May the Almighty God bless
you with the strength to get through this difficult loss and place in your
hearts the comfort of knowing that she now resides in the gardens of
heaven, with so many of our ancestors, comrades and leaders.

We further extend our condolences to the ANC and the SACP on the loss of an
impeccable and dedicated patriot for democracy and fighter for the
betterment of South Africans. We need to continue her plight and forge on
to sustainable development and total eradication of poverty, inequality and
crime. Kondlo, may you rest in peace, knowing that you have given us your
best, for which we are eternally grateful. I thank you.

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Speaker, our country needs a progressive social order
which provides food, housing, clothing, skills and employment. If the
ability to pay for these necessities of life is the passport, then at this
time most of our people, who are the majority of the poor, are excluded
from a decent life fit for all human beings. It is in this spirit that the
PAC joins this House in expressing its profound sadness on the sudden
departure of the hon Ncumisa Chwayita Kondlo on 24 March 2008.

She dedicated her life to the poor and served them with distinction. It
will be remembered that she was the only MEC who personally went to the
Gatyana community to ensure that all the poor got their social grants. She
leaves a yawning gap in the ranks of those who have a similar vision for
the poor. This is a great loss to the ANC and the SACP.

But I want to send special condolences to the Kondlo family. The PAC has a
very soft spot for the Kondlo family as a whole and has always had
revolutionary appreciation for this great family of warriors for freedom.
One of their sons, Gen Gerald Kibwe Kondlo, fell at one of the famous
battles of the PAC, the Villa Peri battle, where he was commanding the
forces of the Azanian People’s Liberation Army against the Portuguese
colonial forces on their way to this country.
May the spirit of this great daughter of Africa continue to inspire us for
the battles that lie ahead. Thank you.

Mr S SIMMONS: Madam Speaker, the NA has noted with great sadness the
passing on of our colleague hon Ncumisa Kondlo. I concur with the
sentiments expressed by previous hon members in this House. The
contributions of any individual in the fight for freedom and democracy can
never be ignored, more so if they are of the magnitude of those of the late
Ms Ncumisa Kondlo. She was an exemplary example in the fight for freedom
and democracy, which started from an early age as a student at Fort Hare
University. As a result of her rural upbringing, she was exposed to extreme
poverty, which resulted in her having a passion to support the poor. The NA
salutes hon Ms Ncumisa Kondlo for her unselfish contribution to our people
and conveys its condolences to her family and the ANC. May her soul rest in
peace. Thank you.

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Speaker, die dood is ’n finaliteit wat nie een van ons
kan ontwyk nie en wat nie een van ons kan verander nie. Die dood gaan altyd
gepaard met hartseer van geliefdes wat agterbly.

As ek luister na die geskiedenis van die agb afgestorwene, Speaker, is dit
baie duidelik dat sy haar merk baie duidelik gemaak het in haar lewe; dat
haar familie werklik trots sal wees op haar; en dat haar optredes en die
merk wat sy gemaak het ook vir hulle ’n voorbeeld sal wees.

Die VF Plus wil dan ook graag ons innige meegevoel betoon aan die familie
en die geliefdes met die afsterwe van ons kollega. Dankie. (Translation of
Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Speaker, death is a finality which none of us can evade
and which none of us can change. Death is always accompanied by sadness for
the loved ones who are left behind.

Speaker, when I listen to the history of the hon deceased, it is evident
that she had very clearly made her mark in her life; that her family will
really be proud of her, and that her conduct and the mark she made will
also serve as an example to them.

The FF Plus also wants to express its sincere condolences to the family and
the loved ones with the passing of our colleague. Thank you.]

Ms N C MADLALA-ROUTLEDGE: Somlomo namalungu ahloniphekile [Speaker and hon
members], on 5 April 2008 our people converged in their thousands at the
Eastern Cape village of Ndwayana to pay their final tributes to one of the
outstanding daughters of our revolution and an esteemed member of this
august tribunal of the people, Comrade Ncumisa Kondlo.

On behalf of the ANC, which Comrade Ncumisa proudly served for many years,
I would like to take this opportunity to convey our deepest sympathies and
heartfelt condolences to her family, friends and comrades. Her passing is
indeed a huge loss to the broader revolutionary alliance and its continued
battle for the victory of our national democratic revolution.

The many who had the privilege of being present when she was laid to rest
at the humble and unassuming village that holds her umbilical cord, heard
the moving orations pertaining to the extraordinary life of this dear
daughter of our people. These orations from the leadership, representing
the revolutionary tripartite alliance, spoke of a true patriot, a
combatant, a socialist, a fearless fighter, a caring servant and hero of
the people.

Those who knew Comrade Ncumisa know that such descriptive accounts were no
mere proverbial expressions habitually accorded the departed, but were a
true and fitting account of her remarkable and inspiring life. Such was
said because hers was a heroic life. It was thus symbolic that Comrade
Ncumisa was laid to rest during the month that the ANC has declared Heroes’
Month, in which we commemorate the lives of the heroes of the struggle.

Comrade Ncumisa’s funeral took place in the month in which, 15 years ago, a
martyr and stalwart of our struggle for liberation, Chris Thembisile Hani,
was assassinated during intensive national negotiations towards a peaceful
and democratic settlement. She was laid to rest in the very same month in
which, in 1979, Solomon Kalushi Mahlangu was executed by the ruthless
apartheid regime as part of a concerted and brutal clampdown on those who
challenged the oppressive order.

These heroes of our struggle, whose deaths we commemorated during the month
of April, paid supreme sacrifices for the freedom we are enjoying today. It
is thus a fitting tribute that the natural circumstances dictated that
Comrade Ncumisa’s final journey from the land of the living should take
place in this particular month, because of the extraordinary and remarkable
life she lived.

Perhaps we should, as we have done with these other heroes of the history
of our revolution whose lives we celebrated during that particular month,
pause and ponder who Comrade Ncumisa was and what she stood for. This, as
the president of the ANC said during her solemn funeral, will enable us as
a nation to pay tribute to her by learning from her life, and to rediscover
and remain true to the values that guided her life.

Comrade Ncumisa was born into the struggle in which she spared neither
strength nor courage in her contribution to the attainment of the
democratic majority rule. Like Solomon Kalushi Mahlangu, Comrade Ncumisa
belonged to a generation of defiant and brave young activists, who speared
the cause for national liberation through the country’s radical youth
movement. She cut her teeth in student politics and played a leading role
in the SA Youth Congress, Sayco, in the 1980s, as well as in the formation
of the ANC Youth League in the Eastern Cape. She was uncompromising in her
abhorrence of racism and inequality, and dearly cherished the ideals for
freedom and equality for all South Africans.

Comrade Ncumisa was a unifier and a humble servant of the people. She
personified the characteristics of the kind of leader and cadre our
movement and country needs – a cadre that is ready to serve the people in
whatever capacity, a cadre that is sympathetic to the poor and dedicated to
the improvement of the quality of life of all our people.

The people of this country will always remember her for the passionate
commitment with which she served them as a member of this august Parliament
and as a provincial Minister in the Eastern Cape. She despised the
philosophy of self-enrichment, but remained steadfast in our revolutionary
mission of eradicating inequality, poverty and joblessness, and the
construction of a prosperous and truly democratic nation.

Death, which the 18th century poet John Donne curses as not mighty and
dreadful in his sonnet Death Be Not Proud, has indeed robbed us of a gender
activist, a worker and a true communist. As a youth, Comrade Ncumisa served
in the executive of the Border Youth Congress and represented the region on
the women’s desk. She was among those who led the re-establishment of the
Progressive Women’s Movement of South Africa. Her activism in the gender
struggle was acknowledged internationally when the Swedish Socialist Party
awarded her an international award for her role as one of the champions of
the country’s young women’s struggle.

Like Thembisile Chris Hani, Comrade Ncumisa was a communist to the end, who
simultaneously served both her party and the ANC with diligence. She was
always guided by her Marxist-Leninist ideological outlook in her defence of
the congress movement. Longtime friend and close comrade, SACP treasurer
Pumulo Maswale, fondly remembers her and says: “She would always insist on
communists guarding jealously the working-class bias of the movement and
rejected any attempt on the part of the working class turning its back on
the ANC.”

Those who had the privilege of working with her testified to her quiet and
reserved personality behind which lay an astute visionary with an acute
political acumen. Such is the character that enabled us to sit as members
of this democratic institution today. Her characteristic leadership, skill
and exemplary personality made the membership of the tripartite alliance
entrust her with positions of leadership, which she loyally served, among
others as an NEC member and caucus chairperson of the ANC, deputy
chairperson and member of the politburo of the SACP and a member of the
Cosatu-affiliated union. She was the embodiment of the alliance and fully
understood and lived by its traditional values.

We in the ANC had hoped to continue gleaning from the wisdom of her
leadership for many more years. In the same manner the millions of our
people were propelled by the blood of Comrades Chris Hani, Solomon Mahlangu
and others to intensify the war against the apartheid order, we will pick
up Comrade Ncumisa’s spear and fight for the realisation of a truly
nonracial, nonsexist and democratic South Africa.

I wish to join this House today in bidding farewell to this humble daughter
of our people. She will indeed be sorely missed. Ulale ngoxolo, Bhelekazi.
[Rest in peace, Bhelekazi.]

The SPEAKER: Hon members, the condolences of the House will be conveyed,
and will include the Deputy Speaker’s and mine, to the Kondlo family, the
ANC and the SACP.

Debate concluded.

Motion agreed to, members standing.

                             ZIMBABWE ELECTIONS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms K R MAGAU (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC believes that the principles of
democracy and good governance are at the heart of the success of the
African Union and the New Partnership for Africa’s Development. Zimbabwe
has consistently upheld its constitution by regularly holding elections as
required, without fail. Where people have indicated dissatisfaction with
the conduct of elections, they have pursued their concerns within the law
and according to the constitution.

The release by the Zimbabwean Electoral Commission of the results of the
presidential election is a positive development, which is long overdue. In
the event of the runoff vote, it is critically important that an
environment exists for the people of Zimbabwe to exercise their right to
vote in a free, fair and peaceful manner. In this regard we are concerned
at reports of violence and intimidation emanating from that country.

The ANC has full confidence in the mediation effort led by President Thabo
Mbeki. [Interjections.] The mediation process has made a significant
contribution to the fairness and peacefulness of the first round of voting.
These efforts need to continue so as to assist the people of Zimbabwe in
their desire for peace, stability and development of their own country. I
thank you. [Applause.]

              INFANT DEATHS IN UKHAHLAMBA DISTRICT MUNICIPALITY

                            (Member’s Statement)

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSTION (DA): Madam Speaker, Ukhahlamba district in the
Eastern Cape is a so-called presidential development node, identified under
the Integrated Sustainable Rural Development Programme by President Thabo
Mbeki in his State of the Nation Address in 2001. An estimated 78 infant
deaths occurred in this district in the past three months, ostensibly due
to diarrhoea that was contracted through impurities in the drinking water,
which the local hospitals were unable to treat due to the unavailability of
basic medication at the government-run local hospitals. For its part, the
clearly undercapacitated Ukhahlamba District Municipality failed to provide
timeous warnings concerning the quality of the drinking water in the area,
shirked all responsibility and resorted to blaming the local hospital and
alleging that infants died because they were HIV sufferers, without any
basis.

The provincial government’s inadequate response was delayed by more than a
week, due to indecision about whether to make the report on the incident
public or not.

Finally, I wish to put on record that neither the Presidency nor any other
department of national government took any action or responsibility or held
anyone accountable for this tragedy.

                             FUEL PRICE INCREASE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr N SINGH (IFP): Madam Speaker, tomorrow the price of petrol and diesel
will rise for the umpteenth time in recent months. The cost of fuel is now
so high that even the petrol pumps cannot keep up anymore. Of course, this
is no laughing matter, as high fuel prices drive a range of other prices
upwards. The worst of these, for the poor, is the cost of food, where
recent increases have far outstripped the average inflation rate, leading
to a situation where more and more already poor people are struggling to
feed their families.

It is so that external factors are driving fuel price increases and that we
have little control over these factors. However, the IFP believes that it
is time for our government to investigate proactive measures that could
assist motorists and the economy as a whole to cope better with high fuel
prices. One such measure could be the reactivation of the Equalisation
Fund, which previously was used to smooth out price fluctuations and lessen
the immediate shock to the economy and the public at large. This government
has done so in the past. We know that the fund is dormant and that no levy
is being collected at the moment, but the legislative framework is still in
place and the Minister of Finance could reactivate the fund if studies show
that it would be beneficial in the long run.

The IFP therefore calls on the Minister of Finance to launch an immediate
investigation into the possibility of using the Equalisation Fund to smooth
out fuel price increases and to lessen the short-term shock of recurring
sharp price increases. Perhaps one of the ways of accomplishing this would
be quarterly implementation of increases or decreases in the fuel price.
Thank you.

                            FOOD PRICE INCREASES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D M DLALI (ANC): Madam Speaker, the current food price increases pose
serious challenges for our country, particularly the poor. Sixty percent of
our people spend more than 25% of their income on food. The ANC believes
that South Africa needs to act urgently to focus the nation’s attention on
the task of developing policies that will enable us to increase
agricultural production. This should apply to both large-scale commercial
farming as well as small-scale subsistence farming, and should include
encouraging and assisting families to start up vegetable gardens at their
homes.

The consistent increase of the international crude oil price and its impact
on the price of petrol, diesel and paraffin aggravates the living
conditions of our people. The proposed tariff increase by Eskom could not
have come at a worse moment. We urge our government to act ruthlessly
against food producers who conspire to exploit our people by fixing food
prices. We must act together in defence of our country’s future, its
stability and all its people; in particular the poorest of the poor. Thank
you.

                          MOVE TO DISBAND SCORPIONS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S N SIGCAU (UDM): Speaker, the UDM calls on the ANC government to desist
from its attempts to disband the Scorpions. The long overdue release of the
Khampepe Commission report yesterday has blown away every flimsy excuse
that has been advanced for the disbandment of the Scorpions. With all those
half-hearted excuses wiped away, all that remain are the shameful public
statements by senior ANC members, including the hon Chief Whip, that the
Scorpions are being closed down for having the temerity to investigate and
prosecute ANC leaders. These public statements are riddled with
contradictions and demonstrate an obsessive, all-encompassing desire to
destroy the Scorpions at all costs.

Is it too late to appeal for sanity and to hope that somewhere within the
ANC there are still leaders who are willing to stand up? Is there nobody
left to say, “no, this course of action is ill-conceived and a blatant
abuse of power”?

Today we hear the news that Leonard McCarthy has been appointed by the
World Bank. Is the intention of this campaign against the Scorpions to
drive away every person willing to fight corruption? One can only wonder
what those who cheer so loudly for the demise of the Scorpions have to
hide. Thank you, Speaker. [Applause.]

                             CRISIS IN ZIMBABWE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr P J GROENEWALD (VF PLUS): Mev die Speaker, President Mbeki het
deurlopend die eis gestel dat die probleme in Zimbabwe op ’n vreedsame en
demokratiese wyse opgelos moet word. Wanneer die MDC geduldig vir meer as
10 jaar dit presies so probeer doen, verkies President Mbeki om
geloofwaardigheid aan President Mugabe te gee deur te sê dat daar geen
krisis in Zimbabwe is nie. Hierdeur versterk hy Mugabe in sy ondemokratiese
misbruik van mag om vir die derde keer ’n verkiesing te steel.

Nêrens in die wêreld word langer as ’n maand gewag vir die uitslag van ’n
verkiesing nie. As President Mugabe die Zimbabwe-verkiesing gewen het, sou
die aankondiging van die uitslag binne twee dae bekend gemaak gewees het,
soos dit in die vorige verkiesings in Zimbabwe gebeur het.

Daarom laat so ’n berekende vertraging alle alarms afgaan dat die Zimbabwe-
regering agter die skerms ingemeng het met die uitslae, en die tyd gebruik
het om opposisiekiesers te intimideer met die oog op ’n opvolgverkiesing.

Suid-Afrika ly tans onherstelbare skade op internasionale vlak as gevolg
van President Mbeki se teleurstellende en kortsigtige hantering van die
saak. Daar is internasionaal absoluut geen voordeel in vir Suid-Afrika om
’n totaal gediskrediteerde Mugabe polities regop te probeer hou nie.

Daarom het die VF Plus alreeds in ’n brief aan die Speaker gevra dat die
Parlement dringend die krisis met die Zimbabwe-verkiesing moet bespreek.
Aangesien die Zimbabwe-krisis nog geensins opgelos is nie, bly so ’n debat
nodig, om aan die wêreld te wys dat alle Suid-Afrikaners nie President
Mbeki se standpunte oor Zimbabwe deel nie. Dankie. (Translation of
Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD (FF PLUS): Madam Speaker, President Mbeki has
continuously demanded that the problems in Zimbabwe be resolved in a
peaceful and democratic manner. When the MDC has been trying for more than
ten years to do precisely this, President Mbeki chooses to give credibility
to President Mugabe by stating that there is no crisis in Zimbabwe. By
doing this, he is strengthening Mugabe in his undemocratic abuse of power
to steal an election for the third time.

Nowhere in the world are the results of an election waited on for longer
than a month. If President Mugabe had won the Zimbabwe elections, the
announcement of the results would have been made within two days, as was
the case in the previous elections in Zimbabwe.

That is why such a calculated delay sounds all the alarms that the Zimbabwe
government has meddled with the results behind the scenes, and has used the
time to intimidate opposition voters with a view to a run-off election.

South Africa is currently suffering irreparable harm on international level
as a result of President Mbeki’s disappointing and short-sighted handling
of this matter. Internationally, there is absolutely no benefit to South
Africa in trying to politically prop up a totally discredited Mugabe.

Therefore, the FF Plus has already asked the Speaker in a letter that
Parliament should urgently discuss the Zimbabwe elections. Since the
Zimbabwean crisis has not been resolved by any means as yet, such a debate
remains necessary to show the world that all South Africans do not share
President Mbeki’s points of view regarding Zimbabwe. Thank you.]

                       ROLE OF RESEARCH IN DEVELOPMENT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M L MATSEMELA (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC believes that open debate
and transparency in government and society are crucial elements of
reconstruction and development. This requires an information policy which
guarantees active exchange of information and opinion among all members of
society. Without the free flow of accurate and comprehensive information,
no concrete planning can succeed.

More than 300 international researchers are to gather at Mafikeng for a
research showcase which aims to highlight the value of information sharing
between government and research institutions to improve socioeconomic
development. This will be hosted by the North West Research Co-ordinating
Committee in conjunction with the North West provincial government. They
are meeting under the theme “Accelerating socioeconomic development through
research”.

The showcase will comprise an interdisciplinary committee made up of a
researcher and all relevant stakeholders. It is viewed as the best answer
to a collaborative research approach. The ANC believes that research is an
important focus area in the process of transformation, development and
growth, and urges all participants in the knowledge development sphere to
place at the centre of their work the needs of the poor. I thank you.

            COLLECTION OF AIDS STATISTICS BY DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs S V KALYAN (DA): Madam Speaker, the Aids pandemic is wreaking havoc
across South Africa, destroying many families in the process. It is
estimated that one in every six South Africans is HIV- positive. A recent
report by the Development Bank of South Africa suggests that a staggering
2,2 million more people than government figures show are becoming sick and
are dying from Aids. The DBSA has based its information on figures obtained
from grassroots sources in addition to clinics, local municipalities,
development planners, mortuaries and funeral parlours.

The Minister of Health recently claimed that the epidemic was stabilising.
She based these statistics on estimates, which is quite ironic, given that
she slammed a United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund report
entitled “Countdown to 2015”, which was presented at the 118th IPU and
which showed that South Africa was falling catastrophically short in
meeting Millennium Development Goals 4, 5 and 6.
If the Department of Health is not using accurate information, it means
that all calculations on the number of persons who need treatment, the
amount of drugs needed and the number of staff required to manage the
pandemic are wrong. The Minister needs to explain to this House how her
department collects the data on which it is basing its treatment programme
and reassess this, if necessary.

                          TREATMENT OF TUBERCULOSIS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms B T NGCOBO (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC has developed and implemented
health policies aimed at ensuring that all South Africans receive total
health care as a contribution to improving levels of prosperity and quality
of life for all. The ANC-led government in KwaZulu-Natal has committed
itself to training a further 3000 health personnel in the management of
tuberculosis, both multi- and extreme drug resistant.

Another important aspect of the project is to make sure that the number of
those who default on treatment programmes is brought down from 10% to 7%,
with the ultimate goal of eliminating the causes that force patients to opt
out of the programme. We commend the government’s initiative in dealing
with the new challenges posed by drug resistant conditions and urge
patients to adhere to their treatment regimes and minimise the threat to
their lives and the lives of those around them. Thank you very much.

                   INFANT DEATHS CAUSED BY POLLUTED WATER

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M W SIBUYANA (IFP): Madam Speaker, the IFP is deeply alarmed by the
deaths of many children in the Eastern Cape. A total of 80 have died. In
the spirit of ubuntu, we are concerned about the loss of life of newborn
babies and the impact that might have on their families. The 62 deaths in
the Sterkspruit area are reported to have been related to water supply. The
Health Department in Bisho has confirmed that babies are dying because of
the dirty water they drink.

As we have argued before, our view is that this is a sign of a water
crisis. Furthermore our belief is that the first solution, as in any state
of crisis, is to acknowledge that indeed a water crisis exists. The
question we put to this House is whether the Minister agrees that the
deaths of so many babies as a result of drinking polluted water constitutes
a crisis. I thank you.

                ROLE OF ICT IN INCREASING INFORMATION ACCESS

                            (Member’s Statement)
Ms M W MAKGATE (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC-led government is committed to
increasing access to the information, communication and training, ICT,
sector to previously disadvantaged communities. Our government works
tirelessly to encourage co-ordination of existing ICT initiatives such as
television and multipurpose community centres, as well as to raise public
awareness of ICT and its impact on women’s development.

The Department of Communications will recruit 800 information technology
graduates to be enrolled for the E-Cadre Programme to assist with IT
technical support within their areas. Rural and urban nodal municipalities
will be prioritised in rolling out this programme and graduates within
these areas are encouraged to apply so that they can render services in
their own communities.

ICT has great possibilities for education, training, skills development,
job creation, basic service delivery and broad-based black economic
empowerment. It is with this understanding that we commend the government’s
E-Cadre Programme and urge the private sector to do more to improve our
country’s skills base. I thank you. [Applause.]

  OSCAR PISTORIUS NAMED ONE OF 100 MOST INFLUENTIAL PEOPLE BY TIME MAGAZINE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr K J MINNIE (DA): Madam Speaker, Time Magazine’s ranking of Oscar’s
Pistorius as one of the 100 most influential people of 2008 is a triumph
for South Africa and a lesson for all of us in overcoming obstacles and
changing perceptions. Over his career, Mr Pistorius has turned a disability
that many people would regard as something requiring sympathy into not only
a personal success story to the point where he may, if he is permitted to
participate, be a serious competitor for an Olympic title, but also into a
story of triumph over a world in which the disabled are often seen as
second-class citizens.

Oscar Pistorius, by continuing to challenge the boundaries of a world which
gives him a different set of rights to those of able-bodied athletes, has
single-handedly lifted the world’s understanding of the disabled in
significant ways. The DA applauds his actions and wishes him well in his
future endeavours. I thank you. [Applause.]

                   ROLE OF GAUTRAIN IN SKILLS DEVELOPMENT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr T G ANTHONY (ANC): Madam Speaker, the Gautrain Skills Training Project
has set aside R23 million to train more than 1000 employed and unemployed
people in critical and scarce skills in construction and construction
vehicle operation. The recruitment programme targets mainly people from
historically disadvantaged communities, including townships such as
Tembisa, Mogale and Soweto.

The ANC believes that improved skills development, based on a sound general
education system, is critical for economic equity, empowerment and growth.
We urge government to accelerate efforts aimed at ensuring that the
National Skills Authority develops effective mechanisms to disseminate
information to and communicate with targeted constituencies about the
programme. I thank you.

                   PROVISION OF LIBRARIES IN KWAZULU-NATAL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Nk M M NTULI (ANC): Umbutho wesizwe uKhongolose uyasithokozela kakhulu
isimemezelo soMnyango Wezamasiko, Ezokungcebeleka Nezokuvakasha KwaZulu-
Natali, sokuthi lo Mnyango uhlela ukwakha izikhungo zezincwadi
eziseqophelweni eliphezulu ezindaweni ezisemaphandleni. Izindawo
ezizohlomula kulolu hlelo oluhlinzekelwe ngesizumbulu esiyi-17 sezigidi
zamarandi, yiNdwendwe, i-Tugela Ferry, iNtabamhlophe kanye naseZinqoleni.

Kuhlelwe ukuthi lezi zikhungo zezincwadi zibe namakhompyutha ezinga
eliphezulu kanye nochwepheshe abazosiza le miphakathi ekuwasebenziseni.
Zingamashumi amabili ezinye izikhungo zezincwadi ezizokwenziwa ngcono kulo
nyaka ngaphansi kwalolu hlelo. UKhongolose uyalujabulela lolu hlelo
njengesinye sezinyathelo esihle emzabalazweni wokwandisa isiko lokufunda
phakathi kwabo bonke abantu bakithi. (Translation of isiZulu member’s
statement follows.)

[Ms M M NTULI (ANC): The African National Congress is happy, following the
announcement made by the provincial arts, culture and tourism department in
KwaZulu-Natal that this department is planning to build state-of-the-art
libraries in the rural areas. The areas that will benefit from this R17
million initiative are Ndwedwe, Tugela Ferry, Ntabamhlophe and Ezinqoleni.

The plan is for these libraries to have state-of-the-art computers, and
experts who are going to assist these communities in using them. There are
20 other libraries that are going to be upgraded through this initiative
this year. The ANC is happy about this initiative as a step in the right
direction, in instilling a culture of learning amongst all fellow people.]

                       CONGRATULATIONS TO HELEN ZILLE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr W J SEREMANE (DA): Madam Speaker, it gives me and the DA great pleasure
to congratulate Helen Zille on her first anniversary as national leader of
the DA. During her first year as leader of this party, Helen has
successfully articulated the DA’s vision for South Africa, that of an open-
opportunity society, and managed to imprint her special leadership style
throughout the party.

There are many signs that indicate that under her leadership the DA has
already made significant gains in driving the politics of issues - not of
personalities - principles and shared values beyond the politics of race.
Helen has been able to do this while successfully executing her exacting
duties as executive mayor of Cape Town, where she has presided over the
restoration of service delivery and administration that was left in tatters
by the former ANC government.

As mayor of Cape Town, Helen has also actively led the political quest for
a new majority in South Africa, as head of a successful coalition
government headed by the DA. We expect that under Helen’s leadership Cape
Town, the DA and opposition politics in South Africa in general, including
democracy, will continue to go from strength to strength without the
unnecessary butchering amongst people. Thank you. [Applause.]

                   PROVISION OF LIBRARIES IN KWAZULU-NATAL

                            (Minister’s Response)

USEKELA MPHATHISWA WEZENKCUBEKO NOBUGCISA: Somlomo, babini ooBotha ke apha;
ubokuyiqaphela loo nto. Mna ndiphakamela ukwaleka umsundulu kumbandela
wamathala eencwadi nobe uphakanyiswa ngobekekileyo uQabane uNtuli.
Siyalivuyela sikwalincoma inyathelo elicetywa liSebe lezeNkcubeko aMasiko
nezoKhenketho lokuba kwakhiwe amathala eencwadi kwiindawo ezisemaphandleni
kwiphondo laKwaZulu Natala. Ngaphezu koko kuyimfanelo ukuba la mathala abe
kumgangatho ophezulu nophucukileyo, abe nombane, iikhompuyutha kunye nayo
yonke into efunekayo yokugcina iincwadi zikwimeko elungileyo ukuze
zilungele ukusetyenziswa rhoqo.

Maze ke kungabikho mahluko phakathi kwala mathala asemaphendleni kunye
nalawo asezidolophini. Phambi kokuba eli lizwe likhululeke alikho isebe
likarhulumente elakhe lacinga ngokwakhiwa kwamathala eencwadi emaphandleni.
Kaloku la rhulumente wangaphambili, nowobandlululo wayesibandeza imfundo
thina kuba efuna ukuba abantu abamnyama besoloko bengamakhoboka. Wayesithi
bona bafaneleke ukuba babengabathuthi bamanzi nokuya kutheza iinkuni.
Ngaphezu koko, iSebe lezeMfundo kuzwelonke sele liqalisile nalo ngephulo
lalo ekuthiwa yiKha ri Gude ngesiVenda, oko ke kukuthi “Masifunde”.
Siyabulela ke kwaba baPhathiswa babini kunye namasebe abo ngala manyathelo
bawathathayo. Umnqweno wethu ngowokuba onke amaphondo azeke mzekweni.
Enkosi. (Translation of isiXhosa Minister’s response follows.)

[The DEPUTY MINSTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Madam Speaker, just be careful
that there are two Bothas here. I support the issue of libraries raised by
Comrade Ntuli. We express our gratitude and also commend the initiative
planned by the provincial arts, culture and tourism department for building
libraries in rural areas in Kwazulu-Natal. Moreover, it is proper to have
libraries of good and high standard with electricity, computers and all
other necessities and for them to be accessible to the public.

Therefore, there should be no difference between libraries in rural and
urban areas. Before democracy, there was no government department that
thought about building libraries in rural areas. And the apartheid
government refused to provide us with education and it always wanted to see
black people suffering. That government perceived black people as people
who only had to fetch water and gather firewood. The national Department of
Education has already started with its campaign known as Kha ri Gude, which
in Tshivenda simply means “Let us learn”. We are grateful to the two
Ministers and their departments for such initiatives. We wish that all
provinces could do the same. Thank you.]

                            FOOD PRICE INCREASES

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I want to
respond briefly to the statement by the hon Dlali. I think he is quite
correct when he emphasises that the question of food prices is a
multifaceted one, and that it requires of us a production response and one
which deals with enhancing capacity in our Department of Agriculture.

But I also just want to comment briefly on the point that he made about
food producers who conspire to exploit our people by fixing food prices. I
just want to say that we have noted from the work which is being done by
the Competition Commission that while we have uncovered collusive
behaviour, we have also found that this is continuing despite the findings
by the competition authorities.

I also just want to say that we will be coming to Parliament with
legislation which will contain proposals that are intended to deal with
continued collusive behaviour, and to tighten up some of the loopholes in
the existing legislation. Thank you very much.

                       CONGRATULATIONS TO HELEN ZILLE

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Deputy Speaker, I am sure it would be
churlish for the ANC not to also congratulate Helen Zille on one year as
leader of the Opposition and to wish her many more years as leader of the
Opposition. [Laughter.]

                ROLE OF ICT IN INCREASING INFORMATION ACCESS
                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Deputy Speaker, I would like to thank the
hon Makgate for highlighting the role that information communication
technology, ICT, plays in the lives of our people and the impact it can
have in improving those lives.

I also thank the hon member for informing the nation about the E-Cadre
Programme. I want to say that graduates that are recruited for this
programme are not only graduates from universities, but also graduates from
further education and training colleges. Given the fact that a lot of ICT
has gone digital, many of the FET colleges are able to produce the kinds of
people that can help us because those technologies have been made much
easier.

The programme is based on a spirit of volunteerism amongst the youth and we
hope that Members of Parliament here will assist us in monitoring those
programmes. We can also inform members that in the municipalities they have
started what we call “e-co-operatives” for young people, where they can
work with municipalities in making sure that assistance is given. We should
not underestimate this programme of the young people, because many of our
own people are not able to use these technologies and this would help.

With regard to the private sector doing more, the private sector is already
participating in an e-skills council with us in order to see how we can
improve the skills. Some of those so-called “co-operate institutions” they
have started need to be known by our people, such as: the Oracle Academy,
programmes under Hewlett Packard as well as the NIIT. But I thank the
member very much for having brought this to light in this meeting.

On the issue of information sharing, I would like to thank the member for
making sure that we highlight the need for information flow and the
accuracy of that information, and not only information flow to the people
but also from the people in doing our research. Those marginalised people
need to be heard from and also to be spoken to. Research does indeed help
us to accelerate our socioeconomic development.

As the member mentioned, the nature of the research is interdisciplinary,
because very often we stay in our own disciplines when research is done;
the doctors do one thing and the sociologists do another thing and the two
do not come together, and yet they are all very bound together. We must
link theory and practice. We really thank the hon member for having made
the statement. We will follow up the outcomes of this to see what we as
government can do to gain the benefits and meet the needs of all people,
not just some people, in our country. Thank you.

                   INFANT DEATHS CAUSED BY POLLUTED WATER

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Deputy Speaker, I would like to
comment on the statement by the hon Sibuyana around the deaths of children
in the Ukhahlamba District Municipality.

At the outset, on behalf of government, I would like to convey our
condolences to the families of the children who died in Ukhahlamba District
Municipality. We would like to assure the hon member that since the visit
of the department to the province and our meeting with the province and the
municipalities, plans are in place to ensure that there will be no further
fatalities in this regard.

I also just want to say that it is correct that at the time of the
incidents, the drinking water quality monitoring results in that area did
reveal some failures. Hon members will remember that when I reported
earlier on, I said that in the country we have a 94% success rate with
regard to drinking water quality. But there are these municipalities, which
comprise 6%, where we still have challenges. Ukhahlamba District
Municipality is one of them.

But if you look at the areas that are covered, the outbreak is not
localised. It is widespread around the district, so there is acceptance
that the water may have contributed to this, but the province has accepted
that there were probably many other reasons contributing to this. The water
is unprotected and dirty, there is poverty, and there are unhealthy living
conditions, including poor food storage, poor sanitation, poor refuse
collection and failing health services.

We are working with the municipality to ensure that we assist them with the
chlorination of water and we have also instructed the municipality to issue
boiling water notices to make sure that we curb any future recurrence.

We are looking at very strong measures, because we have been supporting
municipalities in the field of drinking water quality. But we are also
looking at strong measures that we can take against municipalities which do
not comply with their licences and the water services authorities
including, where necessary, the suspension or cancellation of licences
where municipalities are able but are not providing the necessary services.

At the same time, we are looking at measures to support deserving
municipalities, because municipalities are at different levels of capacity.
We are going to be tougher on those which can afford the services. In the
event of a serious shortage of skills - as we know, there is a serious
challenge of retention of people at this level - we need to come in and
support them before we apply these strong measures. I can assure the hon
member that we are doing everything we can. We have a team in place and we
are continuing with testing. Problems have been found, but since our
intervention we have had no further reports. But we will continuously
report to Parliament about this. Thank you.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: We thank the Ministers and Deputy Ministers for the
responses.

                    CORRECTIONAL SERVICES AMENDMENT BILL

    (Consideration of Bill and of Report of Portfolio Committee thereon)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move:

  That the Correctional Services Amendment Bill [B32D-2007] (National
  Assembly – sec 75) and Report of Portfolio Committee on Correctional
  Services (Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 20 March 2008, p
  511) be referred back to the Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services
  for further consideration and report.

Agreed to.

There was no debate.

The House adjourned at 15:16.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           THURSDAY, 20 MARCH 2008

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

    (a)    Report and Financial Statements  of  the  Represented  Political
         Parties’ Fund for 2006-2007, including the Report of  the  Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 129-2007].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee  on  Correctional  Services  on  the
    Correctional Services Amendment Bill [B32B-2007] (National  Assembly  –
    sec 75), dated 18 March 2008.

      The Portfolio Committee on Correctional  Services,  having  considered
      the Correctional Services Amendment Bill [B32B-2007] and the  proposed
      amendments of the  National  Council  of  Provinces  referred  to  the
      Committee (Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 19  February
      2008), reports the Bill with amendments [B32C-2007].
                           TUESDAY, 25 MARCH 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

1.    Membership of Committees

    (1)    The following changes  have  been  made  to  the  membership  of
         Portfolio Committees:


    Finance
    Appointed:   Sibhidla, Ms N
                  Madlala–Routledge, Ms N (Alt)
    Discharged:  Bhamjee, Mr YS

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Social Development

      (a)   Strategic Plan for the Department of Social Development for 2008-
          2011 [RP 37-2008].

      (b)   Strategic Plan for the  South  African  Social  Security  Agency
          (SASSA) for 2008-2011 [RP 25-2008].
      (c)   Strategic Plan for the National  Development  Agency  (NDA)  for
          2008-2011 [RP 40-2008].

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

      (a)   Additional Protocol on the Trade,  Development  and  Cooperation
          Agreement between the Republic of South Africa and  the  European
          Community and it’s Member States,  tabled  in  terms  of  section
          231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

      (b)   Explanatory Memorandum to the Additional Protocol on the  Trade,
          Development and Cooperation Agreement  between  the  Republic  of
          South Africa and the European Community and it’s Member States.

   3. The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

      (a)    Strategic  Plan  and  Budget  of  the  Ingonyama  Trust   Board
          2008/2009.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the  Standing  Committee  on  Private  Member’s  Legislative
    Proposals and Special Petitions on the legislative proposals  to  amend
    the Constitution in respect of Floor Crossing, 21 November 2007

The  Standing  Committee  on  Private  Member’s  Legislative  Proposals  and
Special Petitions, has considered the legislative proposal of  Mr  J  H  van
der Merwe, that the Constitution  be  amended  to  abolish  floor  crossing.
During the process of considering the proposal, the committee consulted  the
Department  of  Justice  and  Constitutional  Development;  the  Independent
Electoral Commission; the Portfolio Committee on Home  Affairs  and  various
political parties represented in Parliament.

The Committee established that the Department of Justice and  Constitutional
Development was also in the process  of  considering  the  issue  of  floor-
crossing legislation. In this regard  the  committee  became  aware  that  a
number of  pieces  of  legislation  would  need  amendment  to  achieve  the
objective of abolishing floor-crossing.

Besides amending the Constitution, a “membership bill” to effect  amendments
which would mainly be of a consequential  nature  and  which  would  emanate
from the Constitutional Amendment Bill, would need to be  considered.  These
relate to the following Acts:-

 1. Electoral Commission Act, 1996;
 2. Public Funding of Represented Political Parties Act, 1997;
 3. Determination of Delegates (National Council of Provinces) Act, 1998;
 4. Electoral Act, 1998; and
 5. Local Government: Municipal Structures Act, 1998

The committee was concerned that Mr Van  der  Merwe’s  legislative  proposal
only seek to effect amendments to the Constitution whereas other  pieces  of
legislation are also affected.
The committee is of the view that a  full  debate,  in  the  House,  may  be
needed on the issue.

In view of the  above  the  committee  recommends  that  permission  not  be
granted for Mr Van der Merwe to proceed with the legislative proposal.

Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the  Standing  Committee  on  Private  Members`  Legislative
    Proposals and Special Petitions on the Legislative  proposal  to  amend
    Constitution Eighteenth Amendment Bill, dated 18 March 2008

The  Standing  Committee  on  Private  Members`  Legislative  Proposals  and
Special Petitions, has considered  the  Legislative  proposal  by  Honorable
Prince Buthelezi to  amend  the  Constitution  in  respect  of  the  Current
Executive System, and has consulted with the Department Justice,  Department
of Public Service and Administration, National Treasury and the  Presidency.


The committee recommends that permission not be granted  to  the  member  to
proceed with the proposed legislation.

Report to be considered.

                          WEDNESDAY, 26 MARCH 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM  on  18  March  2008  in  terms  of  Joint  Rule  160(6)
         classified the following Bill as a section 75 Bill:

          a) Renaming of High Courts Bill [B 5 – 2008] (National Assembly –
             sec 75).

    (2)    The JTM  on  26  March  2008  in  terms  of  Joint  Rule  160(6)
         classified the following Bill as a section 75 Bill:
          a) Refugees Amendment Bill [B 11 – 2008] (National Assembly – sec
             75).

    (3)    The JTM  on  26  March  2008  in  terms  of  Joint  Rule  160(6)
         classified the following Bills as section 76 Bills:

          a) Tobacco Products Control Amendment Bill [B 7 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 76).

          b) Prevention and Treatment for Substance  Abuse  Bill  [B  12  –
             2008] (National Assembly – sec 76).

2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

      1) Submitted by the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs.
         (a)      Agricultural Debt Management Repeal Bill, 2008


         (b)      Land Use Management Bill, 2008


    Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs and
    the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs.

3.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)    Bill passed by National Council of Provinces on 26 March 2008:


          a) Division of Revenue Bill [B 4 – 2008] (National Assembly – sec
             76).

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Message from National Council of Provinces  to  National  Assembly  in
     respect of Bill passed by Council and sent back to Assembly


    (1)    Bill amended and passed by National Council of Provinces  on  26
         March 2008 and returned for concurrence:


         (a)      National Gambling Amendment Bill [B 31D – 2007]  (National
             Assembly – sec 76 (1)).
             The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Trade
             and Industry of the National Assembly.

      2) Bills, subject to proposed amendments, passed by  National  Council
         of Provinces on 26 March 2008 and transmitted for consideration  of
         Council’s proposed amendments:


         (a)      Local Government  Laws  Amendment  Bill  [B  28B  –  2007]
             (National Assembly – sec 75)  (for  proposed  amendments,  see
             Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 25 March  2008,
             p 515).


             The Bill has  been  referred  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
             Provincial and Local Government of the National Assembly for  a
             report on the amendments proposed by the Council.


         (b)      Prohibition or Restriction of Certain Conventional Weapons
             Bill [B 7B – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75) (for  proposed
             amendments, see Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports,
             18 March 2008, p 498).


             The Bill has  been  referred  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
             Defence of the National Assembly for a report on the amendments
             proposed by the Council.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

        1. The Minister of Transport

    (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Road  Traffic  Management
         Corporation for 2006-2007, including the  Report  of  the  Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
         2006-2007.


 2. The Minister of Science and Technology


    (a)    Strategic Plan for the Department of Science and Technology  for
         2008-2009.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.     Report  of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Housing  on  the   Housing
    Development Agency Bill [B 1- 2008] (National Assembly- sec 76),  dated
    26 March 2008:

         The Portfolio Committee on Housing, having considered  the  subject
         of the  Housing Development  Agency  Bill  [B  1-  2008]  (National
         Assembly-sec 76), referred  to  it  and  classified  by  the  Joint
         Tagging Mechanism as a section  76  Bill,  reports  the  Bill  with
         amendments [B 1A - 2008].

    Report to be considered.

                            MONDAY, 31 MARCH 2008
ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

      1) Financial Intelligence Centre Amendment Bill, 2008, submitted by
         the Minister of Finance. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and the Select Committee on Finance.

      2) Social Assistance Amendment Bill, 2008, submitted by the Minister
         for Social Development. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Social Development and the Select Committee on Social Services.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

        1. The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

    (a)    Strategic Plan for Ncera Farms (Pty) Ltd for 2008-2009  [RP  29-
         2008].

National Assembly
 1. The Speaker

    (a)    Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on  An  Assessment
         of   Professional   Ethics   in   the   Kwazulu-Natal    Provincial
         Administration – 2007 [RP 8-2008].

    (b)     Report  of  the  Public  Service  Commission   (PSC)   on   the
         Implementation  of  the  Batho  Pele  principle  of  Openness   and
         Transparency in the Public Service – February 2008 [RP 23-2008].

    (c)    Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the  Evaluation
         of the Training Needs of Senior Managers in  the  Public  Sector  –
         January 2008 [RP 16-2008].

                           WEDNESDAY, 2 APRIL 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6), classified the following
         Bills as section 75 Bills:

         (a)      Defence Amendment Bill [B 6 – 2008] (National  Assembly  –
             sec 75).
          b) Castle Management Act Repeal  Bill  [B  9  –  2008]  (National
             Assembly – sec 75).

    (2)    The JTM, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6), classified the Reform of
         Customary Law of Succession and Regulation of Related Matters  Bill
         [B 10 – 2008], introduced in the National Assembly, as a section 76
         Bill and as a Bill falling within the ambit of section 18(1)(a)  of
         the Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework Act, 2003  (Act
         No 41 of 2003).

2. Referral to Committees of papers tabled

      1) The Appropriation Bill [B 3-2008]  is  referred  to  the  following
         joint monitoring committees for consideration  in  terms  of  their
         mandate:


          a) Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality  of  Life
             and Status of Women; and


          b) Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality  of  Life
             and Status of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons.

      2) The following paper is referred to the Joint  Monitoring  Committee
         on Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Women and the Joint
         Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life  and  Status
         of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons for  consideration  of  the
         relevant programmes of the Memorandum:


         (a)       Memorandum  on  Vote  No  1  –  “The  Presidency”,   Main
             Estimates, 2008-2009.
National Assembly

Referral to Committees of papers tabled

1.    The Appropriation  Bill  [B  3-2008]  is  referred  to  the  following
    portfolio committees for consideration and report on the relevant parts
    of the Schedule in terms of their mandate:

      a) Agriculture and Land Affairs;
      b) Arts and Culture;
      c) Communications;
      d) Correctional Services;
      e) Defence;
      f) Education;
      g) Environmental Affairs and Tourism;
      h) Foreign Affairs;
      i) Health;
      j) Home Affairs;
      k) Housing;
      l) Justice and Constitutional Development;
      m) Labour;
      n) Minerals and Energy;
      o) Provincial and Local Government;
      p) Public Enterprises;
      q) Public Service and Administration;
      r) Public Works;
      s) Safety and Security;
      t) Science and Technology;
      u) Social Development;
      v) Sport and Recreation;
      w) Trade and Industry;
      x) Transport; and
      y) Water Affairs and Forestry.

2.    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on  Foreign
    Affairs for consideration and report:

    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 3 -  "Foreign  Affairs",  Main  Estimates,
        2008-2009.

3.    The following paper is referred to the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Home
    Affairs for consideration and report:

    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 4 - "Home Affairs", Main Estimates,  2008-
        2009.

4.    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee  on  Public
    Works for consideration and report:

    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 5 - "Public Works", Main Estimates,  2008-
        2009.

5.    The following papers  are  referred  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
    Communications for consideration and report:
    (a)    Memorandum  on  Vote  No  6  -  "Government  Communications  and
         Information System", Main Estimates, 2008-2009;


    (b)    Memorandum on Vote No 24  -  "Communications",  Main  Estimates,
        2008-2009.

6.    The following papers  are  referred  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
    Finance for consideration and report:

    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 7 - "National Treasury",  Main  Estimates,
        2008-2009;
    (b)    Memorandum on Vote No  11  -  "Statistics  South  Africa",  Main
        Estimates, 2008-2009.

7.    The following papers  are  referred  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
    Public Service and Administration for consideration and report:

    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 8 - "Public Service  and  Administration",
         Main Estimates, 2008-2009;
    (b)    Memorandum on Vote No 9  -  "Public  Service  Commission",  Main
         Estimates, 2008-2009;
    (c)    Memorandum on Vote No 10 - "South African Management Development
         Institute", Main Estimates, 2008-2009.



8.    The following paper is referred to the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Arts
    and Culture for consideration and report:

    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 12 - "Arts and Culture",  Main  Estimates,
         2008-2009.

9.    The  following  paper  is  referred  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
    Education for consideration and report:

    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 13 - "Education",  Main  Estimates,  2008-
         2009.



10.   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee  on  Health
    for consideration and report:

    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 14 - "Health", Main Estimates, 2008-2009.


11.   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee  on  Labour
    for consideration and report.

    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 15 - "Labour", Main Estimates, 2008-2009.

12.   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee  on  Social
    Development for consideration and report:


    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 16 - "Social Development", Main Estimates,
         2008-2009.

13.   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio  Committee  on  Sport
      and Recreation for consideration and report:


    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 17 - "Sport and Recreation South  Africa",
         Main Estimates, 2008-2009.
14.   The  following  paper  is  referred  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
    Correctional Services for consideration and report:
    (a)    Memorandum  on  Vote  No  18  -  "Correctional  Services",  Main
         Estimates, 2008-2009.

15.   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on  Defence
    for consideration and report:

    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 19 - "Defence", Main Estimates, 2008-2009.




16.   The following papers  are  referred  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
    Safety and Security for consideration and report:

    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 20 - "Independent Complaints Directorate",
         Main Estimates, 2008-2009;

    (b)     Memorandum  on  Vote  No  22  -  "Safety  and  Security”,  Main
         Estimates, 2008-2009.

17.   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on  Justice
    and Constitutional Development for consideration and report:

    (a)     Memorandum  on  Vote  No  21  -  "Justice  and   Constitutional
         Development", Main Estimates, 2008-2009.

18.   The following papers  are  referred  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
    Agriculture and Land Affairs for consideration and report:

    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 23 - "Agriculture", Main Estimates,  2008-
         2009;
    (b)    Memorandum on Vote No 27 - "Land Affairs", Main Estimates, 2008-
         2009.

19.   The  following  paper  is  referred  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
    Environmental Affairs and Tourism for consideration and report:

    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 25 - "Environmental Affairs and  Tourism",
         Main Estimates, 2008-2009.

20.   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on  Housing
    for consideration and report:

    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 26 - "Housing", Main Estimates, 2008-2009.



21.   The  following  paper  is  referred  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
    Minerals and Energy for consideration and report:

    (a)     Memorandum  on  Vote  No  28  -  "Minerals  and  Energy",  Main
         Estimates, 2008-2009.

22.   The  following  paper  is  referred  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
    Provincial and Local Government for consideration and report:

    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 29 - "Provincial  and  Local  Government",
         Main Estimates, 2008-2009.
23.   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee  on  Public
    Enterprises for consideration and report:
    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 30 - "Public Enterprises", Main Estimates,
         2008-2009;

24.   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on  Science
    and Technology for consideration and report:

      (a)   Memorandum on Vote  No  31  -  "Science  and  Technology",  Main
           Estimates, 2008-2009;

25.   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio  Committee  on  Trade
    and Industry for consideration and report:

    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 32 - "Trade and Industry", Main Estimates,
         2008-2009.

26.   The  following  paper  is  referred  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
    Transport for consideration and report:

    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 33 - "Transport",  Main  Estimates,  2008-
         2009.

27.   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio  Committee  on  Water
    Affairs and Forestry for consideration and report:

    (a)    Memorandum on Vote No 34 - "Water Affairs  and  Forestry",  Main
         Estimates, 2008-2009.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
        1. The Minister in The Presidency


    (a)    Strategic  Plan  of  Government  Communication  and  Information
         System (GCIS) for the Medium-Term Period 2008-2011.

National Assembly

               1. The Speaker

    (a)    Request to the National Assembly, dated 20 February  2008,  from
         the Minister of Communications to submit a shortlist of  candidates
         for appointment to the Council of  the  Independent  Communications
         Authority of South Africa (Icasa) in terms  of  section  5  of  the
         Independent Communications Authority of South Africa Act (Act 13 of
         2000).


         Referred  to  the  Portfolio  Committee   on   Communications   for
         consideration and report.

                            MONDAY, 7 APRIL 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159
      1) Medical Schemes Amendment Bill, 2008, submitted by the Minister  of
         Health. Referred to the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Health  and  the
         Select Committee on Social Services.


National Assembly

Referral to Committees of papers tabled

1.    The  following  paper  is  referred  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
    Finance:



    (a)    Government Notice No  99  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
        30715,  dated  31  January  2008:   Determination   of   limit   of
        remuneration for purpose of determination of contribution in  terms
        of section 6 of the Unemployment Insurance Contributions Act,  2002
        (Act No 4 of 2002).


2.    The following papers  are  referred  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
    Justice and Constitutional Development:



    (a)    Proclamation No R.37 published in Government Gazette  No  30521,
        dated 27 November 2007: Referral of  matters  of  existing  special
        investigating unit and special tribunal in  terms  of  the  Special
        Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No  74  of
        1996).




    (b)    Proclamation No R.38 published in Government Gazette  No  30521,
        dated 27 November 2007: Referral of  matters  of  existing  special
        investigating unit and special tribunal in  terms  of  the  Special
        Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No  74  of
        1996).

    (c)    Proclamation No R.39 published in Government Gazette  No  30521,
        dated 27 November 2007: Referral of  matters  of  existing  special
        investigating unit and special tribunal in  terms  of  the  Special
        Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No  74  of
        1996).




    (d)    Proclamation No R.40 published in Government  Gazette  No  30521
        dated 27 November 2007: Referral of  matters  of  existing  special
        investigating unit and special tribunal in  terms  of  the  Special
        Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No  74  of
        1996).




    (e)    Proclamation No R.41 published in Government Gazette  No  30521,
        dated 27 November 2007: Referral of  matters  of  existing  special
        investigating unit and special tribunal in  terms  of  the  Special
        Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No  74  of
        1996).




    (f)    Proclamation No R.44 published in Government Gazette  No  30527,
        dated 28 November 2007: Referral of  matters  of  existing  special
        investigating unit and special tribunal in  terms  of  the  Special
        Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No  74  of
        1996).




    (g)    Proclamation No R.45 published in Government Gazette  No  30552,
        dated 7 December 2007: Referral  of  matters  of  existing  special
        investigating unit and special tribunal in  terms  of  the  Special
        Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No  74  of
        1996).




    (h)    Proclamation No R.17 published in Government Gazette  No  30664,
        dated 11 January 2008: Amendment of Proclamation in  terms  of  the
        Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No
        74 of 1996).

3.    The following papers  are  referred  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
    Finance for consideration:

    (a)    Government Notice No 128  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
        30730, dated 5 February 2008: The  dimension  of,  design  for  and
        compilation of the year 2008 Natura pure gold coin series in  terms
        of the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).


    (b)    Government Notice No 129  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
        30730, dated 5 February 2008: The  dimension  of,  design  for  and
        compilation of the year 2008 Protea coin series  in  terms  of  the
        South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).


    (c)    Government Notice No 130  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
        30730, dated 5 February 2008: The  dimension  of,  design  for  and
        compilation of the year 2008 Fifa 2010 coin series in terms of  the
        South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).


    (d)    Government Notice No 131  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
        30730 dated 5 February 2008:  The  dimension  of,  design  for  and
        compilation of the year 2008 R2 pure gold coin series in  terms  of
        the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).


    (e)    Government Notice No 132  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
        30730, dated 5 February 2008: The  dimension  of,  design  for  and
        compilation of the year 2008 sterling silver coin series  in  terms
        of the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).


    (f)    Government Notice No 133  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
        30730, dated 5 February 2008: The  dimension  of,  design  for  and
        compilation of the year 2008 Crown size  and  2½c  sterling  silver
        coin series in terms of the South African Reserve  Bank  Act,  1989
        (Act No 90 of 1989).

4.    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on  Justice
    and Constitutional Development for consideration and report:


    (a)    Report on the suspension from office of Mr S  P  Zwelibanzi,  an
        additional magistrate at NgQamakwe, in terms of section 13(4)(a)(i)
        of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).

5.    The following papers  are  referred  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
    Finance for consideration:


     a) Report of the Registrar of Short-term Insurance for 2006.
     b) Report of the Registrar of Long-term Insurance for 2006.

6.    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee  on  Public
    Enterprises for consideration:


     a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Public Enterprises for 2008  to
        2011.

7.    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee  on  Arts
    and Culture for consideration and report. The Report  of  the  Auditor-
    General on the Financial Statements is referred  to  the  Committee  on
    Public Accounts for consideration:

      a) Report and Financial Statements of the Performing  Arts  Centre  of
         the Free State (Pacofs) for 2006-2007, including the Report of  the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007.
      b) Report and Financial Statements of the National Archivist  and  the
         National Archives Advisory Council for 2004-2005.


8.    The following papers  are  referred  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
    Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and report:

     a) Draft Rules of Procedure for Applications to Court in terms of  the
        Promotion of Access to Information Act, 2000 (Act No 2 of 2000).
     b) Draft Amendments to the High Courts and Magistrates’  Courts  Rules
        in accordance with section  7(2)  (c)  of  the  Criminal  Procedure
        Amendment Act, 2003 (Act No 42 of 2003).



9.    The following papers  are  referred  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
    Public Service and Administration for consideration:


      a) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC)  on  an  Overview  on
         Financial Misconduct for the 2006-2007  financial  year  –  January
         2008 [RP 5-2008].
      b) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on  the  Indebtedness
         of Public Servants – November 2007 [RP 7-2008].
      c) Fourth Consolidated Public Service Monitoring and Evaluation Report
         of the Public Service Commission (PSC)  –  October  2007  [RP  227-
         2007].


      d) Report of the Public Service  Commission  (PSC)  on  the  Audit  on
         Vacancy Rates in National and Provincial Departments – October 2007
         [RP 232-2007].
      e) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the Evaluation  of
         the Batho Pele Principle of Value for Money in the Public Service –
         August 2007 [RP 235-2007].
      f) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the Evaluation  of
         the Implementation of the Batho Pele Principle  of  Consultation  –
         October 2007 [RP 237-2007].

10.   The following papers  are  referred  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
    Agriculture and Land Affairs for consideration:


      a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Land Affairs for 2008 to 2011.
      b) Strategic Plan of the Department of Agriculture for 2008-09 to 2010-
         11.

11.   The following papers  are  referred  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
    Environmental Affairs and Tourism:


      a) Government Notice No  R.137  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
         30739, dated  8  February  2008:  Commencement  of  Bioprospecting,
         Access and Benefit-sharing  Regulations,  2008,  in  terms  of  the
         National Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004  (Act  No
         10 of 2004).
      b) Government Notice No  R.138  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
         30739, dated 8 February 2008: Regulations on Bioprospecting, Access
         and  Benefit-sharing  in  terms  of  the   National   Environmental
         Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of 2004).

      c) Government Notice No  R.149  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
         30739, dated 8 February 2008:  Notice  of  exemption  in  terms  of
         section 86 of the National Environmental  Management:  Biodiversity
         Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of 2004).
      d) General Notice No 246 published in  Government  Gazette  No  30767,
         dated 11 February 2008: Regulations:  Fees  for  the  provision  of
         aviation meteorological services in  terms  of  the  South  African
         Weather Service Act, 2001 (Act No 8 of 2001).
      e) General Notice No 253 published in  Government  Gazette  No  30773,
         dated 13 February 2008:  Regulating  Committee  for  Meteorological
         Services: Nominations for the appointment of  suitable  persons  as
         members in terms of the South African  Weather  Service  Act,  2001
         (Act No 8 of 2001).

 12. The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee  on  Foreign
     Affairs for consideration:

      a) Strategic plan of the Department of Foreign Affairs for 2008-2011.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister in The Presidency

    (a)    Strategic Plan of the Media  Development  and  Diversity  Agency
         (MDDA) for 2008-2011.

               2. The Minister of Education
    (a)    Strategic Plan of the Department of Education for 2008-2012  and
         the Operational Plans of the Department of Education for 2008/9.

               3. The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

    (a)    Government Notice No R341 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
         30904 dated 28 March 2008: Regulations for the prohibition  of  the
         use, manufacturing, import and  export  of  asbestos  and  asbestos
         containing materials, in terms of  the  Environmental  Conservation
         Act, 1989 (Act No 73 of 1989).

    (b)    Government Notice No R343 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
         30907 dated 28 March 2008: Amendment of regulations in terms of the
         Marine Living Resources Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of 1998).


               4. The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)     Report  and  Financial  Statements  of  the  Small   Enterprise
         Development Agency (SEDA) for 2006-2007.

National Assembly

 1. The Speaker

    (a)     The President of the Republic submitted  the  following  letter
        dated 28 March  2008  to  the  Speaker  of  the  National  Assembly
        informing  Members  of  the  Assembly  of  the  extension  of   the
        employment of the South  African  National  Defence  Force  in  the
        Democratic Republic of Congo, for a service in  fulfilment  of  the
        International Obligations of the Republic of South  Africa  towards
        the Democratic Republic of Congo:


        EXTENSION OF EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE
        IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO, FOR SERVICE IN  FULFILMENT  OF
        THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS  OF  THE  REPUBLIC  OF  SOUTH  AFRICA
        TOWARDS THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO


        This serves to inform the National Assembly that I have  authorised
        the extension of employment of the South African  National  Defence
        Force (SANDF) personnel to the Democratic Republic of Congo  (DRC),
        in fulfilment of the international obligations of the  Republic  of
        South Africa towards the DRC, in  assisting  with  integration  and
        training of the DRC armed Forces.


        This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution  of  the  Republic  of  South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002).


        A total of 28 SANDF members were employed in the DRC  on  30  March
        2007 as military observes. The term of employment of these  members
        will on 31 March 2008. The mission of the SANDF in the DRC  is  not
        yet completed. The employment of the SANDF members is now  extended
        until 31 March 2009.


        I will communicate this report to members of the  National  Council
        of Provinces, and wish to  request  that  you  bring  the  contents
        hereof to the attention of the National Assembly.


        signed
        TM Mbeki

    (b)     The President of the Republic submitted  the  following  letter
        dated 28 March  2008  to  the  Speaker  of  the  National  Assembly
        informing  Members  of  the  Assembly  of  the  extension  of   the
        employment of the South  African  National  Defence  Force  in  the
        Darfur  Region  of  Sudan,  for  service  in  fulfilment   of   the
        International Obligations of the Republic of South  Africa  towards
        the African Union and the United Nations:


        EXTENSION OF EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE
        IN THE DARFUR REGION OF SUDAN, FOR SERVICE  IN  FULFILMENT  OF  THE
        INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH  AFRICA  TOWARDS
        THE AFRICAN UNION AND THE UNITED NATIONS


        This serves to inform the National Assembly that I have  authorised
        the extension of employment of the South African  National  Defence
        Force  (SANDF)  personnel  in  the  Darfur  region  of  Sudan,   in
        fulfilment of the international  obligations  of  the  Republic  of
        South Africa towards the African Union (AU) and the United  Nations
        (UN), as part of the AU/UN Hybrid Operation in the Darfur region of
        Sudan.


        This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution  of  the  Republic  of  South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002).


        A total of 800 SANDF members were employed in the Darfur Region  of
        Sudan as part of the AU/UN  Hybrid  operation.  The  employment  of
        these members will expire on 31 March 2008. The  AU/UN  mission  in
        the Darfur Region of Sudan is not yet completed. The employment  of
        the SANDF members is now extended until 31 March 2009.  The  number
        of the SANDF members employed will also be increased to be 850.


        I will communicate this report to members of the  National  Council
        of Provinces, and wish to  request  that  you  bring  the  contents
        hereof to the attention of the National Assembly.


        signed
        TM Mbeki

    (c)     The President of the Republic submitted  the  following  letter
        dated 28 March  2008  to  the  Speaker  of  the  National  Assembly
        informing  Members  of  the  Assembly  of  the  extension  of   the
        employment of the South  African  National  Defence  Force  in  the
        Central  African  Republic,  for  service  in  fulfilment  of   the
        International Obligations of the Republic of South  Africa  towards
        the Central African Republic:


        EXTENSION OF EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE
        IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO, FOR SERVICE IN  FULFILMENT  OF
        THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS  OF  THE  REPUBLIC  OF  SOUTH  AFRICA
        TOWARDS THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO


        This serves to inform the National Assembly that I have  authorised
        the extension of employment of the South African  National  Defence
        Force (SANDF) personnel in the Central African Republic  (CAR),  in
        fulfilment of the international  obligations  of  the  Republic  of
        South Africa towards the CAR, to assist with the capacity  building
        of CAR Defence Force.


        This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution  of  the  Republic  of  South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002).


        A total of 85 SANDF members were employed in the CAR to assist with
        the capacity building of the CAR Defence Force. The  employment  of
        these members will expire on  31  March  2008.  The  South  African
        mission in the CAR is not yet  completed.  The  employment  of  the
        SANDF members is now extended until 31 March 2009.


        I will communicate this report to members of the  National  Council
        of Provinces, and wish to  request  that  you  bring  the  contents
        hereof to the attention of the National Assembly.


        signed
        TM Mbeki

    (d)     The President of the Republic submitted  the  following  letter
        dated 28 March  2008  to  the  Speaker  of  the  National  Assembly
        informing  Members  of  the  Assembly  of  the  extension  of   the
        employment of the South African National Defence Force  in  Uganda,
        for service in fulfilment of the International Obligations  of  the
        Republic of South Africa towards the African Union:


        EXTENSION OF EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE
        IN  UGANDA,  FOR  SERVICE  IN  FULFILMENT  OF   THE   INTERNATIONAL
        OBLIGATIONS OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH  AFRICA  TOWARDS  THE  AFRICAN
        UNION


        This serves to inform the National Assembly that I have  authorised
        the extension of employment of the South African  National  Defence
        Force  (SANDF)  personnel  to  Uganda,   in   fulfilment   of   the
        international obligations of the Republic of South  Africa  towards
        the African Union, as part of the African Union Observer Mission in
        Uganda.


        This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution  of  the  Republic  of  South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002).


        A total of 5 SANDF members were employed in Uganda as part  of  the
        African Union Observer Mission in Uganda. The employment  of  these
        members will expire on 31 March 2008.  The  African  Union  mission
        Uganda is not yet completed. The employment of the SANDF members is
        now extended until 31 March 2009.


        I will communicate this report to members of the  National  Council
        of Provinces, and wish to  request  that  you  bring  the  contents
        hereof to the attention of the National Assembly.


        signed
        TM Mbeki

    (e)     The President of the Republic submitted  the  following  letter
        dated 28 March  2008  to  the  Speaker  of  the  National  Assembly
        informing  Members  of  the  Assembly  of  the  extension  of   the
        employment of the South African National Defence Force in  Ethiopia
        and  Eritrea,  for  service  in  fulfilment  of  the  International
        Obligations of the Republic of South  Africa  towards  the  African
        Union and the United Nations:


        EXTENSION OF EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE
        IN  ETHIOPIA  AND  ERITREA,  FOR  SERVICE  IN  FULFILMENT  OF   THE
        INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH  AFRICA  TOWARDS
        THE AFRICAN UNION AND THE UNITED NATIONS


        This serves to inform the National Assembly that I have  authorised
        the extension of employment of the South African  National  Defence
        Force (SANDF) personnel in Ethiopia and Eritrea, in  fulfilment  of
        the international obligations  of  the  Republic  of  South  Africa
        towards the African Union (AU) and  the  United  Nations  (UN),  to
        participate in the AU/UN mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea.


        This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution  of  the  Republic  of  South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002).


        A total of 10 SANDF members were employed in Ethiopia  and  Eritrea
        as  part  of  the  AU/UN  mission  in  Ethiopia  and  Eritrea.  The
        employment of these members will expire on 31 March 2008. The AU/UN
        mission  in  Ethiopia  and  Eritrea  is  not  yet  completed.   The
        employment of the SANDF members is  now  extended  until  31  March
        2009.


        I will communicate this report to members of the  National  Council
        of Provinces, and wish to  request  that  you  bring  the  contents
        hereof to the attention of the National Assembly.


        signed
        TM Mbeki

    (f)     The President of the Republic submitted  the  following  letter
        dated 28 March  2008  to  the  Speaker  of  the  National  Assembly
        informing  Members  of  the  Assembly  of  the  extension  of   the
        employment of the South African National Defence  Force  in  Nepal,
        for service in fulfilment of the International Obligations  of  the
        Republic of South Africa towards the United Nations:


        EXTENSION OF EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE
        IN  NEPAL,  FOR  SERVICE  IN  FULFILMENT   OF   THE   INTERNATIONAL
        OBLIGATIONS OF THE REPUBLIC OF  SOUTH  AFRICA  TOWARDS  THE  UNITED
        NATIONS
        This serves to inform the National Assembly that I have  authorised
        the extension of employment of the South African  National  Defence
        Force  (SANDF)  personnel  to   Nepal,   in   fulfilment   of   the
        international obligations of the Republic of South  Africa  towards
        the United Nations, as part of the United Nations Political Mission
        in Nepal.


        This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution  of  the  Republic  of  South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002).


        A total of 5 SANDF members  were  employed  in  Nepal  as  military
        observes. The employment of employment of these members will expire
        on 31 March 2008. The  United  Nations  has  extended  its  mission
        Nepal. The employment of the SANDF members is now extended until 31
        March 2009.


        I will communicate this report to members of the  National  Council
        of Provinces, and wish to  request  that  you  bring  the  contents
        hereof to the attention of the National Assembly.


        signed
        TM Mbeki

    (g)     The President of the Republic submitted  the  following  letter
        dated 28 March  2008  to  the  Speaker  of  the  National  Assembly
        informing  Members  of  the  Assembly  of  the  extension  of   the
        employment of the South  African  National  Defence  Force  in  the
        Democratic Republic of Congo, for a service in  fulfilment  of  the
        International Obligations of the Republic of South  Africa  towards
        the United Nations:
        EXTENSION OF EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE
        IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO, FOR SERVICE IN  FULFILMENT
        OF THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS OF THE REPUBLIC  OF  SOUTH  AFRICA
        TOWARDS THE UNITED NATIONS


        This serves to inform the National Assembly that I have  authorised
        the extension of employment of the South African  National  Defence
        Force (SANDF) personnel to the Democratic Republic of Congo  (DRC),
        in fulfilment of the international obligations of the  Republic  of
        South Africa towards the United Nations, for participating in peace
        mission in the DRC.


        This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution  of  the  Republic  of  South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002).


        A total of 1252 SANDF members were employed in the DRC as  military
        observes. The employment of these members will on  31  March  2008.
        The United Nations mission in the DRC is  not  yet  completed.  The
        employment of the SANDF members is  now  extended  until  31  March
        2009.


        I will communicate this report to members of the  National  Council
        of Provinces, and wish to  request  that  you  bring  the  contents
        hereof to the attention of the National Assembly.


        signed


        TM Mbeki

                           WEDNESDAY, 9 APRIL 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) Division of Revenue Bill [B 4 – 2008] – Act No 2 of 2008  (assented
         to and signed by President on 31 March 2008).

2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)    Traditional Courts Bill, 2008, submitted  by  the  Minister  for
         Justice and Constitutional Development. Referred to  the  Portfolio
         Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development and the  Select
         Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs.


3.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM on 7 April 2008 in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified
         the following Bill as a section 77 Bill:
          a) Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 13 – 2008] (National  Assembly
             – sec 77).


    (2)    The JTM on 7 April 2008 in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified
         the following Bill as a section 75 Bill:


          a) Taxation Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 14  –  2008]  (National
             Assembly – sec 75).


4.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development
          a) Traditional Courts Bill [B 15 –  2008]  (National  Assembly  –
             proposed sec 76) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
             of its introduction published in Government Gazette  No  30902
             of 27 March 2008.]


             Introduction  and  referral  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
             Justice  and  Constitutional  Development  of   the   National
             Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint  Tagging  Mechanism
             (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of  the  Bill  may  be  submitted  to  the  JTM  within  three
             parliamentary working days.


4.    Referral of Bill to National House of Traditional Leaders


    The Secretary to Parliament has, in accordance with  section  18(1)  of
    the Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework Act, 2003 (Act  No.
    41 of 2003), referred the Reform of Customary  Law  of  Succession  and
    Regulation of Related Matters Bill [B 10 – 2008] (National  Assembly  –
    sec 76) to the National  House  of  Traditional  Leaders,  which  must,
    within 30 days from the date of the referral (8 April 2008),  make  any
    comments it wishes to make.

                           TUESDAY, 15 APRIL 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Public Works


        (a)      Expropriation Bill [B 16  –  2008]  (National  Assembly  –
             proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
             of its introduction published in Government Gazette  No  30963
             of 11 April 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Public
             Works of the National Assembly, as well  as  referral  to  the
             Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in  terms  of
             Joint Rule 160.
             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of  the  Bill  may  be  submitted  to  the  JTM  within  three
             parliamentary working days.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister of Finance

    (a)    Government Notice No R.250 published in  Government  Gazette  No
         30826 dated 29 February  2008:  Amendment  of  Schedule  No  1  (No
         1/1/1356) in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act  No  91
         of 1964).

    (b)    Government Notice No R.254 published in  Government  Gazette  No
         30829 dated 7 March 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No  1/1/1358)
         in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

    (c)    Government Notice No R.255 published in  Government  Gazette  No
         30829 dated 7 March 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No 3/631)  in
         terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

    (d)    Government Notice No R.256 published in  Government  Gazette  No
         30829 dated 7 March 2008: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No  1/1/1357)
         in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

    (e)    Government Notice No R.302 published in  Government  Gazette  No
         30875  dated  20  March   2008:   Exchange   Control   Regulations:
         Appointment of  an  authorised  dealer  in  foreign  exchange  with
         limited authority: Albaraka Bank limited, in terms of the  Exchange
         Control Regulations.

 2. The Minister for Public Enterprises

    (a)     Amendment to Eskom's pricing  structure,  tabled  in  terms  of
        section 42(4) of the Local Government: Municipal Finance Management
        Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003), and supporting documents required in
        terms of section 42(3) of the same Act.

 3. The Minister of Safety and Security

    (a)    Strategic Plan of the Independent Complaints  Directorate  (ICD)
         for 2008-2011.

 4. The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)    Memorandum  of  Understanding  between  the  Government  of  the
         Republic of  South  Africa  and  the  Government  of  the  People’s
         Republic  of  China  on  Promoting  Bilateral  Trade  and  Economic
         Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
         1996.

    (b)     Explanatory  Memorandum  to  the  Memorandum  of  Understanding
         between the Government of the Republic  of  South  Africa  and  the
         Government of the People’s Republic of China on Promoting Bilateral
         Trade and Economic Cooperation.

 5. The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

    a) Report and Financial Statements of Namakwa Water for the year  ended
       30 June 2007, including the Report of the  Independent  Auditors  on
       the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2007.


Committee reports


National Assembly and National Council of Province

CREDA PLEASE SCAN IN PAGES 549-560

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Taxation Laws
   Amendment Bill [B13-2008] (National Assembly- sec 77, dated 25 March
   2008.

   The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered and examined the
   Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 13– 2008] (National Assembly – sec 77),
   referred to it, and classified by the JTM as a Money Bill, reports that
   it has agreed to the Bill.

   Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Taxation Laws
   Second Amendment Bill [B14-2008] (National Assembly- sec 75), dated 25
   March 2008.

   The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered and examined the
   Taxation Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 14– 2008] (National Assembly – sec
   75), referred to it, and classified by the JTM as a sec 75 Bill, reports
   the Bill without amendments.

   Report to be considered

                            MONDAY, 21 APRIL 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

   (1)      Transport Agencies General Laws Amendment Bill [B 27B—2007]—Act
       No 42 of 2007 (assented to and signed by President on 15 April
       2008).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Defence


   (a)      Strategic Business Plan of the Department of Defence for 2008/09
       to 2010/11.
2.    The Minister of Finance

   (a)      Government Notice No 355 published in Government Gazette No
       30915 dated 31 March 2008: Re-allocation of 2007/08 Municipal
       Infrastructure Grant in terms of the Division of Revenue Act, 2007
       (Act No 1 of 2007).


   (b)      Government Notice No 384 published in Government Gazette No
       30941 dated 1 April 2008: Notice setting out excluded arrangements
       for purposes of section 80 N (4) of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No
       58 of 1962).


   (c)      Proclamation No 384 published in Government Gazette No 30941
       dated 1 April 2008: Fixing of date on which section 5(1) and 6(1)
       shall come into operation in terms of the Revenue Laws Second
       Amendment Act, 2006 (Act No 21 of 2006).

3.    The Minister of Transport

   (a)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Transport for 2008-2011 [RP
       45-2008].

4.    The Minister in The Presidency

   (a)      Strategic Plan of the International Marketing Council (IMC) for
       2008/9-2010/11.

5.    The Minister of Safety and Security

   (a)      Annual Performance Plan for the South African Police Service for
       2008/2009 [RP 35-2008].
National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

   (a)      Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the State of
       the Public Service for 2008 [RP 22-2008].

                          WEDNESDAY, 23 APRIL 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills

     (1)    The Minister of Social Development


         (a)      Social Assistance Amendment Bill [B 17 –  2008]  (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 76) [Explanatory summary of  Bill  and
             prior notice  of  its  introduction  published  in  Government
             Gazette No 30891 of 28 March 2008].


             Introduction in the National  Assembly  and  referral  to  the
             Portfolio Committee on  Social  Development  of  the  National
             Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint  Tagging  Mechanism
             (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of  the  Bill  may  be  submitted  to  the  JTM  within  three
             parliamentary working days.

                           THURSDAY, 24 APRIL 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)    General Financial Services Laws Amendment Bill, 2008,  submitted
         by the Minister for Finance. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and the Select Committee on Finance.

2.    Translations of Bills submitted

      1) The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


          a) Umthetho Oyilwayo Wokuguqulwa Komthetho  Wesintu  Wobundlalifa
             Nokulawulwa Kwemicimbi Ehlobene Nawo [UO 10 – 2008]  (National
             Assembly – sec 76).


         This is the official translation into isiXhosa  of  the  Reform  of
         Customary Law of Succession and Regulation of Related Matters  Bill
         [B 10 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 76).


          b) Umtsetfosivivinyo Wekuguculwa Kwemtsetfo Wesintfu Webundlalifa
             Kanye Nekuphatfwa Kwemitsetfo Lehambisana Nawo [Um 10 –  2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 76).


         This is the official translation into  siSwati  of  the  Reform  of
         Customary Law of Succession and Regulation of Related Matters  Bill
         [B 10 – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 76).

TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

    (a)     Report on the provisional suspension  of  a  magistrate:  Ms  A
        Bacharam, an  additional  magistrate  at  Scottburgh  in  terms  of
        section 13(3)(a) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).

    (b)     Report on the  confirmation  of  provisional  suspension  of  a
        magistrate:  Mr  X  R  I  Masimini,  an  additional  magistrate  at
        Queenstown in terms of section 13(4)(a)  of  the  Magistrates  Act,
        1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).

National Assembly

                 1. The Speaker

    (a)     The Acting President of the Republic  submitted  the  following
        letter dated 15 April 2008 to the Speaker of the National  Assembly
        informing  Members  of  the  Assembly  of  the  extension  of   the
        employment of the South  African  National  Defence  Force  in  the
        Central  African  Republic,  for  service  in  fulfilment  of   the
        International Obligations of the Republic of South  Africa  towards
        the Central African Republic:


        EXTENSION OF EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE
        IN THE CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC, FOR SERVICE IN FULFILMENT  OF  THE
        INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH  AFRICA  TOWARDS
        THE CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC


        This serves to inform the National Assembly that I have  authorised
        the extension of employment of the South African  National  Defence
        Force (SANDF) personnel in the Central African Republic  (CAR),  in
        fulfilment of the international  obligations  of  the  Republic  of
        South Africa towards the CAR, to provide security to the  President
        of the CAR.


        This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution  of  the  Republic  of  South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002).


        A total of 85 SANDF members were employed in the CAR to assist with
        the capacity building of the  CAR  Defence  Force  and  to  provide
        security to the President of the CAR. It was initially thought that
        the  deployment  of  the  SANDF  protection  task  force  would  be
        completed by end of February 2008. After  the  review  of  security
        situation in CAR it became necessary that the  protection  services
        be extended extend until 31 July 2008 and to have an additional  15
        SANDF members employed.


        I will communicate this report to members of the  National  Council
        of Provinces and the Chairperson of the Joint Standing Committee on
        Defence, and wish to request that you bring the contents hereof  to
        the attention of the National Assembly.
        Regards


        signed
        P MLAMBO-NGCUKA
        ACTING PRESIDENT

                           TUESDAY, 29 APRIL 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Finance


          a) Financial Intelligence Centre Amendment Bill  [B  18  –  2008]
             (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary  of
             Bill  and  prior  notice  of  its  introduction  published  in
             Government Gazette No 30917 of 4 April 2008.]


             Introduction  and  referral  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
             Finance of the National Assembly, as well as referral  to  the
             Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in  terms  of
             Joint Rule 160.
             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of  the  Bill  may  be  submitted  to  the  JTM  within  three
             parliamentary working days.

2.    Translations of Bills submitted

                      1) The Minister of Defence


          a) Wetsontwerp op die Verbod  op  of  die  Beperking  van  Sekere
             Konvensionele Wapens [W 7 – 2007]  (National  Assembly  –  sec
             75).


         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the  Prohibition
         or Restriction of Certain Conventional Weapons Bill [B  7  –  2007]
         (National Assembly – sec 75).
COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly

The following item replaces item 3, published in the ATC of 31 January  2008
on page 91:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services on a  joint
    oversight visit  to  Pollsmoor  Prison  to  consider  the  position  of
    awaiting-trial prisoners, dated 21 November 2007.

The  Portfolio  Committee  on  Correctional  Services,  and  the   Portfolio
Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development, having  undertaken  the
above oversight visit, reports as follows:

   1. Aim of the visit

On 23 October 2007, the Portfolio Committees on Justice  and  Constitutional
Development,  and  Correctional  Services,  and  the  Select  Committee   on
Security and Constitutional Affairs undertook a  joint  oversight  visit  to
the Pollsmoor Correctional Facility. The aim was  to  consider  overcrowding
in our prisons,  particularly  the  position  of  awaiting-trial  prisoners.
Representatives from the Magistracy, the National Prosecuting Authority  and
the Judicial Inspectorate of Prisons were also present.

   2. Participants


The following members of the Portfolio Committees on Correctional  Services,
and Justice and Constitutional Development,  and  the  Select  Committee  on
Security and  Constitutional  Affairs  visited  the  Pollsmoor  Correctional
Centre:


Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services: Mr D Bloem (Chairperson),
Ms LS Chikunga (ANC), Mr S Mahote (ANC), Mr  E  Xolo  (ANC),  Ms  W  Ngwenya
(ANC), Mr J Selfe (DA) and Mr H Cupido (ACDP).

Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and  Constitutional  Development:  Mr   B
Magwanishe (Acting Chairperson), Mr JB Sibanyoni (ANC), Ms  M  Meruti  (ANC)
and Ms C Johnson (ANC).


Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs: Kgoshi L M  Mokoena
(Chairperson) – Limpopo, Ms F Nyanda (ANC) – Mpumalanga and Mr L H  Fielding
(DA) – Northern Cape.

The Committees were  accompanied  by  the  following  parliamentary  support
staff:
Ms R Lawrence (Personal  Assistant  to  the  Chairperson  of  the  Portfolio
Committee on Correctional Services) and Ms G Dinizulu  (Committee  Secretary
to the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs), Ms C  Balie
(Committee Secretary to the Portfolio Committee on  Correctional  Services),
  Ms N Skaka (Committee Assistant) and Ms C  Silkstone  (Researcher  to  the
Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development)
Pollsmoor  Correctional  Facility  was  represented  by:  Mr  Mkabela  (Area
Commissioner), Mr Nthombeni ( Regional  Commissioner:  Corporate  Services),
Mr  Modisadife  (Head:  Admission  Centre),  Ms  Dayimani  (Head:  Medium  B
Centre),
Mr Molefe (Head: Medium C Centre), Mr Scholtz (Acting Head: Medium  A  Youth
Centre) and Ms Claassen (Head: Female Section)
The Department of Justice was represented by the following  members  of  the
Judiciary: Ms M van Eeden ( Acting Senior Magistrate, Wynberg) Mr M  Dimbaza
(Chief Magistrate, Wynberg), Mr  H  Swart  (Acting  Chief  Magistrate,  Cape
Town) and Mr Zantsi (Senior Public Prosecutor, Athlone)

The Judicial Inspectorate of Prisons was represented by:  Ms  Pritima  Osman
(Acting Director: Functional Services), Mr T Titus (Visitor’s Committee  Co-
ordinator)

   3. Overview of proceedings

The Department of  Correctional  Services  gave  a  short  briefing  to  the
Committees  on  the  Pollsmoor  Management  Area,  which  was  followed   by
extensive discussion.  MPs  then  spoke  with  a  number  of  awaiting-trial
prisoners, especially pregnant women, juveniles and children.

   4. Briefing on the Pollsmoor Management Area

   1. Pollsmoor is overcrowded. The present occupancy rate  is  168%.  While
      Pollsmoor is designed to accommodate 4 252 offenders it currently  has
      7 296 offenders. 4 823 (66.8%) are awaiting-trial  prisoners.  At  the
      Female Centre, which MPs visited, there are 397  offenders,  of  which
      47% are awaiting trial. The occupancy rate is 162%.

      The Department provided the Committees with the breakdown in the table
      below of awaiting-trial prisoners, who had  either  not  been  granted
      bail or had been granted bail but could not afford to  pay.  Sentenced
      juvenile offenders as well as  awaiting-trial  juveniles  (18-21)  are
      housed in the Medium A section.
4.2

|                |Admission Centre  |Medium A          |Female        |
|No bail         |2 531             |877               |152           |
|Less than R 1000|851               |242               |40            |
|Above R 1000    |124               |60                |10            |


   The Department also provided information, which is set out in  the  table
   below,  on  the  number  of  successful   conversions   to   correctional
   supervision in terms of sections 62  (f),  71  and  72  of  the  Criminal
   Procedure Act 51 of 1977 from 1 March 2007 to 30 September 2007.  Section
   62(f) of the Criminal Procedure Act 51 of  1977  empowers  the  court  to
   release an accused on bail under the supervision of a  probation  officer
   or a correctional official. Section 71  of  the  Criminal  Procedure  Act
   provides that awaiting-trial juveniles may be placed in a place of safety
   or under supervision, instead of being released on bail or being detained
   in custody, while section 72 refers to release of an accused on warning.

|Month    |Admission            |Medium A              |Female                |


 |Submitted |Successful  |Submitted  |Successful  |Submitted  |Successful  |
|March |69 |48 (69.5%) |59 |47 (79.7%) |0 |0 | |April |75  |32  (42.7%)  |29
|14 (48.3%) |0 |0 | |May |48 |32 (66.7%) |23 |19 (82.6%) |1 |0 |  |June  |48
|38 (79.2%) |15 |12 (80%) |0 |0 | |July |43 |43 (100%) |44  |28  (63.6%)  |8
|8 (100%) | |August  |104  |21  (20.2%)  |90  |48  (53.3%)  |5  |2  (40%)  |
|September  |96  |56  (58.3%)  |225  |129(57.3%)  |14  |10  (71.4%)  |  |4.3
Interventions to address overcrowding at Pollsmoor include:

     • The appointment of four additional court officials (now a  total  of
       seven) to assist with the reduced bail applications and  alternative
       placements for awaiting-trial prisoners.
     • A list of section 62(f) and 63  applications  (to  reduce  bail)  is
       submitted weekly by the court officials to the various courts.
     • Heads of centres attend monthly case-flow meetings  to  address  the
       management of overcrowding.
     • A list of awaiting-trail children is provided to various courts  and
       at case flow meetings on a monthly basis.
     • The names of awaiting-trial children are given to the Department  of
       Social Development each Friday.
     • There is constant interaction between the  in-house  social  workers
       and the Department of Social Development for available bed space  at
       places of safety.


   5. Issues Arising

   1. Applications in terms of section 62(f) of the Criminal Procedure Act

In response to queries about  the  granting  of  applications  to  place  an
accused under the supervision of a  correctional  or  probation  officer  in
terms  of  section  62  (f)  of  the  Criminal  Procedure   Act   of   1977,
representatives from the Magistracy expressed doubt that the  Department  of
Correctional Services has sufficient capacity to monitor those  released  in
terms of this section. It was said that magistrates  are  unable  to  simply
release  people  awaiting-trial  without  the  assurance  that   there   are
arrangements in place to ensure that they will return  to  court.  MPs  also
heard that a common concern is that the  majority  of  juveniles  are  being
held for ‘aggressive’ offences. Their parents do not  always  want  them  at
home for reasons that include being unable to guarantee that  they  will  be
able to bring their children to court on  the  appointed  dates.  There  are
also not enough places of safety and secure care facilities.

   2. Conditions of Bail

Pollsmoor officials explained that there were many awaiting-trial  prisoners
who could not afford bail, even if it was  below  R1000,  as  shown  in  the
Table  in  paragraph  3.2.  above.  However,  they  could  not  provide  the
Committees with a breakdown of the bail amounts under R1000, nor could  they
tell the Committees the precise details of the alleged crimes committed.

It emerged that the factors involved in granting bail are complex:  bail  is
intended to ensure that an accused returns to court on the  appointed  date,
and is meant to take into account the affordability of  the  accused.  Where
the bail amount is small, it does not necessarily mean that the  offence  is
not serious. Magistrates also take  into  account  the  seriousness  of  the
offence, the strength of the case  against  the  accused  and  the  personal
circumstances of the accused. The number of  previous  convictions  is  also
taken into account.

Amendments to the Criminal Procedure Act  were  designed  to  make  it  more
difficult to get bail: Schedules 5 and 6 to the Act state that bail may  not
be granted for the offences listed in  these  Schedules,  unless  there  are
exceptional circumstances.

   3. Lack of information on the committal warrant

Awaiting-trial prisoners are not assessed when first brought  to  Pollsmoor.
The committal  warrants  that  accompany  awaiting-trial  prisoners  do  not
provide sufficient details of the crime  for  which  the  accused  is  being
detained. Typically, the committal warrant will simply state in broad  terms
the crime for which the accused is being held.

This makes  it  difficult  for  prison  officials  to  establish  whether  a
particular  awaiting-trial  prisoner’s  case  should  be  brought   to   the
attention of the authorities. The lack of information means  that  awaiting-
trial prisoners can spend unnecessary time in prison. Prison officials  need
access to the court file in order to properly understand  why  an  awaiting-
trial prisoner is being held.


   4. Legal facilities available to awaiting trial detainees

Correctional Services officials said that there are facilities available  to
awaiting-trial prisoners to  meet  with  their  legal  representatives.  The
Committees were informed that the Legal Aid Board  visits  the  facility  on
Tuesdays, Thursdays and Fridays. Officials from the  Department  of  Justice
have also visited to explain plea bargaining.

However, through further engagement  with  the  officials,  MPs  established
that the Legal Aid Board  does  not  always  visit  the  facility  and  that
consultations between attorneys and their clients tend to take place at  the
courts. The representative from the Office of the Inspecting  Judge  was  of
the view that if the Legal Aid Board visited  the  facility  more  regularly
there would be far more applications for reduction of bail.  The  Legal  Aid
Board, however, has a shortage of available practitioners, which impacts  on
its ability to conduct prison visits.

It was also alleged that  awaiting-trial  prisoners,  who  are  children  or
juveniles, are often not given a chance to contact their parents when  first
arriving at Pollsmoor.

   5. Co-operation and liaison between Departments of Correctional  Services
      and Justice and Constitutional Development.

The Committees heard that there are inter-sectoral structures  in  place  to
streamline or facilitate the processing of awaiting-trial  prisoners.  These
structures meet monthly. The Committees heard that awaiting-trial  prisoners
are considered to be a priority for magistrates, and  that  magistrates  are
well versed on issues such as juveniles in custody and the granting of  bail
of relatively small amounts.

   6. Visits from Magistrates

While magistrates used to visit offenders in  prisons,  this  is  no  longer
common practice. With the creation of the Office of  the  Inspecting  Judge,
magistrates no longer feel that this is part of  their  function,  and  only
visit when invited.

   7. Caseload Backlogs

Although there are systems in place, the enormous in-flow of  cases  creates
backlogs. The Committees were informed that the Department  of  Justice  has
once again,  from  September,  instituted  backlog  courts  to  reduce  this
problem.


   8. Interventions to reduce the  number  of  Children  Awaiting  Trial  at
      Pollsmoor
There are interventions to reduce the number of awaiting-trial  children  in
Pollsmoor. Every month a list of names is provided  to  courts  and  to  the
case flow meetings. Every  Friday,  Pollsmoor  provides  the  Department  of
Social Development with a list of  sentenced  and  awaiting-trial  children.
Pollsmoor is  also  provided  with  information  on  the  number  of  places
available at places of safety  and  at  secure  care  facilities.  There  is
constant  networking  taking  place  between  the  in-house  Social  Workers
regarding diversion, as well as available bed-space  at  places  of  safety.
This has seen a reduction in the number of male children  incarcerated  from
the end of August 2007, from 195 to 140 in late October 2007.

5. Committees’ Recommendations

   1. In different forms, several of the observations and recommendations in
      this section have been made before. They are not particularly novel or
      exceptional and can  even  be  seen  as  predictable.  The  difference
      however  is  in  the  current  approach  of  the  Committees.  We  are
      determined to follow up on these recommendations and actively  monitor
      progress in regard to them. We are acutely aware of the challenges the
      relevant departments and other roleplayers face, but we  believe  that
      incremental improvements are possible and certainly necessary – and it
      is these modest, incremental  improvements  that  our  Committees  are
      seeking to pursue. We are also aware of our own limitations, with  our
      “over-loaded” programmes and inadequate research, technical and  other
      support, and so we should not be too  ambitious  in  setting  our  own
      oversight targets. We need  to  be  strategic  and  selective  in  our
      oversight targets. In this respect, our main aim is to see incremental
      improvements in the position of awaiting-trial prisoners in  Pollsmoor
      and put appropriate pressure, consistent with our oversight  role,  on
      the  relevant  departments  and  other  roleplayers  for   incremental
      improvements in the position of  awaiting  trial  detainees  in  other
      correctional facilities. The Correctional Services Portfolio Committee
      will, of course, focus more on the general conditions at  correctional
      facilities and further advance its  oversight  role  in  this  regard.
      However, our two  Committees  will  work  closer  together  to  follow
      through on the recommendations set out below. This will  mean  working
      both jointly and, in  a  complementary  way,  in  our  own  respective
      portfolios to monitor progress in respect of the  recommendations.  We
      might also work with other relevant portfolio and select committees to
      follow through on the recommendations below.

   2. As part of the monitoring process, this report will be referred to the
      Departments of Justice and Constitutional Development and Correctional
      Services for an initial written response within two months of the date
      of its  adoption.  The  aim  of  the  response  would  be  to  provide
      information to  the  Committees,  convey  the  initial  views  of  the
      departments on the recommendations below, and set the  basis  for  the
      briefing referred to in 5.3 below. The report will also be referred to
      the Pollsmoor management and other relevant stakeholders.

   3. The Committees will also convene  a  joint  meeting  of  the  relevant
      Departments, the Pollsmoor management and  other  stakeholders  within
      six months to monitor progress in regard to the issues raised in  this
      report and take matters further.

   4. While the Committees appreciate  the  challenges,  we  feel  that  for
      awaiting-trial offenders to constitute 66.8% of the Pollsmoor offender
      population is altogether unacceptable. The Committees require  a  more
      comprehensive explanation than we got during our visit on why this  is
      the case and what is being done to  improve  the  situation,  even  if
      gradually over time. The Committees are keen to get a better sense  of
      how Pollsmoor fares compared to other correctional facilities.

   5. The Pollsmoor officials explained their approach to dealing  with  the
      high number of awaiting-trial prisoners, especially children. However,
      the Committees are not clear that this approach is  being  implemented
      effectively – and will engage further on this at the briefing referred
      to in 5.3 above. The Committees welcome the reduction in the number of
      male children incarcerated, from 195 to 140, between the end of August
      and late October this year.

   6. The Committees  are  concerned  about  the  number  of  awaiting-trial
      prisoners who are being detained in prison  simply  because  they  are
      unable to meet bail, especially when the bail is below  R1000.  It  is
      not cost-effective to accommodate awaiting-trial prisoners  where  the
      bail amounts are small. The Committees note  that  the  Department  of
      Justice and Constitutional Development’s 2006/07 Annual Report  refers
      to section 63(A) of the Criminal Procedure Act  that  allows  for  the
      release of awaiting trial prisoners, who have been granted  bail,  but
      are unable to pay the bail. The Committees note that the Department of
      Correctional Services was requested by  the  Criminal  Justice  System
      Review Project to prioritise the release of  such  prisoners,  and  to
      submit  a  report  by  end  of  May  2007,  indicating  progress.  The
      Committees are interested in what progress  there  has  been  in  this
      regard.

   7. The Committees feel that the judiciary should,  where  possible,  make
      use of alternative sentencing so as to  ensure  that  those  who  have
      committed petty offences are  not  sent  to  the  already  overcrowded
      prisons. Prison should be for serious offenders.


   8. The Committees are concerned that Legal Aid Board practitioners do not
      regularly visit Pollsmoor, except  when  they  are  informed  that  an
      accused does not have legal representation. More immediate access to a
      legal representative will result in more applications for reduction of
      bail, and a  decrease  in  the  number  of  awaiting-trial  prisoners.
      However, the Committees are aware that  there  was  no  representative
      from the Legal Aid Board  present  during  the  oversight  visit.  The
      Committees are also aware of the capacity constraints  that  face  the
      Legal Aid Board. The Committees will refer this report  to  the  Legal
      Aid Board and request a report, within  two  months,  on  the  Board’s
      visits  to  Pollsmoor  and  other  correctional  facilities  and   the
      challenges it faces in this regard.

   9. The Committees feel that when an awaiting-trial prisoner is  committed
      to a correctional facility, adequate  information  of  the  crime,  in
      respect of which the accused has been charged, has to be contained  in
      the accompanying documentation. This information is usually  contained
      in the  case  docket  or  court  file.  If  the  information  is  made
      available, stakeholders will be better able to ensure  that  awaiting-
      trial  prisoners  do  not  spend  unnecessary  time  in  prison.   The
      Committees  request  the  Department  of  Justice  and  Constitutional
      Development to report on the feasibility of providing  the  Department
      of Correctional Services with such information.

  10. The Committees  feels  that,  within  their  constraints,  magistrates
      should seek to visit correctional facilities, particularly in  respect
      of awaiting-trial prisoners. The Committees  are  keen  to  understand
      what the difficulties are in regard to this  and  how  they  might  be
      addressed.  The  Committees  will  raise  this  with  the  Magistrates
      Commission. and also confer with the Judicial Inspectorate of Prison.

  11. While it is clear that there are structures in place that provide  for
      inter-sectoral engagement, it  is  not  clear  to  what  extent  these
      structures are effective. The Committees will engage on  this  further
      at the briefing referred to in 6.3 above.

  12. The Committees feel that there should be greater collaboration between
      all role players around ensuring better conditions for and the  speedy
      sentencing of awaiting trial  detainees  –  co-operation  between  the
      Departments of Justice, Social Development, Safety  and  Security  and
      Correctional Services should be ongoing in this regard.

  13. The Committees note that while sentenced children and  juveniles  take
      part in education, sport and developmental  programmes  in  Pollsmoor,
      awaiting-trial children and juveniles are not allowed  to  take  part.
      This is apparently because the latter category  “fall  under  justice,
      not correctional services”. The Committees are clear that this  “silo”
      approach is not acceptable and inconsistent  with  the  notion  of  an
      integrated justice system, and feel that all children  and  juveniles,
      both those sentenced and awaiting-trial, should  be  allowed  to  take
      part in the above-mentioned programmes.  Some  of  the  awaiting-trial
      juveniles have been awaiting trial for long periods, some as  long  as
      three years.

  14. The Committees note  the  interventions  to  address  overcrowding  in
      Pollsmoor. There is obviously a need for  more  places  of  safety  as
      children and juveniles released from prison cannot always go  back  to
      their homes; sometimes there are  not  even  contact  details  of  the
      families of those released, especially if their families are in  rural
      areas or provinces other than the Western Cape.  The  Committees  note
      that  the  Department  of  Social  Development  also  serves  on   the
      intersectoral task team, referred to in 6.11 above, and are interested
      to receive more information on the availability of places  of  safety.
      The matter will also be raised with the Social  Development  Portfolio
      Committee and, if necessary, the Department of Social Development will
      also be asked to attend the briefing referred to in 6.3 above.

  15. The Committees welcome the use of “backlog courts” and are  interested
      in progress in this regard.

  16. The Committees believe  that  more  should  be  done  to  ensure  that
      pregnant women, who have committed petty crimes, are not  detained  in
      prison but are diverted to community correction or  other  appropriate
      intervention programmes.

  17. The Committees will follow through  on  the  recommendations  set  out
      above and are keen to see progress  in  regard  to  them.  We  do  not
      believe that we should simply carry out  oversight  visits  and  write
      reports for the sake of doing so; there have to be material  outcomes.
      The responsibility for this does not reside solely with the executive.
      Parliament also has a major responsibility - and, consistent with  our
      oversight role, we commit  ourselves  to  working  with  the  relevant
      departments and other stakeholders to achieve progress  in  regard  to
      the above recommendations.

6. Acknowledgements


   The  Committees  express  their  appreciation  to   the   Department   of
   Correctional Services, the Pollsmoor management  and  other  stakeholders
   for their co-operation in ensuring that the study visit  was  productive.
   The Committees acknowledge the assistance of Ms  Christine  Silkstone  of
   the Parliamentary Research and Information Unit  in  the  preparation  of
   this report.


   Report to be considered

                          WEDNESDAY, 30 APRIL 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1. Withdrawal of paper tabled


   Request by the Minister of Safety and Security to withdraw  a  nomination
   made in terms of section 51 of the South African Police Service Act, 1995
   (Act No 68 of 1995), for committees  of  the  Parliament  to  consider  a
   suitably qualified person for appointment to the office of the  Executive
   Director to head the Independent Complaints Directorate.

National Assembly

The Speaker

1. Referral to Committees of papers tabled

   (1)      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee  on
         Trade and Industry for consideration and report:

          a) Additional Protocol  on  Trade,  Development  and  Cooperation
             Agreement  between  the  Republic  of  South  Africa  and  the
             European Community and its Member States.


          b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Additional  Protocol  on  Trade,
             Development and Cooperation Agreement between the Republic  of
             South Africa and the European Community and its Member States.

TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

               1. The Minister of Safety and Security

   a) Proclamation No R 29 published in  the  Government  Gazette  No  30382
      dated 19 October 2007: Notification by the  President  in  respect  of
      entities involved in terrorist and related  activities  identified  by
      the United Nations Security Council, made in terms of  section  25  of
      the Protection  of  Constitutional  Democracy  Against  Terrorist  and
      Related Activities, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004), tabled in terms of 26 of
      the Act.
   b) Proclamation No R 30 published in  the  Government  Gazette  No  30382
      dated 19 October 2007: Notification by the  President  in  respect  of
      entities involved in terrorist and related  activities  identified  by
      the United Nations Security Council, made in terms of  section  25  of
      the Protection  of  Constitutional  Democracy  Against  Terrorist  and
      Related Activities, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004), tabled in terms of 26 of
      the Act.

   c) Proclamation No R 49 published in  the  Government  Gazette  No  30634
      dated 31 December 2007: Notification by the President  in  respect  of
      entities involved in terrorist and related  activities  identified  by
      the United Nations Security Council, made in terms of  section  25  of
      the Protection  of  Constitutional  Democracy  Against  Terrorist  and
      Related Activities, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004), tabled in terms of 26 of
      the Act.


   d) Proclamation No R 1 published in the Government Gazette No 30704 dated
      30 January 2008: Notification by the President in respect of  entities
      involved in terrorist and related activities identified by the  United
      Nations  Security  Council,  made  in  terms  of  section  25  of  the
      Protection of Constitutional Democracy Against Terrorist  and  Related
      Activities, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004), tabled in terms  of  26  of  the
      Act.

   e) Proclamation No R 2 published in the Government Gazette No 30705 dated
      1 February 2008: Notification by the President in respect of  entities
      involved in terrorist and related activities identified by the  United
      Nations  Security  Council,  made  in  terms  of  section  25  of  the
      Protection of Constitutional Democracy Against Terrorist  and  Related
      Activities, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004), tabled in terms  of  26  of  the
      Act.

   f) Proclamation No R 11 published in  the  Government  Gazette  No  30939
      dated 2 April 2008:  Notification  by  the  President  in  respect  of
      entities involved in terrorist and related  activities  identified  by
      the United Nations Security Council, made in terms of  section  25  of
      the Protection  of  Constitutional  Democracy  Against  Terrorist  and
      Related Activities, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004), tabled in terms of 26 of
      the Act.


   g) Proclamation No R 12 published in  the  Government  Gazette  No  30939
      dated 2 April 2008:  Notification  by  the  President  in  respect  of
      entities involved in terrorist and related  activities  identified  by
      the United Nations Security Council, made in terms of  section  25  of
      the Protection  of  Constitutional  Democracy  Against  Terrorist  and
      Related Activities, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004), tabled in terms of 26 of
      the Act.

                             MONDAY, 5 MAY 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)    Protection of Information Bill, 2008, submitted by the  Minister
         for Intelligence.


    (2)    South African National Space Agency Bill, 2008, submitted by the
         Minister of Science  and  Technology.  Referred  to  the  Portfolio
         Committee on Science and Technology and  the  Select  Committee  on
         Education and Recreation.

2.    Introduction of Bills

      1) The Minister of Trade and Industry


         On request of the Minister, the following Bill  was  introduced  in
         the National Council  of  Provinces  by  the  Select  Committee  on
         Economic and Foreign Affairs:


          a) Consumer Protection Bill [B 19 – 2008]  (National  Council  of
             Provinces – proposed sec 76) [Explanatory summary of Bill  and
             prior notice  of  its  introduction  published  in  Government
             Gazette No 31027 of 5 May 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Select Committee on  Economic
             and Foreign Affairs of the National Council of  Provinces,  as
             well as referral to the  Joint  Tagging  Mechanism  (JTM)  for
             classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of  the  Bill  may  be  submitted  to  the  JTM  within  three
             parliamentary working days.


     (2)    The Minister of Science and Technology


          a) South  African  National  Space  Agency  Bill  [B  20  –  2008]
             (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory  summary  of
             Bill  and  prior  notice  of  its  introduction  published   in
             Government Gazette No 30220 of 31 August 2007.]


             Introduction  and  referral  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
             Science and Technology of the National Assembly,  as  well  as
             referral  to   the   Joint   Tagging   Mechanism   (JTM)   for
             classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of  the  Bill  may  be  submitted  to  the  JTM  within  three
             parliamentary working days.

                             TUESDAY, 6 MAY 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6), classified the following
         Bill as a section 75 Bill:

         (a)      Expropriation Bill [B 16 – 2008] (National Assembly –  sec
               75).

      2) The JTM, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6), classified the  Traditional
         Courts Bill [B 15 – 2008], introduced in the National Assembly,  as
         a section 76 Bill and as a Bill falling within the ambit of section
         18(1)(a) of the Traditional  Leadership  and  Governance  Framework
         Act, 2003 (Act No 41 of 2003).

TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Labour

    (a)    Preliminary Report of the Department of Labour for 2007-2008 [RP
        41-2008].


National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

    (a)     The  following  private  member’s  legislative   proposal   was
        submitted to the Speaker on 18 April 2008, in accordance with  Rule
        234:

      Legislative Proposal to amend the Competition Act, No 89 of 1998 (Mrs
        P de Lille)


      Referred to the Committee on Private Members’  Legislative  Proposals
        and Special Petitions for consideration and report.

    (b)    Final Report of the Khampepe  Commission  of  Enquiry  into  the
        Mandate and Location of the Directorate of Special Operations (“The
        DSO”) – February 2006.

COMMITTEE REPORT

National Assembly

1.    Report of the  Standing  Committee  on  Private  Members`  Legislative
    Proposals and Special Petitions on the legislative  proposal  to  amend
    the Transnet Pension Fund Amendment Act, dated 7 March 2008.

    The Standing Committee on Private Members`  Legislative  Proposals  and
    Special Petitions  considered the legislative proposal by Mr K  Minnie,
    MP to amend the Transnet Pension  Fund  Amendment  Act.  The  Committee
    consulted with the Department of Public Enterprise, Transnet,  and  the
    Board of Trustees.

    The committee noted that:

     • Mr Minnie referred to  Section  24  of  the  Transnet  Pension  Fund
       Amendment Act that  does not exist,
     • Mr Minnie apparently confused rules of Pension Fund  with  the  Act,
       and


     • The 2007 amendments of the same Act had addressed the problems  that
       Mr Minnie is attempting to resolve with the legislative Proposal.

    In view of the above, the committee recommends that permission  not  be
    granted to the member to proceed with the proposed legislation.

    Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee  on  Correctional  Services  on  the
    Correctional Services Amendment Bill [B32D-2007] (National  Assembly  –
    sec 75), dated 6 May 2008.

    The Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services, having considered the
    subject matter on the Correctional Services Amendment Bill  [B32D-2007]
    (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to  it  and  classified  by  the
    Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill,  reports  the  Bill  with
    amendments [B32E – 2007]


