---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 24 June 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2008-06-24
---

                            TUESDAY, 24 JUNE 2008
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:09.
The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              YOUTH PARLIAMENT

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, I move on behalf of the Chief Whip of the
Council:

   That the Council, noting that the Youth Parliament  is  taking  place  at
   Parliament on 26 and 27 June 2008 under the theme "Parliament  empowering
   the youth for poverty eradication" –


    1) recognises that this  will  be  the  last  Youth  Parliament  to  be
       conducted under the auspices of the Third Parliament;

    2) acknowledges that this annual event has become  an  opportunity  for
       the youth to voice their  concerns  and  interact  with  Members  of
       Parliament about key issues that affect their lives;

    3) notes that the declarations of the Youth  Parliaments  of  2006  and
       2007 will be reviewed, while deliberations will also take  place  on
       youth  and  their  economic  participation,  youth  development  and
       institutional arrangements in that regard and the role of  youth  in
       our social cohesion;

    4) wishes all the participants in the Youth Parliament  well  in  their
       proposed activities; and

    5) looks forward to receiving soon the Youth  Parliament's  report  and
       recommendations on the crucial issues that will have been discussed.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                       ANC LEADERSHIP IN KWAZULU-NATAL

                             (Draft Resolution)
Mnu D D GAMEDE: Sihlalo ngizophakamisa:

   Ukuthi uMkhandlu -
      1) Ubongela isifundazwe saKwaZulu-Natali ngobuholi obusha  obukhethiwe
         bukaKhongolose obuholwa nguSihlalo uDokotela Zweli  Mkhize  nabanye
         abaholi abafana noWillies  Mchunu,  Senzo  Mchunu,  Sihle  Zikalala
         noPeggy Nkonyeni namanye amalungu;


      2) Uthi halala KwaZulu-Natali, halala  ANC  ngokubamba  ingqungquthela
         ebenempumelelo  nokuthula.  Ngizophakamisa   kanjalo.   Ngiyabonga.
         [Ihlombe.]
(Translation of isiZulu draft resolution follows.)

[Mr D D GAMEDE: Chairperson, I move without notice:

 That the Council –

    1) congratulates the province of KwaZulu-Natal and the new leadership
       of the ANC led by its chairperson Dr Zweli Mkhize and various other
       leaders such as Willies Mchunu, Senzo Mchunu, Sihle Zikalala, Peggy
       Nkonyeni and other members; and


    2) says well done, KwaZulu-Natal! Well done, ANC for holding a
       successful and peaceful conference. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                          ELECTRONIC VOTING IN NCOP

                               (Announcement)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Before we proceed, I
would like to inform members that we will be using the electronic voting
system today.

This will help us to ensure that records of the House are easily captured
and stored. I have also requested staff to put their voting cards on their
desks. During the voting, I will explain to you how to use the system.

We now come to the motion on the Order Paper as printed in the name of the
Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces.

                         SUSPENSION OF RULE 247 (1)

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chair, on behalf of the Chairperson of the NCOP, I move:

   That Rule 247(1), which provides inter alia that a sitting of the Council
   will be dedicated for oral questions, be suspended for the purpose of
   consideration of the Repeal of Black Administration Act and Amendment of
   Certain Laws Amendment Bill [B 50 – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75),
   on Tuesday, 24 June 2008.
Question put: That the motion be agreed to.


IN FAVOUR: Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo, Mpumalanga,
Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.


Motion  accordingly  agreed  to  in  accordance  with  section  65  of   the
Constitution.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order! We will now
proceed with the questions as printed on the Question Paper. Before I call
the Ministers to respond, I would like to remind you of the Rules. The time
for asking a supplementary question is two minutes. Time for replying to
supplementary questions is four minutes, and only four supplementary
questions are allowed per question. We start at Question 47.

                          QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

                             PEACE AND SECURITY
                                  Cluster 1

MINISTERS:

           Measures to ensure access to courts by poor communities

47.   Kgoshi M L Mokoena (ANC) asked the Minister for Justice and
      Constitutional Development:

      Whether there are any measures in place to ensure that people in poor
      communities have access to courts closer to where they stay; if not,
      what is the position in this regard; if so, (a) what measures and (b)
      how will they be implemented?     CO1259E

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Madam
Deputy Chairperson, I thank the hon member for the question, and also
apologise on behalf of the Minister for not being here. She is attending a
meeting with the Presidency in Pretoria.

As indicated in my budget speech of 29 May 2008 in this House, my
department, in its undertaking to improve access to justice, has continued
to commit a substantial amount of our budget towards building additional
courts and providing facilities to deliver services in order to ensure that
we reach out to poor communities, especially in remote areas.

We continue to build, in numbers, court buildings where there were none
before. Not only have we built 23 new courts and refurbished and upgraded
58 courts in the last few years, but we have also improved the architecture
and design of these courts to meet the service level standards befitting
our constitutional era. These courts are more accessible to the people,
including people with disabilities, and have built-in facilities
commensurate with the work of the court, such as archives to safeguard
court information and libraries to provide adequate capacity for legal
research.

In my budget speech I have indicated the need by my department to review
the spatial distribution of our courts as part of removing the relic of the
apartheid court system, which perpetuates the denial of access to justice
to the majority. The process of correcting this situation has gained
momentum and I am pleased to announce that, over the next few months, we
will be focused on creating the necessary infrastructure and human resource
capacity in 23 of the 90 branch courts, which in the current financial year
will be designated as self-standing main courts. By designating branch
courts as main courts the communities in the rural and former black
townships will enjoy the same access to justice, especially civil justice,
as their counterparts in the towns and suburbs.

The process of identifying sites for building the High Courts in Limpopo
and Mpumalanga is at an advanced stage. In the interim the department is
procuring interim accommodation for the two High Courts to commence
operating in these provinces as soon as possible. In Limpopo, the old
magistrate’s office has been refurbished to provide interim accommodation;
in Mpumalanga, an existing office has been identified and the necessary
conversions will take place once the lease agreement has been negotiated.

I would also like to draw this House’s attention to the Jurisdiction of
Regional Courts Amendment Bill, which confers civil jurisdiction on the
regional courts and will be finalised during this session of Parliament.
The intended legislation will ease the hardship and prejudice of the
vulnerable and poor members of society who are compelled by the current
system to seek legal redress in civil matters in remote courts beyond the
borders of their provinces.

In conclusion, I wish to indicate further that the question of access to
justice for all South Africans is one that is close to my heart and also to
the heart of our Minister, but we realise that it will take some time to
achieve this goal. My department has continuously assessed areas where
there is a need for additional court services. Therefore, due to time
constraints, may I request that the details of any new courts to be
established be forwarded in written submissions to this House? I thank you.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chair, let me thank the Deputy Minister for his
response to this question. I would also like to thank the department and
the Ministry for coming up with the legislation that has just been
mentioned by the Deputy Minister. This is a very progressive move.

Arising from the Deputy Minister’s response, as of now, complainants are,
in most cases, not informed timeously when their cases are going to be
postponed. Someone will travel for more than 70 km to go and attend his or
her case, only to be called in the afternoon at about 15:00 to hear that
the case has been postponed. This person had to get public transport to get
there and to go back to where they came from.

Seeing that this is a challenge, what measures will be put in place to try
and address that for those members of the community who, up until now,
before these new measures are put in place, had to face these hardships?
What can be done to try and improve the situation? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: This is a
very big problem, and one that I think undermines the criminal justice
system quite badly. You can imagine if you are poor and a case gets
postponed 50 times, and you have to ask your employer to let you leave work
50 times to go and sit in a court where nothing happens. This is a huge
problem.

As I’ve indicated to you and as you are aware, there is a review of the
criminal justice system, which has again been initiated, and we are working
at it. Hopefully, in the near future we will be able to come and brief you
on it, but in that review of the criminal justice system we are looking at
a whole lot of steps to change this. One of them is to create a screening
mechanism in court that only trial-ready dockets go to court. Therefore,
witnesses only have to be asked to go to court when they have to deal with
the trials; they will not have to go to the postponements.
In the meantime, we’re engaging the prosecuting authority to try and see if
they can’t already start implementing some of those steps before we make
those necessary changes. It is something that we are very seriously looking
at and attending to.

Mr Z C NTULI: Chairperson, I would like to thank the Deputy Minister for
the comprehensive response. We would like to find out whether there are
still courts with the old-order demarcation, like magistrates courts, where
you find that because it serviced a particular class you then had to go to
the other side so that you can get access to justice? Are there still such
courts in the Republic? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: I am not
sure if I fully understand, but a lot of the demarcations we still have in
our court system are still of the old order. That is the problem and we
have clearly looked at trying to change some of those demarcations through
the legislation, which has now been held back to be dealt with in the
Superior Courts Bill at a higher level.

At a lower level, we are looking at a whole audit on the demarcation to see
whether we should bring the demarcation of our courts in line with the
present political demarcations. So, for example, at a lower level we now
have about 300 new municipal areas, which are based on the municipal
legislation. Do we bring the courts in line with that? At the moment their
demarcation is still in terms of the 1994 Magistrates Act, which sets out
the magisterial districts. That whole audit is taking place to ensure it
brings this in line.

The bigger problem that will then take place is we then have to bring all
the departments into line, so that they also fit in with those demarcations
in the Justice cluster. This is again one of the issues in the review that
is receiving attention, so as to make the necessary changes in the future.
We are aware of the problem and we’re definitely, again, looking at
changing them in accordance with the present political demarcations that
exist at a national, provincial and municipal level.

Mr B J TOLO: Chairperson, I also want to thank the Minister and the
department for having finally taken the decision that Mpumalanga will also
have a High Court and thus join other provinces.

We all know that, over and above the advantages of litigating nearer to
your home, there are many other advantages to having a Supreme Court in a
province.

I know that in 1995-96 the provincial legislature of Mpumalanga established
a commission of inquiry to find out as to where the Supreme Court should
actually be located in Mpumalanga. Did they, in coming to the decision they
had come to, take into consideration the recommendations of that commission
that was established in Mpumalanga then? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: We haven’t
come to any decisions, because, as I said, the Superior Courts legislation,
which must change all that, is being held back to have further consultation
with them. But what the legislation and the party you and I belong to, you
will remember in 1987 at the Mafikeng Conference, decided was that the
capital of each province should be the capital of the court of that
province as well.

Obviously, once we are dealing with that legislation, the Superior Courts
legislation, then clearly these issues will arise and we will have to look
at them in that light. What I have reported here is that in the interim we
will try and make it easier for people in those provinces, while we are
waiting for that legislation to be dealt with. In the interim, we are
creating interim structures and leasing interim property to let the cases
from that province be dealt with in that province until we finalise this
legal issue with regard to the Superior Courts Bill. So we are just dealing
here, as I reported, in the interim.

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Madam Chairperson, I think that the hon Deputy Minister
already addressed my question that I had in mind. It is in connection with
the Superior Courts Bill.

In terme van hierdie wet word die trek van grense beskou en gaan Brits,
byvoorbeeld, ingesluit word by die Hooggeregshof Mafikeng. As dit so sou
wees, dan is dit ’n afstand van 245 km na daardie Hooggeregshof toe, terwyl
dit na Pretoria se Hooggeregshof toe iets soos 30 km is. Maar ek glo die
agb Adjunkminister weet reeds die deur is oop vir die ... (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[In terms of this Act, the demarcation of borders are being considered and
Brits, for example, is going to be included with the Mafikeng Supreme
Court. If this is so, then it is a distance of 245 km to that Supreme Court
seat, while it is about 30 km to Pretoria’s Supreme Court. But I believe
the hon Deputy Minister already knows that the door is open on the ...]

... Superior Courts Bill to have further input with regard to this Bill.
Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: You know, I
think we must be careful, because there will always be one point that is
further away than other points. If there is a border between places, the
closest point to that border will obviously be closer to that area and the
furthest point will be further away from it. So, if we are going to deal
with it on that basis, we are going to have difficulties.

The way that we’ve looked at the matter is in the way of provinces as they
are divided. In the justice of the moment we are sticking with the
political decision that was taken on provinces. Clearly, when that Bill
comes along, we can look at other options as well, but at this stage it’s
the provincial boundaries that will prevail.

                    Measures to empower victims of crime

48.   Kgoshi M L Mokoena (ANC) asked the Minister for Justice and
      Constitutional Development:

      (a)   What measures have been put in place to empower victims of
            crime,

      (b)   how are such victims informed of their rights and (c) how are
            they benefiting from public awareness campaigns in this regard?
                                                   CO1261E

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: The
Department of Justice and Constitutional Development has established an
interdepartmental committee on the Victims’ Charter. The interdepartmental
committee consists of all departments in the cluster, as well as the
Department of Education, the SA Human Rights Commission and the Commission
on Gender Equality. The aim of the interdepartmental committee is to
facilitate and co-ordinate the implementation of the Victims’ Charter. I
will provide a short summary of some of the programmes established in the
cluster to empower victims.

The National Prosecuting Authority has employed victim assistance officers
or court preparation officers that provide assistance to victims when they
go to court – 23 officers are employed nationally. The South African Police
Service has established victim-friendly rooms in all police stations where
victims of domestic and sexual violence can make statements and receive
information. Currently, 216 police stations have victim-friendly rooms.

The Department of Social Development has established shelters for victims
of domestic and sexual violence in four provinces. The shelters provide
temporary accommodation for victims and also include skills programmes. The
shelters have been established this year in Vryburg in the Free State, in
Mitchells Plain in the Western Cape and in Sunnyside in Gauteng. In
addition, the Department of Social Development has provided funding to 19
NGO victim empowerment programmes during this financial year from monies
from the Criminal Asset Recovery Funds, Cara.

The Department of Correctional Services has ensured that victims can
participate in parole board hearings, where they can give testimony that
will assist the board in making its decisions about the granting of parole
to offenders. Correctional Services has upgraded some of its facilities
where parole board hearings take place to ensure that these are victim-
friendly. The following facilities were completed at Kirkwood at
Middledrift, at Grootvlei in Bloemfontein, Kroonstad, Polokwane, Nkomo,
Glencoe, and another 15 sites are being completed in this financial year.
Correctional Services is also in the process of establishing a national
call centre, which will also deal with enquiries from victims.

The Victims’ Charter is being printed and is currently available in
English, Afrikaans, IsiZulu, IsiXhosa, Sesotho, Tshivenda and in Braille.
Brochures have been distributed to all departments so that they can
reproduce and distribute it at different service points such as courts,
police stations, public hospitals and correctional facilities. Brochures
are currently also being distributed at multipurpose centres through GCIS.

My department has also developed and printed an A to Z directory of victim
services of all the departments and distributed it to all courts
countrywide. This service directory assists in referrals of victims to
relevant support services. The Department of Justice also facilitates the
integration of a victim service charter training programme into all our
Justice College training programmes so that both our staff and the
magistrates can get the benefit of the training and deal with victims
accordingly. My department has also developed a communication strategy for
informing victims about their rights. The strategy in 2007 has included a
television advert on SABC TV and all radio stations, as well as an
advertorial insert that was placed in all independent newspapers. In
partnership with GCIS, a more comprehensive strategy is planned for 2008-09
to inform victims of their rights. This strategy is to be presented to the
directors-general of the cluster.

The Department of Justice has planned provincial awareness campaigns about
the Victims’ Charter for 2008. These campaigns have targeted rural
communities. To date, five provincial awareness campaigns have taken place
in the Eastern Cape, KwaZulu-Natal, the Free State, Northern Cape and
Mpumalanga.

Lastly, I just want to point out, although I have said this already, that
adverts in all eleven indigenous languages are going to be run in the
foreseeable future to step up our awareness campaign. Thank you.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, let me again thank the hands-on Deputy
Minister for his calculated response. It was very informative and will
empower ourselves as well as the people out there.

Arising from the same response, the question I would like to ask is to find
out from my dynamic Deputy Minister whether it isn’t time now for us to
think of some kind of, for lack of a better term, reparation or
compensation for these victims? Because when you think of restorative
justice and talk of victims of crime, and you go to what we locally call
traditional courts, there is this restorative justice, where a victim will
be somehow, directly or indirectly, compensated or given some reparations.

There is no time for us to think of that, sir. I know this might take some
time, but while having all these measures or programmes in place, can’t we
think of something like that? Because there is this complaint out there
that victims are always the losers. Even when they win a case, whatever
there is will go to the coffers of the state. If we could just think of
that. Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Obviously
this is an issue that is raised often, and that is the issue of a victims’
fund. It is something we are still looking at, but we do believe that the
best way to treat victims is to treat them correctly and make sure that we
serve their interests through the criminal justice system.

Even if you go to some of the richest democracies in the world, for example
the state of Minnesota in the United States and one or two other states in
America, you do get these kinds of funds, but they are very, very limited
and basically what they pay for is your doctors’ fees if you happened to be
injured in the process. They are not what people are advocating, and that
is to say that government must create a fund. You can imagine such a fund
would be enormously draining on the resources if we had to create a fund
where every victim, instead of suing people that had injured them, then
came to the state for money.

It is something that we have looked at. There is a report by the SA Law
Commission, but government has not taken this step as a policy to move in
that direction. Obviously, as we move into our democracy, it is something
we keep on having to look at and see whether we would want to deal with
that.

I want to point out that even in the richest democracies it is incorrect
what people are saying in the public, namely that these funds pay you quite
a substantial amount. They usually only pay your hospital fees and so on.
So it is a very limited way and purpose that they deal with, but we will
keep an open mind as we go forward.

                Lack of public confidence in Legal Aid Board

49.   Mr A T Manyosi (ANC) asked the Minister for Justice and
      Constitutional Development:

      (a)   Why is there a lack of confidence in the Legal Aid Board among
          members of the public and (b) what is her department doing to
          restore the integrity of the LAB?        CO1263E

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Hon member,
I am not aware that there is a lack of confidence amongst members of the
public in the Legal Aid Board.

In fact, I believe that the services of the Legal Aid Board are sought
after by many members of the public. In fact, we are looking at the
statistics and it seems to us that almost 92% of criminal matters,
particularly in the higher courts and in the regional courts, are dealt
with by Legal Aid and not by private lawyers.

This is not to deny that some judicial employees of the board may face
certain challenges, including a lack of experience, but the overall service
of the board is acceptable and cannot be judged on the anecdotal comments
of one or two individuals.

I would like to remind this House that the Legal Aid Board, established
under the Legal Aid Act, is the vehicle through which the state provides
for indigent persons charged with, or involved in, criminal offences where
the person faces a substantial injustice being done if not represented, and
in certain limited, specifically defined, civil matters.

Members of the public are represented in courts by some 1 600 in-house
attorneys, as well as contracted attorneys and advocates from private
firms, depending on the internal human capacity.

My department and the Legal Aid Board have various interventions in place
to ensure that their services continue to reach, and meet, the needs of
South Africans. Amongst these are regular executive meetings we have
between the department, the Legal Aid Board and the Military Police Agency,
MPA, where matters of strategic legal importance are discussed. Some of
these matters are further dealt with by managers at the various technical
levels.

Furthermore, I can also give you this to save some time, this written
answer of mine. We have taken a whole lot of steps in the Legal Aid Board
to make sure that the quality of their work is being overseen by their
supervisors. I am just mentioning the principal; I am not going to read
through all those.

I would also like to draw this House’s attention to the dedicated
children’s court practitioners appointed at the Legal Aid Board centres. We
now have 20 of the 58 centres where specific attorneys are being trained to
handle civil matters concerning children. Legal practitioners in the
remaining 38 justice centres have now also been trained to deal with these
matters.

The Legal Aid Board will also further assist children in foster care and
adoption cases where the children’s views are different from the views of
the adults and we provide special representation in this regard. This
representation of indigent children in these types of cases has increased
by 20% monthly.
The interventions and monitoring tools identified and managed by the Legal
Aid Board are there to assist the Legal Aid Board in proactively responding
to any concerns raised by the clients. The Legal Aid Board’s service
delivery continues to show a significant improvement; hence, there is no
need for me to take any specific action in addition to that which is in
place, except to incrementally ensure that the Legal Aid Board increases
its capacity.

For the period ending March 2008, the Legal Aid Board has reported an
increase of about 10% of new and finalised legal aid matters, as compared
to the previous year. Close to 400 000 legal matters were finalised in this
financial year, with about 93% attended to by lawyers in-house.

I therefore request the hon member to provide me with details of specific
cases where there have been complaints about the services provided by the
Legal Aid Board. I will ensure that the complaint is addressed by my
department in conjunction with the board. Thank you.

Mr Z C NTULI: Thank you, Deputy Minister, for the response. I would like to
find out from the Deputy Minister whether the indigent people will be – I
have heard you talk about the children – attended to as with the children’s
civil claims. I am asking about the indigent people, whether the Legal Aid
will be able to extend their expertise to the indigent people when they are
doing the civil claims? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: As I
indicated, according to the Legal Aid guide that has been adopted by
Parliament, there is a certain limited amount of civil work that gets done
by the Legal Aid Board. There are also, in some instances, like with
children, constitutional requirements that we should attend to these
matters. Clearly, with children we automatically provide it. For all legal
aid matters there is an indigent test - what we call a means test – and you
have to comply with the means test.

At the moment the new guide, as you have requested in this House as well,
is being looked at and changed, and that indigent test would be changed
upward to include more people in it, but clearly it would not include
everyone. There is a big group of people, particularly in the middle
classes and the upper classes, that would clearly deal with their own
matters. So, as you know, the guide does not provide that all indigent
people in all civil matters get dealt with; the rules are very specific.
The idea is, of course, as we obtain more money and as we become a stronger
democracy, to extend the civil services that we are already providing in
criminal matters further and further. The limitation is placed there by the
budget constraints of the department.

Mnr N J MACK: Agb Adjunkminister, die enigste tyd wanneer ons hoor van ’n
regshulpprokureur is wanneer ons in die moeilikheid is en wanneer ons nie
geld het nie. Hoekom word hulle nie bekend gestel in die areas waar hulle
werksaam is nie?  Hoekom hoor ons nooit van die suksesse wat hulle behaal
nie? Ons beheer nou wel nie die media nie, maar hoekom word hierdie
suksesse nie aan ons meegedeel so dat ons hierdie mense kan waardeer vir
wat hulle doen nie? Is daar te min geld vir dekking in die media? Dankie.

Die ADJUNKMINISTER VIR JUSTISIE EN STAATKUNDIGE ONTWIKKELING: Nee, ek dink
ons moet versigtig wees. Die hele regshulpstelsel het van ’n ’’judicare’’-
stelsel verander na ’n kliniekstelsel toe. Omtrent 90% van alle werk word
nou in die Regshulpraad se klinieke self gedoen. Die hoeveelheid werk wat
nie deur die raad gedoen word nie maar deur private prokureurs en advokate,
is omtrent 10% en dit word net gedoen waar daar ’n konflik is tussen die
kliënte wat reeds deur die Raad bedien word.

Ek sal ’n bietjie ondersoek gaan instel na hoekom daar nie genoeg gesê word
oor hulle suksesse nie, maar ek dink – ek is seker – as jy daar na die
Minister van Veiligheid en Sekuriteit langs jou kyk, hy hoop dat daar wat
kriminele sake betref nie te veel suksesse deur die Regshulpraad behaal
word nie. Anders het ons ook die probleem dat daar niks mense gevangenis
toe gaan nie, en die Minister hier sal ook nie gelukkig wees as daar nie
meer mense na die gevangenis toe kom nie. So, ons moet ook hoop dat die
Regshulpraad nie te suksesvol raak nie, want anders kom al die kriminele
skotvry daarvan af. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr N J MACK: Hon Deputy Minister, the only time we hear about a legal aid
lawyer is when we’re in trouble and when we don’t have money. Why aren’t
they introduced in their operational environment? Why do we never hear
about the successes they achieve? We may not be in control of the media,
but why aren’t these successes conveyed to us so that we can appreciate
these people for what they are doing? Is there not enough money for media
coverage? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: No, I think
we should be careful. The entire system of legal assistance has changed
from a judicare system to one of legal clinics. About 90% of all work is
now being done at the actual clinics of the Legal Aid Board. The amount of
work that is taken care of not by the board but by private attorneys and
advocates is about 10% and then it is only done if there’s a conflict
between the clients who are already being served by the board.

I will investigate why not enough mention is made about their successes,
but I think – I am sure – looking at the Minister of Safety and Security
next to you, that he would hope for not too many successes by the Legal Aid
Board as regards criminal cases. Otherwise we will also have the problem
that nobody is going to jail, and the Minister over here will also be
unhappy if people are no longer coming to jail. So, we must also hope that
the Legal Aid Board does not become too successful, otherwise the criminals
will all go scot-free.]

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Thank you to the Deputy Minister for the response. As
oversight practitioners, when visiting departments and, in particular,
correctional services centres, people who are reluctant to make use of the
services of the Legal Aid Board are the awaiting-trial detainees.
Chairperson, I will just give a few examples of their gripes. Firstly, they
complain about double-booking by the Legal Aid Board – double-booking for
the same date, same time and they cannot appear. Secondly, they complain
that they are urged or coerced to plead guilty, because the purpose would
be just to up their conviction rates. When they urge them to plead guilty,
they are saying that they will plead for mitigation for them. That is their
complaint. That is what people are complaining about.

During the budget hearing the departments promised to follow up this
reluctance and these complaints. I wonder: How can we try expeditiously to
curb some of these anomalies that people are complaining about? Some of
these small issues are tainting the image of the Legal Aid Board, because
some of us are aware that they are doing a very good job. Some of these
things are really frustrating. In one area it was confirmed that they urged
these awaiting-trial detainees to plead guilty. If the Deputy Minister can
just unpack this one, I would appreciate it. Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: I am really
scared to look at anecdotal evidence, particularly with regard to prisoners
who are sitting there and – I mean, Kroonstad, four days ago, started a
strike where there are also people that are doing legal aid - they come up
with all kinds of stories. They went to look there and, in fact, the reason
why they only now have got Legal Aid lawyers is because previously the
advocates and the lawyers that they had weren’t paid and they have now had
to give up those cases. Who do they blame? They blame the Legal Aid
lawyerwho was appointed just the other day.

I think we must be careful with regard to anecdotal evidence. I would want
to say this: If you go anywhere and someone complains of the service of the
Legal Aid Board, please send them to go and lodge a complaint. There are no
complaints there at all. It is all anecdotal, so we can’t see whether they
are true or not without anyone acting. For example, with regard to the
issues you raised, if there is a Legal Aid lawyer that forces someone to
plead guilty I, firstly, find it very strange, because part of their
performance agreement is to get people off, not to plead guilty. I don’t
know what benefit they could get by getting people to plead guilty.

Secondly, if you do that, clearly it is against the ethics of a lawyer. If
you are forcing someone to do something they don’t want to do, to plead
guilty, for example, that person must definitely go and lay a complaint
with the Law Council. In this case you said KwaZulu-Natal, so it would be
the KZN Law Council.

If it is a complaint on capacity and so on, of course, that complaint has
to be lodged either with the board, with us or, of course, with the Public
Protector - I mean, if it is a person you are complaining about, or if
people aren’t providing proper services in the Public Protector, or if it’s
a human rights issue. Once these people are making these complaints, please
encourage them to go and make them to the right authorities, so that we can
investigate and see if there is any truth in these matters. Otherwise, they
are just going to remain anecdotal.

I must tell you, before I came to Parliament I practised law for at least 9
or 10 years, and I can’t remember that there were clients that were ever
happy about being in court and with their lawyers, even the ones I got off.
It is just one of those things. Please, if there are complaints, there may
be problems within the legal aid system, then let’s get the complaints on
paper, get them to the right authorities, let’s investigate them so that we
can come and answer them properly. Otherwise, I am going to just keep on
having to say that they are anecdotal, I don’t know how to respond to them.
Thank you.
Ms A N T MCHUNU: Hon Deputy Minister, may I please know if the traditional
courts are used to disseminate information about the Legal Aid Board? Thank
you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: I am not
sure. I doubt it. As far as I know, there is no legal representation before
the traditional courts, so I imagine Legal Aid doesn’t come into play. I am
not aware that that is disseminated through there. That may all change
through the new Bill that’s in Parliament now. Of course, we are trying to
create a slightly different role and add training for traditional leaders
that are doing judicial cases, but at this stage I don’t think that what
you have asked is happening.

  Effect of vacancies in key departmental positions on service delivery and
                              access to justice

50.   Mr A T Manyosi (ANC) asked the Minister for Justice and
      Constitutional Development:

      Whether the many vacancies in key positions in her department are
      affecting (a) service delivery and (b) access to justice; if so, (i)
      how, (ii) what are the reasons for all the vacancies and (iii) when
      will this challenge be addressed?       CO1264E

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT:
Chairperson, thank goodness this is my last one. [Laughter.] This one was
also dealt with during the budget debate. Vacancies in key positions in my
department have not affected service delivery and access to justice. I can
gladly inform the House that during this financial year, my department has
reduced its overall vacancy rate from 23% to 12%. We said that in the House
during the debate.

However, I asked my department to give me the vacancy rate. Having looked
at it, it’s clear to me that these figures are not correct and that they
are much lower. What they have done is they have included in this list 23
senior magistrates, 4 chief magistrates, 16 regional magistrates, 1
regional court president, 1 special grade chief magistrate and 28 judges.
Those vacancies are not part of the department. Those refer to judges and
magistrates. They get appointed through the Magistrates Commission and the
Judicial Service Commission. So, although those posts are vital within the
justice family and although they are vital and key, I do not think they
make up part of the numbers of the department. So, I will relook this and I
will definitely give you what I actually think the percentage is in a
written form because it is definitely below 12%. The vacancies of
magistrates and judges should be reflected separately.

We all know that judges get appointed twice a year. In April and in
October, the Judicial Service Commission fills all existing vacancies. All
such vacancies are filled every time. The magistrate sits throughout the
year filling those vacancies and giving recommendations to the Minister to
sign. So, it seems to me that the figures are much, much lower, and we have
actually done much better during the year. I have asked them, in line with
what I found in this document, to redo the figures. The reasons on how we
turned this around have been written down here. I am not going to go
through them. I think we discussed some of them during the budget debate,
and it is time consuming. So, I will let you have this.

On the second part of the question, the reasons for vacancies are
resignations, retirements and the transfer of employees. In certain
instances, my department experienced difficulties in recruiting candidates
that met the requirements of posts. This is a challenge that most
government departments are currently faced with.

The robust recruitment drive undertaken by my department has seen our
vacancy rate in senior positions reduced to 118 or 12% - I have already
explained that a lot of the vacancies shouldn’t be there. To date, 41 of
these posts have already been advertised and we are in the process of
filling them. The remaining posts will be advertised shortly.

I would like to inform the House that my department has also introduced an
internship programme that will give our graduates an opportunity to acquire
the required skills in law. In this financial year, my department set aside
R15 million to sustain this programme. We have placed over 130 legal
graduates in various areas in line with the National Youth Service
Programme. At least 80 of them are presently at university law clinics,
while another 45 are in the Office of the State Attorney. So, our whole
internship programme is growing substantially every year to get more people
into the system.

Mr D A WORTH: Chairperson, I would like to ask the Deputy Minister whether
he thinks that any of these vacancies, be it in the magistrates’ section or
wherever, has any influence on the number of cases being struck off the
roll. Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: No, not at
all. I mean, if we don’t have permanent posts in the case of magistrates, I
make acting appointments. So, every single post is filled all the time.
There is never a magistrate’s post or a judge’s post that stands empty. If
those posts have been approved by Treasury, we fill them with acting
appointments all the time until permanent appointments are made. Likewise,
in the department, when senior posts are vacant, we obviously fill them
with an acting one. If a DDG is not there, then we fill the post with an
acting DDG till that post is filled, and so we fill the other posts as
well.

But that’s just part of the problem with filling vacancies. There is
movement all the time. Because of these acting appointments, you then have
to appoint someone there in that post and then you have to put an acting
appointment from lower to fill it up. That’s what happens. You will never
get a full vacancy because government just doesn’t work like that. You have
to then advertise the new post – you have to go through a process before
you can fill it. But we fill all those posts with acting appointments. They
don’t stand empty.

Mr B J MKHALIPHI: Chair, I just want to know from the hon Deputy Minister
whether the department does employ interns in their department. If so, what
does the corps of interns do to alleviate the vacancy rate in the
department? Thanks.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Well, you
remember the President, one or two years ago, said in a speech that we need
to draw more interns into the different departments. Our department has
done that from the beginning. The idea with interns is not so much to fill
the vacancies. These are usually people with legal skills but who just came
out of university and can’t get work. So, we draw them into the department
at a stipend or allowance that is paid throughout government - a certain
amount of money that they then get paid.

In this way, they then acquire experience and skills while they are looking
for work. Many of them, specifically the good ones, then of course try and
stay on in the department – whether it’s within Corrections or Justice.
They try and stay where they are. So, that is the purpose of the whole
internship programme. It’s a way to try and give people exposure which they
wouldn’t have otherwise, and in that way try and let them have skills to
then apply for jobs in that department or elsewhere.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, as “padkos” to the Deputy Minister, since
this is the last question, one other reason for these vacancies in key
positions, we were told, is resignations because of poaching by other
entities. Does this not call for the department to review their retention
strategy or policy? Thanks, Chair.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: I wish I
could answer that. I think if someone could answer that question for the
Ministers or Deputy Ministers, it would solve all of our problems. If you
have that answer, you must give it to us because you will solve a lot of
problems. The situation is this: Good people are mobile. What happens is,
particularly in government in the last 13 years, we attracted good young,
black women candidates to the civil service – an opportunity which they
didn’t have previously. So, they get exposed to really good work and very
responsible work at a much earlier stage that they wouldn’t get anywhere
else when they go and work. But what happens is that the good ones then
develop very quickly. They are then so mobile. We can pay them a certain
salary, on level 13, for example, but the private sector would then move in
and give them 3 or 4 times that salary. I mean, just look at any good
communication person in government, for example. I remember when the late
Dullah Omar was still working here, I think there was a person who got a
salary of R90 000. Sanlam and people from those companies came along
because they saw this person in the arena talking and they took the person
and offered the person three times that salary. We couldn’t go to Minister
Fraser-Moleketi and say to her that she must please then let us pay the guy
three times what he was getting then to keep him. So, that is why I say if
you have an answer to this issue you will solve a lot of problems. It is a
big issue.

But government has, in our wisdom, come up with a lot of strategies. The
latest strategy we have is the occupation specific dispensation, OSD. What
the OSD does is within the salary structures of government. If you are in a
particular area, you need to create a particular career path for people -
whether you need professionals or not. So, people don’t have to go through
level 1, 2 and 3, like others. Let us say, for example, you get a detective
that is very good as a detective in the Police Service and he reaches a
certain level in the service. The only way he can get a promotion, since
there are people above him, is then for him to move around in the rest of
the police force. Then we lose the skills and the service of that
detective. So, what we have done in government is that we are looking at
OSDs as a skills retention mechanism in certain key areas. We have done
this with teachers, nurses and legally trained staff.

There are other areas we are now also looking at, particularly in the
Police Service - how we can create a special career path so that people can
stay on till they are 50 or 60 years of age, and they don’t have to become
managers. I mean the civil service is crazy. When you are a doctor in
Health or you are in Justice, if you are really good in court or in
operations and so on and you come to a ceiling, the only way then to get a
promotion is by leaving practice and becoming an administrator. So, your
best-skilled doctors, lawyers, etc, are lost. The civil service is
structured in such a way that at some stage you will have to then become an
administrator and stop practising. You stop doing operations and you stop
doing law.

All these things are the kinds of things we are looking at in the civil
service – how we can restructure that. One of them, as I said, is with this
OSD that will then be able to let one get the same salary while they remain
a detective, for example, or they don’t have to then become an
administrator. That is one of the retention strategies. But if anyone has
other suggestions for us, I think all the Ministers here will be very
excited, and you will get a Nobel prize for actually giving us that
information. Thank you.

     Progress in integrating metropolitan police into SA Police Service

51.   Mr Z C Ntuli (ANC) asked the Minister of Safety and Security:


    (a) What progress has been made in integrating the metropolitan police
    into the SA Police Service, (b) what are the challenges in this regard,
    (c) how will the remaining members be integrated and (d) how soon will
    the matter be finalised?                 CO1266E

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, may I respond here from
the podium, please? Thank you very much, Chairperson. The reason for this
is that my hearing is becoming worse and worse and therefore I have to be
able to look at the person who is asking a question in order for me to
understand the question - that is the only reason. [Laughter.]

Members would be aware that there are decisions that have been taken to
update the South African Police Service Act to produce what is generally
referred to as the Safety and Security Act. What we want to do regarding
that matter, therefore, will be in the end to place before Parliament the
relevant update which talks to a number of issues, including the
metropolitan or municipal police services.

That being so, if I am asked at this time what we have done regarding the
integration, the answer is we have not done much, because we want to
utilise the opportunity of redrafting the Act in order for us to do the
things we want to do.

However, I wanted to indicate to this House how I personally feel about the
matter. I have had discussions with senior police management and they also
have the same attitude towards it, which is that we do not seek to take
away administratively the municipal or metropolitan police services from
the municipalities themselves, as I say, with respect to the administration
of those services. But we want to create a situation where they become a
force multiplayer and with respect to that therefore to be in constant and
dynamic contact with the police on the basis of operational matters.

Secondly, we want to ensure that they do not simply administer by-laws,
with respect to policing, but that they also participate in crime
prevention. We have already started a process whereby the various police
chiefs in the municipalities and metros attend meetings, strategic
sessions, with the police so that they discuss how, together, they can
begin to address matters relating to crime. That is the position,
therefore, as it stands.

Mr Z C NTULI: Thank you, Chairperson, and thank you, Minister, for the
comprehensive response. I just want to check about the community safety
forums that we are talking about – I remember we said it has to happen at a
local level – in order to find out whether the municipal or metro police
would be part of the metro police or whether they would form part of the
SAPS, if we say they are integrated from the top downwards?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, I am sure the hon Ntuli
is aware that that issue is part and parcel of the changes that we want to
make. Therefore, in the end we will have the community safety forums and
everywhere where there is activity, policing, correction, justice, and so
on. There will be those structures, from national right down to the locals.


In other words, at the local level where you have the metropolitan or
municipality police service, that structure will be directly operational,
together with those that are serving in that metropolitan structure. It
will not be via the SA Police Service, so to speak; it is people on the
ground and therefore that service which will be on the ground that will
have a relationship.

However, this is a broad structure. It means, therefore, where policing is
done – be it at national, provincial or local level there will be a
relationship via the community safety forums.

Mr J W LE ROUX: Chairperson, could the Minister explain to this House the
main reasons for bringing the metro police into the SA Police system; and
were there huge problems as it was in the past that made it really
necessary to do this?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, I thought that members
understood what I was saying. I was talking about my point of view and that
I have bounced this off others and there seems to be support for this view,
that we will not integrate them physically into the SA Police Service. They
will continue being administered by the local municipality or metro where
they exist.

For instance, here in Cape Town you have the Cape Town Metro Police
structure and that will continue to be administered by the metro. What I am
saying is that they become a multiplayer in the sense that they will then,
together with the police, work on operational matters. We don’t believe
that metro police ought to be dealing with by-laws only.

We believe that they can be part and parcel of crime prevention and to that
extent, therefore, they get more powers but they will retain their
autonomy, and nonetheless, continue to work with the police. What the law
currently says is that it is the national Police Service that defines the
national strategy for policing. And therefore they will take their marching
orders from that national policing strategy. Otherwise it’s not integration
into the police.

I don’t know what you as lawmakers will say when we present the relevant
Bill to Parliament. You may decide that they need to be integrated fully or
whatever, I don’t know. But when the Bill comes to Parliament, through the
Minister of Safety and Security, it will talk to that issue. Thank you.

          Dedicated team to address low morale of police officials

52.   Mr N J Mack (ANC) asked the Minister of Safety and Security:

      Whether there is a dedicated team addressing the low morale of some of
      the police officials in his department; if not, why not; if so, (a)
      how and (b) what are the further relevant details?
                                  CO1267E

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, you know in the Police,
while understanding the pressures that members of the police have, we have
decided to establish a dedicated unit which deals with those pressures,
traumas and so on, and we call it the employee assistance services. That
service is populated by people who are religiously inclined, in other
words, there are ministers there. Some of them are serving as chaplains and
others are attending to the religious needs of our members. There are
social workers who are also part of that establishment as well as
psychologists.

What they do is to look at the wellbeing of members, right across the
board, and what things worry them. They are able to pick up as quickly as
possible when there are difficulties. These difficulties are varied - some
have to do with problems at home, and some have to do with financial
matters, and so on. When these are picked up, that entire unit is then
brought to bear on trying to find answers to some of the problems that
members experience.

To that extent, therefore, they will do a number of things, including the
briefing of members on what is actually bothering them, how it can be
addressed, and so on. The team also deals with matters of low morale in the
service.

I must say, therefore, that after we put it in place, people who in the
past were not willing to come forward and share their problems have begun
to do so now, because there is a combination of people who are interacting
with them. Some of them, as I say, are people who are religious who sit
down with the members and get them to talk about the problems they have.
So, we have that unit in place which is assisting in cases where our
members are going through traumatic patches in their lives.

Mr N J MACK: Minister, I am very pleased with the answer. I would just
further like to say, especially in these cases, that we need to determine
beforehand the symptoms when someone shows low morale and depression.
Usually, low morale also comes with the inability to deal with the work
stress, or with communicating or the handling of our people in conflict
conditions. As a result, our police have low morale and they are afraid to
attend to certain issues because they do not have that ability. Are there
any refresher courses where capabilities are developed for them to handle
these very stressful situations?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Hon member, yes, many of our people
undergo various types of counselling, but there are others who also attend
those sessions in order for them to understand what actually happens when
someone is said to be depressed and what the causes of their problems are.
I do want to say - we are upfront about this - that it is not always that
we will pick up a problem right at the beginning. It is not always that we
will be able to do that. But we also rely on members who work together with
those who are affected, who have been instructed that, immediately when
they see that there are difficulties, to report to the commanders. You work
together with someone who is undergoing difficulties or your life may be in
danger simply because that person will not be able, among other things, to
cover you when there are difficulties. So, we encourage people to report as
soon as they pick up signs that there are difficulties. So, we try to do
that.

As I’ve already indicated, it must not be read to be saying that we cover
each and every instance where problems arise. That is not so. We deal with
those that do come to our attention. We encourage people to tell us when
they see the relevant signs. We take them into sessions to indicate what
those signs might be and teach people how to respond as an attempt to pay
initial attention to the problems of fellow members in the service.

Mr B J MKHALIPHI: Chairperson, I would like to know from the hon Minister
whether the department does recognise the contribution that is made by
participation in extramural activities by police officers, and if so, does
the department support these participating members in any way so that these
activities contribute to the uplifting of their morale?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, there are many events
that are organised for this and, by the way, I don’t see some of you
attending those events. One of them, which happens annually, is what is
called Polmusca, that is, the police’s musical festival. Every year we have
that. It is one of the most brilliant programmes that we have. I must
indicate that our musicians, the singers and those who play music, I
believe, are the best in this country.

The Minister of Correctional Services knows this. Our bands are much better
than his. Our singers are much better than his. In fact, I said to him
sometime back that I would want us to upgrade the competitions – he also
has those competitions – to a competition where the people in his service
compete with those in my service. It would be a brilliant thing. But that’s
not the only one. In a few weeks’ time, or days, we will be in East London
where there will be an International Rugby Tournament of police structures
across the world. Unfortunately, I don’t remember the date offhand.

With soccer it is the same. They go abroad and participate in all manner of
activities. That helps people to destress to a very large extent.
There are other things that they are involved in, including educational
ones. There are a number of programmes that the police are involved in.
Thank you very much.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, I would like to thank the hon Minister for
the response, because it’s really taking us somewhere. Arising from this
response, Chair, the question is: Why do these frustrated, demotivated,
depressed, stressed and devastated officials, in your own research, hon
Minister, when they are going through all these traumas, turn their anger
to their own families? This is worrying because the next target onto which
they relieve their stress is their families. There is one instance where a
police officer just maimed his whole family, and this when the chaplain
said this guy was stressed, frustrated or whatever. In your own research,
Minister, why is such anger vented in this manner on their next of kin?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Well, the SA Police Service is a
microcosm of what is happening in society. Those people behave in the same
way that society at large behaves. It is just that the uniform easily
distinguishes them from the rest.

One of the biggest problems we have is what we define as social crime.
Social crime accounts for most of the serious and violent crimes that are
happening in South Africa because these are people who are found in the
same circumstances because they are either relatives or family friends, and
so on. They are always found in the same environment. It is in that
environment that they begin to fight over issues relevant to their lives.
For instance, if it is a husband and wife and the wife is asking about the
money, because the husband is not bringing the money back home, then that
issue becomes so problematic that someone is attacked.

We have commissioned a private company to tell us and help us to understand
why there is so much violence and crime in South Africa. Their final report
is going to be available at the end of this year. And hopefully from the
beginning of next year it will become a report that will be tabled in
Parliament to try to generate a discussion in South Africa on how to deal
with that question.

So, these police officers who act in the way that the hon Kgoshi has
explained are part and parcel of that milieu of problems revolving around
social crime. That is a big problem we have. If, as a country, we were able
to resolve that problem, I’m telling you, crimes like murder would be
reduced by 80% because that is what it is. Social crime murders form 80% of
the total rate of murder that we have.

Incidentally, on Monday we are publishing the crime trends report, which
will also include the crime statistics. I can tell you now that the matter
continues to be so bothersome because when we release that report, it will
be clear that social crime is still a big problem in South Africa.

Mr F ADAMS: Hon Minister, the morale of staff at police stations is
sometimes very low because of abuse by their station commissioners, their
seniors and all that. Is this team addressing that because you do get the
policemen who are dedicated to their work? Sometimes they love to be
policemen and policewomen but when they get to the police station, they do
not form part of the blue-eyed boy circle or blue-eyed girl circle of the
station commander, station commissioner or any higher ranking officer above
them. That also breaks down the morale.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Thank you very much for the question.
Yes, that team does that as well, but what is also available to members who
are treated in that fashion is a complaint system that is in place. When
they feel that they are being ill-treated in their workplace, they can
activate that and report it. But more than this, as I indicated a while
back, we have produced what is called a management tool, which is also able
to understand what is happening in the various stations that we have and
where low morale is affecting the performance. Those stations are targeted
for serious interaction between the senior police management and the
station.

Just to have an understanding of what is happening, we have quite a vibrant
human resources development unit that tracks all of these things.
Therefore, it is part and parcel of our work to try to address that
particular problem. I am sure it will be clear to members that what we want
to achieve in the end is success in the fight against crime, and we can’t
do this with units of people who are dissatisfied. That is why, now and
again, the issue of the conditions of the Police Service comes up for
discussion. It has to do with that particular matter because we do not want
people who are responsible for our safety and security and protection to be
disgruntled.

 Training of community police forums by national Secretariat for Safety and
                                  Security

53.   Mr N J Mack (ANC) asked the Minister of Safety and Security:

      (a) How often does the national Secretariat train members of the
      community police forums (CPFs), (b) how is the community benefiting
      from this training and (c) how many members of the CPFs are benefiting
      from the training?                      CO1268E

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, it would be so nice if we
could deal with both Questions 53 and 54. They are talking about the same
issue. I could give an explanation, but I suppose you want me to take them
one by one? Where I come from we say, “by one by one”. I’ll deal with
Question 53 first.

The law, as it stands, never created any system by which we could make
available to the community police forums those resources that they required
– it’s not in the Act at all.

The community police forums, therefore, to a very large extent, have had to
rely on the tender mercies of the person who is the commissioner at a
particular station. If the person who is a commissioner at a station is not
open and hospitable to the community police forums, he or she will not help
them.

One of the reasons that we are revamping the community police forums is for
us to ensure that we resource them independently as a unit that is
necessary, amongst other things, to co-ordinate a relationship between the
people and the Police Service.

In terms of the law, the law that I referred to earlier, we are trying to
ensure that that law will address this particular problem so that we can
directly resource them to be able to do the work that needs to be done.

You don’t have in the Police Service a system that is designed to train the
community police forums, although we said, when we were conceptualising
this, that the police must take responsibility for the training of those
forums. What the police are doing, therefore, is that they themselves have
a dynamic interaction with the members of the forums and they help them
accordingly.

With respect to your question regarding the national Secretariat for Safety
and Security, what happens there is that they do not give any training at
the level of the national Secretariat for Safety and Security. What happens
is that each province has a provincial secretariat and those provincial
secretariats are responsible for the training of the members.

To go back just a little to why the community police forums were
established: Their main function is to co-ordinate this relationship
between communities and the police. We want to establish in South Africa
what is called “community policing”, so that communities, working together
with the police, in an environment of friendship, will give the police the
information that they require. That is what the community police forums are
doing.

Therefore, in the main the training is focused on bringing up such members
in order for them to understand what it is that is required in order for
them to be able to create this system of co-ordination with the
communities.

Because community police forums interact with communities, the first thing
that happens is that communities are therefore galvanised to participate
directly in the fight against crime by providing information to the police,
by making themselves available for the reservist system and by making
themselves available to do volunteering work. So they benefit communities
in that particular way.

We do not have a number at this stage, but we will get it for you, to
indicate how many members of the community police forums have received
training. At a later stage, we will collate that information and make it
available to you. Thank you very much.

Mr N J MACK: Chairperson, I just have two concerns that I would like to
raise with the Minister. When community police forums are at work, they
usually use the same telephone extensions as the police. Sometimes you find
that community police forums want to monitor the police very strictly and
that their focus is more on that than being the link between communities
and the police.

Is this role specifically spelled out during training? Sometimes you find
community police forums are doing worse than the police when going into a
home to arrest a suspect, and that creates friction within the same
community.

My main question is: How, during training, are the forums’ capabilities
harnessed so that they can assist the broader public to be more aware of
its rights and to be law-abiding? Is that specified as part of their
training? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Thank you very much, hon Mack.
Unfortunately, when we established the community police forums we did not
go back to how we had conceptualised them. What we said would happen –
which is what we are now trying to do – is that the forums would be co-
ordinating structures. As such, what they would then do is that they would
sit together with the police and say that the communities where we come
from are worried about the following crime types, therefore produce a
strategy to deal with them, and we will discuss such a strategy together.

When we have agreed on the strategy, we would then go back to the
communities and say to them, “This month we want you to help us deal with
the following”. That is how the issue of community police forums was
conceptualised.

We then said that the people themselves would determine whether the police
are doing their work. After some time, the police would go back to the
communities and report back: “You remember, we came here last month and we
said we were going to deal with this, that or the other? Here are the
results of our work”, so that they are held accountable. That is how this
thing was conceptualised. We are now going back to that.

You are correct that some of the CPFs do not fully understand their role,
and have themselves assumed the position of being police officers. Indeed,
that causes conflict, and we are now meeting with them to explain these
things.

The CPFs must help to identify in the communities people who can be members
of the reservist force and people who can be volunteers. Volunteers, among
others, include doctors and nurses who go to the trauma sections of police
stations and help people, particularly women and children who have been
sexually abused. That is their main function. There has been a
misunderstanding about that, which we are now trying to correct. So, that
is the situation. Thank you, Chairperson.

Mr Z C NTULI: Chairperson, I am glad that the Minister has alluded to the
piece of legislation that we are talking about. I would like to find out,
when is it coming? I am worried about the fact that when it comes to CPFs,
the police commissioner seems to have more powers than the Minister.

If you look at the police Act, it gives the Commissioner of Police the
powers to establish CPFs, and all that. To my way of thinking, that is the
competence of the Minister or the MEC at a provincial level, because this
is a civilian issue.

I would be pleased if this piece of legislation could come, or we would be
made aware as to when it is coming. I think there is a problem when you
find that the Minister seems to have fewer powers than the commissioner,
and I do not think it is correct.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, that is one of the things
we are trying to correct with this law. As I say, hon members here know how
long it takes to produce a piece of legislation. We have been told that in
our focus, we must produce a, do we call it a Safety and Security Act?

It will have four pillars, and those are obviously the police; the
oversight mechanism, including the ICD, that is the Independent Complaints
Directorate; community policing, that is the forum itself; and the other
elements of oversight. We defined each one and its role vis-à-vis policing
in South Africa. It will be like that.

The CPFs, in terms of that piece of legislation, will indeed have the kind
of authority we want them to have so that they do not rely on the police
for the work that they must do. This they must do with the understanding
that that work involves co-ordination of a relationship between the police
and the people around the concept of community policing.

There are many areas where community policing is in place, and in those
areas crime levels have gone down. To mention a few, there is Alexandra and
Sebokeng in Gauteng, and many other areas. This is the consequence of
community policing.

The Act, unfortunately, could not be finalised this year because of the
short sessions that we have. However, I am sure that at some point next
year it will be available. The Act will have to go through public hearings
and all other processes. The initial steps will be made sometime next year.
Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Chairperson, the hon Minister has
alluded to the tendency by CPFs and volunteers to feel entitled to be the
first to be considered for appointment whenever positions are advertised
within the Police Service, irrespective of requirements.

I want to believe that the hon Minister will agree that that is a very
serious and pervasive culture in our society, and not only within the
Police Service. Whenever posts are advertised in health care in local
government, volunteers always feel that they are first in the line.

I want to check the extent to which your department, and government in
general, has engaged the community in terms of conscientising our people to
the culture of volunteerism, which I believe is a societal issue, as
government alone cannot resolve it.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, that matter is of course
very problematic, because we talk about it all the time. I don’t know
whether people do not understand the way we explain things.

For instance, when you are a volunteer, you ought not to expect that you
will get anything at the end of your voluntary work, but people expect to
be given something. This arises as a consequence of the problems we have
generally as a country, such as unemployment, poverty, etc. So, when people
do work, they want to be employed.

What we ought to be able to do within the police - and we are working on
this - is to explain fully to people regarding areas where they will be
paid and areas where they will not be paid. We try to do this.

For instance, the only people that are paid in the Police Service are those
who are reservists. Reservists are paid only to the extent of the work they
have done. In other words, the regulation, as it stands, is that you will
give so many hours of free service. I am uncertain about the number of
hours, but you serve those hours for free. Thereafter, you are paid an
allowance for every hour that you worked beyond the number of hours you
needed to serve.

When I look at the regulation, people can make some kind of living around
voluntary work, because the allowances are quite handsome. If you are a
nurse and you want to go and give service at our trauma centres, you are
volunteering your time and energy to help people; you can’t expect to be
paid for that. We have major problems around the matter.

It is like elections. Ordinarily, if you are helping out during elections
you are helping to consolidate democracy and, therefore, it is your
revolutionary duty to assist, but people want to be paid when they do that
kind of work. Of course, we do pay people when they do that kind of work.
Thank you.

Mr R J TAU: Chair, I do not know if I will be making the Minister’s life
easy or difficult in this instance. However, I appreciate the effort in
responding to this very difficult question related to the spirit of
voluntarism. The follow-up question is: Will the Minister agree with me -
of course, we pick up these things during our programme of Taking
Parliament to the People, especially with regard to voluntarism - that
within civil society as well, we also find an irresponsible element within
organisations, even political parties, that raises expectations amongst
volunteers? I can quote, as an example, our recent visit to Sebokeng, where
members of the public were told that the reason they are not employed as
reservists or whatever, whenever there are vacancies, is because they are
regarded as useless and that they are tools to be used by our government.

I don’t know if the hon Minister will agree with me that it is important
that we make the call right now for organisations or civil society to
refrain from irresponsible statements. Political parties, in particular,
get very excited when some of these statements are made in public. Thank
you very much.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: That was an observation. I will
reserve my comments on that particular observation.

   Funding and tendering procedure iro training of community police forum
                                   members

54.   Kgoshi M L Mokoena (ANC) asked the Minister of Safety and Security:

      (1)   What amount was used in training community police forum
            members in the 2007-08 financial year;


      (2)   whether this function was outsourced; if not, why not; if so,
            (a) which company was awarded the tender, (b) how transparent
            was the tendering process and (c)(i) how many companies tendered
            and (ii) what are the names of those companies?
                                   CO1269E

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, I’ve responded to some
level with respect to the issue of the training of community police forums,
and I’ve indicated that there’s no money involved. I’ve understood this
question, but I don’t know if what I was doing is correct, Kgoshi, because
my training in my other life tells me that there is a question you’re
asking here, and unfortunately you have not given me the facts around it.

There is an issue you’re raising here and to that extent, therefore, I’d
like to appeal to you to please indicate, not here, but do give me the
information. There is specific information you have about abuse here. I
would want to investigate that matter, because quite clearly there is
something; if not criminal, highly mischievous. I’m appealing to you,
therefore, to provide me with the relevant facts so that we can investigate
this. We can’t allow anything like this. But as I say, the way I’ve read
the question, and I’ve read it many times, I think there is a story behind
this question.

I’m appealing to the hon members that we do not interrogate it now; we will
be in touch with the hon member for me to have an understanding. There is
something behind this question that needs to be investigated. Thank you.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you, hon
Minister. Hon member, do you agree?

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, I accept the advice from my calculated,
dynamic Minister. I’ll do exactly that. Thank you.
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon members, the
presiding officers who preceded me have agreed that the Minister will also
answer Questions 65 and 67.

             Renewal of contract of National Police Commissioner

65.   Mr O M Thetjeng (DA) asked the Minister of Safety and Security:

      Whether the contract of the National Police Commissioner, Mr Jackie
      Selebi, will be renewed; if so, (a) for how long and (b) why?
                                                   CO1283E

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Unfortunately, this is a matter that
is handled by the President only. Therefore, I do not have any power and
any information at this stage with respect to the issue of the extension of
the contract of the National Commissioner. Thank you.
Mr O M THETJENG: Ba sa nnyaka, bjale ba nkhumane. [They are still looking
for me, and now they’ve got me.]

Chairperson, through you to the Minister, I had thought that when the
Minister doesn’t have  answers, there is always a consultation process so
that we can be given those responses; answers which would  come from the
provinces, your officials or the President, in this instance, because we
never have the opportunity to ask him such questions. I’ve thought it would
come that way. [Interjections.]
I would really appeal to the Minister, perhaps through him...
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order, please!

Mr O M THETJENG: They are interfering with my interaction with the
Minister. I will request the Minister to assist me, because in this House
we never have the opportunity to ask the President such questions. Thank
you.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon Thetjeng,
firstly, that was not a follow-up. You said that you would request the
Minister to assist you. In terms of the procedures, you can send that
question to the Presidency. Either the President or the Deputy President
can answer that question. That is my view in terms of the procedures of
this House.

Mr O M THETJENG: Chairperson, can I rephrase it so that it becomes a
question if it was confusing to you? I thought I was asking a question. It
is just that English is my third language.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Do you want to ask
it as a follow-up to the question or to the answer that was given by the
Minister?

Mr O M THETJENG: Yes. Minister, as a follow-up question: Is it possible for
you to assist in finding out the procedure of getting the right information
relating to this particular question and your response to the question?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, I’m actually very
surprised. We get written questions. For instance, I answer written
questions from the National Assembly and the NCOP. The President does the
same. I don’t know why it would be difficult to ask the President that
question in written form. Thank you.

          Equity in salaries of Scorpions staff and police members

67.   Mr O M Thetjeng (DA) asked the Minister of Safety and Security:

      How will equity between the salaries of the Scorpions staff and the
      police members in the new unit be reached?         CO1288E

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, I think that question was
partly answered by the Deputy Minister for Justice and Constitutional
Development when he talked about the occupation-specific dispensation.

There is a task team which is comprised of senior managers at the
Department for the Public Service and Administration and the police. That
particular task team is looking at all issues relating to skills - how to
attract and retain them. And this particular matter is also going to be the
subject of some deliberation in that task team.

         Position regarding remuneration of officials on suspension

55.   Kgoshi M L Mokoena (ANC) asked the Minister of Correctional Services:

    (a) How many officials of his department are receiving salaries while
    being at home, (b) how much money is being spent in this regard and (c)
    when will this matter be resolved?       CO1270E

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, it is a fundamental
principle in labour law that an employee on precautionary suspension shall
receive his or her basic remuneration, excluding allowances, whilst on
suspension. This is in line with the principle of innocent until proven
otherwise.

As of 31 March 2008, 117 employees were on precautionary suspension in the
Department of Correctional Services. The occurrences of suspensions are
commensurate with the seriousness of misconduct committed by staff. Against
a staff establishment of 40 000 people, the ratio of suspensions is not out
of hand.

The answer to subquestion (b) is that during their period of suspension R9
489 446, 32 in salaries have been paid to these employees. The periods of
suspension differ from employee to employee.

The answer to subquestion (c) is that the department is trying its utmost
to reduce the turnover time of suspensions. We recently engaged all
regional managers in this regard. The Commissioner has also initiated the
practice to assess senior managers based on their performance in reducing
the turnover time of disciplinary hearings, appeals, suspensions and
dealing with grievances.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, thank you very much, my excellent
Minister, for the response and the honest manner in which they dealt with
the question.

Arising out of that response, I want to find out whether this very same
concern that we are raising – about these officials who are drawing
salaries while they are sitting at home - does not affect service delivery
in the department, because of the vacancies that are there in the
department? Are there measures that you can put in place to try and
expedite the finalisation of these suspensions by these officials? Some of
them are even bragging and saying that unlike those who have to wake up
early in the morning and go to work, they are enjoying their salaries while
sitting at home.

The  MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, yes it does, Kgoshi
Mokoena, but what we are trying to do is to push for an end to it. We have
one regional commissioners’ forum that I have set up. This is where we try
and push these regional commissioners at every meeting to come with the
reports on suspensions so that we can deal with them and find out the
reasons for all the delays. And, if it comes back to the following forum,
then we know that something is wrong with the management style of that
particular regional commissioner. Commissioners assess them on that because
those are some of the things that they should deliver very quickly to
ensure that these suspensions get out of the way.

Expediting these hearings could be done very quickly but sometimes even
those that are suspended tend to delay the processes by coming up with
excuses on this and that. But, again, we are trying our best to push them
so that they are out of the way and that the department does not have to
carry these people who are not assisting us in service delivery.

  Number of sites opened or identified for the provision of antiretrovirals
                                 to inmates

56.   Mr Z C Ntuli (ANC) asked the Minister of Correctional Services:


      How many sites have been (a) opened or (b) identified by his
      department that will provide antiretrovirals to inmates infected with
      or affected by HIV/Aids?                     CO1271E

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, as we mentioned in the
Budget Vote speech earlier this month, hon Z C Ntuli, the department has
initiated a total onslaught against those offenders affected and infected
by HIV and Aids.

In the past financial year, the department has aligned the HIV and Aids
framework to the national HIV and Aids and Sexual Transmitted Infections,
STI, Strategic Plan, which included the accreditation of more sites within
the department. The rationale behind accelerating accreditation of more
sites is to increase access to antiretroviral treatment within correctional
centres and to nutrition as well. Currently, some offenders are accessing
treatment from external health facilities.

The number of known HIV-positive sentenced male and female offenders is
currently standing at 18 000 as at the end of March. The total number of
offenders on antiretroviral treatment is 4 294, including those accessing
treatment at external facilities. This represents 24% of offenders on
treatment out of the total number that are infected. However, it is not all
the offenders that qualify for treatment as per the Department of Health
Standard Treatment Guidelines.
It is assumed that the accreditation of comprehensive prevention,
treatment, care and support centres where offenders have internal access to
the antiretroviral therapy programme can reduce the number of offenders on
the waiting list for treatment and, ultimately, prolong life.

However, we are faced with certain challenges that are not new to this
country, such as the shortage of skilled personnel, shortage of
professional nurses, medical doctors and the availability of qualified
pharmacists that is hampering our accreditation process.

To come to your question, hon member, at this stage there are 16 accredited
sites that exist within the department. In Gauteng we have Johannesburg,
Sizophumelela; in Pretoria we have just launched a new one, the Tshepo
Wellness Clinic; in the Western Cape we have Brandvlei; in the Eastern Cape
we have East London, St Albans, Middledrift and Mthatha; in KwaZulu-Natal
we have Qalakabusha, Pietermaritzburg Medium B, Durban Medium B, Kokstad
Medium B, eBongweni complex, and Ncome Medium A and Medium B; in the Free
State and Northern Cape we have Grootvlei, Kimberley, Groenpunt, and
Kroonstad – 16 in all.

We envisage that in the future there will be an accredited site in each
management area for access to the antiretroviral treatment and nutrition.

Mr Z C NTULI: Thank you, Chairperson, and thank you, hon Minister. I want
to find out as to how they survive in those sites where there is no
provision, do you transport them or what? I am thinking that if one is not
in a correctional centre that is an accredited site then one cannot access
antiretrovirals. Then one would think that it is better to go to where one
can get access. How are they actually surviving?

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, there are two things
that happen. If one is in a facility that does not have an accredited site,
we use the next site which could be nearest to the Department of Health;
either a hospital or clinic. If one is closer to a site, like Durban-
Westville, then one would be transported to Westville where one can access
the benefits. So, those are the two ways that we use. If we bring them to
the ones that are ours and closer to us, then the doctors can look after
them there.

Mr N J MACK: Chairperson, when an inmate has been identified as someone who
will be leaving in a month or two or even in six months and is on
antiretrovirals, do you prepare him or her to get treatment outside, or
what happens in that situation?

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, yes there is a process,
hon Mack. Even when we are going to release them on medical parole, we also
release them on medical parole so that they should die at their homes with
dignity. So, we refer them immediately. As soon as we know that within a
month they are going to get medical parole, we look for the nearest place
to where the offender is going to be released.

For instance, if an offender would be going to Alexandra we then look for a
place there, together with the family. We don’t do it alone because the
family has to be part and parcel of that. Then our doctors that we have at
that particular site where we have referred the offender to would take care
of them.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, I thank the Minister for the response.
Arising from the Minister’s response, what happens in a situation where an
offender was released on a medical parole – those we call terminally ill –
only to find that six months down the line the offender fully recovers
because they were put on the programme? What happens then? [Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, I will take two
examples here to answer the hon Kgoshi. If it is a medical parole and the
doctors have given the go-ahead that this offender could be released on
these grounds, of course, they are still under parole and therefore they
would be checked on time and again. If they recover from that, then we
cannot, my hon Kgoshi, bring them back because it was parole and was done
in that spirit.

Secondly, if someone gets a straight parole and is not sick, he will only
be taken back when he breaks some of the rules and conditions of his
parole. But we cannot just say that because you seem to have recovered well
and seem to be in good condition you must come back. That would not be
right.

Mr R J TAU: Chairperson, my question was definitely the same as that one in
terms of policy direction, whether we have a policy that clearly guides how
we manage these things, and I think the response given by the Minister
suffices.

  Adequacy of number of doctors and social workers at correctional centres

57.   Ms F Nyanda (ANC) asked the Minister of Correctional Services:

      Whether there are enough doctors and social workers at every
      correctional centre; if not, (a) why not and (b) how will his
      department address this challenge in each case?          CO1272E

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Thank you very much, Chairperson.
Hon member Nyanda, we need to agree that South Africa as a country is hard-
hit by a shortage of scarce skills. I think hon De Lange discussed that and
hon Nqakula also touched on that.

Owing to the environment in Correctional Services, it then becomes very
difficult to attract and retain these scarce skills. Some professionals
would find it difficult to stay in the kind of conditions one experiences
working in Pollsmoor, being locked up in Pollsmoor the whole day or being
locked up in any facility for that matter. Being in a security
establishment is a very dangerous situation. Therefore, we cannot say that
we have enough doctors and social workers; we don’t.

The department has created 15 posts for medical practitioners at different
management areas. Currently, nine medical practitioners are employed at the
following management areas: Pretoria and Johannesburg in Gauteng; Kroonstad
and Grootvlei in the Free State; Pollsmoor and Brandvlei in the Western
Cape; St Albans in the Eastern Cape; Pietermaritzburg in KwaZulu-Natal; and
Kimberly in the Northern Cape.

The ideal is to employ at least one medical practitioner per correctional
centre, if we could do that. However, owing to the scarcity of this
category of health professionals in the country and the salary package in
the public sector - hon De Lange did talk about this - the department is
unable to recruit and retain them because we do not pay them enough. That
is why we have come up with all these strategies.

To ensure the availability of medical services, these services are either
rendered by full-time medical practitioners, such as those who have been
allocated by the provincial departments of health - they help us with that
- or private medical practitioners who work with us on a sessional basis.
If there are doctors out there who can work with us on a sessional basis,
they are welcome.

The department has recently upgraded salaries of medical practitioners and
we have broadened their scope of responsibility to ensure that medical
services are also rendered at the different correctional centres within the
management areas.

As for social workers, we now have the finance establishment that makes
provision for 520 posts for social workers at correctional centres. Each
correctional centre has a post for one or more social workers, depending on
the capacity of that centre.

The Department for the Public Service and Administration has developed an
occupation-specific dispensation for the professions experiencing critical
scarce skills, including social workers. This new OSD for social workers
will provide a more attractive salary package for recruitment and retention
of social workers in the broad Public Service.

Correctional Services has also approved a recruitment and retention
strategy which provides for more effective measures in terms of recruitment
and retention of these critical skills, including social workers. Thank you
very much.

Mnu N S S MQUNGQUTHU: Enkosi ngeli thuba, Sihlalo. Mphathiswa, mna
bendifuna nje ukwazi ukuba, njengokuba ezi zakhono zinqabe kangaka phaya
kwisebe lakho, ngaba amaqgirha okanye oosiyazi beningena kubasebenzisa na
bona ukwenzela ukuba bacime aba bantu baphinde babagabhise, ngeli xesha
nisasokolayo? Enkosi.

UMPHATHISWA WEENKONZO ZOLULEKO: Hayi, mandithethe inyaniso emsulwa:
Andiqondi ukuba singakwazi ukubagatya abantu abanezo zakhono, ngoba neSebe
lezeMpilo, ndijongile nje, liyabasebenzisa phaya naphaya. Ngoko ke,
asinakho nje ukubakhuphela ecaleni kuba kaloku amanye amabanjwa ethu
akholelwa kakhulu emayezeni asekhaya okanye awesintu nawemveli. Andiqondi
ke ukuba sinokubachilela ecaleni ke, tata abo bantu. Apho banokusebenziseka
khona, amagosa esebe aya kubona ukuba mawathini na ukubasebenzisa.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Mr N S S MQUNGQUTHU: Thank you for this opportunity, Chairperson.
Minister, I would like to know whether, given the acute skills shortage in
your department, you would consider making use of the services of
traditional healers, who would use traditional medicine to cleanse some
inmates’ systems, for instance, while you are still struggling to recruit
medical practitioners. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Speaking truthfully, I do not think
that we can disregard people with such skills, because even the Department
of Health makes use of them from time to time. Therefore, we cannot
disregard the wishes of our inmates, because some of our inmates believe
strongly in traditional medicine. There is no reason for us to turn
traditional healers away. Departmental officials will decide how to make
use of their services.]

Mr N J MACK: Chairperson and hon Minister, with the retention strategy
today, I think many departments have these problems and they are not only
looking at, as you call it, salary and wages money, they are looking at
packages, to be more specific. Is there any incentive package other than
money that we are looking at when trying to retain our people? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, this morning there was
a presentation to a portfolio committee of the NA about this particular
issue of a retention strategy. I did not sit on it, but I do know that the
Commissioner is looking at all those issues dealing with packages with some
incentives here and there. As Deputy Minister De Lange has said, social
workers and other workers have a tendency of reaching a certain ceiling and
then branching off.

If you look at Correctional Services, for instance, most of the people who
are managers are professionals. They should not be managing; they should
actually be honing their skills in what they know best, rather than going
off to manage. I can mention a number of them: Sis Jabu Sishuba, who
retired from us, was a social worker but she was an Acting Commissioner for
some time and we were in need of social workers.

We have the present Commissioner. He is a social worker. So, he should be
leading the actual social workers in the department. Take a look at
Gauteng. We have an advocate who is leading Gauteng, meanwhile we need to
beef up our legal unit. So, one finds those types of problems. Even nurses
in the department just take the other route and become managers. Then we
are short of nurses. We do have that problem, all of us. I think it happens
across all departments.

As Deputy Minister De Lange said: If there is a plan that any of our
members and colleagues here can give us, we would really be jumping for
joy, because it is difficult.

            Statistics relating to violation of parole conditions

58.   Mr A T Manyosi (ANC) asked the Minister of Correctional Services:

      (a) How many ex-convicts or inmates who are out on parole have been
      found to have violated their parole conditions, (b) what action has
      been taken against them and (c) how many of them disappeared and
      cannot be traced?                            CO1273E
The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, the hon member’s
question appears to refer to the parolees, as opposed - if you read that
question – to the number of ex-convicts or inmates. We do not have ex-
convicts; we have parolees and ex-offenders. That is the language we use.
Where is Mr Manyosi? He is not here.

The question does not indicate the period for which the information is
required. I will therefore use the information from the past financial year
as an indicator for the information required in this regard. During the
period 1 April 2007 to March 2008, the daily active population of parolees
in our community corrections was approximately 31 750 across the country.
Over a period of a year, a total of 12 088 parole violations were
registered.

At every community corrections office ... I hope one day, Kgoshi, you will
visit them with your select committee because we have a community
corrections office right here, behind us, in the building next to the
magistrates’ courts here. That is the one for Cape Town.

What we do on receipt of reports on violations is that every office makes
written recommendations to the head of community corrections with regard to
the adjustment of conditions; remember, every parolee has conditions. So,
if there is a violation, we sit with that and try to find out what happened
and then adjust here and there.

The investigation may reveal various reasons for violation of the parole
conditions. For example, when for some or other reason a parolee violates
any of his set of conditions, his/her parole is not necessarily revoked but
the parolee must be called in for consultation in one of the following
ways: verbally; telephonically; in writing; by letter or fax or per G306
warrant, which is the warrant that we use for the arrest of the parolee. We
have the right to arrest that parolee and bring him or her in.

A sworn statement or written acknowledgement must be obtained from the
parolee upon every violation of conditions so that it can be used as
evidence should the correctional supervision or parole board or delegate
thereof be approached for the revocation of parole. There must be something
written so that when we revoke it we know exactly what he/she has written.

The parolee must take cognisance of verbal as well as written warnings in
writing. The responsible official countersigns the verbal and written
warnings. All actions and involvement are fully documented and placed in
the file of the parolee. Each parolee has a file.

If a parolee has violated his/her conditions due to a technical reason,
such as due to sickness, they must submit a certificate as proof during the
interview with the supervision committee. In such a case, the committee
will reprimand or warn the parolee. In the case where the parolee violates
conditions without any reason or, on being requested to report to the
supervising committee, fails to report there, one of the following steps is
taken against him or her in consultation with the head of community
corrections. It is not the Minister who deals with each and every parolee.

Sometimes when the opposition parties jump around and point fingers at the
Minister, as if I deal with each and every parolee in the country, I just
sit quietly and say, “Forgive them, Lord, for they know not what they are
talking about.” [Laughter.]

Some of the things one does is to alter supervision conditions, with due
consideration of those conditions that have already been set. You adjust
conditions due to changed circumstances; put into operation suspended
community service; intensify house detention and the grade of supervision;
compel the parolee to attend additional programmes, and you give the
instruction in writing to the parolee to appear before the community
supervision or parole board or the commissioner.

When a parolee violates the conditions repeatedly without any reason, a
report to this effect is compiled by the supervision committee and such a
parolee is referred for correctional supervision to the parole board or to
the commissioner for decision. So, these are all the steps that we take
should anything go wrong with a parolee.
During this period that I am talking about, 1 April 2007 to 31 March 2008,
1 522 parolees absconded from the system of community corrections. From
this number a total of 991 were traced, and when traced, they were arrested
and put in, and they start where they stopped with their sentence. A total
of 542 are still at large. They can’t be at large for a very long time. We
will get them back, and they will start where they ended. If you were
paroled on 10 years going for 15 years, you will start at 10 years and
continue to complete that 15, and there will be no parole for you because
you don’t want to give yourself a second chance. Thank you.

Mr J W LE ROUX: Hon Minister, are the parole boards forced in any way to
release a certain percentage of parolees? Is there any pressure put on them
in that regard? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: They are not forced at all. Nobody
would force them. That is why we use people from the community and we use
people of integrity as well so that we cannot actually put pressure on
them. The only thing that we are harmonising is that they must look at at
least 15 cases per day, and it does not mean that that 15 are going to be
released. They have to look at what is there in the file and consider them.
If not considered, you still stay behind; if considered, you will be given
a date which will prepare you for a month before your release.

So nobody is forcing anybody to do anything. In the same breath, I must say
that we cannot have parole board chairpersons who do not want to do their
work - I know where the question comes from - because they believe that
those people must sit and rot there. It cannot be like that. We had a
situation in the Southern Cape where a parole board chair refused to look
at any cases and came up with a story that she was forced to deal with
these people and she did not want to deal with them. Why did she apply for
the job in the first place then? She is gone now, finito. I fired her; end
of the story, because I employed them.

The system of selecting is done by an interview panel, including members of
the portfolio committee and the select committee. I do not sit in those and
then I sign them off. Then they sit at home, they do not want to work and
come with excuses that you are being forced. Oh please, go away! Stay at
home. Why did you apply for the job?

Mr Z C NTULI: Minister, in our last engagement, I think that last year when
you were talking about these rehabilitated offenders, you said you were
thinking of having the community police forum, which is going to receive
these people who are going to be in the community, prepare the ground so
that they are accepted by the community when they come out. I want to find
out whether you are still thinking along those lines or when is that going
to happen?

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, my belief is that there
should really be something like that. But, with the approach that we are
taking as government in terms of these community safety forums, I believe
quite strongly that that team of people at local level should be able to
assist us in this so that it is not a departmental approach, but a
community or communal approach, so that they know that Ngconde Balfour, who
has been an offender at Brandvlei, is now out and is at home. The CSF could
call me in and say, ``You are back, brother. We expect this and this of
you. We expect you to volunteer for this and do that and that as a way of
assisting us in this social responsibility.’’ This social responsibility
does not belong to the department; it is a societal, community
responsibility to look after every person who is an ex-offender.

There are, however, ex-offenders who are doing very well at the moment. I
have seen quite a number of them, and they report time and again on what
they are doing, but the more we can push them towards that community safety
forum, the better for us all so that we don’t duplicate any work that we
do.

Mr R J TAU: The last question to the Minister brings us back to the
thinking on how we ensure that we nurture, keep and develop the capacity
that ex-offenders might have acquired while still in the correctional
centres. I am speaking of my experience in my constituency.
[Interjections.]
Chair, for example, you have an ex-offender who has developed a keen
interest in business. He has an idea, and all the plans are in place. He
wants to provide services, interestingly, to the very same correctional
centre that he is from. Balancing the question of black economic
empowerment, whether it be in the form of co-operatives or small, medium
and micro enterprises and so forth, what is it that the department can do
to assist such offenders to also benefit from these contractual economic
spin-offs that come from the kind of services that the department is
giving? How can we as public representatives assist in organising and
encouraging them to set up their companies and supply stationery to the
correctional centre, or whatever, and earn a living to become a better
person in society? Thank you very much.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Baba, I will give you just one or
two things. Do not worry when they say that you are an ex-offender.
[Laughter.] It is not a problem. I am one, yes, and I look at correctional
services not from the outside in, but rather from the inside out. That is
how I look at it as an ex-offender myself, who still has his name in the
books of some of the facilities that are now being looked at. You go to
Drakenstein; you will find my name there. You go to Pollsmoor; you will
find my name there. So, I am not looking at it from the outside but from
the inside, and that is why I try and spend as much time as possible in
correctional centres.

Coming back to the question, Bishop Tolo, for instance, picked up that in
his constituency there was a young man who came out of prison with a number
of good certificates that were given to him. On Budget Vote day in the
National Assembly, we brought him there because we wanted him to tell his
story of how he is now assisting his own community in dealing with some of
the issues that are there.

Secondly, you will find that a number of ex-offenders are doing very well.
With Kimberley Prison, which we are building now - I had the statistics
here last week - we have employed about hundred and thirty-something
offenders who are building the prison, but they are doing the building work
as sub-contractors of what is going on there. That is the message I want to
echo out there all the time.

When they come to us as Correctional Services, and we were the ones that
actually assisted them with rehabilitation, we should be able to give them
space to do work with us. There is nothing wrong in that, absolutely
nothing wrong. But, to me, if they come together as a group – as they have
done in Port Elizabeth, East London and in Gauteng – one can actually
assist them better, rather than assisting them on an individual basis.

I am saying to area commissioners that when they come to them with this co-
operative idea, which are ideas they got from us, assist them, please. Let
them have something to live for.

            Implementation of recommendations of Jali Commission

59.   Mr S Shiceka (ANC) asked the Minister of Correctional Services:

      Whether all the recommendations made by the Jali Commission have been
      implemented; if not, (a) why not and (b) when will they be
      implemented?                                       CO1274E

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, the commission’s
report, the Jali Commission report, dealt with two categories of
recommendations, namely the organisational systems and policies within the
department and, secondly, disciplinary matters involving some officials.
Most of the recommendations have been dealt with and the department has set
itself a target of 31 December 2008 to complete all outstanding matters.

The response of the department regarding the main aspects of the report is
as follows: Historical background; addressing of issues relating to
transformation, if completed; issues raised to be addressed by the
department; trade unionism within the department, not yet completed. Most
of the matters relating to trade unionism have been addressed. The
outstanding issue is the recommendation pertaining to the creation of a
professional association for senior management. The department is not a
separate entity detached from the rest of the public sector.

A decision relating to the creation of such an association rests with the
Department of Public Service and Administration. This matter is currently
being investigated by the DPSA, and the final implementation of this matter
will depend on the finalisation of this matter by the DPSA.

With regard to gangsterism, we have not completed that and I am not sure if
we will ever be able to, but we are trying our best. We have made
significant progress to address the challenge of gangsterism within the SA
correctional system. Extensive research has been conducted, particularly in
the Western Cape, as part of the process that informs us of an antigang
strategy. A draft manual on gangsterism has also been developed, and this
will be consulted with external role-players, in due course, before
implementation.

This will be followed by an intensive training and awareness campaign to
empower staff, inmates and the community. The gangsters in our centres
actually reflect on some of the things that happen in society. Some of them
have very strong links with the communities where they live. They are known
to be gangsters where they live. Even the groups they belong to, whether 28
or 27, are known. The communities do not deal with it through the community
police forums and CCSFs to let them know that their conduct is not
acceptable. They either stay or leave the community.

The recruitment and merit awards are not yet completed. Correctional centre
security is not yet completed, but most of the recommendations pertaining
to security have been addressed. The department is currently in the process
of installing the Integrated Technological Systems in various centres. In
some of the centres there is electronic access control using the fingertip
and CCTV. The old, big padlocks are no longer used. No more “dankie, hekke”
[thank you, gates].

Regarding the treatment of offenders, this is mainly to ensure that
offenders are treated humanely and, amongst others, referred to offenders’
tribunals. We segregate the offenders. We use C-Max facilities and the
provision of a three-meal system. The amendment of legislation relating to
offenders’ tribunals and segregation were addressed in the new Correctional
Services Amendment Bill, which came to this House and was referred back to
the National Assembly for adoption.

We are currently reviewing the operational procedures and selection
criteria for admission in C-Max facilities. Compliance with the three-meal
system in terms of intervals that are prescribed by the Act differs from
centre to centre, depending on the availability of resources.

We will strictly comply with the legislation after the seven-day working
week system has been fully implemented. It starts on 1 July 2008. I had a
meeting this morning in Goodwood with the heads of correctional centres in
the Western Cape about the starting of the seven-day working week system
and we will begin with two centres for pilot purposes.

Sexual violence and the protection of vulnerable offenders from any kind of
sexual violence is under way. We have just mentioned paroles. The
conversion of sentences is dealt with, with the review of the justice
system. We have a new Acting Judge, Judge Deon van Zyl, in the position of
the inspectorate, and it is performing very well.

We are dealing with overcrowding through the remand centre system. We are
going to separate remand centres from sentenced offenders so that they can
be on their own. This will help us to deal with them through the parole
system. It is quite a long list, and I would submit some of these to hon
Shiceka for his perusal.

    Statistics relating to suspension of departmental officials owing to
                                 corruption

60.   Mr A L Moseki (ANC) asked the Minister of Defence:

      (a) How many officials of his department have been suspended because
      of corruption, (b) how serious are these cases, (c) how many officials
      are involved in each case and (d) when will these cases be finalised?
                                  CO1275E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Chairperson, currently there are no
officials in the department who have been suspended on charges of
corruption. As compared to what we have heard from my colleagues, you can
see that there is a big difference. The numbers range from 117 and so on.
[Laughter.]

There were two cases which were dealt with in court and both offenders were
found guilty. Once found guilty of corruption, you are immediately
expelled. The other one has lodged an appeal and we are awaiting the
findings. As I have said, currently there are no corruption charges against
any of our officers.

                Measures to deal with qualified audit report

61.   Mr A L Moseki (ANC) asked the Minister of Defence:

      (1)   What measures will be taken to deal with the qualified audit
            report received by his department;

      (2)   whether the internal audit committee of his department has been
            found to be effective; if not, what is the position in this
            regard; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                                   CO1276E
The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: The office of the Secretary for Defence has
developed initiatives that are aimed at addressing the root causes of the
qualified audits. The focus is on identifying quick ways which will form
the basis for a sustainable long-term turnaround strategy. The initiatives
in place are: A team dealing with Operation Clean Audit has been put in
place, monthly meetings are held, and significant progress has been made on
issues that can be cleared in the short term.

A project team working on the logistics intervention and repositioning
programme started functioning in 2000 to address qualifications relating to
logistics, asset management, inventory management and accruals. Those who
have seen our qualified audits will realise that that is the major source
of our qualifications. Fraud awareness seminars were conducted in the
department throughout the country to address issues of theft, fraud, losses
and corruption.

Section 45 of the Public Finance Management Act which deals with the
training of nonfinancial officers and financial officers has been rolled
out throughout the department. The process of acquiring an external audit
firm to assist in clearing the audit qualification, designing and
implementing an enhanced internal system is at an advanced stage. The firm
will start before the middle of July.

The medium to long-term audit qualifications which are dependent on the
integrated financial management systems will be resolved when this new
system is implemented.

The department has no internal audit committee. However, there is an audit
committee which has been constituted as prescribed by the Public Finance
Management Act, section 77, read with Treasury Regulation 3.1.1 to 3.1.12.
This audit committee is effective and it comprises of five external members
and two internal members.

During the 2007-08 financial year, five meetings were held, of which one
was special. During the 2007-08 financial year, the audit committee
reviewed and discussed the audited annual financial statements to be
included in the annual report with the Auditor-General and the accounting
officer; reviewed the Auditor-General’s management letter and management
response thereto; reviewed changes in accounting policies and practices;
and reviewed significant adjustments resulting from audit.

Five audit committee meetings are scheduled for the 2008-09 financial year.
The first meeting took place on 6 June 2008, and on 30 July 2008 the
audited financial statement will be discussed at the special audit
committee meeting. Thank you.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Thank you, Chairperson and thank you to my Deputy
Minister for the concise response. We are glad that there is a move to try
and address some of these anomalies that cause the department to get these
qualified audit reports. What I want to find out, arising from the hon
Deputy Minister’s response, is: Is it not worrying for the political heads
in this department when this department receives qualified reports because
of the line items that were identified by the Auditor-General for three to
four consecutive years and those issues are not yet addressed? If it is
worrying for the Deputy Minister and the Ministry, what action is going to
be taken against those who are supposed to address the particular issues
and are not doing so?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Thank you, Kgoshi Mokoena. It is a fact
that the issue of qualified statements in the department has been a major
problem. I think about two years ago, we even called the Auditor-General to
come to the office to speak to the Secretary for Defence, the chief
financial officer, and many others, because we were trying to assist them.
We were hoping that something new was going to happen, but unfortunately
the following year the same thing happened.

We are trying to restructure the department primarily because of the
logistics. One of the weaknesses which we are trying to address is that if
one buys military equipment, one cannot do so without buying spare parts
without knowing when they will be used. Therefore, in terms of the
military, it will be risky to buy military equipment without making sure
that there are spares, which might lie there for five years without being
used. This also creates problems. We are trying to design modern methods
where this will be addressed.

Recently, we decided to tell people that if things do not change, they will
be fired. We have always been nice to people and they have not taken us
seriously. After a series of meetings with them nothing was done, so we are
starting to put pressure on them, especially the Secretary for Defence,
because he is the accounting officer. All these other people, like the CFO,
report to him. We have written to him to inform him that if he does not
take his work seriously, we shall have no alternative but to act.

I know, Kgoshi Mokoena, it is very frustrating. We have been talking to you
as a committee. We have held meetings, and what is frustrating is that
sometimes we think we have found a solution and then we realise six months
later that what we have agreed upon has not been done. Those are the
problems, but we are working on them.

 Position regarding vacant key or technical positions in SA National Defence
                                    Force

62.   Mr N J Mack (ANC) asked the Minister of Defence:

      (a) How many key or technical positions in the SA National Defence
      Force are vacant because of resignations or poaching by the private
      sector or other countries, (b) how are these vacancies affecting
      service delivery and (c) how is the SANDF countering the moves to
      other countries?       CO1277E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: What I will do, Mr Mack, is to leave a copy
for you. The question which you have asked is a very elaborate one because
this is one of our biggest problems in the department. In fact, it is
costing us a lot of money. We are not like other departments; most of our
technical staff are trained by us. For example, we have two types of pilots
in the department. We have a transport pilot like the one who can be taken
by SAA at any given time. We also have a fighter pilot; the one based in
Makhado and is trained for war. To train a pilot costs millions.

Our system stipulates that if a person is trained by the department that
person must stay in the department for a particular period. But if one is
bought out one must pay a certain amount, which is less than the money
which the department spent in training that individual. That is where we
are losing. We’ve got a lot of technicians that we train in the
SA Air Force, SA Navy, SA Army and the SA Military Health Service, SAMHS.

Most of the people that we train are poached, sometimes internally, by the
various companies. The poaching is now serious and it is even done by
foreign countries, especially countries like Australia. Poaching is cheaper
and easier because it is very expensive to train these technicians.
According to the statistics that we have summarised, in the Navy alone
there are 316 vacancies, 1 400 in the SA Air Force, 469 in SAMHS and 81 in
the SA Army.

This is so bad, especially when it comes to the issue of parachutists.
African countries and other countries like Singapore used to send their
parachutists here for training in Bloemfontein. However, due to the
shortage of technical staff that programme is experiencing problems because
there are no technicians to service the aircraft that are used to train
parachutists. Service delivery is at its optimal level but it is seriously
affected by the shortage of technicians.

The maintenance of equipment in all services is not optimal. Standard
maintenance tasks take longer. Because of the importance of what is
happening I have called an urgent meeting with the Chief of Staff and
others to discuss what we can do. This hampers the provision of certain
clinical services at some bases.

We have started discussing a retention strategy but, unfortunately, the
retention strategy costs money. We have started it in the SA Air Force but
we are still losing because there are still 1 400 vacancies.

We have also started to look at some benefits. At the moment we are
developing a remuneration package for the military.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Deputy Minister, may I warn that you
summarise because your time for replying has actually expired.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: What we are also doing is to train more so
that there can be a stage when those South African companies who are taking
our technicians will not need them anymore. That does not work because they
are now taken by foreign countries, and that complicates our problem.

Mr R J TAU: In actual fact, after listening to the Minister, this brings
one to another issue, which is: On the basis of the observations you have
made, isn’t there a need for a policy shift in terms of the retention
strategy; not necessarily at the level of remuneration, because we are
investing? If we do not have a policy shift that seeks to ensure that
whatever skill we train, whatever investment we make we are able to retain
it within the system, I anticipate another security load shedding in the
future.

This really presents a security risk, where we are going to lose so many
highly technical staff that we have invested so much in as a country. So, I
think maybe we don’t even need legislation or to wait for legislation.
Can’t we look into the question of regulations that govern the retention of
skills within the SA Army so that we don’t see this exodus of our technical
staff?

If one simply interprets what the Minister raises, one can arrive at the
conclusion that there is a globalisation of recruiting army personnel and
skills and the target is the developing countries. Perhaps, South Africa is
the entry point of this process that seeks to weaken the developing
countries in the area of technical staff and skills. Therefore, as a follow-
up question I would like to know whether there isn’t a need now for a
policy shift to ensure that we become much stronger in order to retain
these skills? Thanks.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: As I have said, this is one of our biggest
challenges. We are looking at a lot of things. One of them is to move away
from allowing a person to be bought after we have trained him or her. For
example, we want to introduce a regulation that stipulates that if the
department trains a person for five years, that person must stay in the
department for five years. But this still does not solve the problem
because the personnel will just wait patiently for five years and then
leave.

This is the case especially with regard to pilots. Pilots are judged by the
number of hours they have accumulated flying. The more hours the pilot has
accumulated, the more in demand that pilot is.

So, even if you, the legislators, can think of something, we will welcome
it because it is a big challenge. Furthermore, because of the element of
globalisation that hon Tau referred to, I must be honest with you, we do
not have answers.
            Measures to ensure no repetition of Lohatla incident

63.   Ms F Nyanda (ANC) asked the Minister of Defence:

      (1)   Whether any measures have been put in place to ensure that what
            had happened at Lohatla in the Northern Cape does not happen
            again; if so, what measures;

      (2)   whether these measures have proved to be effective; if not, why
            not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                              CO1278E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Chair, firstly, I did not understand the
question but I have to start by saying that what happened at Lohatla was an
accident. I think we did inform both the select committee and the joint
committee.

A critical mechanical failure occurred on Gun 124 when the interface
between the hand-mortar actuator selector lever and the traverse gearbox
broke during engagement. This was caused by a spring pin that sheared and
disengaged the control mechanism, rendering the gun uncontrollable when it
was fired. This caused the gun to swing to the left for approximately two
seconds, expending high explosives and trace rounds on adjacent people and
equipment.

With those guns one can kill as many people as possible in one second. So,
imagine what could happen in two seconds. The gun product was
decommissioned immediately after the incident. That’s all we could do. We
based our finding on the board of inquiry and technical committee
recommendations and no live firing will take place until such time as all
possible avenues have been addressed and rectified.

You must understand that we will also have to talk to the company, - which
is a foreign company, because this lever or spring pin was not listed as
part of what could one say was a serviceable part.

Furthermore, the board issued an implosion instruction, tasking all the
role-players to formulate various plans addressing those shortcomings
identified by the board of inquiry. So, because it starts even from the
manufacturer, we are now finding a solution.

On receipt of this implementation instruction, rectification plans were
drafted and work sessions took place where these plans were refined and
ownership was coupled. This process has not yet been completed because we
are dealing here with equipment that is very dangerous. You must make sure
that everything involves, again, technicians.

It is too early to report on the effectiveness of these measures because
they have not even been implemented. Many role-players are involved,
including Armscor and the South African Army. All parties took ownership of
ensuring that this type of incident will not happen again.

As I am saying, this was one incident. An incident is a very terrible thing
and one might say it will not happen again. It is like having a tyre burst
on the road, but you then say you must make sure that you do not have a
tyre burst again. The only way of making sure that you do not have a tyre
burst again is to drive at 90 km/h. You still have a tyre burst and it
looks like this thing of 90 km is not working.

Some say it is a very complicated matter. Even when one feels that one has
the answer, namely, that we need to train soldiers on how to use live
ammunition. Otherwise, if we do not train them on live ammunition when we
take them to war they will run away because, unfortunately, once those big
military guns start firing into the air, “dhoom”, they will run away. At
the moment we are working on the plan.

Mr B J TOLO: Hon Minister, I am just saying that in other instances there
would be blanks that would make the same sound as live ammunition.
Therefore, why do we not use blanks that are able to simulate live
ammunition?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Mr Tolo, we do use blanks.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon Deputy Minister, could I please
make a ruling here, with due respect. Hon Tolo, could we take your issue
really as an advice to the department because I am afraid that we are
getting into the technical aspects of ...

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: No, it is a short question because in the
department we do use blanks for practice. But, if you want to produce an
army that can fight a war you still have to use live ammunition. Because,
like I am saying, we use simulators and blanks for practice but we still
have to use live ammunition because when you train soldiers they must be in
war mode.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon members know that hon Tolo is a
trained military man. So, I was afraid that he might get into the finer
details of these things. That was my concern.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Thanks, Chairperson, and thanks to the Deputy Minister
for the response. Chair, I must first thank the Deputy Minister for being
honest and frank about what happened there. The follow-up question that
arises from that response is whether a finger cannot be pointed at the
country we acquired this ammunition from, Chair, because based on the
preliminary investigations and the reports that were given to the committee
it is not a question of our officers having blundered or made a mistake; it
was a technical fault with the very same equipment. I am saying the country
from which we acquired this ammunition really, I think, must say something
to us as a country. Can I please check that with the Minister?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Well, Kgoshi, there is communication
between us and the country but we have also to tread carefully. You see, we
have information that this pin once also broke off in one of the European
countries. This is now the second time, and whether now that is enough
grounds for us is a matter which is being discussed by the legal people.
The problem with this pin is when you buy military equipment, the
serviceable parts and everything are bought accordingly from a book, and
this pin was not on the service list. But the question of course that
people are asking is: If this happened in one country in Europe, why did
this company not inform us about this? This is the matter which the lawyers
are dealing with. It involves all sorts of things and it could even lead to
litigation, but at the moment we are still working on it.

          Position regarding outsourcing of departmental functions

64.   Mr A L Moseki (ANC) asked the Minister of Defence:

      (a) Which functions of his department are outsourced, (b) why are they
      outsourced and (c) how much is his department paying to these private
      entities?                               CO1279E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: We’ve got a list again. When you talk about
outsourcing, I would assume that you mean these services. I mean, in
defence we don’t outsource anything. If we want to fight a war, we send our
own soldiers. So, there is nothing that we are outsourcing.

But there are a lot of small things such as gardening and cleaning which
you outsource, you employ a private company. I have been given a list here,
Mr Moseki. I will give you this list because we honestly deal with all
things that have nothing to do with defence.

We must understand that the core business of defence is to defend the
integrity and protect the citizens of this country against foreign ogres.
We cannot outsource it to anybody. We do it ourselves. You can’t have
soldiers working as cleaners and gardeners. So, that we have to outsource.
We’ve got areas where – for instance, a base on the other side of Soweto –
we are moving out. Since there are properties there, we would have to hire
a private security company to make sure that those buildings and properties
that are there are properly looked after in the process of us transferring
them back to Public Works. So, if you look at that you’ll need the
security, laundry, all those small things that have nothing to do with our
core business. Otherwise, in our core business we don’t outsource anything.

REPLY
    a) Kindly refer to the attached schedule for details.
    b) Because it is not cost effective to perform such function in-house.
    c) The grand total for outsourcing is R580 059 452 over a period of ±
       three years.


The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Can I make the ruling that this
question is of a statistical nature by all measures and standards, and in
terms of the Rules and procedures of the council. I was actually lenient to
have allowed it to be responded to. Your initial intervention to say that
you’ll hand over the written reply to the hon member and the House was
appropriate and this is the ruling that I’m making in that regard. Thank
you.

Mr R J TAU: Chairperson, I think this question, much as I did not have the
benefit of discussing it with the hon Moseki, is very strategic in the
sense that it has to do with elements of the second economy and of black
economic empowerment. Perhaps, if the question would have been that to what
extent ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon member, you are out of order;
could you take your seat.

Mr R J TAU: Chairperson, it’s not a new question. It’s about outsourcing,
about private sector involvement.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon member, could you take your
seat, please! I must make a ruling.

Hon member, I have made a ruling on this issue. You are at liberty, in the
next question session, to strategise that question and put it to the hon
Minister. From what I’m reading – unless I’m contested, and you are
yourself saying it could have been couched differently – as it is couched
in a statistical manner, this is my ruling. I’m saying the hon Minister
would forward this thing. I’m not going to accept that my ruling be
contested, hon members ... [Interjections.]

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: On a point of order: As oversight practitioners, we are
dealing with departments. They are giving us some stats about outsourcing
some of these things, and tenders are being given to friends and everybody.
There are people who are not supposed to benefit from some of these things.
Now, when we say these are of a statistical nature, it’s an insult to some
of us who, as a committee, are dealing with these departments.

I know that the Deputy Minister is aware of what I’m talking about because
he also raised some concerns during some of our meetings. With due respect,
don’t do so, especially to some of us as members.
Nobody is having a monopoly of mind in this House. Please, respect us as
members!

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Member, there is no issue of
monopoly of the House. You are out of order, and I sustain my ruling. Thank
you.

Mr B J TOLO: You are saying that you are presiding officers. If you have a
problem with questions, then those questions should not be printed on the
Order Paper because all questions that are printed on the Order Paper
members have the right to entertain. They are brought by you into this
House, you cannot then come and say no these questions should not be
responded to. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): There’s a regulation that deals with
questions but we will deal with this issue in the next sitting. Presiding
officers do not bring questions to the House. We have a Questions Office.
The Deputy Minister himself was even reluctant to deliberate further on
this, hence he said that he would supply a written answer. I am making a
ruling on that basis. That is a normal convention here. It is not a
judgement either on the author of the question or any member, and it has
got nothing to do with anything about wisdom, hon Kgoshi Mokoena. It is a
matter of procedure, and that procedure must be respected. It’s a procedure
that binds everybody, irrespective of their position in this House. And I
really want to appeal to hon members to accept it as it is. I’m closing
this issue on that note.

   Position regarding the introduction of legislation to prohibit security
                   forces from participating in elections

66.   Mr O M Thetjeng (DA) asked the Minister of Defence:

      Whether he intends introducing legislation that will prohibit security
      forces from participating in elections; if so, (a) when and (b) what
      are the further relevant details? CO1284E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Comrade Chair, the problem is this question
is vague, so the answer would also be vague. For instance, Kgoshi was
saying, if this question was dealing with tenders then that’s different
because tenders to us is not outsourcing; it is something you do when you
are undertaking a special project.

The question is whether he intends introducing legislation that will
prohibit security forces from participating in elections. We had to take
the easier route, but the question could have meant two things: Do soldiers
participate in the elections and do they assist with the voting process? Do
soldiers participate in elections in terms of being deployed? The question
does not say that, and then we said: No. We have no intention of
introducing legislation that will prohibit security forces from
participating in elections.

Section 19(3)(a) of the Constitution determines that “Every adult citizen
has the right to vote in elections for any legislative body established in
terms of the Constitution, and to do so in secret”. Section 199(7) of the
Constitution also determines that none of the security services members,
when performing their duties, should

    a) prejudice a political party interest that is legitimate in terms of
       the Constitution; or
    b) further, in a partisan manner, any interest of a political party.

In addition to this, section 52(7)(a) to (c) of the Defence Act of 2002
determines that no member of the regular force may –

    a) further or prejudice the political interest of any political party
       in the performance of his or her functions;
    b) be politically partisan, or express any party-political allegiance,
       in the performance of his or her functions; or
    c) hold any position other than that of ordinary member in any
       political party.

The Constitution and the Defence Act make provision for circumstances in
which the President or the Minister of Defence, as the case may be, may
deploy the Defence Force. I’m trying to cover both. They may employ the
Defence Force if there are elections, as a back-up to the police. The
powers and duties of the Defence Force while being deployed are also
determined by the Defence Act. When they are deployed to assist the police,
the role they play is that of a back-up force and they cannot be in the
forefront, unless the situation gets worse. Even in the elections that’s
exactly what happened. Thank you.

Mr O M THETJENG: Thank you, Minister, for the answer. The intention was
that you should look at the voting part of the elections. We are seeing
South Africa’s democracy and what is happening across the borders, where
soldiers are actually taking a proactive role in politics. The follow-up
question is: Despite the issues that are related in the Constitution, for
us to ensure that our democratic process is well protected without soldiers
getting involved in voting for one party or the other and them remaining as
neutral as possible. That is the way in which the question was actually put
in terms of looking at that. We have soldiers that are 100% neutral in
every aspect. That’s why we are asking if there is any plan to amend
legislation and to ensure that they remain where they are and defend any
other person who comes into governance.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Hon member, I believe that you do not
repair a car unless you realise that there is a fault or that it is broken.
So far, the system as I have explained, according to the Constitution and
the Defence Act, has worked perfectly. Soldiers at the moment know that
they can only vote. In terms of other deployments, they do not participate
in any politics.

Of course, we have a problem that we are addressing and that is the issue
of the unions. The issue of unions is a very dicey situation at the moment,
but even there the regulations are very clear. That is why we told SASFO
when they affiliated to Cosatu that you either get out or we don’t
recognise you. Cosatu is politically allied. If you are affiliated to
Cosatu you are to a large extent associated with the SACP and the ANC. The
unions in the Defence Force are different from the unions in the private
sector. Their job is to look at issues of grievance procedures that they
have followed, and what not to do. We have warned them that if they start
to march and toyi-toyi, they might get into a situation where we have to
deal with them.

They understand, and we read the regulations to them, especially during the
strike. They tried to take a chance; we called them into the office, we
read the regulations, they understood and brought their leaders and said:
“If you do what you are saying, then we can tell you now that it is not
even going to a disciplinary because you will all be fired.” Of course,
they took it seriously. They did not do it because they must maintain
neutrality. This is one of the biggest back-up forces for security in the
country and it cannot be associated with any such behaviour. Even the SADC
and the AU are against it because once you involve soldiers in politics you
are going to have coups and all those things that are undemocratic.
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Thank you, hon Deputy Minister. In
the absence of further follow-up questions, the questions session is now
concluded.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

    REPEAL OF THE BLACK ADMINISTRATION ACT AND AMENDMENT OF CERTAIN LAWS
                               AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Chairperson, it rarely happens that I get ten minutes
and I’m going to use some of the ten minutes, which is at least more than
the three minutes which I usually get. I was not sure whether I was in
Polokwane when there were some interventions when you made a ruling or
whether this was the NCOP, but be that as it may, another observation is
that apparently many members, maybe myself included, suffer from list
fever.

Ons noem dit in Afrikaans sommer “lyskoors”. [In Afrikaans we simply call
it “lyskoors”.]

Not lust fever but list fever. You must show that you are indispensable so
that you come back to this place.

Before I get to the statement, another matter is that maybe it is
interesting for other members, not members of our committee, to know how we
work in the Safety and Security committee. We are a committee where members
ask a lot of questions, and there is nothing wrong with asking questions.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon member, I don’t think you are
addressing the Bill.

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: I’m working towards it. I have ten minutes,
Chairperson.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Time is important and I’ve just
received an announcement that affects all members and it is from the
Chairperson’s office. For some of us time is very important. Continue,
please.

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Chairperson, the other thing is that before asking
questions it also became a custom in our committee that there is a very
long introduction or preamble or a preface, even before a question is being
put.

But now to get back to this particular Bill, it caused a controversy
because there was no opportunity to ask a lot of questions. The reason is
because the purpose of this Bill was just to amend and substitute a date.
The recommendation of the committee is that the House endorses this and
approves this amendment. It’s just a date that has been changed from July
2008 to 30 December 2009.

The reasons are that the Traditional Courts Bill seeks to regulate matters
dealt with in sections 12 and 20 of the Black Administration Act 1927 and
it is foreseen that the Traditional Courts Bill will not be signed into law
by the deadline of 30 June 2008. Consequently, this Bill seeks to extend
the date of the application of the provisions of this section and that the
date be moved to 30 December 2009. There was no contention as far as the
date was concerned but there was contention about the fact that we couldn’t
interact with questions and long interviews. Thank you.

Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.
The Council adjourned at 17:28.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                            FRIDAY, 20 JUNE 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)    National House of Traditional Leaders Bill, 2008, and
         Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework Amendment Bill,
         2008, submitted by the Minister for Provincial and Local
         Government.


      Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local
         Government and the Select Committee on Local Government and
         Administration.

2.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Foreign Affairs
          a) Diplomatic Immunities and Privileges Amendment Bill [B 55 –
             2008] (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory
             summary of Bill and prior notice of its introduction published
             in Government Gazette No 31170 of 20 June  2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Foreign Affairs of the National Assembly, as well as referral
             to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in
             terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.


    (2)    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government


          a) National House of Traditional Leaders Bill [B 56 – 2008]
             (National Assembly – proposed sec 76) [Explanatory summary of
             Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
             Government Gazette No 31108 of 3 June 2008.]


          b) Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework Amendment Bill
             [B 57 – 2008] (National Assembly – proposed sec 76)
             [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
             introduction published in Government Gazette No 31108 of 3
             June 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Provincial and Local Government of the National Assembly, as
             well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
             classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.
             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.


     (3)    The Minister of Health


          a) Medical Schemes Amendment Bill [B 58 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
             prior notice of its introduction published in Government
             Gazette No 31114 of  2 June  2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Health
             of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint
             Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint
             Rule 160.
             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

3.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bills as section 75 Bills:

          a) Provision of Land and Assistance Amendment Bill [B 40 – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).

          b) National Strategic Intelligence Amendment Bill [B 38 – 2008]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).

          c) South African National Water Resources Infrastructure Agency
             Limited Bill [B 36 – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 75).


    (2)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bills as section 76 Bills:

          a) National Qualifications Framework Bill [B 33 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 76).

          b) Land Use Management Bill [B 27 – 2008] (National Assembly –
             sec 76).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

    (a)    Government Notice No R561 published in Government Gazette No
         31076 dated 22 May 2008: Criminal Law (Sexual Offences and Related
         Matters) Regulations in terms of the Criminal Law (Sexual Offences
         and Related Matters) Amendment Act, 2007 (Act No 32 of 2007).

                            MONDAY, 23 JUNE 2008

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

CREDA INSERT REPORT - T080623e–insert1 PAGES 1339-1360.

                            TUESDAY, 24 JUNE 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)    Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 24 June 2008:


          a) Repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment of
             Certain Matters Amendment Bill [B 50 – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 75)

2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)    Mineral and Petroleum Resources Royalty (Administration) Bill,
         2008, submitted by the Minister of Finance.
      Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance and the Select
         Committee on Finance.

3.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Finance


          a) Mineral and Petroleum Resources Royalty Bill [B 59 – 2008]
             (National Assembly – proposed sec 77).


          b) Mineral and Petroleum Resources Royalty (Administration) Bill
             [B 60 – 2008] (National Assembly – proposed sec 75)
             [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
             introduction published in Government Gazette No 31164 of 19
             June 2008.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Finance of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
             Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
             Joint Rule 160.
             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

4.    Calling of Joint Sitting

    The Speaker of the National Assembly, Ms B Mbete, and the Chairperson
    of the National Council of Provinces, Mr M J Mahlangu, in terms of
    Joint Rule 7(2), have called a joint sitting of the Houses of
    Parliament for Friday, 27 June 2008 at 10:00 in order to celebrate the
    90th birthday of Nelson Rholihlahla Mandela, former President of the
    Republic.



    B MBETE, MP                                    M J MAHLANGU, MP
    SPEAKER OF THE                                 CHAIRPERSON OF THE
    NATIONAL ASSEMBLY                        NATIONAL COUNCIL OF
                                        PROVINCES


National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


    (1)    Bills passed by National Assembly and transmitted for
         concurrence on 24 June 2008:


         (a)      Prevention of and Treatment for Substance Abuse Bill [B
             12B – 2008] (National Assembly – sec 76).


            The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Social
             Services of the National Council of Provinces.


         (b)      Financial Services Laws General Amendment Bill [B 21B -
             2008] (National Assembly – sec 75).


            The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Finance of
             the National Council of Provinces.


         (c)      Insurance Laws Amendment Bill [B 26B – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).


            The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Finance of
             the National Council of Provinces.


         (d)      Special Pensions Amendment Bill [B 29B – 2008] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).


            The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Finance of
             the National Council of Provinces.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

        1. The Minister of Trade and Industry

       a) Government Notice No 180 published in Government Gazette No 30781
          dated 22 February 2008: Standards Matters in terms of the
          Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).
       b) Government Notice No 181 published in Government Gazette No 30781
          dated 22 February 2008: Standards Matters in terms of the
          Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


       c) Government Notice No R.193 published in Government Gazette No
          30782 dated 22 February 2008: Review Board Regulations: Appeal
          fees, in terms of the National Building Regulations and Building
          Standards Act, 1977 (Act No 103 of 1977).


       d) Government Notice No 224 published in Government Gazette No 30805
          dated 29 February 2008: Amendment to the Compulsory Specification
          for vehicles of category 03 and 04, in terms of the Standards
          Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


       e) Government Notice No 225 published in Government Gazette No 30805
          dated 29 February 2008: Proposed withdrawal of the Compulsory
          Specification for articles marked E.P.N.S. in terms of the
          Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).

 2. The Minister in The Presidency

          a) African Youth Charter, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of
             the Constitution, 1996.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on  Social  Services  on  the  Refugees
    Amendment Bill [B11B - 2008] (National Assembly –  sec  75),  dated  24
    June 2008:

    The Select Committee on Social Services having considered  the  subject
    of the Refugees Amendment Bill [B11B – 2008] (National Assembly  –  sec
    75), referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as  a
    section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with proposed amendments as follows:

                                  CLAUSE 14

1. On page 8, in line 40, to omit “the” and to substitute “any”.
2. On page 8, in line 40, to omit “that processed his or her application”.


2.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the  oversight  visit  to
    Eastern Cape from 21 to 22 February 2008, dated 23 May 2008

Background

On 22 and 23 January 2008, the Select Committee  on  Finance  held  hearings
with provincial departments on conditional grants  capital  expenditure  for
the first three quarters of the previous financial year.  The Committee  had
concerns on a number of issues following the hearings and  decided  to  have
further meetings with the following departments:

   1. Department of Housing, Local Government & Traditional Affairs
   2. Department of Land Affairs
   3. Department of Sport Recreation Arts and Culture
   4. Department of Economic Development and Environment Affairs
   5. Provincial Treasury
   6. Land Claims Commission
   7. Great Kei Municipality

Delegation

   1. Hon E M Sogoni
   2. Hon M O Robertson
   3. Ms N C Chaso (Committee Secretary)
   4. Ms N Mnyovu (Committee Assistant)
   5. Ms M Herling (Researcher)

The meetings were held in the East London’s Regent Hotel.

Eastern Cape – Department of Local Government and Housing: Key Challenges

The Committee observed the following issues:

      • Poor planning by both the Department and  municipalities.  Some  of
        the approved projects were still not ready for implementation.
      • Some of the emerging contractors lack  capacity  and  there  was  a
        small pool of established contractors attracted to low cost housing
        resulting in the need to re-tender.  Established  contractors  were
        not attracted to  rural  development  projects  due  to  logistical
        issues  and  the  additional   cost   of   transporting   material.
        Established  contractors   were   supposed   to   mentor   emerging
        contractors.
      • The slow start of the  rectification  programme  was  a  cause  for
        concern. There was a lot of  unfinished  work  that  needed  to  be
        redone. There was also the issue of community housing that had been
        inherited  from  Matatiele,   KwaZulu-Natal   which   had   funding
        shortages. The rectification  programme  had  been  handed  to  the
        National Home Builders Registration Council (NHBRC), but  this  was
        progressing and only 5000 out of 19 800 units had been dealt with.
      • The land restitution process did not prevent  development  but  the
        department needed to consult with the Land Claims  Commissioner  to
        determine whether or not the development interfered with the claim.
        It was reported that problems arose in cases where the  development
        did not benefit the community as a whole.  Communication  with  the
        community prior to the development  was  critical.  Road  shows  to
        municipalities regarding this matter had been conducted but it  was
        reported that changes in the councils might have led  to  knowledge
        gaps.
      • There was a need to provide land for sustainable human livelihoods.


      • There was some misalignment of the Municipal Infrastructural  Grant
        (MIG)  and  the  housing  grant.  Reasons  for  this  included  the
        discrepancy in percentage growth in the allocation between  housing
        and MIG, the conditions of the grants  and  the  identification  of
        priorities by the province and the  subsequent  allocation  of  the
        grants by the Department of Provincial and Local Government.
      • The meeting was informed that one  could  still  find  cases  where
        houses  had  been  built  without  the  necessary  supporting  bulk
        infrastructure. There was a need  for  an  integrated  approach  to
        development.
      • The capacity of the provincial Department  of  Housing  remained  a
        challenge and slow moving projects  would  be  taken  back  by  the
        Department of Housing.
      • The department also reported that all contractors were meant to  be
        NHBRC approved and CIDB compliant but this was taking long owing to
        lack of capacity at the NHBRC.


Eastern Cape – Department  of  Sport,  Recreation,  Arts  and  Culture:  Key
Challenges

    •  The  building  of  infrastructure  was  the  responsibility  of   the
      Department of Public Works.
    • The process of registering quantity surveyors  took  time,  especially
      with respect to those  who  were  not  registered  with  the  Quantity
      Surveyors Board.
    • There was a lack of commitment and capacity within institutions  which
      were expected to assist in service delivery.
    • There was possible exemption in relation to the procurement of library
      materials  that  would  reduce  the  turnaround  time  for   receiving
      materials.
    • There was a concern about the number of operational  libraries,  their
      location and also the question of who was  responsible  for  operating
      them. The province had 118 operating libraries and only  36  of  those
      received conditional grants.
    • The Department reported that the main cause of poor  performance  were
      the capacity within the directorate and supply chain management.
    • SEDA did not attend the meeting despite being invited.

Great Kei Municipality

      •  The  municipality  showed  improvement  in  relation  to   revenue
        collection.
      • Electricity distribution  was  confined  to  the  Komga  area.  The
        municipality had licences for areas  within  its  municipality  but
        there were still some problems with Eskom. There was a need  for  a
        smooth handover from Eskom to ensure that there were no disruptions
        in  service  delivery.  Eskom  received  R500  million   from   the
        Department of Minerals  and  Energy  to  re-establish  networks  in
        Komga.
      • Refuse removal was also a big  challenge  and  businesses  such  as
        holiday resorts were removing their own solid waste.
      • The condition of roads affected service delivery. There was a  need
        for capital equipment to improve and maintain roads.
      • The Development Bank of Southern Africa had committed R3 million to
        fund this municipality but the money had since been reduced  to  R1
        million.
      • Rural housing development was  engaging  Thubelisha  to  assist  in
        feasibility study and proposals that would be in line with  spatial
        development framework.
      • Water and sanitation were a big challenge  for  this  municipality.
        There was a need for assistance in relation to bulk water and water
        supply projects. There  was  almost  no  information  available  to
        determine expenditure and revenue for water services.  The  age  of
        water infrastructure reinforced the problem of water outages.
      • Questions were raised about the  municipality’s  ability  to  spend
        money. It was said that the municipality  would  get  support  from
        DBSA in the form of engineers, technicians & financial advisors.
      • The district reported that the local municipalities had no  records
        to verify their asset registers. The municipality  had  received  a
        disclaimer for the 2006/7 financial year. There was also no  proper
        planning for the refurbishment of infrastructure.
      • The Committee undertook to  have  further  discussions  with  Eskom
        regarding electricity distribution.
Recommendation

There should be an ongoing forum where  planning  issues  are  discussed  to
ensure that stumbling  blocks  that  have  a  huge  impact  on  housing  are
identified  and  removed  early.  Each  stakeholder  should  play  its  role
effectively. All line managers in the forum must attend the meetings.

The Committee resolved that it would convene a meeting  with  Department  of
Water Affairs and Forestry to establish why the Great Kei  Municipality  has
received  only  R1  million  out  of  the  R3,2  million  provided  by   the
Development Bank of Southern Africa.

Report to be considered

3.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the  oversight  visit  to
   identified provincial departments  and  the  Sol  Plaatjie  Municipality,
   Northern Cape, dated 13 May

   1) Introduction

   The oversight visit took place on Friday, 28 March 2008. A meeting was
   held with the Sol Plaatjie Municipality and various governments
   departments. The Committee’s delegation was as follows:


         • Hon TS Ralane (Chairperson of the Committee)
         • Hon EM Sogoni (Gauteng, ANC)
         • Hon GM Goeieman (Northern Cape, ANC)
         • Hon BJ Mkhaliphi (Mpumalanga, ANC)


   Staff composition was as follows:
      • Ms TP Xaso (Committee Secretary)
      • Ms NC Chaso (Committee Secretary)
      • Ms N Mnyovu (Committee Assistant)

   2) Terms of reference


   At a meeting held between the Committee and the Provincial Department  of
   Local Government and Housing at Parliament, the Province  indicated  that
   it had been promised R100 million by National  Treasury.  The  Department
   had indicated that it was in need of that funding and the  Committee  had
   undertaken to assist in attaining the money. The Committee’s objective in
   meeting with the Department of Local Government and Housing  during  this
   visit was to establish whether it had been able to absorb this additional
   funding and whether there were any risks of under-spending as a result of
   that additional funding.


   The Committee had also been informed about  challenges  that  related  to
   building materials which had been bought three to four years ago  by  the
   Department of Local Government and Housing, but  remained  unused.  Given
   that this matter impacted negatively on housing delivery in the Province,
   the Committee undertook to meet with the  department  concerned  and  the
   affected municipality of Sol Plaatjie.


   The Provincial Department of Health had reported to  the  Committee  that
   the Provincial  Treasury  had  taken  over  the  Health  Department.  The
   Committee had undertaken to follow the matter up in a meeting  with  both
   departments. This was one of the reasons  for  the  meeting  in  Northern
   Cape.


   The Departments of Agriculture and Roads, Transport and Public works were
   invited to report on  their  third  quarter  expenditure  of  Conditional
   Grants and Capital Expenditure as well  as  personnel  and  non-personnel
   spending.


   National and provincial departments as well as other stakeholders that
   were invited to the meeting were as follows:
      • Department of Provincial and Local Government
      • National Treasury
      • Provincial Department of Roads, Transport and Public Works
      • Provincial Department of Health
      • Provincial Department of Agriculture
      • Provincial Treasury
      • The Homeless Federation
      • Provincial National Home Builders Registration C


The Provincial Department of Health was one of  the  main  reasons  for  the
Committee’s  visit  to  the  Northern  Cape.  The  Committee  expressed  its
displeasure at the non attendance of the MEC and the Head of  Department  at
the meeting.

Both the provincial Treasury and the provincial Health departments  reported
that relations between the two had improved.  The  Committee,  however,  was
not convinced  that  this  was  so.  On  two  occasions  the  Northern  Cape
Department of Health had reported that they were not able to function  as  a
result of the Provincial Treasury.  The  reports  presented  that  relations
were good were perceived to be making mockery of the  Committee’s  visit  to
the province.  Poor  relations  between  the  two  departments  had  led  to
hospitals not having medication. Furthermore, the  Committee  was  concerned
that the Health Department had not prepared a proper report to form a  basis
for the discussion, nor had it taken serious the matter on hand.

The Committee further informed the Department  of  Health  that  the  Public
Works Department reported  that  Health  had  not  signed  a  Service  Level
Agreement.  Moreover,  the  Committee  still  needed  to  enquire  from  the
Treasuries what had brought about the need for the department  to  be  under
administrations.

Provincial  Treasury  reported  that  the  decision  to  put  Health   under
administration was  made  by  the  Provincial  Executive  Committee  (EXCO).
According to the Provincial Treasury, it was the media that  reported  about
a  hostile  take  over  and  this  was  said  to  be  the  reason  for   the
misunderstanding between  the  two  departments.  It  further  disputed  the
statement of a hostile takeover.

There was a concern with relating  to  inconsistency  on  the  part  of  the
Provincial Treasury given that Public Works in the  province  had  been  and
was still in a worse condition than the Health Department.  The  appointment
of the Chartered Accountant was also a concern and questions were raised  as
to what the role of the CFO was in such an event.

Local Government and Housing

The department reported that the additional allocation of R100  million  had
been received and that the money had already been  transferred  to  district
municipalities for housing delivery. To this end no risks were  anticipated.
Those were the Pixley Kaseme, Kgalagadi, Francis Baard and Siyanda  district
municipalities.  The  department  further  reported  that   monitoring   and
evaluation plans were already in place to ensure that  the  money  was  used
appropriately.
The Committee expressed a concern that, as far as it  was  aware,  the  only
municipality  that  had  been  targeted  for  accreditation  as  a   housing
developer was the Sol Plaatjie Municipality and none of those  mentioned  by
the  department.  The  Committee  further  enquired   as   to   when   these
municipalities became  accredited.  According  to  the  Committee  no  other
district municipalities had been targeted for accreditation. Furthermore  it
noted that housing  delivery  was  the  competency  of  the  department  not
district municipalities. The observation made  by  the  Committee  was  that
money  had  been  dumped  on  the  municipalities  by  the  department.  The
Committee enquired as to whether there were  any  houses  delivered  in  the
process.

The department responded  that  there  were  projects,  according  to  their
business plan, that had been waiting for funding.  This  was  the  basis  on
which the additional allocation  had  been  requested.  It  added  that  the
districts were still in the process of  accreditation  and  that  the  funds
were transferred to municipalities that had made claims.  According  to  the
department the transfers were done two weeks prior to the meeting  with  the
Committee. The Sol Plaatjie Municipality, however, disputed having  received
money from the department.

The Committee expressed a concern  at  the  contradiction  in  the  versions
given by the  department  and  the  Sol  Plaatjie  Municipality  and  sought
clarity on the nature of communication  lines  in  regard  to  transfers  of
funds.

The Committee raised the matter regarding material that had been bought  for
the delivery  of  houses.  A  group  of  housing  beneficiaries  called  the
Homeless Federation had been present in a visit three  years  ago  during  a
provincial week wherein decisions were taken with respect  to  the  delivery
of houses. Certain promises  were  made  at  the  time  to  a  parliamentary
delegation but nothing had come of them.

The  Committee  was  informed  that  the  project  had  stopped  pending  an
investigation that was underway with regards  to  materials  that  had  been
bought. It was reported that the Premier had  instituted  the  investigation
into the matter.  The  municipality  reported  that  this  was  one  of  the
projects that had been stifled by the department who  went  into  agreements
with contractors, bypassing the municipality and issuing subsidies.

It was not clear how exactly the department had  come  up  with  a  list  of
beneficiaries given  that  the  municipality  had  been  excluded  from  all
processes.  It was noted that,  under  normal  circumstances,  the  indigent
list should be with the municipality. To this end the  department  responded
that it had held several meetings with the municipality  and  other  support
organisations.  The Sol Plaatjie  municipality  disputed  this.  It  further
reported that the current beneficiaries were not eligible  to  benefit  from
the project.

Recommendations of the Committee
      The Committee recommends as follows:
     1. Projects should be in line with the  Integrated  Development  Plans
        (IDP) and in consultation with the Sol Plaatjie Municipality.
     2. The Northern Cape Premier should be asked for  the  report  on  the
        investigation she had instituted.
     3. The Mayor of Sol Plaatjie and the Department  of  Local  Government
        and Housing should assist by expediting availability of the  report
        on the investigation to avoid further delays which were leading  to
        escalated costs.

Roads and Public Works

The Committee noted with concern that there seemed  to  be  a  communication
problem within the department. A question was  posed  on  the  status  of  a
project that related to one mental  hospital  in  the  Province.  A  further
question related to the provision of  transport  to  other  departments  and
whether this responsibility  lay  with  the  transport  department  or  not.
Furthermore the Committee enquired whether the department  had  any  Service
Level Agreements with suppliers.  Spending as at 31 December was as  57%  or
over R2 million and now the expense was projected to be 100%.  Capacity  was
another area of concern raised by the Committee.

In  responding  to  these  questions  the  department   reported   that   in
consultation with the Provincial Treasury, it had employed people, in  terms
of the IDP programme,  who  assist  by  looking  into  capacity  issues  and
identifying  the  role  of  the  department.  With  regards  to  the   fleet
management, it was reported that this service had been  outsourced.  At  the
time of the meeting the tendering process was underway.

The Committee was informed that Service  Level  Agreements  (SLA)  had  been
agreed to and the department was in the process of effecting them  with  the
various departments it dealt with.  It  further  reported  that  the  Health
department had not signed the SLA while other departments had signed.

The department acknowledged that its expenditure was at 57% by end  December
and maintained that at the time of the meeting it was at  100%.  To  justify
this leap  the  department  cited  that  from  14  December  to  14  January
contractor closed and that invoices were  forwarded  to  the  department  in
January and payments only started to take place then. They  added  that  the
maintenance of access roads was also a factor resulting in what appeared  to
be a March spike.

The department reported that they  had  approached  treasury  for  money  to
build the SK road however treasury could not provide the funds. To this  end
the Committee felt that this was an indication that there had been no  prior
planning for the project, hence Treasury had no money for it.

A concern was  raised  with  the  Provincial  Treasury  in  respect  to  its
allocations towards roads infrastructure  which  amounted  to  a  mere  R199
million coming from the equitable share  while  the  biggest  allocation  of
R257 million came from conditional grants.  The  Committee  noted  that  the
bulk of that R199 million was probably spent on salaries.

Recommendations of the Committee


   The Committee recommends as follows:
    • A list of all municipalities to which money had been  transferred  and
      where access roads had been constructed should  be  submitted  to  the
      Committee;
    • Furthermore there should be an indication of how these linked  to  the
      Municipal Infrastructure Grant and the  Integrated  Development  Plans
      and
    • This information should be forwarded to  the  Committee  within  three
      weeks after the consideration of the report by the Council..

Department of Agriculture

The department had overspent on CASP and Land Care and it argued  that  this
was not as a result of poor planning on its part. It added that bulk of  its
spending  took  place  from  January  because  there  had  been  outstanding
completion certificates that were required before money could be  paid  out.
Furthermore it reported that the allocations of the conditional grants  were
based on each project determining how much money it required.

The Committee enquired on how the overspending would be funded  and  whether
there were any programmes that had been compromised to fund  the  land  care
programme. The  department  responded  that  funding  would  come  from  the
equitable share and a food security fund. Some of the money  came  from  the
hydroponics project in Moreletswa which was under-spending. To this  end  it
was pointed  out  that  the  department  was  compromising  issues  of  food
security. The place where the hydroponics structure had been put up  had  no
drainage and alternative location needed to be found. The location had  been
in an industrial area where there were no community members.  It  was  noted
that the project had not been compromised but merely relocated.  There  were
interactions with the Droogfontein beneficiaries with  the  view  to  moving
the project to their location.

The Sol Plaatjie Municipality reported that the  report  about  the  project
was different from the information at its disposal. It  added  that  it  had
not been consulted about the relocation of the said project. The  department
apologised for not involving the municipality in the project  and  undertook
to improve on this front.

The Committee encouraged the two to finalise the matter and noted  that  the
performance of the department would be closely monitored by  the  Committee.
It was found to be an interesting coincidence that  all  invoices  had  come
through at the same time.  The  Committee  also  pointed  out  that  vandals
would always be there  hence  the  need  to  partner  with  communities  and
municipalities.

A question was posed to the Provincial Treasury as  to  how  much  would  be
allocated towards agriculture in the coming year for  infrastructure,  given
that some of its projects were in crops and live stock. Provincial  Treasury
indicated that the department had been given R8.8  million  for  the  2008/9
financial year based on their business plan and on the basis of page 108  of
the Division of Revenue Act.

Conclusion

Mr Goeieman and the department were tasked to visit  some  of  the  projects
outlined by the  department.  It  was  indicated  that  in  some  cases,  Mr
Goeieman would need to conduct unannounced visits to ascertain  whether  the
projects reported on did exist. His task would be to assess  the  impact  of
these projects  on  the  communities  within  which  they  existed  and  the
sustainability thereof.

Report to be considered.


4.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the  oversight  visit  to
   Limpopo,   22 February 2008, dated 23 May 2008

     1) Introduction


The Select  Committee  on  Finance  conducted  an  oversight  visit  to  the
province of  Limpopo  on  Friday,  22  February  2008.  The  delegation  was
follows:

     • Hon T S Ralane (Chairperson of the Committee)
     • Hon D Botha (ANC MP)

Support staff:
     • Ms T Xaso (Committee Secretary)
     • Mr M Tau (Researcher)
     • Ms N Tshoma (Committee Assistant)

2)    Background

From Tuesday, 22 January 2008 the Select Committee commenced  with  hearings
wherein Provincial departments accounted for their expenditure of  the  1st,
2nd and 3rd Quarter Conditional Grants, Capital Expenditure and Personnel  &
Non-personnel. It was evident from these hearings that the Committee  needed
to undertake a visit to the Province of Limpopo  to  follow  up  on  matters
that had been raised during the hearings. The  Committee  intended  to  meet
with the following departments:
     a) Roads and transport
     b) Local Government and Housing
     c) Agriculture
     d) Health
     e) Sports, Arts and Culture
     f) Water Affairs and Forestry
     g) Provincial Treasury

The following National Departments and entities were  invited  to  accompany
the Committee on this visit:
     a) Department of Housing
     b) Department of Sports and Recreation, Arts and Culture
     c) Department of Provincial and Local Government (DPLG)
     d) Development Bank of South Africa (DBSA)
     e) Department of Water Affairs and Forestry (DWAF)

3)    Terms of reference
         • The Committee wanted to follow up on a report by the  Department
           of Agriculture that they were constructing roads in farm  areas.
           Roads and Transport in the province had  been  invited  so  that
           they could respond to this matter;
         • The Department of Health had  expressed  concerns  that  it  was
           under-funded;
         •  The  Committee  also  needed  to  interact  further  with   the
           Department of Sports, Arts and Culture to discuss  their  under-
           spending in respect of the grant for libraries;

4)    Findings

Having discussed at length matters of concern with  departments  which  were
in attendance, the Committee made the following observations:

Provincial Departments of Agriculture and Roads and Transport
The Committee concluded that there was
    • Generally no collaboration amongst departments in the province;
    • no collaboration between the two departments;
    • a lack of cooperation on the part of Roads Agency Limpopo  (RAL)  with
      regard to business plans and reporting back;
    • evident non-participation by departments in IDP’s;
    • high salaries paid by Road Agency Limpopo (RAL) when compared to Roads
      and Transport;
    • staff component at RAL was 40 versus the department’s staff  component
      of  about  2000  despite  the  fact  that  RAL  received  70%  of  the
      infrastructure budget. These issues had been raised by  the  Committee
      with the MEC for Roads and Transport, requesting the  MEC  to  resolve
      issues of parity between the officials of the department and those  of
      RAL; accountability and;
    • gaps were identified in terms of district roads in areas that  had  no
      powers to build road (e.g. Greater Skhukune).

The following were the recommendations of the Committee:
    •  The  Departments  of   Roads  and  Transport,  Agriculture  and  the
      Provincial Department of Local Government and Housing were  requested
      to convene an urgent meeting to look at the issue  of  infrastructure
      in the province, inclusive of district roads,  in  respect  of  areas
      relating to agriculture. Out of that  meeting  they  should  draft  a
      proposal to the FFC, Provincial Treasury and the National Departments
      of Roads and Agriculture requesting more funding. IDP’s were   to  be
      an integral part of that proposal;
    • Mr Tooley, was tasked to coordinate this meeting and report  back  to
      the Committee within three weeks.


Department of Sports and Recreation, Arts and Culture

The Committee observed that there was:
    • disagreement between the  Provincial  Department  and  the  Provincial
      Treasury in terms of figures on expenditure; National Department  was,
      however, in agreement with the Provincial Department;
    • under-spending with respect to libraries and was of great concern;
    • a concern that transferred figures did not  necessarily  translate  to
      expenditure;
Whilst pointing out that reports at Treasury emanated  from  submissions  by
accounting officers, the Committee recommended the following:
    • Provincial Treasury and the Provincial Department of Sports, Arts  and
      Culture meet to resolve differences in reported figures;
    • Report back to the Committee within two weeks after  consideration  of
      the report by Council;
    • The Committee committed itself to monitor this closely;
    • It was proposed that national projects should be done in  consultation
      with the Provincial Treasury in order to provide a synergy  and  avoid
      disjuncture in reporting.
    • The Committee advised the Provincial  Department  to  draft  a  report
      outlining how the adjustment budget of R16m was to be spent

National Department of Housing

The Provincial Department of Local Government failed to make  input  at  the
Committee’s proceedings  due  to  their  late  arrival,  after  the  meeting
adjourned.

The  Committee  observed  that  provinces  were   still   not   capacitating
municipalities to become housing developers.  Provincial  Treasury  informed
the  Committee  of  challenges  they  experienced  when  meeting  with   the
Provincial Department of Local Government and  Housing,  thereby  requesting
the intervention of the Committee.

The Committee reiterated to  the  meeting  that  housing  was  a  provincial
competence and that the provincial  department  had  the  responsibility  to
capacitate municipalities and avoid dumping money  on  them.  It  was  noted
that a major challenge was that of planning.

In the absence  of  the  Provincial  Department  of  Housing  the  Committee
permitted the National Department  to  leave  stating  that  discussions  on
housing would be taken further at hearings on the Division of  Revenue  Bill
which were scheduled to follow shortly.

Development Bank of Southern Africa (DBSA)

The Committee was still waiting for a report from the DBSA and DPLG on  what
was  being  done  to  assist  municipalities  in  need  of  assistance.  The
observation of the Committee was that  assistance  given  to  municipalities
was in  the  context  of  Siyenza  Manje,  which  did  not  speak  to  other
programmes, which were also under the DBSA.   The  Committee  resolved  that
this would be taken

Provincial Department of Health

While the department acknowledged that some of its challenges related
amongst other things to issues of high procurement costs and abuse of the
departments vehicles, it stressed that its biggest problem was the fact
that it was extremely under funded. The department also expressed its
difficulty in adhering to the PFMA given its circumstances within the
province. At a recent hearing before the Select Committee on Finance the
province had raised a concern at a baseline allocation of 24.1%.
Furthermore the Committee was also informed that due to the gross under
funding, the department would carry over into the new financial year debts
of the last two months of the previous year. Some of the reasons given by
the provincial department for over expenditure included costs for the
transporting of bio-hazardous waste; importing of vaccines; warehousing of
medicines and distribution thereof; personnel and other expenses, which
include Occupation Specific Dispensation (OSD’s). The Committee resolved to
verify the matter of OSD’s with the National Department of Health.



Having heard the report of the Department, the Committee made the following
observations with respect to the Department of Health in Limpopo:

  • For the Provincial Growth and Development Strategy of any  province  to
    work, it requires healthy people to partake in it;
  • Expenditure for OSD’s was very high;
  •  There  was  a  need  to  align  provincial  priorities  with  national
    priorities
  • The baseline had risen to 25.9%.


Recommendations

The Committee recommends that:

  • the MEC’s for Treasury and for Health meet and discuss funds  available
    through OSD’s.
  • HOD’s of these two departments also  meet  to  discuss  matters  at  an
    official level;
  • the National Department of Health conduct an  audit  to  determine  the
    rate at which professionals are leaving the province and come  up  with
    strategies for staff retention;
  • Portfolio Committees in the provincial legislatures should be  part  of
    interactions with provincial departments.


Report to be considered



5.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the  oversight  visit  to
   identified municipalities in Mpumalanga, dated 23 May 2008


   1) Introduction

   The oversight visit took place from 18 to 19 March 2008. Meetings were
   held at the Gert Sibande Municipality in Secunda. The delegation was as
   follows:


         • Hon TS Ralane (Chairperson of the Committee)
         • Hon EM Sogoni
         • Hon GM Goeieman
         • Hon DJ Botha
         • Hon ANT Mchunu
         • Hon MO Robertsen
         • Hon ZS Kolweni
         • Hon BJ Mkhaliphi


   Staff composition was as follows:
      • Ms TP Xaso (Committee Secretary)
      • Ms NC Chaso (Committee Secretary)
      • Ms N Mnyovu (Committee Assistant)



   2) Terms of reference


   The visit formed part of the Committee’s ongoing interaction with
   municipalities to monitor collaboration and coordination pertaining to
   the provision of municipal services and support given to municipalities
   by provincial and national departments. The following municipalities had
   been identified for the visit:
         • Emakhazeni Local Municipality
         • Emalahleni Local Municipality
         • Steve Tshwete District Municipality
         • Gert Sibande District Municipality
         • Albert Luthuli Local Municipality
         • Msukaligwa Local Municipality
         • Bushbuckridge Municipality
         • Nkomazi Local Municipality


   National departments and other stakeholders that accompanied the
   Committee on this visit were as follows:
      • Department of Provincial and Local Government
      • Department of Minerals and Energy
      • Department of Water Affairs and Forestry
      • National Treasury
      • Eskom


   The aim of the Committee was to engage with the above mentioned
   municipalities, along with national and provincial departments, on the
   following areas:



    • Municipalities’ budgets;
    • Municipalities’ compliance with the Municipal Finance Management Act;
    • The spending and performance of  the  municipalities  with  regard  to
      conditional grants;
    • The municipalities’ relations and collaboration with various  national
      and provincial departments and entities;
    • Capacity constraints of the municipalities, if any;
    • The extent of service delivery; and
    • Determining whether municipalities’ Integrated Development Plans  were
      aligned to the Provincial Growth and Development Strategy.


   3) Findings

        a) Emakhazeni Municipality
      The municipality reported that it had been appointed as a housing
      developer and that progress had been made in delivering houses.  Only
      920 people were registered on the indigent list in the 2006/7
      financial year and this was a concern for the Committee which felt
      that the number should have been bigger than 920.


      It was reported that the municipality had a Mayor’s Discretionary Fund
      amounting to R5m.


      Sewerage and refuse removal were reported to be free for all  indigent
      people. One of the major challenges faced by the municipality was  the
      deaths of the indigent people as funerals  were  not  affordable.  The
      municipality further reported that it had come up with a  strategy  to
      deal with this. In addition, some managers had adopted needy families.




      Other challenges reported by the municipality were:
            • Transportation for learners who had to  travel  distances  of
              over 80km to get to school;
            • Provincial departments that owed money  to  the  municipality
              (Education, Health and Local Government  and  Housing),  some
              for over three years. To this end the  municipality  reported
              that a service provider had been appointed to deal  with  the
              collection of monies owed;
            • A promise not met by the DPLG of R65 million  relating  to  a
              pilot project of which the municipality was a part;
            •  Government  departments  that  refused  to  participate   in
              Integrated Development Plans (IDP’s); and
            • Sewerage spillages were reported as a problem.


      The Department of Provincial and Local Government (DPLG) reported that
      it was pleased with the expenditure patterns of the  municipality  and
      encouraged the municipality’s  commitments  to  progress.  It  further
      reported  that  within  the  current   MTEF,   allocations   to   poor
      municipalities in terms of the Municipal  Infrastructure  Grant  (MIG)
      had been reviewed. Whereas the applicable formula would have allocated
      about R3m to Emakhazeni, reviewed allocations saw  this  municipality,
      and others similar to it, receiving a minimum of R5 million.


      DPLG confirmed  that  Emakhazeni  was  part  of  a  pilot  project  on
      developing an Infrastructure Management Plan. This pilot involved  the
      development of a 10 to 20 year  plan  for  the  municipality.  It  was
      reported that banks had been included in the  pilot  to  look  at  the
      municipality and its capacity to raise revenue. The  report  from  the
      pilot would be used to come up with a  plan  for  the  whole  country.
      Furthermore, the DPLG disputed the claim by Emakhazeni that an  amount
      of R65m had been promised to the municipality.


      The Provincial Treasury reported  that,  while  the  municipality  was
      compliant with the Municipal Finance Management Act (MFMA),  it  still
      relied heavily on grants and subsidies and was not able to  raise  its
      own revenue.  The Provincial Treasury informed the Committee  that  it
      had written letters  to  municipalities  in  the  province  raising  a
      concern about departments who  owed  municipalities  huge  amounts  of
      money. In the letters it had requested municipalities to indicate  the
      exact amounts owed and the duration of the debts. It reported that, to
      date, no responses had been received from the municipalities.


      Observations of the Committee


      The Committee made the following observations relating to the
      Emakhazeni Municipality:


         • According to the Municipal Finance Management Act (MFMA),
           municipalities were only allowed to invest money that was not
           immediately needed. It was the view of the Committee that the
           Mayor’s Discretionary Fund was not in line with the law; and
         • The DBSA needed to be brought on board with the pilot project by
           the DPLG.

        b) Msukaligwa Local Municipality

        Having heard the presentation of the  municipality,  the  following
        observations were made by stakeholders present, and the Committee:
         •  The  DPLG  complained  that  this  was  the  most   frustrating
           municipality to deal with in terms of cooperation. Some  of  the
           most obvious challenges faced by  the  municipality  related  to
           procurement and the appointment of staff. Furthermore, the  DPLG
           reported that it had been receiving reports signed by the  Chief
           Financial  Officer  (CFO)   and   Municipal   Manager   on   the
           municipality’s expenditure and was surprised to hear that  money
           had in fact not been spent.
         • National Treasury pointed  out  that  the  presentation  by  the
           municipality did not give specifics e.g.  how  many  houses  had
           been electrified. It added that, post 2010, municipalities would
           be getting more money and needed to gear  themselves  for  that.
           National  Treasury  observed  that  municipalities  neither  had
           ability to spend nor did they have the ability to  collect  from
           debtors. It was reported that, for over  three  years,  National
           Treasury had  been  trying  to  get  the  municipality  to  hire
           interns. It was also reported  that  the  municipality  was  not
           using the  Finance  Management  Grant  (FMG)  which  was  at  0%
           expenditure.
         • Provincial Treasury  also  raised  a  concern  that  the  report
           presented to the Committee was glaringly different from the  one
           that had been presented by the municipality  to  the  Provincial
           Treasury.

        The Committee made the following observations with respect  to  the
        municipality:
         • The number of positions was 1330 of which 741 were vacant  while
           the salary bill was already at  40%.  This  meant  that  if  the
           vacancies were to be filled the salary bill would be bloated. To
           this end, the Committee requested the  municipality,  Provincial
           Treasury, National Treasury, DPLG and Local Government  to  look
           at the following matters:
              a)  Determine whether  the  given  1330  posts  was  the  real
                 figure;
              b) The credibility of the budget that  was  presented  to  the
                 Committee;
              c) The sustainability of  the  budget  were  the  post  to  be
                 filled;
              d) Address the issue of under-collection;
              e) Look into the alignment of priorities to the budget; and
              f) Determine whether there was a discretionary fund or not.

         • The Committee was concerned about the attitude  of  the  Auditor
           General given that in the context of what was presented  to  the
           Committee, there had  been  no  forensic  investigation  of  the
           municipality. The Committee noted that it considered interacting
           with the  National  Auditor-General  on  this  matter  with  the
           objective to assist and ensure service delivery.


        c) Nkomazi Municipality


        It was reported that the  provincial  Health  Department  owed  the
        municipality an amount of R9 million.


        DPLG reported that it was  pleased  with  the  expenditure  of  the
        municipality which was at 76%. They added that they were  aware  of
        challenges faced by the municipality.


        National Treasury pointed out that the  presented  budget  did  not
        include the capital budget which was a concern.


        Provincial Treasury  reported  that  it  had  challenges  with  the
        municipality and assisted wherever they were needed.


        Eskom reported that it had projects totalling 1400 connections  and
        another 943 connections were scheduled to be done  by  the  end  of
        March.


        The Department of Water Affairs and Forestry (DWAF)  reported  that
        it had a very good working relationship with the municipality.
        Observations of the Committee


        The Committee pointed  out  that  the  MIG  had  been  under-spent.
        Furthermore, the Committee was concerned that the municipality  had
        appointed a deputy CFO (a new post) while there was funding  for  a
        properly qualified CFO.


        The water subsidy was also under-spending. To  this  end  DWAF  was
        requested to assist in dealing with capacity. It was noted that, in
        a rural municipality such as this one, every cent needed to be used
        and used well. The Department of Local Government and  Housing  was
        requested to be part of the discussions on capacity building.


        d) Steve Tshwete District Municipality


        It was reported that the  total  number  of  libraries  within  the
        municipal area was eight. Eventually the  municipality  planned  to
        have ten libraries with two in rural  villages.   The  municipality
        further reported that their operational budgets were ballooning  as
        a result of high levels of legislation  governing  operations.  All
        new legislation came with  staff  requirements  which  reduced  the
        capital budget that had been aimed at  service  delivery.   It  was
        further reported that the district had instructed that MIG funds be
        ring-fenced to deal with issues of water.


        The Committee heard that the municipality needed an amount  of  R18
        million to assist in the provision  of  toilets  in  the  place  of
        biological toilets that were currently in place.


        The Committee was informed that the Provincial Education department
        also owed this municipality about R900 000. Furthermore it was said
        that funding was given to schools on  the  basis  of  how  old  the
        schools were, as such schools in towns received bigger  allocations
        than those in RDP areas.


        The Provincial Health Department also owed  the  municipality  R5.5
        million.  The  Department  was  reported  to  be  taking  over  the
        provision of primary health care. The municipality reported that it
        was resisting this move by the Health department since it felt that
        it could provide this service.


        The Committee was also informed that 74% of  the  municipal  budget
        was from its own revenue in which case it  sometimes  had  to  take
        loans. In areas where revenue was generated,  refuse  removal  took
        place twice a week and in others once a week.


        Provision for the indigent:
        10 kl of water, 50kwh, free sanitation, free refuse  removal,  100%
        rebate on property tax. The municipality reported that 82.3% of its
        equitable share went towards the free basic services for indigent.


        Furthermore the municipality  reported  that  it  was  facilitating
        housing delivery even though it had not been  given  the  subsidies
        for this. The actual erection of the houses was said to be done  by
        the province. In addition the municipality  believed  that  housing
        delivery  could  be  accelerated  if  the  municipality  could   be
        accredited.


        All municipal programmes were reported to be fully aligned  to  the
        Provincial Growth and Development Strategies (PGDS).


        The DPLG reported that it was pleased with the expenditure  of  the
        municipality. National  Treasury  commended  the  municipality  for
        being able to raise its own revenue. It noted,  however,  that  the
        question of unfunded mandates needed to be addressed.


        Provincial Treasury reported that the  municipality  complied  with
        the MFMA and that it had an in-house financial system  that  worked
        well.  It  also  pointed  out,  that  the  municipality’s   capital
        expenditure was an area of concern since the municipality  was  not
        spending according to a set benchmark.  To this end the  Provincial
        Treasury  reported  that  it  had  sent  out  a  template   wherein
        municipalities could fill in their capital projects.


        With  respect  to  the  accreditation  of  the  municipality,   the
        Committee agreed that it would set up a meeting with  the  National
        Department of Housing, Provincial Treasury and  Provincial  Housing
        to address the matter.


        e) Albert Luthuli Municipality


        The National Treasury pointed out that the  report  that  had  been
        presented by the municipality to it was not the  same  as  the  one
        presented  to  the  Committee.  It  was  reported  that  when   the
        municipality adopted its budget there had been  a  deficit  of  R22
        million. It had debtors of over R86 million. The adjustment  budget
        that was being presented  at  the  meeting  was  not  credible.  It
        further reported that the municipality was overspending by over  R1
        million  in  January  2008  on  its  Capital  budget.  Furthermore,
        National Treasury enquired on what the director  in  the  Municipal
        Manager’s office did.


        The National Treasury also noted that  in  the  operations  budget,
        there was an allocated amount for “other” and this had  the  second
        highest amount of money.  It  enquired  as  to  what  this  “other”
        included. It  also  pointed  out  the  glaring  difference  in  the
        capacity requirements of this municipality and that of  Msukaligwa,
        adding that this municipality seemed to be doing well  without  the
        huge numbers of staff needed in Msukaligwa. The Provincial Treasury
        concurred with National Treasury  that  the  presentation  differed
        from what had been presented to the Provincial Treasury.  It  added
        that support  was  given  by  Provincial  Treasury  to  assist  the
        municipality.


        The Committee made the following observations:


        The municipality had received a qualified report from  the  Auditor
        General. The findings of the AG with respect  to  the  municipality
        included among others:
      • Incorrect accounting framework;
      • Non availability of a fixed asset register;
      • Overstatement by R499 788 due to calculation error;
         • Capital Development fund overstated by R4m  due  to  calculation
           error; and
      • Non availability of source documents.


        f) Bushbuckridge Municipality


        The Committee noted the report by this municipality  but  requested
        that, given that the Mayor  and  the  Municipal  Manager  were  not
        present, they would be invited to be part of the meeting on  5  May
        in Cape Town.


        g) Gert Sibande District Municipality


        The presented report did not relate the  challenges  faced  by  the
        municipality, but reported on behalf of other municipalities.  This
        made  it  difficult  for  the  Committee  to  interact   with   the
        presentation.


        The municipality reported that it had  been  under  the  impression
        that it needed to report on the entire district. To this end it was
        agreed that the municipality should also  prepare  itself  for  the
        meeting scheduled to take place in Cape Town.


        h) Emalahleni Local Municipality


        In the absence of the Executive Mayor and  the  Municipal  Manager,
        the Committee noted the report by this municipality  but  requested
        that they be part of the meeting on 5 May in Cape Town.


   4) Conclusion


        Given the above findings, the Committee made the following
   conclusions:
      • Issues of capacity were a common challenge among municipalities;
         • Departments were not honouring their commitments to
           municipalities in terms of debt;
      • There were departments who were reluctant to participate in IDP’s;
         • Municipalities had discretionary funds that were not in line
           with the MFMA;
      • Some municipalities had very high salary bills;

   5) Recommendations

      Emakhazeni Municipality
      The Committee recommends as follows:
         • Departments owing money to this and other municipalities  should
           promptly meet their commitments or risk being  in  violation  of
           the law;
         • The Department of Education should meet  with  the  municipality
           and address the question of scholar transportation;
         • The matter of the municipality being housing developers would be
           taken up by the Committee with the department of housing;
         • The Department of  Water  Affairs  and  Forestry  (DWAF)  should
           develop a programme of action to assist  with  the  problems  of
           sewerage spillages in Emakhazeni and report to the Committee;
         • The municipality should continue to put in place ways of raising
           its own revenue; Furthermore it should limit personnel  spending
           to be no more than 30% of its budget;
         • The MEC for Finance and the Mayor of Emakhazeni  should  address
           the issue of outstanding debts as a matter of urgency  in  terms
           of the MFMA.

      Msukaligwa


         • The Committee recommends that the municipality prepare a  report
           on the true state of affairs for a meeting that would be held in
           Cape Town on 5 May 2008.


      Nkomazi
      The Committee recommends as follows:
         • The Provincial Treasury meet with the municipality  and  discuss
           possible  ways   of   ensuring   capacity   building   for   the
           municipality.
         • The DWAF assist in dealing with capacity  issues  ensuring  that
           the municipality was able to spend its water subsidy.
         • The Department of Local Government and Housing should be part of
           the discussions on capacity building.
         • The Mayor should inform the Provincial Treasury  whenever  there
           was money owed to it by the departments.


      Steve Tshwete
      The Committee recommends as follows:
         • The municipality should consider making use of its investment to
           address the issue  of  biological  toilets.  All  municipalities
           should invest money that was not  immediately  needed,  in  line
           with the MFMA.


      Albert Luthuli
      The Committee recommends as follows:
         • Given the report of the Auditor  General  on  the  municipality,
           National Treasury should  meet  with  this  municipality,  DWAF,
           DPLG, Provincial Department of Local Government and Housing  and
           Provincial Treasury, to deal with  all  matters  raised  in  the
           report so as to get the municipality on track. Some of the focal
           areas specified for that   meeting were:
         • Alignment of budgets and
         • Salary bill
               o  The  DWAF  and  the  municipality  needs  to  resolve  the
                 following matters that had been raised by the  municipality
                 as challenges; the upgrade and refurbishment of  water  and
                 sewer treatment works and the huge backlogs in sanitation.

      Report to be considered.


