---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 25 March 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2008-03-25
---

TUESDAY, 25 MARCH 2008
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:07.

The Acting Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 581.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                          (The late Ms N C Kondlo)

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon members, before
we proceed, I would like us to observe a moment of silence to honour the
memory of the late chairperson of the ANC caucus, the hon Kondlo, who has
passed on to higher service. Could you please stand for a minute.

Agreed to unanimously, all the members standing.

                           WELCOMING OF MINISTERS
The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (P M Hollander): I welcome the hon
Ministers: the Minister for Public Enterprises, hon Erwin; the Minister of
Minerals and Energy, hon Sonjica; the Minister of Labour, hon Mdladlana;
the Deputy Minister of Trade and Industry, the hon Davies; and the Minister
of Public Works, the hon Didiza. The Minister of Transport, the hon Jeff
Radebe, has been excused. He will not be with us this afternoon. The
Minister of Public Works, the hon Thoko Didiza, has requested that we group
together the questions related to her portfolio as she has another
engagement which requires her attention. We will then relieve her of her
duties in the NCOP.

               NO NOTICES OF MOTION OR MOTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander):Hon members, I have
been informed that the Whippery have agreed that there will be no notices
of motion or motions without notice today.

We now proceed to the questions as printed on the Question Paper. I call on
the Minister of Public Works, the hon Thoko Didiza, to respond. The time
for asking supplementary questions will be two minutes; the time for
replying to supplementary questions will be four minutes; and only four
supplementary questions will be allowed per question.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

                                  ECONOMICS
                                  Cluster 3

MINISTERS:

           Outcomes of national workshop on laws on expropriation

41.   Mr J W le Roux (DA) asked the Minister of Public Works:

      (1)   What were the outcomes of the national workshop held on 15
           February 2008 regarding her department’s revisiting of the
           current laws on expropriation;

      (2)   whether any stakeholders were invited to attend the workshop; if
           not, why not; if so, (a) which stakeholders and (b) when will
           this new legislation be introduced in Parliament?
                                  CO1056E

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Thank you very much, hon Acting Chairperson.
The answer to Question 41, asked by the hon Le Roux, relates to a matter
that will be serving in the National Assembly portfolio committee tomorrow
with regard to the Expropriation Act. I am not going to deal with the
details, because I think that will be pre-empting what the Bill is all
about, which, in my view, might be inappropriate. However, it relates to
the process.

The question asked is what the outcomes were of the national workshop held
on 15 February regarding the department’s revisiting of the current law on
expropriation.

There was an agreement reached by the various stakeholders that were at the
workshop on the need for the amendment of the current Act, which is the
Expropriation Act of 1975, in that indeed it was not in line with the
current Constitution. There were obviously some issues, as we would
appreciate, from various stakeholders about certain issues, one of those
relating to the nature of compensation and the powers of the executive and
the powers of the courts.

As I said earlier, I am not going to deal with the details of that question
because they would be matters for debate in the portfolio committee and the
select committee as the Bill has already been passed by Cabinet and is now
with the state law advisers for certification.

The second part of the question was whether any stakeholders were invited
to attend the workshop; and if not, why not. Actually, a number of
stakeholders who will be affected directly by the legislation were invited.
This includes government departments which have to exercise the powers with
regard to expropriation. Farmers’ organisations were also invited, and
property organisations, represented by the SA Property Owners Association,
were also invited. The invitation was actually open to other parties that
would have liked to participate, including political parties. Thank you
very much, hon Chair.

Mr J W LE ROUX: Thank you, Acting Chairperson. I can understand the
Minister in that this will only be in Parliament tomorrow or whenever, but
can she give us any indication of how price will be determined when
expropriation takes place?

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Hon Le Roux, as I have indicated, these are
matters that are at the centre of the legislation that is being amended.
Obviously, as a department we have made proposals on the legislation on
what we think should be the calculations towards reaching a fair and
equitable compensation as indicated in section 25(3) of our Constitution.
However, Parliament, including the NCOP select committee, will still
conduct public consultation on the matter. I don’t think we need to pre-
empt this, because the current Bill is not yet an Act. We cannot say this
is how it will be determined because that may be changed in the course of
the discussion on that matter. Thank you.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: It is said that it would be in the public interest to
expropriate certain pieces of private land. Wouldn’t it also be in the
public interest for the department to do an audit of state-owned land that
is not being used or is underutilised to see whether that can’t be
expropriated as well?

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Hon Terblanche, you know as well as I do that
the issue of the state land audit is not a new matter, and that has always
been debated. As we stand, for land reform purposes the state has actually
donated land in terms of the disposal Act that is currently our legislation
and our policy.

Secondly, with regard to expropriation, if you were to read our own
Constitution, section 25(3), you would see that this deals with the issue
of property rights and the powers for the state to expropriate both in the
public interest and for public purposes, among other things, to address the
issues of land reform and of equitable access to land and other natural
resources.

If you look at the Expropriation Act of 1975, it gives powers to the state
to expropriate for public purposes - where you need a road, the state will
expropriate; where you need a railway line, the state will expropriate even
today. So, the expropriation instrument is not a new instrument on the
South African Statute Book; neither is it unique to South Africa. It is a
worldwide instrument that is used by governments in order to make
compulsory the acquiring of particular pieces of land for development
purposes. Whether it is the state or the private individual, I don’t think
that is a matter of debate. In my view the question, with due respect,
doesn’t arise in respect of this legislation. Thank you very much.

    Position regarding allocation of new tenants to commercial farm, and
         employment and accommodation of employees of current tenant

44.   Mr D A Worth (DA) asked the Minister of Public Works:

      (1)   Whether, in view of her department’s intention to allocate new
           tenants to a certain commercial farm owned by her department
           (name furnished), her department has allocated any other
           property to the current tenant in order to allow the commercial
           enterprise to continue; if not, why not; if so, what are the
           relevant details;

      (2)   whether her department will find new (a) employment and (b)
           accommodation for the five employees of the current tenant and
           their families; if so, what are the relevant details; if not,
           why not;

      (3)   whether these persons will be evicted; if so, what are the
           relevant details;

      (4)   whether her department will (a) ensure that the new tenants will
           utilise the property for commercial purposes and (b) employ the
           current employees residing on the property; if not, why not; if
           so, (i) what are the relevant details in each case and (ii) what
           rental amount will be paid for the property by the new tenant?
           CO1059E

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Acting Chair, I would like to preface the
answer to this question by first indicating that the question, as asked, by
the hon D A Worth is a question that was asked in the department last year
- in detail with no change in each paragraph.

So, our answer to that question remains the same, but for the sake of the
hon member, we want to repeat that again, indeed, the national Department
of Public Works will not allocate any property to the current tenant. That
was a lease, and in the conditions of the lease we had indicated that when
the lease expired, the state would indeed take over its property.

So, that position still stands. We can give the details to the hon member,
but he has the answer because it has not changed from what it was last
year. Thank you.

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you, hon
Minister. Are there any other follow-up questions to the Minister on
Question 44. [Interjections.] Order! We then move to Question 46 to the hon
Minister, and I ask the hon Minister to respond.

 Number of permanent and temporary jobs created under Expanded Public Works
                                  Programme

46.   Mrs A N D Qikani (UDM) asked the Minister of Public Works:

      How many (a) permanent and (b) temporary jobs had been created under
      the Expanded Public Works Programme as at the latest specified date
      for which information is available?     CO1065E

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Acting Chair, well, Question 46 relates to
the number of job opportunities that have been created. But once again the
question has been asked as though the intention of the Expanded Public
Works Programme is to create permanent employment. I would like to indicate
that that has never been the intention of this programme.

The intention of this programme was to create possibilities for employment
to ensure that once people exited the programme, they could be permanently
employed either in the areas in which an opportunity had been created or
elsewhere. Also, such individuals would also be able to be self-employed in
the future. As at October 2007, 857 job opportunities were created by
government. Thank you very much.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Acting Chair, arising from the Minister’s response, I
want to find out from my hon Minister what impact this programme had on
people who had never had employment in their entire lives, but because of
this programme they were able to put food on their table. What impact did
this programme have? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Thank you very much, hon member. Indeed, one
of the impacts that we have observed, and as has been indicated by the
Medium-Term Budget Review, is that we have seen the change in the quality
of lives of those members of the community who participated in this
programme. To cite an example, in the long run that the Business Trust had,
they visited one of the projects in Tugela Ferry in KwaZulu-Natal. Part of
the Zibambele project, which is on road maintenance as part of the Expanded
Public Works Programme, involves a family being given an opportunity to
maintain a kilometre of road. One of the women who was part of that
programme said:

  One of the things that this programme has done for us as this community
  and for me as an individual ...

I will mention only two -


  ... has been to open access to mobility for our communities. There was
  never a road before that came to my village. Now, there are taxis close
  by. We can move to visit our families in other areas, and even go to town
  without having to walk a long distance to access transport.
Secondly, she said:

  I was actually an embarrassment to my neighbours because every night I
  would have had to send a child to go and ask for food from the neighbours
  because there was nothing I could eat. I was not part of those who could
  benefit from the social grant because my circumstances did not put me in
  that position. However, after this programme started, today I am able to
  feed myself and my family, secondly, one of my daughters is training as a
  nurse in one of the colleges.

What this says to us is that where people are given opportunities, they are
able to actually come out of a poverty-stricken situation and break the
cycle of poverty going forward, because they will be able to take their
children to school. Indeed, one of the issues we have been grappling with
working with the Department of Labour and others has been to see the extent
to which we can actually look at improving this programme going forward.

I’m sure the next government will learn lessons from what we have done thus
far and ensure that, as this programme continues, it adds other elements to
deal with the issue of sustainability that members have raised around this
programme before. One of the questions asked even today by Mrs A N D Qikane
was on the issue of permanence, which is really about the issue of
sustainability. I’m sure that through the lessons that we’ve learnt from
this programme, we can see what the other possibilities are that can emerge
from it. Thank you.

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you, hon
Minister. Are there any follow-up questions to the Minister? If there is
none, I then relieve the Minister of her duties here in the NCOP. Thank
you, Minister Didiza, for participating in this question session.

    Plans to restore Athlone Power Station in light of electricity supply
                                 constraints

30.   Mr N J Mack (ANC) asked the Minister of Minerals and Energy:

      Whether her department has any plans to restore the Athlone Power
      Station in light of the current electricity supply constraints; if
      not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                        CO771E

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Thank you very much, Acting
Chairperson. The answer to the question is no, there are no plans to
demothball the Athlone Power Station.

I should probably give some background that led to that decision. The
Athlone Power Station stopped generating energy for the City of Cape Town
some years ago when it was more economical to purchase energy from Eskom
than to use the power station. Realising that the demand for electricity
was increasing, the City of Cape Town issued a proposal for the running of
the power station. A number of proposals were received and evaluated from
interested parties, and none of them was found to be viable.

Over the years that the power station was mothballed, its condition
deteriorated to the point at which bringing it back into operation was not
a viable proposition. The City of Cape Town has embarked on a process to
formally decommission the power station and apportion the land for use by
other services within the city. That then should close the matter. Thank
you, Chair.

   Steps taken to ensure conclusion of commercial agreement by Infraco and
                                   Neotel

31.   Ms N D Ntwanambi (ANC) asked the Minister for Public Enterprises:

      What steps has his department taken in ensuring (a) that the
      conclusion of the commercial agreement between Infraco and Neotel is
      expedited in terms of the understanding upon which the Broadband
      Infraco Bill [B26D—] was passed and (b) that the terms of the
      commercial agreement are acceptable to all involved and interested
      parties?                          CO1040E
The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Thank you very much, Acting Chair.
Yes, the department did assist in the conclusion of the commercial
agreement between Infraco and Neotel. That agreement has been concluded.
Infraco is in operation in terms of that agreement and I believe that the
agreement is to the mutual benefit of all parties.

Just to inform the House, as I am sure it is already aware, this is an
arrangement that would apply until such time that Infraco is self-licensed
and the process of licensing, in terms of the amendment to the Electronic
Communications Act that was passed last year, is in progress. So I believe
that the objectives of creating Infraco and licensing it are well on track,
and the current operations are going well. I believe that the volume of
traffic now being conducted on the infrastructure is very significant
indeed.

 Role of department and government, as well as pricing, in assisting Eskom’s
                             capacity expansion

32.   Mr J M Sibiya (ANC) asked the Minister for Public Enterprises:

      (1)   How is his department assisting Eskom’s capacity expansion;


      (2)   whether the government will inject capital into Eskom for the
           building project; if so, how; if not, why not;
      (3)   whether Eskom will have to resort to charging higher prices to
           the consumer; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                             CO1041E

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Acting Chair, I think the House knows
that this build programme is a massive programme. As the shareholder
Ministry of Eskom, we are clearly very actively involved in a number of
ways in dealing with this. Firstly, it has been to develop, jointly with
the Department of Minerals and Energy, what the build programme should be.
As you know, we must diversify our primary energy sources. So we are
examining the nuclear build programme as well so that we can diversify away
from coal to a high degree.

Included in the build programme are also various other forms of primary
energy. The one using diesel is an expensive form. It is used for peaking
stations and does pose a number of problems for us, particularly with the
rise in diesel prices. But we are currently building what is called a
pumped storage station which is a form of hydropower in the Drakensberg
where water is pumped up and down to operate turbines which are used mainly
for peaking, also for what is called “mid-range”, ie for slightly longer
periods of usage. So the department has been very active in assisting Eskom
in the build programme and is working very closely with the policy
department – the Department of Minerals and Energy.

With regard to the capitalisation of the programme, this was evident from
the Budget Speech – a pretty complex issue. Essentially, it has been many,
many decades since Eskom was last capitalised. It has been able to operate
on its own balance sheet for some decades now. However, if we are going to
double the size of our energy system, which we have to do in the next two
decades, the implications are very large indeed.

As you know, electricity prices are regulated prices with some clear
formulas and rules as to how you can claim for the costs of producing
energy. This is clearly a very topical matter right at the moments because,
with the rise in the cost of coal and fuel, and our need to introduce solar
geysers and smart metering, there are a number of pass-through costs in
that we are currently applying for a reopening of the pricing for this
year.

What the Treasury announced was that it would support Eskom to an amount of
R60 billion over the next five years. The exact form of that support -
whether this will be in cash or guarantees and what pace it will have - is
a matter still under discussion because this depends largely on our
decisions on pricing. If you do not raise the price of electricity, then
Eskom’s ability to raise capital in the capital market declines. That would
mean we would have to do it on budget. And, as you have seen, for an amount
of R340 billion over the next five years, it is not feasible to do that on
budget. This will be so disruptive of our fiscal position that we can’t do
it.
So, in short, the department has been very actively involved in supporting
Eskom for the build programme. It is a massive build programme - one of the
biggest in the world currently. The state has agreed to an amount of R60
billion in the form of cash or guarantees for Eskom to assist its
capitalisation programme. This is necessary in order to ensure that we can
raise funds in the national and international capital markets.

Mr J M SIBIYA: Thank you very much, Comrade Acting Chairperson and Comrade
Minister. You indicated that Eskom has been assisted by government for some
time and is in a position to stand on its own. Regarding the current
assistance the government is giving to Eskom, is it coupled with some
arrangement whereby the assistance given will have to be recouped either in
part or in total, or is it assistance that just goes to Eskom to enable it
to stand on its own and proceed with business as usual? Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Hon Sibiya, that is a good question.
This is a capital injection. This means that as Eskom is profitable in the
future, dividends will be paid back to the shareholder. As you have
probably seen in the period up until 2004, Eskom did in fact pay dividends
and it has paid dividends in the past.

However, for such a large build programme, we finance some of it by debt
and some of it by retained earnings – approximately what is called a
gearing ratio. This is the ratio between what you borrow and what you self-
finance. It is approximately 50:50. So half of what we need to build the
new programme will be borrowed in the markets and half will be financed
from self-financing in an agreement with the regulator. So the price that
the regulator gives us is designed to give us a rate of return on assets
that would allow us to self-finance to the extent of half of the programme.


The regulator originally indicated that, and we supported this, the
increase of 14% that was envisaged was the price that would be the last
increase in the three-year cycle that was due to end next year. So the
regulator has been giving us three-year cycle increases. What the regulator
had originally planned was that from the next three-year cycle, we would
begin to give price increases that would allow us to finance this very big
build programme. However, with the rapid rise in costs of energy, the
figures that we were working on, which are from more than a year back, are
no longer appropriate. This is why we have to reopen this in terms of the
rules of the regulator. This is not something that is unusual. You can
reopen if costs rise very rapidly.

The difficulty we face is that given the projected rises at 14% and given
what we know is happening to costs, it became evident in the discussions
with Eskom, Minerals and Energy, Public Enterprises and the National
Treasury that Eskom’s balance sheet would deteriorate very rapidly; that in
the coming financial year it will be forced into a loss position; and that
the price rise would not be sufficient to re-establish our profitability in
terms of the rate of return on assets.

Also, certain financial ratios for the fiscal boffins here or the financial
boffins: Your cash interest cover, your gearing ratios, financial ratios
that are important on a balance sheet – all of these ratios were going into
a terrain or a set of figures which meant that the rating that Eskom has,
which is a very favourable rating that allows us to borrow money on the
international capital markets at a very competitive rate, was going to be
lowered, as you saw in the press.

This would change the cost of capital. It would change the financing
programme. And, in terms of what we can raise at current market rates and
the capital markets and what we projected we would earn in terms of
retained earnings, there was a gap. That gap would have the effect of
reducing Eskom’s rating, increasing the cost of capital and putting us into
a whole new downward cycle.

So, the Treasury gave us a bridging capital injection. Technically, we can
adopt various forms: It can be a shareholder loan, or it can be cash. There
are various financial implications for each of these, but they are a
capital injection to keep the balance sheet of Eskom strong enough to be
able to raise finance and self-finance so that we can build this massive
programme. Obviously, the reason the Treasury supported us on this is that
it is absolutely crucial for our economy. If we don’t keep the build
programme moving as fast as possible, we could get a much more serious
crisis, and that is obviously what we want to avoid.

Mr A WATSON: Thank you, hon Chair. Hon Minister, you said a lot about the
financial implications and the servicing of the finances, etc. But I think
the more important question for the people of South Africa is: What impact
do you envisage this injection having, which you call the biggest in the
world, on the increased generation of energy for South Africa so that we
can relieve the problems that we are currently experiencing, particularly
in the mining industry?

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Well, the cause of the current
situation, I think, by now is very well known. If we do away with a lot of
the speculation, what becomes very clear is that the demand for electricity
increased by unprecedented amounts for South Africa. So, the overall demand
jumped at above 4% - it was growing at above 4%. But more problematic than
that was that the peak demand – the highest level of demand - increased by
just under 5%. This is unprecedented in South Africa’s history. So, this
rapid growth in demand reduced our reserve margin, particularly at peaking
periods.

This caused a cycle of events, which is what we are grappling with now.
Because this demand is very high and in order to avoid the last resort
which is load shedding, we have had to run our plant at levels which have
never been achieved in South Africa before. So, currently, we are running
our plant on average at a 75% utilisation level, which for coal-fired power
stations is very, very high indeed. The historic average in Eskom is round
about 65%.

When you start running complicated equipment – and many of you here are
engineers - you will know that as you run it, you are going to get more
faults, particularly since we know that the bulk of Eskom’s equipment –
that is why we are building more stuff - is beyond its mid-life period. So,
a power station’s life is 40 years; if it is nuclear, maybe 60 years. Most
of our equipment is beyond its mid-life cycle. So, we are dealing with
equipment in the second half of its lifespan.

This causes more faults and leads to a situation in which you have
unplanned outages. In summer, we take 5 000 megawatts out of our commission
in order to carry out maintenance activities. With the situation I have
just described, you get more unplanned outages. On 24 January we had the
situation with the mines when we had just under 10 000 megawatts out. This
can be through maintenance problems, lightning, fires – it was a whole
range of things that occurred that just brought everything together at that
time. So, what we have to do is carry out the power recovery programme,
that is, to reduce the current demand by 3 000 megawatts. If we can do
that, we can drop the utilisation of equipment. This means that the
maintenance problems can be reduced and we can carry out a more organised
maintenance programme than we can if we are in a situation of a lot of
unplanned outages and essentially many crises throughout the system.

So, each year from 2004, we have been bringing new capacity on stream. Our
target for this year, which we are on course to reach, is another 1 110
megawatts. Next year, in terms of the original build programme, we will
have brought on 2 400 megawatts, and then each year, another 1 000 to 2 000
megawatts. Finally, when we bring the Madupi on in 2012, we will have
brought 2 000 megawatts and then 4 000 megawatts on shortly one after the
other. So, that was the programme as we envisaged it.

Given the problems we have had and given our inability to be more efficient
in energy use, we are now negotiating for what is called co-generation.
This is to look for other partners to come in, and we have called for
another independent power producer, IPP. But no project, it doesn’t matter
what it is, can be brought on in a few days. Most projects are going to
take us 12 to 24 months to bring on stream. This is why we have to have, in
the current period, the national response programme, as we announced
recently. Eskom will begin with scheduled load shedding to avoid a
situation in which you have load shedding in an unplanned manner. We would
rather make it predictable.

So, this is a fairly complex situation. If we can reach the saving levels
that we want of 3 000 megawatts and hold those levels, we can get back to a
situation that we have been used to over the past year and a half. As you
know, over the past year and a half, our margin has been 8% to 10%. What
the current events in January have illustrated to us is that this margin is
much too narrow for reliability. If you have just a configuration of
problems hitting you, you have a serious problem. So we must reduce the
demand in the short term by 3 000 megawatts. That is an absolute
requirement. If we don’t do that, we are going to have more and more
problems with load shedding.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Thank you, Chairperson. I didn’t hear the Minister’s
response to part 3 of the question on whether Eskom would resort to
charging consumers high prices. And then I actually want to ask a question
about that. The Minister has just explained the financial situation to us -
why Eskom will need bridging capital. Is it then, in the current financial
circumstances, appropriate for Eskom to pay such high bonuses to the people
that work for it when the public is being faced with having to pay more and
the government has to fork out more money? Surely, there must be something
that can be done about that.

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: I thought I had dealt with the third
part, but I am happy to give more detail. The system works in terms of the
regulator, Nersa – the National Energy Regulator of SA – which allows a
certain rate of return on assets. That rate of return on assets is designed
to generate sufficient surplus. Profit is not technically the right word;
let’s call it surplus for Eskom to finance, as I have explained earlier,
half of the build.

In addition to that, the regulator does allow what are called pass-through
costs. These are costs that arise in the course of operations which can be
passed through to the consumer. So if your coal and diesel prices have
risen dramatically - because we have to use the gas-fired turbines at a
higher level than we would normally use - you can get those prices passed
through.

The choice that we face as Public Enterprises and the Department of
Minerals and Energy more specifically is that if we delay the pass-through
until the next cycle of price increases, we are going to have a very big
increase. You are going to have the cost of the coal and the diesel which
would have been incurred right through two financial years.

So Eskom, as we now look at it, has probably projected for a loss. You
would have that, plus you would have had to factor in the financing of the
next increase. Now as I have indicated publicly and as has become public
knowledge, in terms of the stability, essentially, of South Africa’s energy
system, the price of electricity on average probably has to be doubled in a
very short period of not more than two or three years – this is a matter
for the regulator to assess and discuss. I will come to poor households in
a moment.

How do we do that? Shouldn’t we do it in bigger chunks and quickly -
because it makes sense to do it that way? We also need to get people to
save electricity. Those who can afford to save it must do so. Certainly,
the application that has been put in and publicised is dealing mainly with
the pass-through costs. We are proposing that it would be better for
everybody to take those costs now rather than wait until 2009 and probably
have a 100% increase.

If we don’t do that, Eskom’s financial situation will deteriorate so badly
that it will not be able to raise capital and will have to stop its build
programme. And, if we were to stop Eskom’s current build programme, by 2010
– which is a very important year for us - we would have a serious energy
crisis, much more serious than we have now.

So, really, it makes sense to begin the price increases now. Our original
planning, as I have already indicated in my earlier answer, was that the
regulator planned to start next year. In view of the experience we have
had, we believe we should start this year with those price increases. I
hope I have dealt as comprehensively as I can with this matter.

Let me just stress very clearly that we can’t comment in a lot of detail
publicly on the proposal we have made to the regulator, because the
regulator itself will have a public hearing on this matter. It would be
entirely wrong, either for the Minister for Public Enterprises or for Eskom
to start having a detailed discussion in the media when the regulator must
follow a process which includes public hearings.

But, certainly, we can say that we have structured the proposal in a manner
that poor households would be subject to a minimal increase. There will be
some, but a very low increase. We are also finding ways to ensure that we
reduce the burden on smaller businesses, certain kinds of tariffs which are
more aligned with small businesses, small farmers, etc.

It will be the more affluent households that have greater scope for saving.
It will be Parliament that has quite a lot of scope for saving, as we can
see looking up there. All of those that can save don’t say they are going
to pay more. So, we have structured this in a manner that can increase
savings. Basically big businesses as you have seen, the mines included –
everybody - has said, “Look, the simplest way of dealing with this problem
is to raise the price.” So that is what we intend doing.

The bonuses for Eskom executives are contractual matters that relate to the
previous financial year. Eskom has, in its bonus system, what are called
gatekeeper provisions. If certain key objectives are not met, no one can
get a bonus. But in the period we’re looking at - backwards - they could
get that; they earned it in terms of their contracts. If you have a
contract with your employees which says you can get a bonus for work done,
and now in future periods suddenly something happens, you say, “Sorry, we
are not paying bonuses,” I am not sure if you are going to have many
employees around, because that is just capricious; you can’t do that.

Whether they will earn a bonus in this year, is most unlikely, because what
are called the gatekeeper provisions have already been triggered. So, I
think, we have to treat employees fairly, no matter who they are. It might
satisfy our anger and our desire to punish somebody, but you can’t do that.
You can’t allow people to work hard and perform as per their contracts, and
then suddenly later on, you say, “Sorry, we are not giving you that.”

We are not going to do that. We can’t conduct ourselves in that manner. You
can’t expect to have senior executives ever wanting to join a company where
they do their work, they perform their contractual obligations and then
suddenly, because someone gets angry with them, they take it away. You
can’t run a business like that.

Mr S SHICEKA: Thank you very much, Acting Chairperson. Well, the Minister
will agree that energy is a strategic sector of our economy. Of course,
now, it is always on our minds. Are there any plans, other than for
stabilisation, for ensuring that in this sector, Eskom is able to be self-
sufficient not only in getting the resources from government, as is
happening now, but also for it to be able to ensure that it funds itself
going forward after you have gone over the hump that we are currently
experiencing in our economy? That is what I wanted to check, Minister.
Thank you very much.

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Chairperson, for any company that is
about to double the size of its assets, that would very seldom be done only
on the profitability of the company. Normally, for a company that is going
to do that, its shareholders will put capital in. As I explained a moment
ago, this is what is happening now. Because of the size of the build and
because of the speed with which we need to do it, government as shareholder
says “We are prepared to put in R60 billion in capital.”

But, in doing that, we do it in the knowledge that Eskom can, within a
pretty short period of time, get back to its previous position which was
self-sufficient, ie it can produce enough of its own retained earnings and
borrow in the capital market. So we would see this position as being a very
short-term position, not longer than three to four years, in which event
Eskom then returns to a pretty stable position from the point of view of
its balance sheet.

   Reasons for government’s decision to sell Komatiland Forest and wind up
                                   SAFCOL

33.   Mr D D Gamede (ANC) asked the Minister for Public Enterprises:

      What is the reason for the Government’s decision to sell the
      Komatiland Forest and wind up the SA Forestry Company Ltd (Safcol)?
                                                   CO1044E

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Chairperson, as members would recall,
a decision was taken some time ago that the state would exit its forestry
holdings. A number of sales and transactions have taken place here in the
Western Cape, in the Eastern Cape and in KwaZulu-Natal.

The remaining forest was Komatiland Forests which stretches across Limpopo
and Mpumalanga and some small holdings in KwaZulu-Natal. This transaction
has proven to be a very complex and difficult one, because it has not been
able to get through the competition authorities. This is, in the main,
because Komatiland Forests is an important supplier, as I’ll explain in a
moment, of what is called saw logs - logs for timber, building material,
etc, as opposed to pulping wood that is used for paper.

When we failed to go through the competition authorities, you may recall
that we took a year to assess the position again. So we looked at all the
options regarding what we needed to do and we came to the conclusion that
although Komatiland Forests was relatively important in terms of what’s
called saw logs – it’s about 30% of the supply in South Africa – in terms
of its significance in the forestry industry, it’s relatively small. It’s
roughly 3% of the turnover of the total forestry industry in South Africa.

So, we went back to Cabinet and said, our view is that we should do two
things: Firstly, we should dispose of Komatiland but that we would have to
redesign the deal and do it in a different manner; and, secondly, whatever
we then do, we should strengthen the capacity in the Department of Water
Affairs and Forestry and basically establish a development agency for
forestry in Water Affairs and Forestry.

In addition, with forestry, unlike other industries, you have to get a
lease agreement because we would not sell the land - the land would remain
state land – and you have to get a licence from Water Affairs and Forestry.

So control over the type of forestry that would be done in Komatiland
Forests can be achieved through the lease agreement and through the
licensing agreement, because it is important to keep Komatiland Forests
largely in the saw-log industry. On that basis we decided that we should,
once again, proceed with the transaction of selling Komatiland Forests and
then, after we had done that, consider exactly what role the remaining SA
Forestry Company Limited, Safcol, should play.

However, it’s now become very clear that no transaction can proceed easily
until we resolve the land claims issues. The land claims are very extensive
over Komatiland Forests. The Department of Land Affairs has not yet
verified all the claims, so it is fairly clear that it won’t be possible to
proceed quickly with this deal until we have resolved the land claims
issues. And we will be in discussion and are in discussion with the
Department of Water Affairs and Forestry and the Department of Land Affairs
to deal with this matter.

Our view is that, strategically, the state does not need to own Komatiland
Forests, but there is a proviso: That that would only be a correct
statement if a capacity is developed in the Department of Water Affairs and
Forestry to carry out developmental work in forestry, because it can play a
very important role in rural areas and other areas.

Mr A WATSON: Thank you, Chair. Hon Minister, one of the negative spin-offs,
as you well know, of this whole pending transaction between Safcol and
Komatiland Forests has been the detrimental effect it has had on the very
people who actually inherently own the land the forests are on – and you
referred to the land claims that are in process. If I read government’s
intentions correctly, the ultimate intention would be for those people who
are living in the area, who are currently working in the forests and in the
sawmills in particular, to ultimately become the owners of the land that
the forests are on.

But the negative spin-off I am talking about is the fact that Komatiland
became a little bit of a hoarder in the sense that the smaller sawmills
that were the lifeblood of Komatiland, because they gave work to those
people living from the forests, were denied equal access to the saw logs,
and the tender process was eliminating a lot of them. And, to the best of
my knowledge as I stand here, a number of the smaller sawmills in KwaZulu-
Natal, Mpumalanga and the lower parts of Limpopo have actually closed
business and those people have lost their work.

Is government in this whole negotiating exercise – and I’m glad that it has
been stalled a bit – looking at the implications of this sell-off of
Komatiland in terms of protecting the work of the people on those forestry
lands?

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Well, let me say that our first
problem is identifying and verifying the land claimants. So, yes, it is
true that government’s intention, as we have done with the Richtersveld and
elsewhere, is to have the local community benefit from this very important
industry. But I’m afraid we have to go through that process first. It’s
very, very important. One of the difficulties we face with capitalising
Komatiland, which we have to do as it goes along to keep it as a viable
entity, is that we are doing so without a clear knowledge who the final
landowners will be. So this does create some commercial uncertainty.

I would not entirely agree with you that it is that that causes the problem
for the small sawmills. A number of factors come together concerning the
small sawmills. The first is that in South Africa we have a shortage of
timber. We just don’t have enough timber to supply everybody.

I’m afraid we went through what would normally be called a bubble: There
were some pretty large fires in the late nineties in that area; a lot of
logs became available because you had to do a big harvest, which is what we
have to do now again after the very big fires of last year. This brought a
lot of new players into the business who probably could not survive the
basic underlying market condition in South Africa, which is a shortage of
timber. South Africa will have a shortage of timber for a long time to
come. One of Safcol’s investments is in Ifloma, the Industrias Florestais
de Manica, which is a project in Mozambique. This is because the timber
potential of Mozambique is very large if we can expand it.

So, yes, we are conscious of the problems with the small loggers and
sawmillers. It is a pretty difficult situation. We have contractual
obligations with the larger producers - long-term contracts - and this is a
process of trying to extract from one to give to the other. We have been
working with the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry to try to
alleviate that. I would say that what we can’t do is provide enough logs
for everybody that would like to be in this industry. We just don’t have
enough timber to do that.

  Identification of persons responsible for purchasing small quantities of
     poor quality coal and for poor scheduling of maintenance of energy
                               infrastructure

34.   Mr A Watson (DA) asked the Minister for Public Enterprises:

      (1)   Whether her department has identified the persons responsible
           for the (a) purchasing of coal that was of poor quality, (b)
           small quantities of coal purchased and (c) poor scheduling of
           maintenance of energy infrastructure; if not, why not; if so,
           what are the relevant details;

      (2)   whether any action has been taken against them; if not, why not;
           if so, what action?                          CO1049E

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Well, I’m a little confused by this
question, because the question reads “(1) Whether her department”, so I’m
not sure whether that was for me, or... [Interjections.] [Laughter.] I take
it that, in the world of - what’s it called? - “customary union”, I can
speak for men and women.

As to the issue of coal: I know we always have a natural human instinct to
want to find someone whom we can string up. It’s a nice thought. It
sometimes works like that, but most times it doesn’t. The problem we have
with coal has been pretty well described, but let me go through it again.

Essentially, we have contractual arrangements with our coal suppliers. The
Eskom power stations, in terms of the quality of coal they can use, are
some of the most advanced in the world. We can use lower quality coal than
most countries. A few things have happened.

Firstly, as I explained earlier, we are using our plants at 75%
utilisation, not 65%. So this eats into your coal stocks very, very
rapidly, and that’s what has happened. We then have to go into the market
to find new stocks, over and above your supply commitments that were there
contractually, which were based not on 75% utilisation, but on 65%. And, as
we go into the market, you find a highly competitive coal market.

So, basically, the coal exporters are now exporting more coal because the
world market prices are very, very high, and we had more difficulty getting
access to additional coal. On top of that, as big economies like that of
China needed more and more coal, they were also prepared to take lower and
lower quality coal. What we’ve found was that what was coming to Eskom was,
in many cases, the lowest of the low quality, reducing the energy outputs
of our generators.

So, this was a pretty complex problem. It was not due to some incompetence
where people forgot to buy; it was not because we switched wholesale to
black companies. Virtually all our coal still comes from our main suppliers
- the giant mining companies. We will always do this and continue to do so
and have tried to encourage small and medium miners to supply us with coal.
But in terms of the quantities of coal we use and how much we use, this is
not a factor.

So, it has been a combination of rising prices and rising utilisation. In
some stations, like Majuba, we had transport problems. Those of you from
Mpumalanga are very familiar with the problem we’ve got there: We have to
build a new railway line to put more coal into the area. So it has been a
complex set of problems. We have made some managerial changes. You would
have seen that if you had been watching the media. But this is not a
question of someone having made some gross error; it’s a combination of
factors that have come together to give us a major problem with coal
supply.

Again, although it doesn’t help to pacify people, the fact of the matter is
that there are power stations in the world that are reliant on coal that
are not in a coal crisis right at the moment. Virtually every station is
having difficulty keeping its stockpiles up and getting the correct
supplies. Exactly as we did in South Africa when rain hit us and added to
the problems, China too experienced this when snow hit them and added to
their problems.

You can get the kind of short-term problem we had. We are busy correcting
it quite quickly but, to correct it, we have to pay much higher prices and
that takes us back to the price increase I discussed earlier.

Mr A WATSON: Madam, I actually have two questions but I’ll take my chances
on the next one if I do get a chance. Let me try to concentrate on the one
that I think hurts the most.

In light of what you’ve just said and readily admitted in terms of the
damage our economy is suffering for whatever reasons – we can debate
whether people should be strung up or not – you made a statement that the
shortage of coal and the resultant energy crisis won’t actually have an
effect on business, or something to that effect.

Now, to me, that flies in the face of the fact that businesses in Cape Town
have admitted that, in the past few months, they’ve lost half a billion
rand because of the energy crisis. And in Johannesburg and on the coal
mines, it’s even worse. Would you retract that statement, or is there an
explanation for the statement that you made on the question of there having
been no ill effect on business?

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: If you find the statement, I’ll
retract it, but you won’t. It’s obvious that it has had an effect and I
said that very clearly in the House and elsewhere. It’s quite obvious it
has had an effect.

What we were asked was whether it would have an impact on the growth rate.
The answer I gave was that we would do everything we could to try to
minimise that impact on the growth rate. However, it will have an impact.
And this was prior to the Budget. We said that we would not comment until
the Minister of Finance had commented, which he has. If you recall, his
estimate was that both the global crisis and the electricity problem we’ve
had will have – if I recall – an estimated 0,5% effect, I think, on the
growth rate. That was a calculation done by Treasury on behalf of
government.

So we know what we estimate the growth impact will be of approximately 5%.
It is a result of the combination of energy and the global crisis. So,
there’s nothing for me to retract. I mean, it was quite common-sensical. Of
course it will have.

What we disputed, as did the Minister of Finance and the President, was
this notion that there would be some catastrophic effect on growth and that
we would go into recession. We have all disputed that and said that there
was no evidence of our going into a recession as a result of the energy
situation.

To save 10% on energy and become more efficient certainly may have an
impact on growth, as we’ve indicated, but it could also be a stimulus to
other industries to produce more efficient equipment. One industry it will
certainly have an impact on – a very positive impact – is solar geysers.
It’s going to have a very big impact. It’s going to double, triple,
quadruple the production of these geysers in South Africa.

So, it has complex effects. If you find the statement, I will retract it,
but I think you are going to have as much luck as looking for the
proverbial needle in the haystack.

Mr S SHICEKA: Thank you, House Chair. Minister, there is a call for small
businesses to contribute in supplying coal. Of course ... [Inaudible.] ...
I mean, you were just interrupting, you see. ... to supply coal. What is
the procedure? Because when you talk to people out there, they say that it
is difficult to reach Eskom and supply Eskom with coal. Can you outline
that so that we can communicate it to small businesses out there that were
not part of Eskom’s suppliers? Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Let me immediately say that for a
giant power station, you have to supply massive quantities of coal
continuously. It’s an expensive exercise. So I would say that it is not
automatically the best place for a small supplier to be. What we have tried
to do, and what Eskom has tried to do, is to create a purchasing
arrangement which helps the small supplier.

The big suppliers have to meet their requirements; they have to move that
coal all the time to get there. So, we are trying to create a situation in
which we give the benefits of a stable contract to the small supplier, but
not necessarily burden them with some of the supply conditions that a big
supplier would have to meet.

So, there’s a limited number of medium to small suppliers of coal – I can’t
remember offhand - and we have a specific programme that tries to source
from those suppliers.

Now, for a very small coal mine to supply a big power station frankly makes
no economic sense. It’s a small amount you are supplying - it’s just a
little package – and it’s not throughout the year that you can supply it.
So, this is a balance. The supplier can’t be too small; there are some very
big ones; there are medium ones; and the process of bidding and tendering
within that framework is reasonably well known and understood, I believe.
We are working hard to make it well known. I think we must remove any idea
that every small supplier of coal can supply Eskom. It doesn’t make sense.
We have to be commercially realistic about that.

Mr A WATSON: Thank you, Madam. I hoped I would get my other bite. Minister,
you said “those who are from Mpumalanga”. I am. I’m as aware of the
problems with coal and transport and the effect of those as you probably
are. But this past week, in interacting with the communities that I serve,
I was told – and maybe I am making a statement that is not true - that the
recently revamped or unmothballed Camden Power Station, which is actually
on the same grounds as the Usutu mine that has various shafts, historically
got coal from the Usutu coal mine, but now gets its coal from something
like 200 kilometres away. This is because the Usutu coal mine has not been
put back into operation at the same time as the Camden Power Station.

I find that very, very difficult to understand. In fact, I find it
difficult to believe. Could you shed some light on that? If, as was claimed
to me, is true, namely that the conveyer belting is not in a position to
bring coal to the power station and that, at the same time, coal is being
brought in by road from 200 kilometres away, roads which are being damaged
by the minute, then something terrible is wrong. I hope you can shed some
light on that.

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Well, I hope something terrible is not
wrong. I can’t give you ... I mean, I’m not aware of any major coal supply
problems to Camden. By the end of this year we would have refurbished the
final generating unit and that takes us to 3 400 megawatts. It’s a big
station. I’m not aware of any coal supply problems. I can check that, but I
can tell you now that I can’t believe it. No one is going to transport coal
200 kilometres to Camden when you are so close to coal. So I really don’t
believe it.

 Identification of persons responsible for current energy crisis, and action
                             taken against them

35.   Mr J W le Roux (DA) asked the Minister of Minerals and Energy:

      (1)   Whether her department has identified the persons responsible
           for the current energy crisis; if not, why not; if so, what are
           the relevant details;

      (2)   whether any action has been taken against them; if not, why not;
           if so, what action?                          CO1050E

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Thank you very much, Deputy Chair. The
answer to the question is short and sweet. Government has taken collective
responsibility for the energy crisis. The President, on many occasions,
admitted this and that would include the state of the nation address.

Inasmuch as officials are concerned, I do want to remind members that the
President is on record admitting that officials did advise Cabinet that
there would be a shortage in the supply of electricity. It is then in that
context that government took this collective responsibility, and not only
took the responsibility but also apologised to the nation. Thank you,
Chairperson.

  Meeting of performance targets by Setas with respect to the enrolment in
   and completion of programmes, and the provision of workplace experience

36.   Ms J F Terblanche (DA) asked the Minister of Labour:

      (1)   Whether the Sector Education and Training Authorities ‘Setas’
           are meeting their performance targets with respect to the (a)
           enrolment in and (b) successful completion of programmes; if
           not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details;

      (2)   whether the degree to which the Setas are meeting their
           performance targets in the provision of workplace experience is
           satisfactory; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant
           details?                          CO1051E

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Chairperson, Setas are meeting their targets with
respect to the enrolment of learners. Now that the hon member also wants
the details of that, I can tell her that during 2006 and 2007, the target
set for Setas was that 32 479 workers should be assisted to enter skills
programmes, of which 17 672 must complete those programmes, including
learnership and apprenticeship programmes. By the end of March 2007, Setas
enrolled a total of 57 577 workers, of which 21 423 successfully completed
those learning programmes.

As far as the enrolment of unemployed learners into programmes is
concerned, Setas have met their targets. The targets set for 2006 to 2007
were that 30 258 unemployed people should be assisted to enter learning
programmes and that at least 15 129, that is almost 50%, should
successfully complete those learning programmes, including learnerships and
apprenticeships. By the end of March 2007, a total of 41 011 unemployed
learners had been assisted to enter learnerships programmes.

Programmes such as learnerships and apprenticeships are longer than a year
and completion is inclusive of learners enrolled in previous years.

I just want to correct the hon member regarding her question.
Unfortunately, Setas do not provide workplace experience. It is workplaces
that provide workplace experience. Setas assist workplaces to provide that
work experience. Thank you.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Chairperson, for 2006-07, there was an underspending by
13 of the country’s 23 Setas of at least R600 million, and the Minister
then said that some of the underperforming Setas would be put under
administration. What I would like to know is: Will the Minister put
pressure on the National Skills Authority to expedite the process of
putting underperforming Setas under administration?

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Chairperson, the question is quite clear: Whether
the Setas are meeting their performance targets with respect to enrolment
and successful completion of programmes. My answer is yes. Democracy does
not allow anybody to pressurise anyone. So I cannot go to the National
Skills Authority and pressurise it, because the National Skills Authority
is made up of trade union leaders and business leaders. For your
information, very junior officials of government are represented there.

Therefore, I cannot go to Zwelinzima Vavi and pressurise him to take
action. I cannot go to Vic van Vuuren and pressurise him to take action.
Unfortunately, democracy is democracy. You may be impatient; it takes long;
and all of us must just relax a bit until they take a decision to advise
the Minister. I am sure that at the appropriate time they will advise me
accordingly.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Minister, I hear what you are saying. So, you are
waiting to be advised from them on further steps to be taken. Is there a
specific timeframe? How long are you willing to wait before you are advised
on what steps are going to be taken?
The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Unfortunately, the hon member passed the law that
says the power lies in the National Skills Authority. I do not know whether
there is any section in the law that says I must give them some or other
timeframe. I will wait, because these are legal issues, hon member. You can
be litigated for taking a wrong decision. It is better to be patient than
to regret later.

  Assessment of effects of artisanal and small-scale mining on environment

37.   Ms J F Terblanche (DA) asked the Minister of Minerals and Energy:

      Whether his department has conducted an environmental impact
      assessment of the effects of artisanal and small-scale mining on the
      environment; if not, why not; if so, what are the findings?
                                              CO1052E

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Thank you very much, Chairperson. Yes,
environmental impact assessments regarding the effects of artisanal and
small-scale mining are conducted. In South African environmental policy and
legislation, the polluter-pays principle is applied in the regulation and
enforcement of environmental management.

In terms of the Minerals and Petroleum Resources Development Act MPRDA,
artisanal and small-scale mining entrepreneurs applying for a mining permit
in terms of section 27 of the Act are responsible for all costs pertaining
to the impact of their operations on the environment. Section 39(2) of the
MPRDA requires that such entrepreneurs submit an environmental management
plan for approval prior to the issuing of a mining permit by the Minister
of Minerals and Energy.

Regulation 52 of the MPRDA prescribes the standard format and contents for
this environmental management plan, which includes the following: A
description of the environment to be affected by the proposed mining
operation; an assessment of the potential impact of the mining operation on
the environment; a summary of the significance of the potential impact and
proposed mitigation and management measures to minimise a negative impact;
financial provision; details of the method and the quantum; planned
monitoring and performance assessment of the environmental management plan;
closure objectives to be achieved; a record of public participation
undertaken and the results thereof; and an undertaking by the applicant
regarding the execution of the environmental management plan.

It should be mentioned that the artisanal and small-scale mining sector is
the only informal sector in South Africa to be regulated on environmental
impact management. Other informal sectors such as small-scale agriculture
or farming are not required to conduct any environmental impact
assessments, EIAs or to manage or mitigate the effects of their activities
or operations on the environment. So, if anything, the Department of
Minerals and Energy respects this law. Thank you very much.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Thank you, Minister. I would really like to congratulate
you on informing us that this is the only informal sector to be regulated
with regard to environmental impact assessments. I think that is really
something that other departments can also look into.

It is, however, true that environmental degradation is very common with
artisanal miners who seldom rehabilitate the area that they have mined. In
the environmental plan and in the assessment, what can be done, because I’m
sure that the problem could sometimes be related to the fact that they are
not as big as other companies and that money could be a problem when it
comes to rehabilitation? What does your department do if those small
companies cannot rehabilitate the area as per the environmental plan which
was set out before they started?

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: I think the challenge is there, not
only for small-scale mining, but even for bigger mining operations. What we
do as the Department of Minerals and Energy is make sure that there is a
plan in place. In other words, we make companies commit to rehabilitation
after mining, but that ends there when the commitment has been made.
Thereafter the ball is in the court of the Department of Environmental
Affairs and Tourism, to monitor compliance with the management plan that
has been submitted to the Department of Minerals and Energy. I think it is
a challenge, as we speak, that we need to be focusing on.

My assumption is that the Green Scorpions should be responsible for
monitoring the implementation of this environmental management plan.
Chairperson, thank you very much.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: This is tongue in cheek, Minister. If the Scorpions go,
will the Green Scorpions stay?

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Well, these ones are green.
[Laughter.]

   Scope and function of Black Economic Empowerment Advisory Council, and
                            stakeholders therein

38.   Mr O M Thetjeng (DA) asked the Minister of Trade and Industry:

      What is the (a) scope of, (b) function of and (c) stakeholders
      involved in the recently proposed Black Economic Empowerment Advisory
      Council?                                           CO1053

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Dr R H Davies): Thanks, House
Chairperson. The Broad-Based Black Economic Empowerment Act, Act 53 of
2003, provides for the establishment of a black economic empowerment
advisory council.

The envisaged functions of the advisory council include giving general
advice to government on black economic empowerment; reviewing progress in
achieving black economic empowerment; providing specific advice on the
draft codes of good practice which the Minister intends publishing for
comment in terms of section 9(5); providing advice on the development,
amendment or indeed replacement of a BEE strategy; providing advice on
draft transformation charters on request; and facilitating partnerships
between organs of state and the private sector that will advance the
objectives of broad-based black economic empowerment.

In terms of the Act, the advisory council will consist of the President,
who will chair it, four Cabinet Ministers and not more than 15 other
members appointed by the President. The last category will consist of
representatives from different constituencies including trade unions, big
business, small business, civil society and academics.

Other important key principles that will be taken into consideration in
composing the council include gender equity and balance in terms of racial
profiles of the members, as well as balance in terms of provincial
representation.

The process of establishing the advisory council has been and will continue
to be a transparent and consultative one. It has and will involve
consultations with key stakeholders. Members of the advisory council will
be required to possess expertise and knowledge relating to broader economic
development issues. The diverse skills and experience of the different
members are expected to add value to the functionality and dynamism of the
council.

Considerable work has been done on developing a constitution for the
council as well as on identifying potential members. Some work still needs
to be concluded, and we hope to be able to submit a proposal to the
President by the end of June this year. Thank you.

Mr O M THETJENG: Thank you, Chair, and Deputy Minister for responding to
the question and for also explaining the processes that have been followed
in the consultation process and with the stakeholders that are involved.

I just want to check something, Deputy Minister. Won’t the establishment of
the council create or result in the overregulation of the private sector,
which by now is actually reeling from electricity rationing, the global
slowdown and the inflation pressure that is there? We are just concerned.
Can you shed some light on whether these will create overregulation of the
system which, we believe, already has problems? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Dr R H Davies): Thank you, hon
member. The basic structure of the regulation will not, in fact, be
impacted on by the establishment of the advisory council. The codes of good
practice have already been formulated and published through a consultative
process. A number of sector charters are also being reviewed and aligned to
the codes. The advisory council will add nothing to that.

It will monitor the process. Indeed, if there are problems of the type you
are mentioning, we will be able to advise government on any of that. So,
the advisory council is, as its name implies, a council to advise and
monitor the process. It will not add any further level of regulation at
all.

  Implementation of measures to deal with problems of financial misconduct
 identified by Public Service Commission in the 2005-06 financial year, and
           number of cases finalised in the 2006-07 financial year

39.   Ms D Robinson (DA) asked the Minister of Labour:

      (1)   Whether his department has implemented any measures to deal with
           the problems of financial misconduct identified by the Public
           Service Commission in the 2005-06 financial year (details
           furnished); if not, why not; if so, (a) what measures and (b)
           what are the reasons for his department’s poor performance in
           the 2006-07 financial year;


      (2)   (a) how many (i) of the 23 cases that were reported in the 2006-
           07 financial year have been finalised and (ii) departmental
           officials have been (aa) charged with and (bb) found guilty of
           financial misconduct and (b) what action was taken against those
           who had been found guilty?
                       CO1054E

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Thank you very much, Chairperson. I am going to
attempt to answer parts (1) and 1(a) of the question because when I look at
(b) it does not necessary deal with the issues that are raised by both
parts (1) and (2) of the question. Maybe the hon member will resubmit a
question so that I can check the criteria that has been used to have the
statement that is in (b).

Indeed, we have instituted disciplinary measures to deal with these
financial misconduct cases, and I can inform the hon member that of the 23
cases that were reported in the year 2006-07, 22 were finalised, 18
officials were charged and 10 officials were found guilty of misconduct.
The following action was also taken regarding the 10 officials that were
found guilty: seven of them were dismissed; two received written warnings;
and one received a final written warning. Thank you, Chairperson.

    Outcomes of impact assessment of quota system implemented in textile
                                  industry

40.   Ms S S Chen (DA) asked the Minister of Trade and Industry:

      Whether his department has conducted any impact assessment of the
      quota system implemented in the textile industry; if not, why not; if
      so, what were the outcomes?                  CO1055E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Dr R H Davies): Thank you, House
Chair. On 1 January 2007 quotas on certain clothing and textile imports
from China were introduced. The quotas arose from a voluntary arrangement
between the South African and Chinese governments and cover 24 clothing and
seven textile products imported from China.

The Department of Trade and Industry has, indeed, undertaken an initial
assessment of the impact of the quotas on import levels of clothing and
textile products.

During the period between 2000 and 2006, annual average growth in total
imports of clothing products was 28% and of textiles was 10%, measured in
terms of South African rand. However, there were large growth spurts in
textile imports in particular years, for example by 29% in 2002 and 18% in
2006.

Annual average growth of imports from China over the period 2000 to 2006
far exceeded the average of total imports, being 42% for clothing and 35%
for textiles. Between 2000 and 2006, China’s share of imports grew from 41%
to 75% in the case of clothing and from 11% to 35% in the case of textiles.


After the introduction of the quotas on 1 January last year, 2007 year-on-
year growth of total imports from China declined substantially. Chinese
clothing import growth turned negative by 25%. Textile import growth slowed
to 2%. This led to a decline in the share of Chinese imports between 2006
and 2007 from 75% to 61% in the case of clothing and from 35% to 33% in the
case of textiles.

There was significant growth in clothing and textile imports from other
countries during 2007, but often off a very low base. However, given
China’s high share in imports of clothing and textile products, the
moderation of Chinese imports more than offset by far any increase in
imports from other markets. Therefore, the growth in total imports in 2007
fell by minus 8% and textile import growth slowed to 9% in 2007, half of
the 2006 level.

Therefore, the quotas introduced on certain Chinese clothing and textile
products in 2007 have been strongly associated with the substantial
moderation of imports of clothing and textile products from China.

Given the high share of Chinese imports in total imports, this has led to
much slower growth for total imports of clothing and textile products.
Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Hon members, regarding Questions
42, 43 and 45 addressed to the Minister of Transport, the Acting
Chairperson read the apology earlier on from the Minister of Transport. We
have received the responses, and copies of these will be given to members.
The copies will be put in their pigeonholes.

    Cost to department as a result of torching of trains and findings of
          investigation into torching of trains on 18 January 2008

42.   Mr A Watson (DA) asked the Minister of Transport:

      (1)   How much did the torching of trains cost his department over the
           past three years;


      (2)   whether the investigation into the  torching  of  trains  on  18
           January 2008 (details  furnished) has been  concluded;  if  not,
           why not; if so, (a) what were the findings   and (b) when will a
           new        management         team         be         appointed?
                 CO1057E

REPLY:

The Minister of Transport:

     1) The damage to trains due to train burnings in the past three  years
        cost the South African Rail Commuter  Corporation  Limited  ‘SARCC’
        R265.7 million. Of this amount, R128.6  million  was  paid  by  the
        SARCC’s insurers, leaving a shortfall of R137.09 million, which was
        covered  by  the  self  insurance  fund  of   the   Rail   Commuter
        Corporation.



|Financial|Number of|Total Damage  |Amount Recovered |Actual Loss        |
|Period   |Incidents|              |from Insurers    |(Self Insured Fund)|
|01 April |22       |R121,824,715.1|R81,416,277.93   |R40,408,437.24     |
|2005 to  |         |7             |                 |                   |
|31 March |         |              |                 |                   |
|2006     |         |              |                 |                   |
|01 April |16       |R44,561,781.84|R7,214,270.00    |R37,347,511.84     |
|2006 to  |         |              |                 |                   |
|31 March |         |              |                 |                   |
|2007     |         |              |                 |                   |
|01 April |13       |R99,343,219.05|R40,000,000.00   |R59,343,219.05     |
|2007 to  |         |              |                 |                   |
|date     |         |              |                 |                   |
|         |TOTAL    |R265,729,716.0|R128,630,547.93  |R137,099,168.13    |
|         |         |6             |                 |                   |

(2)   Yes, the investigation  into  the  torching  of  trains  on  the  18th
      January 2008 has been completed.

      (a)   The Board of Inquiry found, amongst others, the following:-

      Inadequate work analysis

      Failure to implement lessons and experiences from the past.
      Insufficient commuter communication and interaction.
      Lack of decisive leadership by the Regional Executive.
      Inadequate execution of the contingency plan.

      (b)   An interim Regional Management Team is in place.  The  Board  of
            Inquiry found that several elements had created “organisational
            distance” between the Regional Management Team  and  functional
            bodies in the operation. Some of these elements are the hazards
            of the unknown; avoidance  of  commitment  and  responsibility;
            insecurity; and lack  of  confidence.  The  suspended  Regional
            Management team has been given an opportunity to respond to the
            findings of the Board of Inquiry.  Following  this,  the  SARCC
            will decide on a future course regarding this whole matter.

  Findings of study on the introduction of roadworthiness tests for private
                    vehicles and implementation of tests

43.   Ms S S Chen (DA) asked the Minister of Transport:

      (1)    Whether  his  department  has  concluded  its  study   on   the
           introduction of roadworthiness tests for  private  vehicles;  if
           not, (a) why not and (b) when will it be concluded; if so,  what
           are the findings of the study;


      (2)   whether these tests will be implemented; if not, why not; if so,
           what are the relevant details?               CO1058E

The Minister of Transport:

(1)   No, the Department of Transport has not yet concluded the  feasibility
      study for the periodic testing of private vehicles.

      (a)   Safe Drive Holdings (Pty) Ltd, the company that was awarded  the
           bid in December  2006  to  conduct  the  feasibility  study  for
           periodic vehicle testing for private vehicles, was placed  under
           liquidation on 20 March 2007 by Westrust (Proprietary)  Limited.
           At the time Safe Drive  Holdings  was  liquidated,  80%  of  the
           research had been completed. The Department had to  engage  with
           the liquidators for Safe Drive (Pty) Ltd to release the work  it
           had completed. Tender processes to acquire the services  of  new
           tenderers to conclude the feasibility study are in progress.

      (b)   The study will be completed as soon as a new  company  has  been
           appointed to finalise the feasibility study.   It  is  projected
           that  the  completion  of  the  study  will  take  a  period  of
           approximately nine months.

(2)   The implementation of periodic vehicle testing will be guided  by  the
      feasibility study. With the study  having  been  delayed  due  to  the
      unfortunate liquidation of Safe Drive Holdings, it would be  premature
      for the Department to give specific implementation details with regard
      to periodic testing.

  Steps taken by department to speed up repairs to roads on the coal routes
                 in Mpumalanga, in view of the energy crisis

45.   Mr A Watson (DA) asked the Minister of Transport:

      Whether, in view of the energy crisis, his department  has  taken  any
      steps to speed up repairs to the  badly  damaged  roads  on  the  coal
      routes  in  Mpumalanga;  if  not,  why  not;  if   so,   what   steps?
                                                   CO1060E


The Minister of Transport:

The South African National Roads Agency Limited (Sanral) and officials  from
the Department of Transport’s Branch: Integrated Planning  and  Inter-sphere
Coordination have been involved, together with the Department of  Roads  and
Transport  of  the  Mpumalanga  Province  and  Eskom,   since   2003/04   in
identifying the  coal  haulage  road  network/grid.  The  work  required  to
upgrade/rehabilitate the coal haulage road network was identified  and  cost
estimates were identified.

Further engagements with  Eskom  have  led  to  Eskom  making  R330  million
available to start the process of  improving  the  coal  network.  Officials
from the Department of Transport (DoT) and Sanral participated in  the  Coal
Haulage Conference held in Mpumalanga at the end of October 2007.  Emanating
from the Coal Haulage Conference, an implementation plan is currently  being
developed, which will address the coal haulage network challenges.

DoT officials and Sanral are also part of a team that is working  to  ensure
that the coal haulage grid is trafficable in order to  meet  Eskom’s  short-
term and long-term coal requirements.

Sanral has  upgraded  the  N11  between  Middelburg–Hendrina-Ermelo  and  is
currently upgrading the N11 between Volksrust-Amersfoort-Ermelo.   This  has
cost Sanral R800 million.

Currently the N2 from the Mpumalanga/KwaZulu-  Natal  border  to  Ermelo  is
being designed. Construction will start  from  June  2008  onwards  for  the
rehabilitation/upgrading.

The R35 and R38 are routes that  have  been  incorporated  into  the  Sanral
network in 2006. These are also part of the coal haulage grid.  These  roads
are in a relatively  good  condition.  However,  designs  for  upgrades  are
scheduled to start in 2009/2010 and construction in 2010/2011.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

The Council adjourned at 15:36.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           THURSDAY, 20 MARCH 2008

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following paper is referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
        Economic and Foreign Affairs for consideration:
        (a)      Strategic Plan of the Department of  Foreign  Affairs  for
             2008-2011.




    2.      The following papers are referred to the  Select  Committee  on
        Land and Environmental Affairs for consideration:


        (a)      Business Plan of the  Agricultural  Research  Council  for
             2008-2008 [RP 29-2008].

          b) Rand Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for 2008-
             09, tabled in terms of section 42  of  the  Local  Government:
             Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


          c) Sedibeng Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs  for
             2008-09,  tabled  in  terms  of  section  42  of   the   Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No  56
             of 2003).

          d) Magalies Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs  for
             2008-09,  tabled  in  terms  of  section  42  of   the   Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No  56
             of 2003).

          e) Pelladrift Water Board’s Proposed increase  in  Water  Tariffs
             for 2008-09, tabled in  terms  of  section  42  of  the  Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No  56
             of 2003).

          f) Bushbuckridge Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs
             for 2008-09, tabled in  terms  of  section  42  of  the  Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No  56
             of 2003).

          g) Amatola Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water  Tariffs  for
             2008-09,  tabled  in  terms  of  section  42  of   the   Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No  56
             of 2003).

          h) Umgeni Water Board’s Proposed increase in  Water  Tariffs  for
             2008-09,  tabled  in  terms  of  section  42  of   the   Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No  56
             of 2003).

          i) Mhlathuze Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs for
             2008-09,  tabled  in  terms  of  section  42  of   the   Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No  56
             of 2003).

          j) Namakwa Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water  Tariffs  for
             2008-09,  tabled  in  terms  of  section  42  of   the   Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No  56
             of 2003).

          k) Overberg Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs  for
             2008-09,  tabled  in  terms  of  section  42  of   the   Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No  56
             of 2003).

          l) Botshelo Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water Tariffs  for
             2008-09,  tabled  in  terms  of  section  42  of   the   Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No  56
             of 2003).

          m) Lepelle Northern Water  Board’s  Proposed  increase  in  Water
             Tariffs for 2008-09, tabled in terms  of  section  42  of  the
             Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003  (Act
             No 56 of 2003).

          n) Bloem Water Board’s Proposed increase  in  Water  Tariffs  for
             2008-09,  tabled  in  terms  of  section  42  of   the   Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No  56
             of 2003).

          o) Albany Coast Water Board’s Proposed increase in Water  Tariffs
             for 2008-09, tabled in  terms  of  section  42  of  the  Local
             Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No  56
             of 2003).

    3.      The following paper is referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs and  to  the  Joint  Monitoring
        Committee on Improvement of Life and Status of Women:


        (a)      Report of the  South  African  Law  Reform  Commission  on
             Domestic Partnerships (Project 118, March 2006) [RP 136-2007].

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

    (a)    Report and Financial Statements  of  the  Represented  Political
         Parties’ Fund for 2006-2007, including the Report of  the  Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2006-2007 [RP 129-2007].

                           TUESDAY, 25 MARCH 2008

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

   1. The Minister of Social Development

    (a)    Strategic Plan for the Department of Social Development for 2008-
         2011 [RP 37-2008].

    (b)    Strategic Plan for the  South  African  Social  Security  Agency
         (SASSA) for 2008-2011 [RP 25-2008].

    (c)    Strategic Plan for the National  Development  Agency  (NDA)  for
         2008-2011 [RP 40-2008].

 2. The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)    Additional Protocol on the Trade,  Development  and  Cooperation
         Agreement between the Republic of South  Africa  and  the  European
         Community and it’s Member States, tabled in terms of section 231(2)
         of the Constitution, 1996.

    (b)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Additional Protocol on the  Trade,
         Development and Cooperation Agreement between the Republic of South
         Africa and the European Community and it’s Member States.

 3. The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

    (a)     Strategic  Plan  and  Budget  of  the  Ingonyama  Trust   Board
         2008/2009.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

 1. Report of the Select Committee on Local Government  and  Administration
    on the Local Government Laws Amendment Bill [B 28B  –  2007]  (National
    Assembly – sec 75), dated 4 March 2008, as follows:

      The Select Committee on Local Government  and  Administration,  having
      considered the subject of the Local Government Laws Amendment Bill  [B
      28B – 2007] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to  it,  agrees  to
      the Bill with proposed amendments as follows:

                                  CLAUSE 2
1.    On page 3, after line 21, to add the following paragraph:


            (c)   The MEC may,  after  consultation  with  the  Minister  of
      Finance, in exceptional cases, including those referred to in  section
      87 of the Municipal Structures Act, 1998(Act No. 117 of  1998)  decide
      on a different or shorter  period  than  the  period  referred  to  in
      paragraph (a) and (b).

                                  CLAUSE 6
1.    On page 4, in line 15, to omit "and".

2.    On page 4, after line 15, to insert the following paragraphs:

      (b)   by the substitution in subsection (2) for paragraph (a)  of  the
           following paragraph:


                 "(a)  the councillor representing that ward in the  council
                       [, who must also be the chairperson of the committee;
                       and];";


      (c)   by the insertion in subsection (2) of the word "and" at the  end
           of paragraph (b) and the addition  to  that  subsection  of  the
           following paragraph:
                 "(c)  a chairperson elected  from  among  the  ten  persons
                       referred to in paragraph (b).";


      (d)   by the substitution in subsection (3)(a) for the words preceding
           subparagraph (i) of the following words:


                 "the procedure to elect the subsection (2)(b) members of  a
                 ward  committee  and  the   chairperson   contemplated   in
                 subsection 2(c), taking into account the need—";


      (e)   by the substitution in subsection (3) for paragraph (b)  of  the
           following paragraph:
                 "(b)  the circumstances under which those members  and  the
                       chairperson must vacate office; and";  and


3.    On page 4, in line 19, after "must" to insert "develop a policy and".

4.    On page 4, in line 19, after "determine" to omit "the".

5.    On page 4, in line 19, after "criteria" to omit "for".

6.    On page 4, in line 20, after “(c)“ to insert the following  “based  on
      the provincial framework and criteria determined by the MEC  in  terms
      of paragraph (e).”

7.    On page 4, after line 27, to insert the following paragraph:


            (e)   The MEC must determine a provincial framework and criteria
      in order to monitor the policy, criteria and calculation of the out of
      pocket expenses referred to in paragraph (b).
                                 NEW CLAUSE

1.    That the following be a new Clause:

      Amendment of section 75 of Act 117 of 1998


            8.    Section 75 of the Structures Act is hereby amended by  the
      addition of the following subsection, the  existing  section  becoming
      subsection (1):  The section 73(2) (b) members of a ward committee are
      elected for a term  [determined  by  metro  or  local  council.]  that
      corresponds with the term referred to in section 24 of this Act.
                  "(2) The Minister may by notice in the  Gazette  prescribe
      regulations for the implementation of subsection (1).".

                                  CLAUSE 9

1.    On page 5, in line 11, after “least” to omit “six” and  to  substitute
“four”

2.    On page 5, after line 15, to insert the following paragraph:


            "(d)  The MEC may,  after  consultation  with  the  Minister  of
      Finance, in exceptional cases, including those referred to in  section
      87 of Municipal Structures Act, 1998 (Act No. 117 of 1998), decide  on
      a different or shorter period than the period referred to in paragraph
      (a) and (b).”

                                  CLAUSE 10
1.    On page 5, in line 22, to omit "amended" and to substitute:
      amended—
      (a)   by the insertion  after  the  definition  of  "citizen"  of  the
           following definition:

                 “ 'close family member', in relation to any  person,  means
                 his or her—
                 (a)   child;  or
                 (b)   parent; or
                 (c)   spouse, including a partner in a civil, religious  or
                       customary marriage or union, whether or not the union
                       is registered;  or
                 (d)   a person living with  that  person  as  if  they  are
                       married to each other.";
      (b)

                                  CLAUSE 11

1.    On page 5, in line 31, to omit  “one  year“  and  to  substitute  "six
months".

                                  CLAUSE 13

1.    On page 5, from line 45, to omit subsection (1) and to substitute:


                 "(1)   A staff member may be a candidate for  election  to
           the National Assembly or a  provincial  legislature  or  may  be
           nominated as a permanent delegate to  the  National  Council  of
           Provinces subject to the Code of Conduct for the municipal staff
           members contemplated in Schedule 2,  and  any  other  prescribed
           limits and conditions as may be regulated by the Minister.

2.    On page 6, from line 6, to omit subsection 3 and to substitute:
                 (3)   A staff member may be a candidate for election to  a
           municipal council subject to the Code of Conduct  for  Municipal
           staff  members  contemplated  in  Schedule  2  and   any   other
           prescribed limits and conditions as  may  be  regulated  by  the
           Minister.

                                  CLAUSE 17

1.    On page 7, in line 25, after "Minister" to  insert  "or  the  National
      Council of Provinces".

2.    On page 7, in line 27, after "Minister" to insert "and in the  opinion
      of the National Council of Provinces".

3.    On page 7, from line 29, to omit paragraph (b) and to substitute:

            (b)   The MEC must table a report detailing the outcome  of  the
      investigation in the relevant provincial legislature  within  90  days
      from the date on which the Minister requested  the  investigation  and
      must simultaneously send a copy of such report to  the  Minister,  the
      Minister of Finance and the National Council of Provinces.

                                  CLAUSE 19

1.    On page 7, in line 40, after "councillor" to insert "or  close  family
      member".
2.    On page 7, in line 41, to omit "and" and to substitute "or".

                                  CLAUSE 21

1.    On page 8, in line 6,  after  "member"  to  insert  "or  close  family
      member of a staff member".

2.    On page 8, in line 7, to omit "and" and to substitute "or".


