---
title: 'National Assembly - 14 February 2008'
layout: debate
year: 2008
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2008/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2008-02-14
---

THURSDAY, 14 FEBRUARY 2008
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 667.

                      WELCOMING OF NAMIBIAN DELEGATION

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I would like to start off by recognising a
Namibian delegation led by the Minister of Health and Social Services, the
hon Dr R N Kamwi. [Applause.] You are very welcome, hon members.

                COPY OF LETTER FROM UDM TO SPEAKER AVAILABLE

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Mama uSomlomo, izolo uthe awuyifumenanga incwadi
esasikubhalele yona. Yiyo le ikopi yayo, kwaye nazi iikopi esasizithumele
kwezinye iinkokeli ngefekisi. Ukuba usayifuna ke ikopi yayo, uzuze
kuyilanda. Enkosi. [Madam Speaker, yesterday you said you did not receive
the letter we wrote to you. Here is a copy and herewith are the copies
which we faxed to other leaders. If you still want a copy thereof, you can
come and collect it. Thank you.]

         PRESIDENT’S REPLY TO DEBATE ON STATE OF THE NATION ADDRESS

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, Deputy President, hon
members, when Nelson Mandela delivered the first state of the nation
address to our first democratic Parliament, on May 24, 1994, he quoted some
stanzas from Ingrid Jonker’s poem, “Die Kind/The Child”, in which, among
other things she said:

 The child is not dead
 the child lifts his fists against his mother
 who shouts Afrika!

 The child is not dead
 not at Langa nor at Nyanga
 nor at Orlando nor at Sharpeville
 nor at the police station at Philippi
 where he lies with a bullet through his brain ...
 the child is present at all assemblies and law-givings
 the child peers through the windows of houses and into the hearts
 of mothers
 this child who just wanted to play in the sun at Nyanga is everywhere
 the child grown to a man treks through all Afrika
 the child grown to a giant journeys through the whole world


 Without a pass

Nelson Mandela then went on to say:

 And in this glorious vision, Ingrid Jonker instructs that our endeavours
 must be about the liberation of the woman, the emancipation of the man and
 the liberty of the child ...

 And so we must, constrained by and yet regardless of the accumulated
 effect of our historical burden, seize the time to define for ourselves
 what we want to make of our shared destiny.

He went on to say:

 The government I have the honour to lead, and I dare say, the masses who
 elected us to serve in this role, are inspired by the single vision of
 creating a people-centred society. Accordingly, the purpose that will
 drive this government shall be the expansion of the frontiers of human
 fulfilment, the continuous extension of the frontiers of freedom.

 The acid test of the legitimacy of the programmes we elaborate, the
 government institutions we create, the legislation we adopt, must be
 whether they serve these objectives.

I believe that, in the end, this assembly of lawgivers must give itself the
space and time to consider the vitally important question whether through
the 14 years of our democracy we, together, as a nation, have responded
adequately to the historic challenge that ``we must, constrained by and yet
regardless of the accumulated effect of our historical burden, seize the
time to define for ourselves what we want to make of our shared destiny’’,
as Nelson Mandela said.

We must, in action, sustain the historical experience to which the hon
Pieter Mulder referred when he said black and white together have built the
South Africa in which we live, and expressed the pride we all share in the
contribution to this common effort made by our Afrikaner compatriots.

The fact of the matter is that the millions of people who went to the polls
in 2004 to elect us, the party representatives who sit in this House,
indeed share a common destiny.

In 1994 none of us, regardless of our political affiliation, could or would
disagree with Nelson Mandela when he said, ``the masses who elected us ...
are inspired by the single vision of creating a people-centred society.’’

Neither could anyone among us contest the assertion he made that the
fundamental task of the nation is ``the expansion of the frontiers of human
fulfilment, the continuous extension of the frontiers of freedom.’’

Through all the years I have served in government, I have always hoped that
this assembly of lawgivers would feel the presence, in its midst, of the
child ``with a bullet through his brain’’ that Ingrid Jonker celebrated,
who is ``present at all assemblies and law-givings’’.

I have entertained the hope that, understanding that the presence in this
House of die kind/the child means that our democracy ``must be about the
liberation of the woman, the emancipation of the man and the liberty of the
child’’, again as Nelson Mandela said. This assembly of lawgivers would
have used the occasion of the state of the nation address to make an
objective assessment of the distance we have travelled to accomplish these
objectives, and what we need to do next to accelerate our advance towards
their achievement.

I believe that as yet we have not given ourselves the space and the time
calmly and frankly, without partisan constraints and imperatives, to speak
to one another and to the nation about the objectives fundamental to the
future of our country and people, which Nelson Mandela addressed from this
podium 14 years ago.

In this regard, I am convinced that all of us must take very seriously and
respond to the appeal made by the hon Mangosuthu Buthelezi, who sits among
us as a senior statesperson, when he said we must rise ``to the hard task
of dealing with the real issues and living up to one’s own political
responsibility.” He added: ``There is no point in discussing any change
unless there is a serene and objective debate of what went right and what
went wrong.’’

I believe too that this assembly of lawgivers must, for the sake of all our
people, rather than party-political interest, give itself the time and
space to engage in ``a serene and objective debate of what went right and
what went wrong’’, and answer the troubling question whether we have met
the expectations of the child with a bullet through its brain, and yet is
present at all assemblies and law-givings, peering through the windows of
houses and into the hearts of mothers.

In her intervention, the hon Hlengiwe Mgabadeli quoted what I said in the
state of the nation address that ``our nation should unite as never before
and strain every sinew of its collective body to address our common
challenges ...’’

She went on to say:
 Let me pause and say I agree with the President so much. I will however
 request that all of us, hon members, think deep on an inclusive members’
 workshop whose purpose will be to sincerely, as public representatives,
 think and deal with these problems and tendencies of contradicting
 ourselves when it suits us ...

 We need this workshop ... if we can all be honest about ‘creating the
 South Africa visualised in our Constitution’ and indeed begin to plan
 jointly on how we can as a people share in the country’s wealth, how
 jointly we can tackle poverty and underdevelopment, etc.

The hon Mgabadeli closed her intervention by warning all of us of an
objective outcome that we must, all of us, dread. She said:

 Countries like Kenya do love peace. But if we avoid confronting the roots
 of our difficulties, and correcting our errors, we will find ourselves in
 the same situation ... Let us be exemplary. Let us know our history as a
 nation. As public representatives we will be hosting the Inter-
 Parliamentary Union in 2008.

Once again, the hon Bantu Holomisa repeated the appeal he made last year,
which essentially the hon Mgabadeli reflected, that –

 We require a national indaba or convention to deal with various national
 issues. Such a national convention would review the progress we have made
 since 1994 and identify whether there are any inherent defects.

I would like to indicate my own support for the process suggested by the
hon members Holomisa and Mgabadeli. This might indeed help our Parliament
and our country to respond properly to the heartfelt appeal made by the hon
Nkosi Buthelezi that we engage one another in ``a serene and objective
debate of what went right and what went wrong’’. I was indeed very pleased
to hear you, Madam Speaker, yesterday saying this matter was indeed being
pursued.

Yesterday, the hon Minister of Education showed me an article by William
Saunderson-Meyer which appeared in a recent edition of the Weekend Argus,
in which he pointed out some of the difficulties we have to confront to
conduct the kind of national dialogue of which the hon members Buthelezi,
Holomisa and Mgabadeli spoke. After criticising the SABC national radio
service for failing to carry out its task to educate, he said:

 It is not only the ignorance that makes one despair. It is the smug
 positions taken on both sides of the racial divide. The darkies mutter
 self-indulgently ... about past injustices. The whities opt loudly for the
 Chicken Licken theory of the universe: the sky is about to fall down, at
 least over the southern part of Africa.

 There is an unpleasant schadenfreude – the malicious enjoyment of
 another’s misfortune - to the response of many whites to the electricity
 crisis. To them it is the final proof that blacks are innately incompetent
 and unable to run a modern economy.

He continued:

 Undoubtedly the government has failed. It is telling that the ANC did not
 believe its own propaganda about sustained future economic progress, which
 is why it refused to generate more power.


 Nevertheless the ability to ensure the uninterrupted delivery of power and
 water is by no means an unassailable skill of the white man.


 The west coast of the US is in an endless cycle of power and water
 shortages; Australia has spectacularly mismanaged its water resources and
 London ... has both water and transport systems that are teetering on the
 edge of collapse.

He went on to say:


 Successful nations are optimistic and have an ability to transcend
 internal divides at times of adversity and crisis ... Much depends on the
 quality of national leadership but perhaps more depends on the willingness
 of individual citizens to be politically and emotionally engaged in their
 country.

If William Saunderson-Meyer is correct in his assessment, then, surely all
of us have a duty to encourage all our ``citizens to be politically and
emotionally engaged in their country’’, precisely to create the possibility
for us to unite in action and act in unity as we suggested in the state of
the nation address.

Madam Speaker, I believe that the hon Sandra Botha was right when she said
our people are concerned about crime and corruption. She was right when she
said our people are concerned about the capacity of the national
infrastructure of various kinds to cope with our contemporary needs. She
was right when she said our people want discipline in our schools, safe
streets for children to play in, elderly people to be treated with dignity,
and a Police Service the people trust. She was right when she said the poor
must become the beneficiaries of any policy changes. She was right also
when she said that all of us must respect the constitutional prescript
concerning the separation of powers, as well as the separation between
party and state.

Both I and our government cannot but be pleased that we agree on so many
issues with the Official Opposition. This agreement should, in principle,
enable us to work together with the Official Opposition, in the context of
the proposal made by the hon members Buthelezi, Holomisa and Mgabadeli, to
address the identified matters of common concern.

I trust that the hon members Sandra Botha and Patricia de Lille listened
carefully to what the hon Jeremy Cronin and others from the government
benches said with regard to their suggestion that we dissolve Parliament
and hold elections now. Given our real challenges, none among us should
allow ourselves to be seduced by the false promise of delusion. [Applause.]

To return to our real world, the hon Sandra Botha will have to remember
that the matters she raised, with the intention to condemn our government
to burn forever in Dante’s Inferno, are matters we too have raised on many
occasions, to challenge our nation to act in unity to eradicate the deeply
entrenched legacy of colonialism and apartheid, as well as respond to
negative tendencies borne of the opportunities provided by the democratic
order. Indeed, in the last 14 years we have engaged in programmes aimed at
eradicating this deeply entrenched legacy.

However, once more the debate on the state of the nation address showed a
clear division with regard to the characterisation of our country - between
those who believe South Africa is experiencing the worst of times and those
who assert that this is the best of times. These diametrically opposed
characterisations have not just arisen from the emergency we have been
experiencing in the last few weeks around electricity supply, but have been
with us for many years now, as William Saunderson-Meyer argued.

Leading the charge that South Africa has been experiencing the worst of
times was, as we might have expected, the Democratic Alliance Parliamentary
Leader, the hon Sandra Botha. On Tuesday, among others, she claimed that,
``The sudden dimming of the lights across SA is merely the most potent and
obvious metaphor for the crisis government has visited on the people.’’
Other hon members joined her, wrongly asserting, as she said, that ``few of
the programmes and strategies of previous years have been fulfilled.’’

I would like to say that indeed, there are matters that have been raised
during this debate that are also of concern to government and hence serve
as the subject of focus as reflected in the Apex Priorities. However, there
are many other assertions that were made by some of the hon members which
bear no relationship to the truth.

Fully to appreciate the steady progress that our nation is making, I
believe we would do well to listen to the people themselves, who have
spoken very positively of the progress we have made, as reflected in the
community survey conducted by Statistics South Africa, which was published
last October. This is important because, when we stand at this podium, we
all claim to speak on behalf of these masses of our people.

The responses of the people in the community survey confirm what the
honourable Pandelani Nefolovhodwe said, quoting the great African patriot
Amilcar Cabral:

 Always bear in mind that the people are not fighting for ideas, for the
 things in anyone’s head. They are fighting to win material benefits, to
 live better and in peace, see their lives go forward, to guarantee the
 future of their children.

The results of the survey also support the appeal made by the Ministers of
Transport and of Trade and Industry when they cautioned all of us not to be
spokespersons of doom or cheerleaders of bad news.

In this context I should, once again, mention the challenge we face to
fight corruption in our society. Quite correctly, the hon members have
emphasised the critical importance of this front of struggle. Indeed we
must strive to intensify our offensive against this scourge. However, I
believe that we must avoid addressing this issue in a manner that suggests
that we revel in playing the role of cheerleaders of bad news about our
country.

In this regard I would like to refer to a Country Corruption Assessment
Report about South Africa published two years back by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime. The UN said:

 With South Africa’s rating of 4,8 out of a score of 10 on Transparency
 International’s Corruption Index, it is clear that the country is
 perceived as having fairly high levels of corruption. There is a general
 perception within the country, too, that corruption is rife. Many people
 believe corruption has increased in the postapartheid era during the
 period of political and economic transition.

The UN went on to say:

 Unfortunately, the tools and surveys that have been used to measure levels
 of corruption are primarily based on perceptions. The media has also been
 influential in emphasising the incidence of corruption, which is of utmost
 importance but with lesser focus on the steps that have been taken to
 prevent and combat corruption. Perceptions and media have thus come to
 form the foundation for understanding the prevalence of corruption.

The report said:

 It is important to recognise that perceptions do not necessarily reflect
 levels of corruption in the country. The premise that levels of corruption
 in South Africa are high needs to be tested.

All of us assert that we are patriotic and want to see our country succeed.
Yet, the perceptions to which the United Nations report refers, which ``do
not necessarily reflect the actual experience of corruption in the
country’’, are sometimes fuelled by some among us, thus perpetuating
dangerous falsehoods that impact negatively on our country.

Madam Speaker, we identified the Apex Priorities to accelerate our advance
towards the fulfilment of the mandate the people gave our government in
2004. I would like to assure this House and our nation that government will
ensure the closest possible monitoring and evaluation of the process of the
implementation of these Apex Priorities. I would also like to urge
Parliament to play its oversight role in this regard, so that indeed
implementation happens as it should. This is central to our call - All
hands on deck!

Some negative comments were also made about the Accelerated and Shared
Growth Initiative for South Africa and the Joint Initiative for Priority
Skills Acquisition consistent with the view among some of us that we must,
at all costs, find fault. To indicate to the hon members what is actually
being done, I would like to give a short report about Asgisa and the
Western Cape. After discussions with the Deputy President and the Minister
of Education, with their active support, the Western Cape Provincial
Government launched a skills initiative called the Masakhisizwe Centre for
Excellence. Dr Mamphela Ramphela chairs its board. Masakhisizwe is a
partnership between the provincial government and the engineering
departments of the four universities in the Western Cape, and also includes
industry representatives.

The centre trains students mainly in civil engineering and architecture, to
respond to the infrastructure investment-led growth which Asgisa champions.
The construction sector in the province has grown from 8% in 2005 to 13% by
end of 2007. The Masakhisizwe students are provided with scholarships,
mentoring and non-financial assistance, with the objective rapidly to
develop and nurture young engineers.

The skills programme started with 120 students. Sixty-eight of these have
graduated. Fifty of the students who graduated have been placed in full-
time jobs in government. There are currently 305 students in the system.
Students sign a 4-year contract to work for government on completion of
their studies. [Applause.]

I am convinced that nobody can describe Masakhisizwe as a failure, and thus
argue that Asgisa and Jipsa are not producing the outcomes expected from
these two initiatives. And yet these false claims are repeated regularly,
flying in the face of the most important contributions that Asgisa and
Jipsa are making to respond to the economic and skills challenges we face.

Madam Speaker, historically, the majority of South Africans have always
demonstrated the will to overcome whatever problems they may face.

‘n Boer maak ‘n plan. [Necessity is the mother of invention.] [Applause.]

The good response we are already witnessing with regard to the electricity
emergency confirms the determination of the nation to ensure that,
together, as the public and private sectors as well as communities, we
respond correctly to the emergency energy situation.

Correctly, the hon members have expressed serious concerns at the levels of
poverty among our people. Government shares this concern. That is why we
spoke of an anti-poverty War Room. The government is determined that we
must indeed, and practically, enable as many people as possible to exit
from poverty, encourage every poor household to be a partner in the fight
against poverty, and defeat the well-known sociological process in terms of
which the poor are condemned to pass on poverty to succeeding generations.

Hon members, it is clear that the remarks of the hon Minister of Safety and
Security during the debate about the Scorpions have raised some concerns. I
would therefore like to make some observations in this regard. As I
indicated last Friday, as confirmed by the Ministers of Justice and
Constitutional Development and of Safety and Security, working with
business and other sectors of our society, we have undertaken a detailed
review of the criminal justice system, further to improve our response to
crime.

In the words of the Minister of Safety and Security, we must revamp the
criminal justice system in such a way that we ``establish a seamless
interconnection between investigations and arrests, prosecutions and
sentencing and imprisonment and rehabilitation’’.

Necessarily the review process included an investigation of the overall
capacity of the state to fight organised crime, with reference to
intelligence, investigations, prosecutions and other matters. Obviously,
this included an assessment of all matters relating to the Directorate of
Special Operations, the Scorpions. We were assisted in this regard by the
findings and recommendations of the Khampepe Judicial Commission.

The decision our government has taken is that we have to retain and expand
the specialised skills focused on organised crime which exist in the
Scorpions and other institutions in the criminal justice system. This view
was adequately explained by the hon Nyami Booi when he spoke from this
podium on Tuesday.

The government has also taken the firm decision that all reforms we
institute in this regard must be informed by the unwavering determination
to ensure that we strengthen the capacity of our law-enforcement agencies
to intensify the war against organised crime, and under no circumstances to
weaken it.

The government has also reaffirmed its commitment to meeting its
international obligations in this regard, fully conscious of the fact that
significant and highly dangerous elements of organised crime are, in fact,
transnational. We have therefore decided to bring the specialised
investigative skills focused on organised crime under one roof in a
specialised unit that will have more personnel and resources and capacity
than currently exists in the Scorpions. These personnel will be drawn from
both the Scorpions and the Organised Crime Unit of the SAPS, and perhaps
other institutions in our system of governance.

The proposal regarding the reorganised structures, which government will
table in Parliament, will therefore cover more than the Scorpions. It will
also address the important issue of the relationship between the
reconstituted specialist institution to fight organised crime on one hand,
and the intelligence establishment on the other, including the National
Intelligence Agency, the National Communications Centre, the Financial
Intelligence Centre and the SA Secret Service, as well as Customs.

The new specialist institution to fight organised crime will serve as a
referral body, enabling it to focus on the most complicated and the most
pernicious instances of organised crime that will be referred to it by
other formations in the criminal justice system, thus to play exactly the
same role for which the Scorpions were established. [Applause.]

This specialist unit will continue to be guided and assisted by the skills
that reside among members of the National Prosecuting Authority and our
intelligence service, ensuring that its operations are both prosecution-
and intelligence-driven, to continue the history of the high conviction
rate of the Scorpions.

The complex reorganisation indicated by the process I have described, which
will affect a number of institutions that belong within the executive arm
of government, will not entail any negative effect on the salaries and
conditions of service of the current members of the DSO. [Applause.]

At the time that we approach Parliament to seek its view and agreement with
the proposals we will make, we will also release the recommendations of the
Khampepe Judicial Commission to enable the hon members and the country the
better to understand the overall context within which we must address the
specific challenge of intensifying the fight against organised crime.

Hon members, the government is acutely aware of the fact that it owes its
legitimacy to the popular mandate it received in 2004. We know very well
that we have an obligation always and at all times to listen and respond to
the voice of the people. These masses are deeply concerned that the
government they elected must continuously improve their safety and
security, including safety from the drug dealers, safety from death and
injury caused by guns in the hands of criminals, safety in their homes,
streets, villages and businesses, safety from theft of their possessions
and the attendant grievous bodily harm, and safety from the corruption of
government and society, all of which constitute an integral part of
organised crime.

The government needs no prompting to understand the weight and urgency of
this challenge. The government that came to our Houses of Parliament last
Friday to give an account to this assembly of lawgivers of what it intends
to do over the next twelve months needs no reminder that it is accountable
both to our Parliament and the masses of our people. We understand this
very well that, acting in unity with you, the elected representatives of
our people, and the people themselves, we must, everyday and in action,
respond to the people’s heartfelt wish for enhanced safety and security.

To conclude my remarks in this regard, I would like to remind the hon
members that the SA Police Service remains the pre-eminent and unequalled
formation in our country that confronts crime daily, including organised
crime. I was very disturbed when I listened to unfortunate remarks during
our debate which sought to denigrate the critically important work that our
Police Service does everyday to improve the safety and security of all our
citizens.

The suggestion that the Police Service is nothing more than a junior and
inferior formation relative to the DSO is absolutely wrong in the extreme.
[Applause.] The SAPS is made up of patriotic men and women who have, over
the years, to date, demonstrated an unwavering commitment even to give
their lives to guarantee the safety and security of all our citizens.
[Applause.] Let us not insult them or speak carelessly about them,
projecting them as a cabal of corrupt and incompetent individuals.
[Applause.]

Madam Speaker, I am obliged to address some matters I would rather avoid
speaking about because they concern the actions of the President of the
Republic directly. However, the circumstances dictate that I address these.
Yesterday, the hon Kenneth Meshoe said that in the light of information
contained in a court document evidently submitted by the Acting National
Director of Public Prosecutions, there were ``grave allegations that go to
the heart of the President’s integrity’’. I have not seen the document to
which the hon Rev Meshoe refers, which apparently relates to issues
affecting the suspended National Director of Public Prosecutions and the
National Commissioner of Police, who is on extended leave.

With regard to the latter, I noticed that the Hon Rev Meshoe decided to
quote part of what I have said about the alleged criminal culpability of
the National Commissioner. For reasons I do not understand, he did not
mention the fact that I also said that the National Prosecuting Authority
approached me some time ago, as President of the Republic, to inform me
that they had received claims about alleged criminal misconduct implicating
the National Commissioner of Police.

As I have said publicly a number of times, from then onwards, I interacted
with the National Director of Public Prosecutions to assist him to get such
information as he sought to facilitate the investigations he and the DSO
felt they had to conduct to establish whether there was any truth to the
allegations.

Having satisfied themselves that they had prima-facie evidence suggesting
that the National Commissioner had been involved in criminal misconduct,
they informed me of this conclusion and their decision to charge the
National Commissioner. At this point, we informed the NPA that we were
ready to assist them to inform the National Commissioner of Police that he
should willingly submit himself to the process of prosecution which the
National Prosecuting Authority had decided to institute, which we did.

I trust that the hon Rev Meshoe will explain to this House and the nation
why he saw it fit to make the grievous and gratuitous insult which sought
to challenge not only the integrity of the person of the President of the
Republic, but also the Office of the President and our government as a
whole. [Applause.] It cannot be that this resulted only from the careless
use of words!

With regard to matters relating to the National Director of Public
Prosecutions, I would like to reiterate that we acted on this matter
strictly in terms of the National Prosecuting Authority Act. We are
convinced that the process put in place to deal with this matter must be
allowed to take its course. In this regard, precisely to respect the
principle and practice of the rule of law, we will continue to respect the
prescriptions described in the NPA Act.

I would also like to inform the House that our Zimbabwe Facilitation Team
was in Harare yesterday to discharge the mandate we have been given by
SADC. We have agreed with the Zimbabwe negotiating parties to continue this
engagement, in an appropriate forum, after the March elections and will
therefore not address this matter through the media.

As I approach the end of this response, I would like to assure the hon
Pandelani Nefolovhodwe that we will follow up on his suggestion relating to
rural development. I would also like to assure the hon Bantu Holomisa that
we have already contacted the Premier of the Eastern Cape to ensure that
together we respond to the memorandum he handed to me.

I would like to take this opportunity to wish the important Conference of
the Pan-African Women’s Organisation, which begins today, success,
convinced that its decisions will help to advance the cause of the
emancipation and development of the women of Africa. [Applause.] In this
context, I must wish our Deputy President success as she will speak at the
opening of this conference this evening.

Further, we wish our Parliament success when it hosts the Congress of the
Inter-Parliamentary Union later this year. Undoubtedly, through our
conduct, we will continue to demonstrate to the democratic world that we
remain firmly determined to protect and advance the democratic gains we
achieved at the cost of many lives.

I would also like to take this opportunity once more to congratulate the
Soweto Gospel Choir for winning their second Grammy Award. [Applause.] We
trust that this great achievement will inspire many South Africans as they
engage in Business Unusual.

I thank the hon members, the media and our people for the attention they
paid to the state of the nation address, as well as the response from the
hon members, indicating as it does that we remain committed to addressing
our common challenges through frank dialogue, without resorting to any
violence. In particular I would like to salute the Gauteng schools which
gathered at the Ekurhuleni Council Chambers in Germiston under the auspices
of the Government Communication and Information System on Tuesday, 12
February to debate the state of the nation address. [Applause.]

Before I conclude, I’d like to assure the House that we are working on the
matter of the appointment of the energy champions. Many, many people,
outstanding South Africans, have agreed to serve as such energy champions.
We are consulting within their areas of work to ensure that, indeed, there
is agreement that they should be the energy champions. [Applause.] Among
these, I’d like to mention one of us who is present in the House, the hon
Prof Kader Asmal. [Applause.] The hon Kader Asmal leaves this Parliament at
the end of this month, in two weeks’ time. He is going to retire, but he
retires from this hothouse to the other hothouse that deals with this
electricity emergency. [Applause.] I am quite certain that we shall, all of
us, miss you, Prof Asmal, and the incisive contributions you have made over
many years to the matters that have served on the agenda of this House. We
wish you success in everything else that you have to do, that you will do,
once you leave. [Applause.]

Finally, I wish the honourable members a happy St Valentine’s Day ...
[Laughter] ... which will give all members an opportunity to turn their
attention to matters of love rather than conflict and fractious debate.
[Laughter.]

I thank you very much indeed for your attention. [Applause.]
Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 14:46.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


    (a)    Government Notice No 128 published in Government Gazette No
         30730 dated 5 February 2008: The dimension of, design for, and
         compilation of, the year 2008 Natura pure gold coin series in terms
         of the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).


    (b)    Government Notice No 129 published in Government Gazette No
         30730 dated 5 February 2008: The dimension of, design for, and
         compilation of, the year 2008 Protea coin series in terms of the
         South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).


    (c)    Government Notice No 130 published in Government Gazette No
         30730 dated 5 February 2008: The dimension of, design for, and
         compilation of, the year 2008 Fifa 2010 coin series in terms of the
         South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).
    (d)    Government Notice No 131 published in Government Gazette No
         30730 dated 5 February 2008: The dimension of, design for, and
         compilation of, the year 2008 R2 pure gold coin series in terms of
         the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).


    (e)    Government Notice No 132 published in Government Gazette No
         30730 dated 5 February 2008: The dimension of, design for, and
         compilation of, the year 2008 sterling silver coin series in terms
         of the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).


    (f)    Government Notice No 133 published in Government Gazette No
         30730 dated 5 February 2008: The dimension of, design for, and
         compilation of, the year 2008 Crown size and 21⁄2c sterling silver
         coin series in terms of the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989
         (Act No 90 of 1989).

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


    (a)    Report on the suspension of a magistrate: Mr S P Zwelibanzi, an
         additional magistrate at NgQamakwe in terms of section 13(4)(a)(i)
         of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).


National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Submission of Private Members’ Legislative Proposals
    (1)    The following private members’ legislative proposals were
         submitted to the Speaker in accordance with Rule 234:


         (a)      Legislative Proposal to amend the Employment Equity Act,
             No 55 of 1998 (Mr W D Spies)


         (b)      Legislative Proposal to repeal the Saint Andrew’s College,
             Grahamstown, (Private) Act, No 15 of 1932 (Mr P A Gerber)


         (c)      Legislative Proposal to repeal the Saint Andrew’s College,
             Grahamstown, (Private) Amendment Act, No 82 of 1985 (Mr P A
             Gerber)


         (d)      Legislative Proposal to repeal Diocesan College,
             Rondebosch, (Private) Act, No 7 of 1942 (Mr P A Gerber)


         (e)      Legislative Proposal to repeal the Natal Ecclesiastical
             Properties and Trust Amendment (Private) Act, No 60 of 1975
             (Mr P A Gerber)

Referred to the Standing Committee on Private Members’ Legislative
Proposals and Special Petitions for consideration and report.


